NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CONSEQUENCES OF THE CLEAN WATER ACT AND THE DEMAND FOR WATER
QUALITY
David A. Keiser
Joseph S. Shapiro
Working Paper 23070
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23070

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2017, Revised June 2018

We thank the editor, Larry Katz, along with four referees, Joe Altonji, Josh Angrist, David Autor,
Richard Carson, Lucas Davis, Esther Duflo, Eli Fenichel, Michael Greenstone, Catherine Kling, Arik
Levinson, Matt Kotchen, Amanda Kowalski, Rose Kwok, Drew Laughland, Neal Mahone, Enrico
Moretti, Bill Nordhaus, Sheila Olmstead, Jordan Peccia, Nick Ryan, Daniel Sheehan, Kerry Smith,
Richard Smith, Rich Sweeney, Reed Walker, and participants in many seminars for excellent comments,
Randy Becker, Olivier Deschenes, Michael Greenstone, and Jon Harcum for sharing data, Elyse Adamic,
Todd Campbell, Adrian Fernandez, Ryan Manucha, Xianjun Qiu, Patrick Reed, Vivek Sampathkumar,
Daisy Sun, Trevor Williams, and Katherine Wong for excellent research assistance, and Bob Bastian
and Andy Stoddard for explaining details of the Clean Water Act. Keiser thanks the USDA for funding
through the National Institute of Food and Agriculture Hatch project number IOW03909. Shapiro
thanks fellowships from the EPA, MIT-BP, Martin Family Fellows, the Schultz Fund, the Yale Program
on Applied Policy, and NSF Grant SES-1530494 for generous support. Any opinions and conclusions
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the U.S. Census
Bureau or the National Bureau of Economic Research. All results have been reviewed to ensure that
no confidential information is disclosed.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2017 by David A. Keiser and Joseph S. Shapiro. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Consequences of the Clean Water Act and the Demand for Water Quality
David A. Keiser and Joseph S. Shapiro
NBER Working Paper No. 23070
January 2017, Revised June 2018
JEL No. H23,H54,H70,Q50,R31
ABSTRACT
Since the 1972 U.S. Clean Water Act, government and industry have invested over $1 trillion to
abate water pollution, or $100 per person-year. Over half of U.S. stream and river miles,
however, still violate pollution standards. We use the most comprehensive set of files ever
compiled on water pollution and its determinants, including 50 million pollution readings from
240,000 monitoring sites and a network model of all U.S. rivers, to study water pollution's trends,
causes, and welfare consequences. We have three main findings. First, water pollution
concentrations have fallen substantially. Between 1972 and 2001, for example, the share of
waters safe for fishing grew by 12 percentage points. Second, the Clean Water Act's grants to
municipal wastewater treatment plants, which account for $650 billion in expenditure, caused
some of these declines. Through these grants, it cost around $1.5 million (2014 dollars) to make
one river-mile fishable for a year. We find little displacement of municipal expenditure due to a
federal grant. Third, the grants' estimated effects on housing values are smaller than the grants'
costs; we carefully discuss welfare implications.

David A. Keiser
Iowa State University
468F Heady Hall
Ames, IA 50011
dkeiser@iastate.edu
Joseph S. Shapiro
37 Hillhouse Avenue
PO Box 208264
New Haven, CT 06520-8264
and NBER
joseph.shapiro@yale.edu

I

Introduction

The 1972 U.S. Clean Water Act sought “to restore and maintain the chemical, physical, and biological
integrity of the Nation’s waters.” This paper quantifies changes in water pollution since before 1972,
studies the causes of any changes, and analyzes the welfare consequences of any changes.
The Clean Water Act addressed a classic externality. Textbooks since at least Stigler (1952; 1966)
have illustrated the concept of an externality through the story of a plant dumping waste in a river and
harming people downstream. The immediate impetus for the Clean Water Act was a 1969 fire on the
Cuyahoga River, which had fires every decade since 1868 though has had no fires since 1972. Time (1969)
described it vividly:
“Anyone who falls into the Cuyahoga does not drown,” Cleveland’s citizens joke grimly. “He
decays.” The Federal Water Pollution Control Administration dryly notes: “The lower Cuyahoga has no visible life, not even low forms such as leeches and sludge worms that usually
thrive on wastes. It is also literally a fire hazard.”
Despite the potential to address this market failure, the Clean Water Act has been one of the most
controversial regulations in U.S. history, for at least two reasons. First, it is unclear whether the Clean
Water Act has been effective, or whether water pollution has decreased at all. An analysis in the 1990s
summarized, “As we approached the twenty-year anniversary of this landmark law, no comprehensive
analysis was available to answer basic questions: How much cleaner are our rivers than they were two
decades ago?” (Adler, Landman, and Cameron 1993). Other writers echo these sentiments (Knopman
and Smith 1993; Powell 1995; Harrington 2004). Today over half of U.S. river and stream miles violate
state water quality standards (USEPA 2016), but it is not known if water quality was even worse before
the Clean Water Act. William Ruckelshaus, the first head of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA), nicely summarized what is known about water pollution today: “even if all of our waters are not
swimmable or fishable, at least they are not flammable” (Mehan III 2010).
The second controversy is whether the Clean Water Act’s benefits have exceeded its costs, which have
been enormous. Since 1972, government and industry have spent over $1 trillion to abate water pollution, or over $100 per person-year. This is more than the U.S. has spent on air pollution abatement (see
Appendix A). In the mid-1970s, Clean Water Act funding of municipal wastewater treatment plants was

1

the single largest public works program in the U.S. (USEPA 1975). These costs were large partly because
the Clean Water Act had ambitious targets: to make all U.S. waters fishable and swimmable by 1983; to
have zero water pollution discharge by 1985; and to prohibit discharge of toxic amounts of toxic pollutants. President Nixon actually vetoed the Clean Water Act and described its costs as “unconscionable,”
though Congress later overruled the veto (Nixon 1972). Large costs could be outweighed by large benefits.
However, existing cost-benefit analyses of the Clean Water Act have not estimated positive benefit/cost
ratios (Lyon and Farrow 1995; Freeman 2000), including U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s own
retrospective analysis (2000a; 2000c).
These academic controversies have spilled over into politics. The U.S. Supreme Court’s 2001 and 2006
SWANCC and Rapanos decisions removed Clean Water Act regulation for nearly half of U.S. rivers and
streams. In 2015, the Obama Administration proposed a Clean Water Rule (also called the Waters of
the United States Rule) which would reinstate many of those regulations. Twenty-seven states have sued
to vacate the rule.
This paper seeks to shed light on these controversies using the most comprehensive set of files ever
compiled in academia or government on water pollution and its determinants. These files include several
datasets that largely have not been used in economic research, including the National Hydrography
Dataset, which is a georeferenced atlas mapping all U.S. surface waters; the Clean Watershed Needs
Survey, which is a panel description of the country’s wastewater treatment plants; a historic extract
of the Grants Information and Control System describing each of 35,000 Clean Water Act grants the
federal government gave cities; the Survey of Water Use in Manufacturing, a confidential plant-level
dataset of large industrial water users which was recently recovered from a decommissioned government
mainframe (Becker 2016); and around 50 million water pollution readings at over 240,000 pollution
monitoring sites during the years 1962-2001 from three data repositories—Storet Legacy, Modern Storet
and the National Water Information System (NWIS). Discovering, obtaining, and compiling these data
has been a serious undertaking involving three Freedom of Information Act requests, detailed analysis
of hydrological routing models, and extensive discussions with engineers and hydrologists from the U.S.
Geological Survey (USGS), the EPA, and engineering consultancies. These data enable a more extensive
analysis of water pollution and its regulation than has previously been possible.
The analysis obtains three sets of results. First, we find that most types of water pollution declined

2

over the period 1962-2001, though the rate of decrease slowed over time. Between 1972 and 2001, the
share of waters that met standards for fishing grew by 12 percentage points. The pH of rivers and lakes
has increased at a similar rate to the pH of rainwater, likely in part due to decreased sulfur air pollution.
In other words, less acid rain may have led to less acidic rivers and lakes. Additionally, the temperature
of rivers and lakes increased by 1 degree F every 40 years, consistent with climate change.
Second, the paper asks how the Clean Water Act’s grants to municipal wastewater treatment plants,
one of the Act’s central components, contributed to these trends. We answer this question using a tripledifference research design comparing water pollution before versus after investments occurred, upstream
versus downstream of recipient plants, and across plants. We define upstream and downstream waters
using a set of 70 million nodes that collectively describe the entire U.S. river network. We find that
each grant decreases the probability that downriver areas violate standards for being fishable by half a
percentage point. These changes are concentrated within 25 miles downstream of the treatment plant
and they persist for 30 years. Through these grants, it cost around $1.5 million ($2014) per year to make
one river-mile fishable. We do not find substantial heterogeneity in cost-effectiveness across regions or
types of grants. We also find that one dollar of a federal grant project led to about one additional dollar
of municipal sewerage capital spending.
Third, the paper asks how residents valued these grants. We analyze housing units within a 25 mile
radius of affected river segments, partly since 95 percent of recreational trips have a destination within
this distance. We find that a grant’s estimated effects on home values are about 25 percent of the grant’s
costs. While the average grant project in our analysis cost around $31 million ($2014), our main estimates
imply that the estimated effect of a grant on the value of housing within 25 miles of the affected river is
around $7 million. We find limited heterogeneity in these numbers across regions and types of grants.
We discuss several reasons why the true benefit/cost ratio for the grants program could exceed this 0.25
ratio of the change in home values to grant costs. These reasons include that people may have incomplete
information about changes in water pollution and their welfare (including health) implications; these
numbers exclude nonuse (“existence”) values; grants may increase sewer fees; these estimates abstract
from general equilibrium effects; and they exclude the five percent of most distant recreational trips.
Available evidence to evaluate these reasons is limited; it does suggest that the true benefit/cost ratio
may exceed 0.25, though does not clearly show that this ratio exceeds one. One interpretation of our

3

main estimates is that the benefits of these grants exceed their costs if these unmeasured components of
willingness to pay exceed the components of willingness to pay that we measure by a factor of three or
more.
We provide several indirect tests of the identifying assumptions, which generally support the validity
of the research design. First, we report event study graphs in time which test for pre-trends in the
years preceding a grant. Second, we report two research designs—a triple-difference estimator which uses
upstream areas as a counterfactual for downstream areas, and a differences-in-differences estimate using
only downstream areas. Third, we assess whether grants affect pollutants closely related to municipal
waste more than they affect pollutants that are less closely related. Fourth, we separately estimate the
effect of a plant receiving one, two, three, or more grants. Finally, we estimate specifications controlling
for important potential confounding variables, including industrial water pollution sources, air pollution
regulations, and local population totals.
More broadly, this paper departs from the literature in four primary ways. This is the first study
quantifying national changes in water pollution since before the Clean Water Act using a dense network
of monitoring sites. Trends are important in their own right and because measuring water pollution is
a step towards measuring its costs (Muller, Mendelsohn, and Nordhaus 2011). Some studies measure
trends in water pollution for small sets of monitoring sites (e.g., USEPA 2000b; Smith, Alexander, and
Wolman 1987).1
This paper also provides the first national estimate of how Clean Water Act investments affected
ambient pollution concentrations. We use these estimates to calculate the cost effectiveness of these
investments. Water pollution research typically uses ex ante engineering simulations to assess water
quality policies (Wu, Adams, Kling, and Tanaka 2004). A few studies do investigate how water pollution
affects self-reported emissions of one pollutant in specific settings (Earnhart 2004a,b; Cohen and Keiser
2017), or study similar questions for air pollution (Shapiro and Walker Forthcoming). Recent research
finds that India’s water pollution regulations, which have similar structure to the U.S. Clean Water
Act, are ineffective (Ebenstein 2012; Greenstone and Hanna 2014). Several studies find that ambient
1

Smith and Wolloh (2012) study one measure of pollution (dissolved oxygen) in lakes beginning after the Clean Water Act
and use data from one of the repositories we analyze. They conclude that “nothing has changed” since 1975. We find similar
trends for the pollutant they study in lakes, though we show that other pollutants are declining in lakes and that most pollutants
are declining in other types of waters.

4

water pollution increases with political boundaries (Sigman 2002; Lipscomb and Mobarak 2017; Kahn,
Li, and Zhao 2015). Some work investigates how fracking wells and the pollution they send to wastewater
treatment plants affect water quality (Olmstead, Muehlenbachs, Shih, Chu, and Krupnick 2013).
Third, this study provides the first estimate of the effects of water pollution regulation on home
values. Existing estimates of willingness-to-pay for water quality use travel cost methods, hedonics,
or stated preferences (i.e., contingent valuation; Kuwayama and Olmstead (2015) list many individual
studies).2 Travel cost studies typically rely on cross-sectional variation in pollution and focus on a limited
area like a county (e.g., Smith and Desvousges 1986), though some work uses broader coverage (Keiser
2016). Such studies may suffer from omitted variable bias because unobserved disamenities like factories
or roads contribute to pollution and discourage recreational visits (Leggett and Bockstael 2000; Murdock
2006; Moeltner and von Haefen 2011). Such omitted variables are important for studying air pollution,
though their importance for water pollution is unknown. Most cost-benefit analyses of the Clean Water
Act rely on stated preferences (Carson and Mitchell 1993; Lyon and Farrow 1995; USEPA 2000a), which
are controversial (Hausman 2012; Kling, Phaneuf, and Zhao 2012; McFadden and Train 2017).
Finally, we believe this is the first empirical study of the efficiency of subsidizing the use of pollution
control equipment. This policy is common in many countries and settings. Theoretical research has
lamented the poor incentives of such subsidies (Kohn 1992; Aidt 1998; Fredriksson 1998) and empirical
research is scarce.3 Our analysis of heterogeneity in cost-effectiveness and benefit-cost ratios also provides
a new domain to consider recent research on spatially differentiated policy (Muller and Mendelsohn 2009).
The paper proceeds as follows. Section II describes the Clean Water Act and water pollution. Section
III explains the data. Section IV discusses the econometric and economic models. Section V summarizes
pollution trends. Section VI analyzes how grants affected pollution. Section VII discusses grants’ effects
on housing. Section VIII concludes. All appendix material appears in the online appendix.
2

Muehlenbachs, Spiller, and Timmins (2015) relate fracking to home values and drinking water. Some studies in historic or
developing country settings, where drinking water regulation is limited, relate surface water quality to health (Ebenstein 2012;
Greenstone and Hanna 2014; Alsan and Goldin Forthcoming). Others relate drinking water quality directly to health (Currie,
Zivin, Meckel, Neidell, and Schlenker 2013).
3
The only econometric analysis we know of such policies tests how the French policy of jointly taxing industrial air pollution
and subsidizing abatement technologies affected emissions, using data from 226 plants (Millock and Nauges 2006). That study
does not separately identify the effect of the pollution tax from the effect of the abatement subsidy.

5

II

The Clean Water Act and Water Pollution

II.A

Clean Water Act Background

Policies before the Clean Water Act may contribute to some of the water pollution patterns we observe
before 1972.4 The U.S. Congress passed major water pollution control laws in 1948, 1956, 1961, 1965,
1966, and 1970. Many earlier laws, like the Clean Water Act, supported municipal wastewater treatment
and industrial abatement, but provided funds an order of magnitude below the funds distributed by
the Clean Water Act. By 1966, all 50 states had passed some type of water pollution legislation, but
enforcement varied greatly across states (Hines 1967).
The Clean Water Act retained large roles for state-level implementation, and the effectiveness of
that implementation most likely varied across states. While a simple formula determined the level of
grant funds that each state received, each state designed the priority lists determining which plants
received grants. States with decentralized authority also oversaw writing of permits for municipal plants,
monitoring and enforcement of violations, and other activities (Sigman 2003, 2005).
The Clean Water Act targeted municipal waste treatment and industrial pollution sources, sometimes
called “point sources.” However, much water pollution also comes from “non-point” pollution sources
such as urban and agricultural runoff. The Clean Water Act has largely exempted these latter sources
from regulation.
This paper focuses on the Clean Water Act grants program, but the Clean Water Act also limited industrial water pollution through the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES). NPDES
aims to cover every source which directly discharges pollution into U.S. waters. Some plants are part
of a separate “Pretreatment Program,” in which they discharge untreated or lightly-treated wastewater
through sewers to wastewater treatment plants, then pay fees to the treatment plant.5 The permits
were distributed in the early 1970s. This was a national program affecting most plants and industries at
around the same time.
4
The 1972 law was formally called the Federal Water Pollution Control Amendments, though we follow common practice in
referring to it as the Clean Water Act.
5
The wastewater treatment plants which are the focus of this paper also receive effluent permits through the NPDES program,
so our analysis of grants may also reflect NPDES permits distributed to wastewater treatment plants.

6

II.B

Wastewater Treatment Background

In most cities and towns, sewers convey wastewater to a municipal wastewater treatment plant which
treats the waste and then discharges it to surface waters. Ninety-eight percent of treatment plants are
publicly owned (USEPA 2002). The abatement technology in treatment plants initially only included
screens to remove large objects. As technology improved during the twentieth century, treatment plants
began allowing wastewater to settle before discharging, then plants began applying biological treatments
(e.g., bacteria) that degrade pollution, and finally began using more advanced chemical treatments. These
abatement technologies are generally called raw, primary, secondary, and tertiary treatment. The Clean
Water Act required all municipal treatment plants to have at least secondary treatment by 1977.
This investment in wastewater treatment was not cheap. Projects funded by Clean Water Act grants
cost about $650 billion in total over their lifetimes ($2014). Grants covered new treatment plants,
improvement of existing plants, and upgrades to sewers (USEPA 1975). Local governments paid about
a fourth of most grant projects’ capital costs.6 The 1987 Clean Water Act Amendments replaced these
grants with subsidized loans (the Clean Water State Revolving Fund).
The U.S. did not come close to meeting the Clean Water Act’s goal of having every plant install
secondary treatment by 1977, though abatement technologies improved over time. In 1978, for example,
nearly a third of all plants lacked secondary treatment, and by 1996, almost none did. The treatment
technology used in wastewater treatment plants, however, had been improving steadily before the Clean
Water Act (USEPA 2000b).
Because this paper exploits the timing and location of grants to identify the effect of the Clean Water
Act’s grants program, it is useful to clarify how grants were distributed. The allocation of wastewater
spending across states came from formulas depending on state population, forecast population, and
wastewater treatment needs (CBO 1985). Within a state, grants were distributed according to a “priority
list” that each state submitted annually to the EPA. States had to base a priority list on seven criteria
(USEPA 1980, p. 8):
6

The federal government paid 75 percent of the capital cost for most construction projects awarded through September 1984,
and 55 percent thereafter; local governments paid the rest of the capital costs. Beginning in 1977, grants provided a higher 85
percent subsidy to projects using “innovative” technology, such as those sending wastewater through constructed wetlands for
treatment. This extra subsidy fell to 75 percent in 1984, and about 8 percent of projects received the subsidy for innovative
technology (USGAO 1994).

7

1. [T]he severity of the pollution problem; 2. [T]he existing population affected; 3. [T]he
need for preservation of high quality waters; 4. [A]t the State’s option, the specific category
of need. . . 5. . . . [T]echniques meeting innovative and alternative guidelines. . . 6. [O]ther criteria, consistent with these, may be considered (including the special needs of small and rural
communities). The state may not consider: the project area’s development needs not related
to pollution abatement; the geographical region within the State; or future population growth
projections; and 7. [I]n addition to the criteria listed above, the State must consider . . . total
funds available; and other management criteria.
EPA estimated that it took two to ten years from project conception to finishing construction.

II.C

Water Pollution Background

This paper emphasizes two measures of water quality – the dissolved oxygen saturation of water, and
whether waters are fishable – though also reports results for other measures. We focus on dissolved oxygen
saturation because it is among the most common omnibus measures of water quality in research, because
it responds to a wide variety of pollutants, and because it is a continuous (rather than binary) measure
of pollution, which alleviates concerns about failing to measure inframarginal changes in water quality.
Most aquatic life requires dissolved oxygen to survive. Water can absorb dissolved oxygen from the
air, but loses dissolved oxygen when microorganisms consume oxygen in order to decompose pollution.
Dissolved oxygen levels move inversely with temperature. Dissolved oxygen saturation represents the
dissolved oxygen level divided by the maximum oxygen level expected given the water temperature, so
implicitly adjusts for water temperature. Actual dissolved oxygen saturation is bounded below at zero
(describing water with no oxygen) but is not bounded above. Dissolved oxygen deficits are defined as
100 minus dissolved oxygen saturation.
We focus also on the fishable standard because making water safe for fishing is a major goal of the
Clean Water Act, and because recreational fishing is believed to be a main reason why people value water
quality. We use a definition of “fishable” developed by William Vaughan for Resources for the Future
(RFF). This definition distills several published water quality criteria and state water quality standards
from between 1966 and 1979. It is also a widely-used interpretation of “fishable.” In this definition,

8

water is “fishable” if pollution is below a threshold, based on four measures: biochemical oxygen demand
(BOD), dissolved oxygen saturation, fecal coliforms, and total suspended solids (TSS). To implement
these definitions in the data, we pool data from these pollutants and define a dummy for whether a raw
pollution reading exceeds the relevant standard.7
We also report estimates for whether waters are swimmable, and we report separate results for the
other pollutants that are part of the “fishable” and “swimmable” definitions—BOD, fecal coliforms, and
TSS. These pollutants merit interest in their own right because BOD, fecal coliforms, and TSS are a
majority of the five “conventional pollutants” the Clean Water Act targeted. The other “conventional”
pollutants are pH, which we analyze in Appendix Table IV, and oil and grease, a pollutant for which
we have little data. We define all pollutants so that lower levels of the pollutant represent cleaner water
(so we report the share of waters that are “not fishable” or “not swimmable,” and we report dissolved
oxygen deficits).
Describing these other pollutants may help interpret results. BOD measures the amount of oxygen
consumed by decomposing organic matter. Fecal coliforms proxy for the presence of pathogenic bacteria,
viruses, and protozoa like E. coli that cause human illness. Pathogens including fecal coliforms are the
most common reason why water quality violates state standards today (USEPA 2016). TSS measures
the quantity of solids in water that is trapped by a filter.8 Municipal sources in the early 1980s were
estimated to account for about 20 percent of national BOD emissions and less than one percent of national
TSS emissions (Gianessi and Peskin 1981), though municipal sources may account for a larger share of
emissions in urban areas. Most TSS comes from agriculture and urban runoff.
We also report a few results for three additional groups of pollutants: industrial pollutants like lead,
mercury, and phenols; nutrients like nitrogen and phosphorus; and other general water quality measures
like temperature. We use a standardized criterion, described in Appendix B.3, to choose pollutants for
7

“Fishable” readings have BOD below 2.4 mg/L, dissolved oxygen above 64 percent saturation (equivalently, dissolved oxygen
deficits below 36 percent), fecal coliforms below 1000 MPN/100mL, and TSS below 50 mg/L. “Swimmable” waters must have
BOD below 1.5 mg/L, dissolved oxygen above 83 percent saturation (equivalently, dissolved oxygen deficits below 17 percent),
fecal coliforms below 200 MPN/100mL, and TSS below 10 mg/L. The definition also includes standards for boating and drinking
water that we do not analyze.
8
We analyze all these physical pollutants in levels, though Appendix Tables III and VI show results also in logs. Fecal coliforms
are approximately lognormally distributed, and BOD and TSS are somewhat skewed (Appendix Figure I). Log specifications
would implicitly assume that the percentage change in a river’s pollution due to a grant is the same for a river with a high
background concentration, which is unlikely. Other water pollution research generally specifies BOD and TSS in levels; practices
vary for fecal coliforms.

9

this appendix table.
One important question is how far these pollutants travel downstream. We focus on a distance
of 25 miles for several reasons. First, the only engineering study we found on this question (USEPA
2001) limited its analysis to 25 miles downstream of point sources for BOD. They chose this distance to
reflect 15 watershed-specific studies designed to remedy pollution problems. Second, an interview with a
wastewater regulation specialist at the Iowa Department of Natural Resources suggested that effects of
treatment plants on dissolved oxygen would be concentrated within 20 miles downriver. Third, estimated
effects of grants on whether rivers are fishable out to 100 miles downstream of a treatment plant only
show effects within 25 miles (Appendix Table VI).

III

Data

We use eight types of data; Appendix B provides additional details.
1. Spatial Data on Rivers and Lakes. We use data from the National Hydrography Dataset
Plus, Version 2.1 (NHD), an electronic atlas mapping all U.S. surface waters. NHD organizes the U.S.
into approximately 200 river basins, 2,000 watersheds, 70,000 named rivers, 3.5 million stream and river
miles, and 70 million river nodes. A river in these data consists of a set of river nodes (i.e., points)
connected by straight lines. NHD forms a network describing the flow direction of each river or stream
segment and helps us follow water pollution upstream or downstream. Panel A of Figure I shows U.S.
streams, rivers, and lakes, colored by their distance from the ocean, Great Lakes, or other terminus. (See
details in Appendix B.2.)
2. Municipal Water Pollution Sources. We use data on U.S. municipal water pollution treatment
plants from the EPA’s Clean Watershed Needs Survey (CWNS). We use latitude and longitude data from
the first available year for a plant (CWNS reports this beginning in 1984), and grant identifying codes
for all available years. We limit the analysis to plants that report non-zero population served.
3. Clean Water Act Grants. We filed two Freedom of Information Act requests to obtain details
on each of the 35,000 Clean Water Act grants that the federal government gave to these plants. These
records come from the EPA’s Grants Information and Control System (GICS). We restrict the analysis
to grants with non-missing award date, grant amount, and total project cost (including both federal and

10

local capital expenditures). The data also report the name of the overseeing government authority (city,
county, state, or special district), a grant identifier code, and the name of the recipient treatment plant.
The data also include grants in the years 1957-1971 given under predecessor laws to the Clean Water
Act. For simplicity, the analysis counts multiple grants to a treatment plant in a calendar year as a single
grant. (See details in Appendix B.4.)
4. Ambient Levels of Water Pollution. We use water pollution readings from three federal
data repositories: Storet Legacy, Modern Storet, and the National Water Information System (NWIS).9
Storet Legacy focuses on the earlier part of our period, and the full raw data include 18,000 data files
and 200 million pollution readings. Modern Storet is similar to Storet Legacy but covers more recent
years. The Storet repositories have data from many local organizations. USGS national and state offices
collect a large share of NWIS readings. Appendix B.3 describes details and steps taken to clean these
data, including limiting to rivers, streams, or lakes, restricting to comparable measurement methods,
winsorizing at the 99th percentile, excluding readings specific to hurricanes and other non-routine events,
and others.
Appendix Table I provides basic descriptive statistics. The analysis sample includes 11 million observations on the four main pollutants and 38 million observations on the additional pollutants discussed in
Appendix Table IV. The analysis sample covers 180,000 monitoring sites; an additional 60,000 monitoring
sites record data on the other pollutants discussed in Appendix Table IV. Levels of BOD, fecal coliforms,
and dissolved oxygen deficits are much lower in the U.S. than in India or China (Greenstone and Hanna
2014). Among the four main pollutants, about half the data describe dissolved oxygen. Almost half the
data come from monitoring sites that report readings in at least three of the four decades we analyze.
No sampling design explains why certain areas and years were monitored more than others. In some
cases, hydrologists purposefully designed representative samples of U.S. waters. At least three such networks are in these data: the Hydrologic Benchmark Network, the National Stream Quality Accounting
Network, and the National Water-Quality Assessment Program (HBN, NASQAN, and NAWQA), which
this paper discusses later. In other cases, sampling locations and frequency were chosen by local governments or non-governmental organizations. Cities and some states like Massachusetts have denser
9

We considered a fourth repository, the Sustaining the Earth’s Watersheds: Agricultural Research Data System (STEWARDS), managed by the USDA. We did not use these data because they focus on years 1990 and later, mainly measure
pesticides, and have a small sample.

11

monitoring networks, while other areas like Texas have less dense networks (Figure I, Panel C).
5. Census Tract Data. We use the Geolytics Neighborhood Change Database (NCDB), which
Geolytics built from the 1970, 1980, 1990, and 2000 Censuses of Population and Housing. The 1970
census only included metro areas in tracts, so these tract-level data for 1970 are restricted to metro areas,
and so much of our analysis is as well.
We use these census data because they have national coverage and because transaction-level records
from county assessor offices, such as those aggregated by Dataquick or CoreLogic, generally do not extend
back to the 1970s. Appendix B.5 provides further details, including a discussion of data quality.
6. Recreational Travel Distances. We seek to determine a distance around a river that covers
most individuals who travel to participate in recreation at this river. We obtain estimates of this distance
from the Nationwide Personal Transportation Survey (NPTS) for years 1983, 1990, and 1995. This survey
is the only source we know that provides a large nationally representative sample of recreational activities
and travel distances over the period we study.10 The survey picks a day and has respondents list all trips,
their purposes, and the driving distances in miles. We limit trip purposes to “vacation” or “other social
or recreation.” Averaged across the three survey years, the 95th percentile of one-way distance from
home to recreational destinations is about 34 miles. Of course, these data represent all recreational trips,
and do not distinguish whether water-based recreation trips require different travel distances.
This is the distance traveled along roads, but the radius we use to calculate the distance of homes
from rivers represents the shortest direct path along the ground (“great circle distance”). We are aware
of two comparisons between great circle and road distances. First, the 2009 National Household Travel
Survey (USDOT 2009, successor to the NPTS) reports both the road and great circle distance between
a person’s home and the person’s workplace. The mean ratio of the road distance to the great circle
distance is 1.4. Second, a recent study compared driving distance versus great circle distances for travel
from a representative sample of 70,000 locations in the U.S. to the nearest community hospital, and the
average ratio was also 1.4 (Boscoe, Henry, and Zdeb 2012).11 So we estimate that the great circle distance
between homes and rivers which covers 95 percent of recreational trips is 25 miles (≈33.7/1.4).
10

The National Survey of Recreation and the Environment and its predecessor, the National Recreation Survey, do not
systematically summarize trips taken and travel distances. Many travel demand papers use small surveys that report distance
traveled to a specific lake or for a narrow region.
11
The 1.4 ratio and the 34 mile calculation from the previous paragraph both use survey weights. These values are similar
without survey weights, or when excluding outlier reported travel distances (above 150 miles).

12

7. Municipal Financial Records. To examine the pass-through of federal Clean Water Act grants
to municipal spending on wastewater treatment, we use data from the 1970-2001 Annual Survey of State
and Local Government Finances and the Census of Governments. These data report annual capital and
total expenditures for sewerage (a category including wastewater treatment), separately for each local
government.12 The final sample includes 198 cities; in addition to describing these data in more detail,
Appendix B.6 discusses the main sample restrictions, including requiring a balanced panel and accurate
links to the grants data. Given this sample size, we report a set of estimates which weight by the inverse
propensity score, to provide estimates more representative of all cities. For use as a control variable
in some specifications, we obtain population data for most of these cities from the 1970-2000 decennial
censuses, then linearly interpolate between years.
8. Other Environmental Data. One sensitivity analysis controls for nearby industrial sources of
water pollution. We are not aware of any complete data on industrial water pollution sources around the
year 1972, so we use two distinct controls as imperfect proxies. The first is a list of the manufacturing
plants that used large amounts of water in 1972. We obtain these data from the confidential 1973
Survey of Water Use in Manufacturing (SWUM) microdata, accessed through a Census Research Data
Center. The second control is a count of the cumulative number of plants in a county holding industrial
effluent (NPDES) permits. We filed a Freedom of Information Act request to obtain a historic copy of
the EPA database which keeps records of industrial pollution sources—the Permit Compliance System,
now called the Integrated Compliance Information System. Appendix B.7 describes more information on
these sources, along with additional data on weather and nonattainment designations. Finally, Appendix
B.8 describes data used to consider heterogeneity across different groups of grants by several dimensions:
grant size, baseline abatement technologies, baseline pollution, Clean Water Act state decentralization,
prevalence of local outdoor fishing and swimming, local environmental views, declining older urban areas
(Glaeser and Gyourko 2005), and high amenity areas (Albouy 2016).
Spatial Links. We construct four types of links between datasets. The first involves linking each
pollution monitoring site and treatment plant to the associated river or lake. The second involves measuring distances along rivers between treatment plants and pollution monitoring sites. The third involves
12

The “year” in these data refers to each local government’s fiscal year. We convert the data to calendar years using data from
these surveys on the month when each government’s fiscal year ends, assuming that government expenditure is evenly distributed
across months. For the few governments that don’t report when their fiscal year ends, we assume they report by calendar year.

13

measuring areas of census tracts around rivers. The fourth involves linking grants to individual plants in
the CWNS. Appendix C provides details of each step.

IV
IV.A

Econometric and Economic Models
Econometrics: Water Pollution Trends

We use the following equation to assess year-by-year changes in water pollution:

Qicy =

τ =2001
X

0

ατ 1[yy = τ ] + Xicy β + δi + icy

(1)

τ =1963

Each observation in this analysis is an individual water pollution reading at monitoring site i, hour and
calendar day-of-year c, and year y. The variable Qicy represents the level of water pollution. We estimate
this equation separately for each pollutant. The matrix Xicy includes cubic polynomials in time of day
and in day of year. In sensitivity analyses, Xicy also includes air temperature and precipitation. The fixed
effects δi control for all time-invariant determinants of water pollution specific to monitoring site i. These
are important because they adjust for any cross-sectional differences in baseline pollution rates across
monitoring sites in the imbalanced panel, which ensures that identification comes only from changes in
pollution within each monitoring site and over time. The error term icy includes other determinants of
water pollution. We plot the year-by-year coefficients α1963 . . . α2001 plus the constant. The year-specific
points in graphs can be interpreted as mean national patterns of water pollution, controlling for time and
monitoring site characteristics.
Except where otherwise noted, all regressions in the paper are clustered by watershed. Appendix
Tables III, VI, and VIII also report results from two-way clustering by watershed and year. A watershed
is defined by the USGS as an area of land in which all water within it drains to one point. Where relevant,
watersheds or counties are defined by the treatment plant’s location.
We also estimate linear water pollution trends using the following equation:
0

Qicy = αyy + Xicy β + δi + icy

14

(2)

The main coefficient of interest, α, represents the mean annual change in water pollution, conditional on
the other controls in the regression. We also show specifications which interact the trend term y with an
indicator 1[y ≥ 1972] for whether an observation is year 1972 or later. This interaction measures how
water pollution trends differed after versus before the Clean Water Act. We emphasize graphs based on
equation (1) more than tables based on equation (2) since the nonlinear trends in graphs are crudely
approximated with linear trends and since 30 years is a long post period.

IV.B

Econometrics: Effects of Grants on Water Pollution

This section discusses estimates of how grants affect downstream water pollution, which is the paper’s
second main research question. It then assesses how grants affect municipal spending on wastewater
treatment capital. Appendix D discusses evidence on how water pollution changes as rivers pass treatment
plants, which tests the hypothesis that the data capture an important feature of the world.

Effects of Clean Water Act Grants on Water Pollution
We use the following regression to estimate effects of Clean Water Act grants on water pollution:
0

Qpdy = γGpy dd + Xpdy β + ηpd + ηpy + ηdwy + pdy

(3)

This regression has two observations for each treatment plant p and year y, one observation describing mean water quality upstream (d = 0), and the other observation describing mean water quality
downstream (d = 1). The variable Gpy describes the cumulative number of grants that plant p had
received by year y. This regression measures grants as a cumulative stock because they represent investment in durable capital. The main coefficient of interest, γ, represents the mean effect of each grant on
downstream water pollution. We also explore other specifications for G, including limiting to grants for
construction and not for planning or design, estimating effects separately for each possible number of
cumulative grants, and others.
Equation (3) includes several important sets of controls. The matrix Xpdy includes temperature and
precipitation controls. The plant×downstream fixed effects ηpd allow both upstream and downstream
waters for each treatment plant to have different mean levels of water pollution. These fixed effects

15

control for time-invariant sources of pollution like factories and farms, which may be only upstream or
only downstream of a plant. The plant×year fixed effects ηpy allow for water pollution to differ near
each treatment plant in each year, and they control for forces like the growth of local industries, other
environmental regulations, and changes in population density which affect both upstream and downstream
pollution. The downstream×basin×year fixed effects ηdwy allow upstream and downstream water quality
separately to differ by year in ways that are common to all plants in a river basin. These fixed effects
address the possibility that other point source pollutants and regulations are located near wastewater
treatment plants and had water quality trends related to the municipal grants.
Equation (3) focuses on the effect of the number of grants a plant has received, rather than the dollar
value of these grants, for several reasons. (Appendix Table VI reports similar effects of grant dollars.)
First, it may be easier to think in discrete terms about the effect of a grant, rather than the effect of
an arbitrary amount of money. Second, estimating these regressions in simple discrete terms makes the
regression tables more easily comparable with event study graphs. Third, larger grants tend to go to more
populated areas and larger rivers. Because it takes larger investment to achieve a change in pollution
concentration for a more populated area and larger river, it is ambiguous whether larger grants should
have larger effects on pollution concentrations. Fourth, the distribution of cumulative grant amounts is
both skewed and has many zeros. Focusing on the number of grants rather than grant dollars avoids
issues involved in log transformations (or other approaches) in the presence of many zeros.
A few other details are worth noting. Because the dependent variable is an average over different numbers of underlying pollution readings, in all regressions where each observation is plant-downstream-year
tuple, we use generalized least squares weighted by the number of raw underlying pollution readings.13
To maximize comparability between the treatment plant location and monitoring sites, we restrict pollution data to monitoring sites located on the same river as the treatment plant. Finally, estimates are
limited to plants within 1 kilometer of a river node. Appendix Table VI shows results with some of these
assumptions relaxed.
The identifying assumption for equation (3) to provide an unbiased estimate of the parameter γ is
13

We also report unweighted estimates.
GLS based on the number of underlying pollution readings in each
plant×downstream×year is an efficient response to heteroskedasticity since we have grouped data. GLS estimates the effect
for the average pollution reading rather than for the average plant×downstream×year. It is possible that areas with more
pollution data may be of greater interest; for example, Panel C of Figure I shows more monitoring sites in more populated areas.

16

that the grants×downstream interaction Gpy d is independent of the regression error, conditional on other
explanatory variables:
E[Gpy dd · dpy |Xpdy , ηpd , ηpy , ηdwy ] = 0
This assumption would be violated if, for example, grants or permits responded to unobserved shocks to
variables like population which themselves affect pollution concentrations.14
We also report event study graphs of outcomes relative to the year when a facility receives a grant:15

Qpdy =

τX
=25

0

γτ 1[Gp,y+τ = 1]dd + Xpdy β + ηpd + ηpy + ηdwy + pdy

(4)

τ =−10

Here τ indexes years since a grant was received, where τ = −10 is plants receiving a grant ten or more
years in the future, and τ = −25 is plants receiving grants 25 or more years in the past.16

Pass-through of Clean Water Act Grants to Municipal Expenditure
How does a dollar of Clean Water Act grants affect municipal spending on wastewater treatment? Grants
could have complete pass-through, so a federal grant of one dollar increases municipal spending on wastewater treatment by a dollar. Grants could also have incomplete pass-through (crowding out municipal
expenditure) or more than complete pass-through (crowding in).
We study this question primarily because it can increase the accuracy of cost-effectiveness and costbenefit analyses. If, for example an additional dollar of federal grant funds lead cities to spend less than
a dollar on wastewater treatment, then the spending due to grants is less than our cost data imply.
14
This assumption could also fail if changes in governments’ effectiveness at receiving grants are correlated with governments’
effectiveness at operating treatment plants. This does not seem consistent with our results since it would likely create pre-trends
in pollution or home values, whereas we observe none. Our finding that benefits last about as long as engineering estimates
suggest (30 years) and for only the expected pollutants also are not exactly what this story would predict. We also observe that
each additional grant results in further decreases in pollution (Appendix Table VI), which would be a complicated story for the
timing of government human capital to explain.
15
The analysis includes plants that never received a grant (which have all event study indicators 1[Gp,y+τ = 1] equal to zero),
plants that received a single grant (which in any observation have only a single event indicator equal to one), and plants that
received more than one grant (which in any observation can have several event indicators equal to one). Since no reference
category is required in this kind of event study setting where one observation can receive multiple treatments, for ease of
interpretation, we recenter the graph line so the coefficient for the year before treatment (τ − 1) equals zero. This implies that
coefficients in the graph can be interpreted as the pollution level in a given year, relative to the pollution level in the period
before the treatment plant received a grant.
16
As in most event study analyses, only a subset of event study indicators are observed for all grants. Because most grants
were given in the 1970s, we observe water pollution up to 10 years before and 15-25 years after most grants.

17

The question of how federal grants affect municipal spending is also important in the fiscal federalism
literature (Oates 1999; Lutz 2010). Finally, this analysis provides some evidence on the quality of the
grants data, since the grants data come from a completely different source than the municipal expenditure
data.
To estimate the pass-through of Clean Water Act grants to local expenditure, we regress cumulative
municipal sewerage capital expenditures Ecy in city c and year y on cumulative Clean Water Act grant
dollars Dcy this city has received:

Ecy = βDcy + υc + ηwy + cy

(5)

The dependent and independent variables are cumulative because capital is a stock, and since local
investment could occur after the grants are received. The regression includes city fixed effects υc and
year fixed effects ηy . We also report specifications with river basin×year fixed effects ηwy . The value
β = 1 implies complete pass-through (no crowding out or crowding in). Finding β < 1 implies incomplete
pass-through (crowding out), while β > 1 implies more than complete pass-through (crowding in).
The definitions of these variables are important. Municipal expenditures Ecy include both expenditures funded by federal grants and those funded by other sources of revenue. As mentioned in Section
II.B, most grants require cities to pay 25 percent of the capital cost, though a small share require other
copayments. We therefore report two sets of regressions—one where the variable Dcy includes only federal grant funds, and another where the variable Dcy includes both federal grant funds and the required
municipal capital contribution. We also report specifications that weight by the inverse propensity score
for inclusion in the balanced panel of cities.

IV.C

Demand for Water Quality

Hedonic Model
A few definitions and a graph convey essential features of the hedonic model. A house i is described
by a vector of its J different characteristics, (z1 , . . . , zJ ). The home’s price is Pi = P (z1 , . . . , zJ ). The
marginal implicit price of attribute j is the marginal change in home price due to a marginal increase in
attribute j, all else constant: Pzj ≡ ∂P/∂zj . The key feature of this hedonic price schedule P (·) is that

18

it reflects the equilibrium of firms that supply housing and consumers that demand housing. We assume
that housing markets are competitive and that each consumer rents one house.
Appendix Figure VII illustrates. The curve θ1 describes the bid function of one type of consumer.
The bid function is the consumer’s indifference curve in the tradeoff between the price of a home and the
amount of attribute j embodied in the home. The curve θ2 describes the bid function for another type of
consumer. The curve φ1 describes the offer function of a firm, and φ2 of another firm. The offer function
is the firm’s isoprofit curve in the tradeoff between home price and attribute j.
The hedonic price schedule provides information about willingness-to-pay for amenity j because it
reflects the points of tangency between consumer bid curves and firm offer curves. This implies that the
marginal implicit price of an amenity at a given point on the hedonic price schedule equals the marginal
willingness to pay of the consumer who locates on that point of the hedonic price schedule.

Econometrics: Demand for Water Quality
To analyze how Clean Water Act grants affected home values, we use a differences-in-differences estimate
comparing the change in the log mean value of homes within a 0.25, 1, or 25 mile radius in any direction
of the downstream river, before versus after the plant receives a grant, and between plants receiving
grants in early versus late years.
Because water pollution flows in a known direction, areas upstream of a treatment plant provide a
natural counterfactual for areas downstream of a plant. For this reason, our preferred methodology in
Section IV.B to assess how Clean Water Act grants affect water pollution uses a triple-difference estimator
comparing upstream and downstream areas. But because residents who live upstream of treatment plants
can benefit from clean water downstream of treatment plants (e.g., by traveling for recreation), upstream
homes could benefit from grants. Hence our preferred housing estimates come from difference-in-difference
regressions analyzing homes within a 25 mile radius of river segments that are downstream of treatment
plants. We report both the double-difference and triple-difference estimators for both outcomes, and
obtain qualitatively similar conclusions.
We estimate the following regression:
0

Vpy = γGpy + Xpy β + ηp + ηwy + py

19

(6)

Here Gpy represents the cumulative number of grants received by plant p in year y, Vpy is the log mean
value of homes within a 0.25, 1, or 25 mile radius of the portion of the river that is 25 miles downstream of
treatment plant p, ηp are plant fixed effects, and ηwy are river basin×year fixed effects. Some specifications
include controls Xpy for house structure characteristics and the interaction of baseline characteristics with
year fixed effects (see Appendix B.5 for details). We estimate the change in total housing units and total
value of the housing stock.
A few points are worth noting. First, we limit regression estimates to the set of tracts reporting
home values in all four years 1970, 1980, 1990, 2000. When we fit the change in home values, we do so
both for only the balanced panel of tract-years reporting home values, and for all tract-years. Second,
because the differences-in-differences specification used for home values does not use upstream areas as
a counterfactual, it involves the stronger identifying assumption that areas with more and fewer grants
would have had similar home price trends in the absence of the grants. In part for this reason, we focus
on specifications including basin×year fixed effects and the interaction of baseline characteristics with
year fixed effects. Estimates without the basin×year controls are more positive but also more sensitive to
specification, which is one indication that the specification of equation (6) provides sharper identification.
Fourth, to obtain regression estimates for the average housing unit, and to provide an efficient response
to heteroskedasticity, we include generalized least squares weights proportional to the number of total
housing units in the plant-year observation and to the sampling probability.17

V
V.A

Water Pollution Trends
Main Results

We find large declines in most pollutants the Clean Water Act targeted. Dissolved oxygen deficits and the
share of waters that are not fishable both decreased almost every year between 1962 and 1990 (Figure II).
After 1990, the trends approach zero. Year-by-year trends for the other pollutants in the main analysis
– the share of waters that are not swimmable, BOD, fecal coliforms, and TSS – show similar patterns
(Appendix Figure III).
17

The census long form has housing data and was collected from one in six households on average, but the exact proportion
sampled varies across tracts.

20

The graphs show no obvious evidence of a mean-shift or trend-break in water pollution around 1972.
This tells us little about the Clean Water Act’s effects, however, since its investments may take time
to affect water pollution, expanded during the 1970s, and may be effective even if not obvious from a
national time series. These graphs also suggest that existing evaluations of the Clean Water Act, which
typically consist of national trend reports based on data from after 1972, may reflect forces other than
the Clean Water Act. Using a national time series to evaluate the Clean Water Act could imply that it
has been counterproductive, since the rate of decrease in pollution slowed after 1972.
Regressions with linear trend and trend break specifications underscore these findings, subject to the
caveats mentioned earlier about the linear approximations and the long post period. The share of waters
that are not fishable fell on average by about half a percentage point per year, and the share that are
not swimmable fell at a similar rate (Table I, Panel A). In total over the period 1972-2001, the share of
waters that are not fishable and the share not swimmable fell by 11 to 12 percentage points. Each of the
four pollutants which are part of these fishable and swimmable definitions declined rapidly during this
period. Fecal coliforms had the fastest rate of decrease, at 2.5 percent per year. BOD, dissolved oxygen
deficits, and total suspended solids all declined at 1 to 2 percent per year.
These full data show more rapid declines before 1972 than after it. Independent evidence is generally
consistent with this idea. Engineering calculations in USEPA (2000b) suggest that the efficiency with
which treatment plants removed pollution grew faster in the 1960s than in the 1980s or 1990s. Hines
(1967) describes state and local control of water pollution in the 1960s, which typically included legislation designating regulated waters and water quality standards, a state pollution control board, and
enforcement powers against polluters including fines and incarceration. Data on industrial water pollution in the 1960s is less detailed, though manufacturing water intake (which is highly correlated with
pollution emissions) was flat between 1964 and 1973 due to increasing internal recycling of water (Becker
2016). Moreover, the share of industrial water discharge that was treated by some abatement technology
grew substantially in the 1960s (Bureau 1971). We interpret pre-1972 trends cautiously, however, both
because far fewer monitoring sites recorded data before the 1970s (Appendix Table I), and because the
higher-quality monitoring networks (NAWQA, NASQAN, and HBN) focused their data collection after
1972.
It is interesting to consider possible explanations for these slowing trends. One involves declining

21

returns to abatement of pollution from “point sources.” At the same time, much oxygen-demanding
pollution comes from agriculture and other “non-point” sources, and those sources have remained largely
unregulated. Another is that “fishable” and “swimmable” are limited between 0 and 1, and dissolved
oxygen saturation does not much exceed 100 percent. This explanation is less relevant for the slowing
trends in continuous variables like BOD, fecal coliforms, or TSS.
We estimate many sensitivity analyses, including restricting to high-quality subsamples of the data,
adding important controls, weighting by population, and many others. Most of these alternative approaches have similar sign, magnitude, and precision as the main results. Appendix Table III shows these
results and Appendix E.1 explains each.

V.B

Other Water Quality Measures

We also discuss trends in three other groups of water quality measures: industrial pollutants; nutrients;
and general measures of water quality (Appendix Table IV).18 All three industrial pollutants have declined
rapidly. Lead’s decrease of about 10 percent per year may be related to air pollution regulations, such
as prohibiting leaded gasoline. The decline in mercury is noteworthy given the recent controversy of
the Mercury and Air Toxics Standards (MATS) policy that would regulate mercury from coal-fired
power plants. Some nutrients like ammonia and phosphorus are declining, while others like nitrates
are unchanged. Nutrients were not targeted in the original Clean Water Act, but are a focus of current
regulation. Temperature is increasing by about 1 degree F per 40 years, which is consistent with effects
from climate change. Electricity generating units and other sources do contribute to thermal pollution
in rivers, but increasing temperature is an outlier from decreasing trends in most other water pollutants.
pH increased by 0.007 pH units per year, meaning that waters became more basic (less acidic).
Rainwater monitors that are not in our data record increases of similar magnitude in rainwater pH
over this period, and attribute it to declines in atmospheric sulfur air pollution (USEPA 2007). Hence
decreases in acidic sulfur air pollution may have contributed to decreases in acidic water pollution.
18

Appendix B.3 describes the rule we use to choose indicators for this list; it mainly reflects the pollutants used in the EPA’s
(1974) first major water pollution report after the Clean Water Act.

22

VI
VI.A

Clean Water Act Grants and Water Pollution
Effects of Clean Water Act Grants on Pollution

Table II shows that these grants cause large and statistically significant decreases in pollution. Each
grant decreases dissolved oxygen deficits by 0.7 percentage points, and decreases the probability that
downstream waters are not fishable by 0.7 percentage points. The other pollutants decrease as well —
BOD falls by about 2.4 percent, fecal coliforms fall by 3.6 percent, and the probability that downstream
waters are not swimmable by about half a percentage point. The point estimate implies that each grant
decreases TSS by one percent, though is imprecise.
Event study graphs corresponding to equation (4) support these results. In years before a grant,
the coefficients are statistically indistinguishable from zero, have modest magnitude, and have no clear
trend (Figure III). This implies that pollution levels in upstream and downstream waters had similar
trends before grants were received. In the years after a grant, downstream waters have 1-2 percent lower
dissolved oxygen deficits, and become 1-2 percent less likely to violate fishing standards. These effects
grow in magnitude over the first ten years, are statistically significant in this period, and remain negative
for about 30 years after a grant. The gradual effect of the grants is unsurprising since, as mentioned earlier,
EPA estimates that it took two to ten years after a grant was received for construction to finish. The 30year duration of these benefits is also consistent with, though on the lower end of, engineering predictions.
Two studies report that concrete structures of treatment plants are expected to have a useful life of 50
years but mechanical and electrical components have a useful life of 15-25 years (American Society of
Civil Engineers 2011, p. 15; USEPA 2002, p. 11). Event study graphs for other pollutants are consistent
with these results, though are less precise (Appendix Figure IV). Appendix Figure V shows the effect of a
grant by distance downstream from a treatment plant; less data is available to estimate effects separately
for each 5-mile bin along the river, and estimates are correspondingly less precise.
Appendix Table VI shows a variety of sensitivity analyses, and Appendix E.2 discusses each. They
give similar qualitative conclusions as the main results, though exact point estimates vary.

23

VI.B

Grants’ Effects on Water Pollution: Cost-Effectiveness

We now turn to estimate the cost-effectiveness of these grants. The cost-effectiveness is defined as the
annual public expenditure required to decrease dissolved oxygen deficits in a river-mile by 10 percentage
points or to make a river-mile fishable. These calculations use our regression estimates and the cost data.
Even without the hedonic estimates of the next section, one can combine cost-effectiveness numbers
with estimates from other studies of the value of clean waters to obtain a cost-benefit analysis of these
grants. Moreover, we are not aware of any existing ex post estimates of the cost required to make a
river-mile fishable or to decrease dissolved oxygen deficits.
Table III presents estimates of cost-effectiveness. The simplest specification of column (1), which
includes rivers with water quality data, implies that it cost $0.67 million per year to increase dissolved
oxygen saturation in a river-mile by ten percent; the broadest specification of column (3), which assumes
every treatment plant has 25 miles of downstream waters affected, implies that it cost $0.53 million per
year. The annual cost to make a river-mile fishable ranges from $1.5 to $1.9 million.19
A few notes are important for interpreting these statistics. First, this is the average cost to supply
water quality via Clean Water Act grants; the marginal cost, or the cost for a specific river, may differ.
Second, measuring cost-effectiveness is insufficient to reach conclusions about social welfare; Section VII
discusses peoples’ value for these changes. Third, if some grant expenditures were lost to rents (e.g.,
corruption), then those expenditures represent transfers and not true economic costs. EPA did audit
grants to minimize malfeasance. In the presence of such rents, this analysis could be interpreted as a
cost-effectiveness analysis from the government’s perspective.
Appendix E.2 investigates heterogeneity in grants’ effects on water pollution and cost-effectiveness.
Overall, this evidence does not suggest dramatic heterogeneity in cost-effectiveness. Compared to the
mean grant, grants to declining urban areas are significantly less cost-effective, while grants to the generally rural counties where many people go fishing or swimming are significantly more effective. Most others
are statistically indistinguishable from the mean grant, though there is some moderate (if statistically
insignificant) heterogeneity in point estimates.
19

The cost-effectiveness estimates for fishable regressions are based on Appendix Table VI, Row 13. The main regression
estimates in Table II reflect the change in the share of pollution readings that are fishable and do not distinguish between cases
where the share of readings that are fishable moved from 20 to 21 percent, or where it changed from 80 to 81 percent. The
statistic we use reflects the binary cutoff of whether a majority of readings are fishable.

24

VI.C

Pass-Through of Clean Water Act Grants to Municipal Expen-

diture
Table IV reports estimates corresponding to equation (5). In Panel A, the main explanatory variable
excludes required municipal contributions, while Panel B includes them. Column (1) reports a basic
differences-in-differences regression with nominal dollars. Column (2) uses real dollars. A city may spend
a grant in years after it is received, so real pass-through may be lower than nominal pass-through. Column
(3) adds river basin×year fixed effects. Column (4) reweights estimates using the inverse of the estimated
propensity score for inclusion in the balanced panel of cities.
The estimates in Table IV are generally consistent with near complete pass-through, i.e., little or no
crowding out or in beyond the required municipal capital copayment. Panel A estimates pass-through
modestly above one since it excludes the required municipal copayment. Panel B includes the local
copayment, and finds pass-through rates of 0.84 to 0.93 in real terms or 1.09 in nominal terms. These
estimates are within a standard deviation of one, so fail to reject the hypothesis that the municipal
wastewater investment exactly equals the cost listed in the grant project data.20
We emphasize a few caveats in interpreting Table IV. First, the analysis is based on only 198 cities.
The inverse propensity score reweighted estimates are designed to reflect the entire population of US cities.
Second, this city-level difference-in-difference estimate cannot use the upstream-downstream comparison
for identification. Third, this analysis is different from the question of what municipal spending (and
pollution and home values) would be in a world without the Clean Water Act. Our estimates are
consistent with no crowdout for an individual grant, but the existence of the Clean Water Act may
decrease aggregate municipal investment in wastewater treatment. Appendix Figure VI shows national
trends in federal versus state and local spending on wastewater treatment capital over the years 19601983.21 State and local spending on wastewater treatment capital declined steadily from a total of $43
billion in 1963 to $22 billion in 1971 and then to $7 billion annually by the late 1970s. Notably, almost
half of this decline in state and local wastewater treatment capital spending occurred before the Clean
20

We also explored estimates controlling for city-year population or city-year municipal revenue. These controls could help
address possible omitted variables bias due to city growth in these differences-in-differences regressions, but are potentially a case
of bad controls (Angrist and Pischke 2009) since they could be affected by grants. Adding population or city revenue controls
to the specification of column (4) in Table IV gives estimates of 1.22 (0.30) or 0.91 (0.18) for Panel A, and 0.92 (0.22) or 0.68
(0.13) for Panel B. We discuss a range of pass-through estimates including these for cost-effectiveness and cost-benefit analysis.
21
CBO (1985) dictates this time period since it provides the national total state and local spending data underlying this graph.

25

Water Act. Federal spending grew to between $10 and $20 billion per year in the late 1970s.
Other sources note that these time series trends are consistent with aggregate crowdout (Jondrow and
Levy 1984; CBO 1985). Identification from a national time series is difficult, since other national shocks
like the 1973-5 and early 1980s recessions, high inflation and interest rates, and the OPEC crisis make
the 1960s a poor counterfactual for the 1970s and 1980s.
Our interpretation is that once the Clean Water Act began, cities became less likely to spend municipal
funds on wastewater treatment capital. In this sense, the existence of the Clean Water Act did crowd
out aggregate municipal investment in wastewater treatment. But municipal investments that occurred
were closely connected to grants, and point estimates imply that the grant costs in our data accurately
represent the actual change in spending. Appendix E.2 discusses how cost-effectiveness numbers change
with alternative estimates of crowd-out.22
These pass-through estimates also speak to the broader “flypaper” literature in public finance, a
literature named to reflect its finding that federal government spending “sticks where it hits.” Researchers
have estimated the pass-through of federal grants to local expenditure in education, social assistance, and
other public services. A review of ten U.S. studies found pass-through estimates between 0.25 and 1.06
(Hines and Thaler 1995). Non-U.S. studies and more recent U.S. estimates find an even wider range
(Gamkhar and Shah 2007). One general conclusion from this literature is that the effect of federal
grants on local government expenditure substantially exceeds the effect of local income changes on local
government expenditure (the latter is typically around 0.10). This literature also finds that federal
grants which require local matching funds and which specify the grants’ purpose, both characteristics of
the Clean Water Act grants, tend to have higher pass-through rates. Our findings are consistent with
both these general conclusions.

VII
VII.A

Demand for Water Quality
Main Results

Table V analyzes how Clean Water Act grants affect housing. Column (1) shows estimates for homes
within a quarter mile of downstream waters. Column (2) adds controls for dwelling characteristics, and
22

See Kline and Walters (2016) for a related analysis in education.

26

for baseline covariates interacted with year fixed effects. Column (3) include all homes within 1 mile, and
column (4) includes homes within 25 miles.
Panel A reports estimates of how grants affect log mean home values. The positive coefficients in the
richer specifications of columns (2) through (4) are consistent with increases in home values, though most
are statistically insignificant. Column (4) implies that each grant increases mean home values within
25 miles of affected waters by two and a half hundredths of a percentage point. The 0.25 or 1.0 mile
estimates are slightly larger, which is consistent with the idea that residents nearer to the river benefit
more from water quality. Panel B analyzes how grants affect log mean rental values. These estimates are
even less positive than the estimates for housing. The estimate in column (4), including homes within a
25 mile radius of downstream rivers, is small and statistically insignificant but actually negative.
Panels A and B reflect the classic hedonic model, with fixed housing stock. Panel C estimates the
effect of grants on log housing units and Panel D on the log of the total value of the housing stock. They
suggest similar conclusions as Panels A and B. Most of these estimates are small and actually negative.
Two are marginally significant (Panel C, column 1), though the precision and point estimate diminish
with the controls of column (2).
Figure IV shows event study graphs, which suggest similar conclusions as these regressions. Panel A
shows modest evidence that in the years after a plant receives a grant, the values of homes within 0.25
miles of the downstream river increase. The increases are small and statistically insignificant in most
years. Panel B shows no evidence that homes within 25 miles of the downstream river increase after a
treatment plant receives a grant.
We also report a range of sensitivity analyses, which are broadly in line with the main results. Estimates appear in Appendix Table VIII and discussion appears in Appendix E.3.

VII.B

Measured Benefits and Costs

We now compare the ratio of a grant’s effect on housing values (its “measured benefits”) to its costs.
The change in the value of housing is estimated by combining the regression estimates of Table V with
the baseline value of housing and rents from the census. Grant costs include local and federal capital
expenditures plus operating and maintenance costs over the 30 year lifespan for which we estimate grants
affect water pollution. We deflate operating and maintenance costs and rents at a rate of 7.85 percent

27

(Peiser and Smith 1985).23
Column (1) of Table VI includes only owned homes within a 1 mile radius of the downstream river
segments; column (2) includes homes within a 25 mile radius; and column (3) adds rental units. Column
(4) includes imputed home values for the non-metro areas that were not in 1970 or 1980 census.24
Considering all owner-occupied homes within 25 miles of the river, the estimated ratio of the grants’
aggregate effects on home values to the grants’ costs is 0.26. Adding rental units in column (3) barely
changes this estimate. The main regression sample includes only a balanced panel of tracts that appear
in all four censuses between 1970-2000; imputing values for missing homes hardly changes the ratio in
column (4). These confidence regions do not reject the hypothesis that the ratio of the change in home
values to the grants’ costs is zero but do reject the hypothesis that the change in home values equals the
grants’ costs.
Appendix Table VII investigates heterogeneity in measured benefits and costs; Appendix E.3 discusses
the results. We find suggestive evidence that ratios of measured benefits to costs follow sensible patterns,
though not all estimates are precise. None of these subsets of grants considered has a ratio of measured
benefits to costs above one, though many of the confidence regions cannot reject a ratio of one. The
largest ratios of estimated benefits to costs are for areas where outdoor fishing or swimming is common
(ratio of 0.53), for high amenity urban areas (ratio of 0.40), and in the South (ratio of 0.84).
The map in Appendix Figure VIII shows heterogeneity in the ratio of measured benefits to costs across
U.S. counties. This map assumes the same hedonic price function and reflects spatial heterogeneity in
housing unit density.25 The map shows that the ratio of measured benefits to costs is larger in more
populated counties. The bottom decile of counties, for example, includes ratios of measured benefits
to costs of below 0.01. The top decile of counties includes ratios between 0.31 and 0.41. Grants and
population are both skewed, so large shares of both are in the top decile. While a point estimate of
0.41 for the ratio of benefits to costs does not exceed one, one should interpret this value in light of the
23

We include all capital and operating and maintenance costs in the measure of total grant project costs. The tables separately
list the different components of costs, and Section VII.C discusses possible effects of these costs on local taxes or fees. We calculate
the present value of rental payouts as rentalP ayout[1 − (1 + r)−n ]/r, where rentalP ayout is the change in total annual rents
due to the grants, r = 0.0785 is the interest rate, and n = 30 is the duration of the benefits in years.
24
We impute these values from a panel regression of log mean home values on year fixed effects and tract fixed effects.
25
These estimates divide treatment plants into ten deciles of the number of housing units in the year 2000 within 25 miles
of downstream river segments. They then use the regression estimates from column 4 of Table V to calculate the ratio of the
change in the value of housing and grant costs, separately by decile. Finally, we average this ratio across plants in each county.

28

discussion from the next subsection that it may be a lower bound on true benefits.
This predictable spatial variation in the net benefits of water quality variation suggests that allowing
the stringency of regulation to vary over space may give it greater net benefits (Muller and Mendelsohn
2009; Fowlie and Muller Forthcoming).

VII.C

Interpreting Hedonic Estimates

We now discuss six reasons why the ratios of measured benefits to costs from the previous subsection
may provide a lower bound on the true benefit/cost ratio. Appendix F discusses other reasons which we
believe have weaker support.
First, people might have incomplete information about changes in water pollution and their welfare
implications. Research does find statistically significant though imperfect correlation between perceived
local water pollution and objectively measured local water pollution (Faulkner, Green, Pellaumail, and
Weaver 2001; Poor, Boyle, Taylor, and Bouchard 2001; Jeon, Herriges, Kling, and Downing 2011; Steinwender, Gundacker, and Wittmann 2008; Artell, Ahtiainen, and Pouta 2013). Incomplete information
would be especially important if pollution abatement improves health. Misperception would be less important if most benefits of surface water quality accrue through recreation or aesthetics, since failing to
perceive water pollution through any means would mean its effects on recreational demand are limited.
Most recent cost-benefit analyses of the Clean Water Act estimate that a substantial share of benefits
come from recreation and aesthetics channels (Lyon and Farrow 1995; Freeman 2000; USEPA 2000a).
Cropper and Oates (1992) describe the Clean Water Act as the only major environmental regulation of
the 1970s and 1980s which does not have health as its primary goal.
Second, due to “nonuse” or “existence” values, a person may value a clean river even if that person
never visits or lives near that river. We recognize both the potential importance of nonuse values for
clean surface waters and the severe challenges in accurately measuring these values.26 Other categories
potentially not measured here include the value for commercial fisheries, industrial water supplies, lower
treatment costs for drinking water, and safer drinking water.27 Evidence on the existence and magnitude
26

The USEPA’s (2000a) cost-benefit analysis of the Clean Water Act estimates that nonuse values are a sixth as large as use
values. This analysis, however, is subject to serious concerns about both use and non-use estimates in the underlying studies.
27
Flint, Michigan, has recently had high lead levels in drinking water due to switching its water source from the Detroit River
to the Flint River. Flint potentially could have prevented these problems by adding corrosion inhibitors (like orthophosphate),

29

of the benefits from these other channels is limited, though as mentioned above, recreation and aesthetics
are believed to account for a large majority of the benefits of clean surface waters.
Third, these grants could lead to increased city taxes, sewer fees, or other local costs that depress home
values. Table VI separately lists three types of costs: federal expenditures on capital, local expenditures
on capital, and operation and maintenance costs. The ultimate entity responsible for local capital costs
and operation and maintenance costs is ambiguous since local governments may receive other payments
from state or federal governments to help cover these costs. But if local governments ultimately pay these
costs, they could depress home values.
A few pieces of evidence help evaluate the relevance of these issues. One is to estimate hedonic
regressions excluding housing units in the same city as the wastewater treatment plant. This is potentially
informative since increased taxes, sewer fees, or changes in other municipal expenditures are likely to
be concentrated in the municipal authority managing the treatment plant, whereas the change in water
quality is relevant for areas further downstream. Row 12 of Appendix Table VIII reports this specification
and finds similar and if anything slightly less positive change in home values than the main results
estimate, which is the opposite of what one would expect if city taxes, sewer fees, or other local costs
depressed home values. Another test comes from the fact that the 1980-2000 gross rent data reported in
the census include utilities costs. If sewer fees were particularly important, then one would expect rents
to increase more than home values do; if anything, the estimates of Table V suggest the opposite. Finally,
we can recalculate the ratios in Table VI considering only subsets of costs. The ratio of the change in
housing values to federal capital costs in columns (2)-(4) of Table VI ranges from 0.8 to 0.9; the ratio of
the change in housing values to the sum of federal capital costs and operating costs (but excluding local
capital costs) in these columns is around 0.3. None of these ratios exceeds one, though they are closer to
one than are the values in Table VI.
Fourth, this analysis abstracts from general equilibrium changes. One possible channel is that wages
change to reflect the improvement in amenities (Roback 1982). A second general equilibrium channel is
that the hedonic price function may have shifted. In the presence of such general equilibrium changes,
our estimates could be interpreted as a lower bound on willingness to pay (Banzhaf 2015).
which are used in many cities including the Detroit water that Flint previously used, at low cost. Drinking water treatment falls
under a separate set of regulations, the Safe Drinking Water Act.

30

Other possible general equilibrium channels describe reasons why the effects of cleaning up an entire
river system could differ from summing up the effects of site-specific cleanups. One such channel involves
substitution—cleaning up part of a river in an area with many dirty rivers might have different value
than cleaning up a river in an area with many clean rivers. Another possible channel involves ecology.
The health of many aquatic species (so indirectly, the benefit people derive from a river) may depend
nonlinearly on the area of clean water. Our approach focuses on the effects of cleaning up an individual
site and is not as well suited to capture the potentially distinct effects of cleaning up entire river systems.
Fifth, the 25 mile radius is only designed to capture 95 percent of recreational trips. The last 5 percent
of trips might account for disproportionate surplus because they represent people willing to travel great
distances for recreation. Alternatively, the most distant travelers might be marginal. Our recreation data
also represent all trips, and water-based recreation trips might require different travel distances.
Finally, we interpret our pass-through estimates cautiously since they reflect only 198 cities, do not
use upstream waters as a comparison group, and reflect pass-through of marginal changes in investment,
rather than the entire Clean Water Act. Appendix E.3 discusses interpretations of our housing estimates
under alternative pass-through numbers.

VIII

Conclusions

This paper assembles an array of new data to assess water pollution’s trends, causes, and welfare consequences. We find that by most measures, U.S. water pollution has declined since 1972, though some
evidence suggests it may have declined at a faster rate before 1972. The share of waters that are fishable
has grown by 12 percentage points since the Clean Water Act.
We study $650 billion in expenditure due to 35,000 grants the federal government gave cities to improve
wastewater treatment plants. Each grant significantly decreased pollution for 25 miles downstream, and
these benefits last for around 30 years. We find weak evidence that local residents value these grants,
though estimates of increases in housing values are generally smaller than costs of grant projects.
Our estimated ratio of the change in housing costs to total grant costs may provide a lower bound on
the true benefit/cost ratio of this grant program since we abstract from nonuse (“existence”) values, general equilibrium effects, potential changes in sewer fees, and the roughly five percent longest recreational

31

trips. The point estimates imply that the benefits of the Clean Water Act’s municipal grants exceed
their costs if these unmeasured components of willingness to pay are three or more times the components
of willingness to pay that we measure. As mentioned in the introduction, other recent analyses estimate benefits of the Clean Water Act that are smaller than its costs, though these other estimates note
that they may also provide a lower bound on benefits. For example, the U.S. Environmental Projection
Agency’s (2000a; 2000c) estimate of the benefit/cost ratio of the Clean Water Act is below 1, though the
EPA’s preferred estimate of the benefit/cost ratio of the Clean Air Act is 42 (USEPA 1997).28
It may be useful to highlight differences in how the Clean Air and Clean Water Acts answer four
important questions about environmental regulation. These comparisons also highlight features of the
Clean Water Act which are not widely recognized and could lead it to have lower net benefits than some
other environmental regulation.
First is the choice of policy instrument. Market-based instruments are believed to be more costeffective than alternatives. Parts of the Clean Air Act use cap-and-trade systems, but nearly none of
the Clean Water Act does. The grants we study actually subsidize the adoption of pollution control
equipment, which is a common policy globally that has undergone little empirical economic analysis.
A second question is scope. Cost-effective regulation equates marginal abatement costs across sources,
which requires regulating all sources. The Clean Air Act covers essentially all major polluting sectors.
The Clean Water Act, by contrast, mostly ignores “non-point” pollution sources like agriculture. Ignoring
such a large source of pollution can make aggregate abatement more costly.
A third question involves substitution. Optimizing consumers should equate the marginal disutility
of pollution to the marginal cost of protection from pollution. People breathe the air quality where they
live, and relocating to another airshed or some other defenses against air pollution are costly (Deschenes,
Greenstone, and Shapiro 2017). For water pollution, however, people can more easily substitute between
nearby clean and dirty rivers for recreation.
A fourth question involves health. Air is typically unfiltered when it is inhaled, so air pollution
is believed to have large mortality consequences that account for much of the benefits of air pollution
regulation. Surface waters, by contrast, are typically filtered through a drinking water treatment plant
28

Analyses of the Clean Air Act relying solely on hedonic estimates generally have smaller cost-benefit ratios; the EPA’s benefit
numbers for air pollution rely heavily on estimated mortality impacts.

32

before people drink them. Most analyses of recent U.S. water quality regulation count little direct benefit
from improving human health (Lyon and Farrow 1995; Freeman 2000; USEPA 2000a; Olmstead 2010).29
Finally, we note one similarity between and air water pollution that may be relevant to policy design.
We find some evidence that the net benefits of Clean Water Act grants vary over space in tandem with
population density and the popularity of water-based recreation. Related patterns have been found for
air pollution, and suggest that allowing the stringency of pollution regulation to vary over space has
potential to increase social welfare.
Iowa State and CARD
Yale University and NBER

References
Adler, R. W., J. C. Landman, and D. M. Cameron (1993): The Clean Water Act 20 Years Later.
NRDC.
Aidt, T. S. (1998): “Political internalization of economic externalities and environmental policy,” Journal of Public Economics, 69, 1–16.
Albouy, D. (2016): “What are Cities Worth? Land Rents, Local Productivity, and the Total Value of
Amenities,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 98(3), 477–487.
Alsan, M., and C. Goldin (Forthcoming): “Watersheds in Child Mortality: The Role of Effective
Water and Sewerage Infrastructure, 1880 to 1920,” Journal of Political Economy.
American Society of Civil Engineers (2011): “Failure to Act: The Economic Impact of Current
Investment Trends in Water and Wastewater Treatment Infrastructure,” Discussion paper, ASCE.
Angrist, J. D., and J.-S. Pischke (2009): Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An Empiricist’s Companion. Princeton University Press.
Artell, J., H. Ahtiainen, and E. Pouta (2013): “Subjective vs. objective measures in the valuation
of water quality,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 130, 288–296.
Banzhaf, H. S. (2015): “Panel Data Hedonics: Rosen’s First Stage and Difference-in-Differences as
“Sufficient Statistics”,” Mimeo, Georgia State.
Becker, R. A. (2016): “Water Use and Conservation in Manufacturing: Evidence from U.S. Microdata,”
Water Resources Management, 30(12), 4185–4200.
Boscoe, F. P., K. A. Henry, and M. S. Zdeb (2012): “A Nationwide Comparison of Driving Distance
Versus Straight-Line Distance to Hospitals,” Professional Geographer, 64(2), 188–96.
29

This contrasts with the regulation of surface water quality in developing countries and in the historic U.S. (Ebenstein, 2012;
Alsan and Goldin, Forthcoming), where drinking water is less well filtered, piped water access less widespread, and stringent
drinking water standards less common or less well enforced.

33

Bureau, U. C. (1971): “1967 Census of Manufactures: Water Use in Manufacturing,” Discussion paper,
U.S. Census Bureau.
Carson, R. T., and R. C. Mitchell (1993): “The Value of clean water: The public’s willingness to
pay for boatable, fishable, and swimmable quality water,” Water Resources Research, 29(7), 2445–2454.
CBO (1985): “Efficient Investment in Wastewater Treatment Plants,” Discussion paper, Congressional
Budget Office.
Cohen, A., and D. A. Keiser (2017): “The effectiveness of incomplete and overlapping pollution
regulation: Evidence from bans on phosphate in automatic dishwasher detergent,” Journal of Public
Economics, 150, 53–74.
Cropper, M., and W. E. Oates (1992): “Environmental Economics: A Survey,” Journal of Economic
Literature, 30(2), 675–740.
Currie, J., J. G. Zivin, K. Meckel, M. Neidell, and W. Schlenker (2013): “Something in
the water: contaminated drinking water and infant health,” Canadian Journal of Economics, 46(3),
791–810.
Deschenes, O., M. Greenstone, and J. S. Shapiro (2017): “Defensive Investments and the Demand
for Air Quality: Evidence from the NOx Budget Program,” American Economic Review, 107(10),
2958–89.
Earnhart, D. (2004a): “Panel Data Analysis of Regulatory Factors Shaping Environmental Performance,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 86(1), 391–401.
(2004b): “Regulatory factors shaping environmental performance at public-owned treatment
plants,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 48, 655–681.
Ebenstein, A. (2012): “The Consequences of Industrialization: Evidence from Water Pollution and
Digestive Cancers in China,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 94(1), 186–201.
Faulkner, H., A. Green, K. Pellaumail, and T. Weaver (2001): “Residents’ perceptions of water
quality improvements following remediation work in the Pymme’s Brook catchment, north London,
UK,” Journal of Environmental Management, 62, 239–254.
Fowlie, M., and N. Muller (Forthcoming): “Market-based emissions regulation when damages vary
across sources: What are the gains from differentiation?,” Journal of the Association of Environmental
and Resource Economists.
Fredriksson, P. G. (1998): “Environmental policy choice: Pollution abatement subsidies,” Resource
and Energy Economics, 20(1), 51–63.
Freeman, A. M. (2000): Public Policies for Environmental Protection chap. Water Pollution Policy,
pp. 169–213. Resources.
Gamkhar, S., and A. Shah (2007): Intergovernmental Fiscal Transfers: Principles and Practicechap.
The Impact of Intergovernmental Fiscal Transfers: A Synthesis of the Conceptual and Empirical
Literature, pp. 225–258. World Bank.

34

Gianessi, L. P., and H. M. Peskin (1981): “Analysis of National Water Pollution Control Policies:
2. Agricultural Sediment Control,” Water Resources Research, 17(4), 803–821.
Glaeser, E. L., and J. Gyourko (2005): “Urban Decline and Durable Housing,” Journal of Political
Economy, 113(2), 345–375.
Greenstone, M., and R. Hanna (2014): “Environmental Regulations, Air and Water Pollution, and
Infant Mortality in India,” American Economic Review, 104(10), 3038–72.
Harrington, W. (2004): Choosing Environmental Policy: Comparing Instruments and Outcomes in
the United States and Europe chap. Industrial Water Pollution in the United States: Direct Regulation
or Market Incentive?, pp. 67–90. Resources for the Future.
Hausman, J. (2012): “Contingent Valuation: From Dubious to Hopeless,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 26(4), 43–56.
Hines, J. R., and R. H. Thaler (1995): “The Flypaper Effect,” Journal of Economic Perspectives,
9(4), 217–226.
Hines, N. W. (1967): “Nor Any Drop to Drink: Public Regulation of Water Quality. Part I: State
Pollution Control Programs,” Iowa Law Review, 186.
Jeon, Y., J. A. Herriges, C. L. Kling, and J. Downing (2011): The International Handbook on
Non-Market Environmental Valuationchap. The role of water quality perceptions in modelling lake
recreation demand, pp. 74–101. Edward Elgar.
Jondrow, J., and R. A. Levy (1984): “The Displacement of Local Spending for Pollution Control by
Federal Construction Grants,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 74(2), 174–8.
Kahn, M. E., P. Li, and K. Zhao (2015): “Water Pollution Progress at Borders: The Role of Changes
in China’s Political Propotion Incentives,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 7(4), 223–
242.
Keiser, D. A. (2016): “The Missing Benefits of Clean Water and the Role of Mismeasured Pollution
Data,” Mimeo, Iowa State.
Kline, P., and C. Walters (2016): “Evaluating Public Programs with Close Substitutes: The Case
of Head Start,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131(4), 1795–1848.
Kling, C. L., D. J. Phaneuf, and J. Zhao (2012): “From Exxon to BP: Has Some Number Become
Better than No Number,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 26(4), 3–26.
Knopman, D. S., and R. A. Smith (1993): “Twenty Years of the Clean Water Act: Has U.S. Water
Quality Improved?,” Environment, 35(1), 17–41.
Kohn, R. E. (1992): “When Subsidies for Pollution Abatement Increase Total Emissions,” Southern
Economic Journal, 59(1), 77–87.
Kuwayama, Y., and S. Olmstead (2015): Handbook on the Economics of Natural Resources chap. Water quality and economics: willingness to pay, efficiency, cost-effectiveness, and new research frontiers,
pp. 474–501. Robert Halvorsen and David F. Layton.

35

Leggett, C. G., and N. E. Bockstael (2000): “Evidence of the Effects of Water Quality on Residential Land Prices,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 39, 121–144.
Lipscomb, M., and A. M. Mobarak (2017): “Decentralization and Pollution Spillovers: Evidence
from the Re-drawing of Country Borders in Brazil,” Review of Economic Studies, 84(1), 464–502.
Lutz, B. (2010): “Taxation with Representation: Intergovernmental Grants in a Plebiscite Democracy,”
Review of Economics and Statistics, 92(2), 316–332.
Lyon, R. M., and S. Farrow (1995): “An economic analysis of Clean Water Act issues,” Water
Resources Research, 31(1), 213–223.
McFadden, D., and K. Train (eds.) (2017): Contingent Valuation of Environmental Goods. Edward
Elgar.
Mehan III, G. T. (2010): “A Symphonic Approach to Water Management: The Quest for New Models
of Watersed Governance,” Journal of Land Use & Environmental Law, 26(1), 1–33.
Millock, K., and C. Nauges (2006): “Ex Post Evaluation of an Earmarked Tax on Air Pollution,”
Land Economics, 82(1), 68–84.
Moeltner, K., and R. von Haefen (2011): “Microeconometric Strategies for Dealing with Unobservables and Endogenous Variables in Recreation Demand Models,” Annual Reviews of Resource
Economics, 3, 375–96.
Muehlenbachs, L., E. Spiller, and C. Timmins (2015): “The Housing Market Impacts of Shale Gas
Development,” American Economic Review, 105(12), 3633–59.
Muller, N. Z., and R. Mendelsohn (2009): “Efficient Pollution Regulation: Getting the Prices
Right,” American Economic Review, 99(5), 1714–1739.
Muller, N. Z., R. Mendelsohn, and W. Nordhaus (2011): “Environmental Accounting for Pollution in the United States Economy,” American Economic Review, 101(5), 1649–1675.
Murdock, J. (2006): “Handling unobserved site characteristics in random utility models of recreational
demand,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 51(1), 1–25.
Nixon, R. (1972): “Presidential Veto Message: Nixon Vetoes Water Pollution Act,” CQ Almanac.
Oates, W. E. (1999): “An Essay on Fiscal Federalism,” Journal of Economic Literature, 37, 1120–1149.
Olmstead, S. M. (2010): “The Economics of Water Quality,” Review of Environmental Economics &
Policy, 4(1), 44–61.
Olmstead, S. M., L. A. Muehlenbachs, J.-S. Shih, Z. Chu, and A. J. Krupnick (2013):
“Shale gas development impacts on surface water quality in Pennsylvania,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 110(13), 4962–4967.
Peiser, R. B., and L. B. Smith (1985): “Homeownership Returns, Tenure Choice and Inflation,” Real
Estate Economics, 13(4), 343–360.
Poor, P. J., K. J. Boyle, L. O. Taylor, and R. Bouchard (2001): “Objective versus Subjective
Measures of Water Clarity in Hedonic Property Value Models,” Land Economics, 77(4), 482–493.

36

Powell, M. (1995): “Building a National Water Quality Monitoring Program,” Environmental Science
& Technology, 29(10), 458A–463A.
Roback, J. (1982): “Wages, Rents, and the Quality of Life,” Journal of Political Economy, 90(6),
1257–1278.
Shapiro, J. S., and R. Walker (Forthcoming): “Why is Pollution from U.S. Manufacturing Declining?
The Roles of Environmental Regulation, Productivity, and Trade,” American Economic Review, NBER
Working Paper No. 20879.
Sigman, H. (2002): “International Spillovers and Water Quality in Rivers: Do Countries Free Ride?,”
American Economic Review, 92(4), 1152–1159.
(2003): “Letting States Do the Dirty Work: State Responsibility for Federal Environmental
Regulation,” National Tax Journal, 56(1), 107–122.
(2005): “Transboundary Spillovers and Decentralization of Environmental Policies,” Journal of
Environmental Economics and Management, 50, 82–101.
Smith, R. A., R. B. Alexander, and M. G. Wolman (1987): “Water-Quality Trends in the Nation’s
Rivers,” Science, 235(4796), 1607–1615.
Smith, V. K., and W. H. Desvousges (1986): Measuring Water Quality Benefits. Kluwer.
Smith, V. K., and C. V. Wolloh (2012): “Has Surface Water Quality Improved Since the Clean
Water Act?,” NBER Working Paper 18192.
Steinwender, A., C. Gundacker, and K. J. Wittmann (2008): “Objective versus subjective assessments of environmental quality of standing and running waters in a large city,” Landscape and
Urban Planning, 84, 116–126.
Stigler, G. J. (1952): The Theory of Price. Macmillan.
Stigler, G. J. (1966): The Theory of Price. Macmillan.
Time (1969): “The Cities: The Price of Optimism,” Time Magazine, August 1.
USDOT (2009): 2009 National Household Travel Survey. Federal Highway Administration.
USEPA (1974): “National Water Quality Inventory. 1974 Report to the Congress. Volume II,” Discussion
paper, USEPA.
(1975): “Clean Water Construction Grants Program News,” Discussion paper, USEPA.
(1980): “Handbook of Procedures: Construction Grants Program for Municipal Wastewater
Treatment Works,” Discussion paper, USEPA, Second Edition.
(1997): “The Benefits and Costs of the Clean Air Act, 1970 to 1990,” Discussion paper, USEPA.
(2000a): “A Benefits Assessment of Water Pollution Control Programs Since 1972: Part 1, The
Benefits of Point Source Controls for Conventional Pollutants in Rivers and Streams: Final Report,”
Discussion paper, USEPA.

37

(2000b): “Liquid Assets 2000: America’s Water Resources at a Turning Point,” Discussion
paper, Office of Water.
(2000c): “A Retrospective Assessment of the Costs of the Clean Water Act: 1972 to 1997: Final
Report,” Discussion paper, USEPA.
(2000b): Progress in Water Quality: An Evaluation of the National Investment in Municipal
Wastewater Treatment. USEPA.
(2001): “The National Costs to Implement TMDLs (Draft Report): Support Document 2,”
Discussion paper, USEPA.
(2002): “The Clean Water and Drinking Water Infrastructure Gap Analysis,” Discussion paper,
USEPA.
(2007): “30 Years of the NADP,” Discussion paper, USEPA.
(2016): “ATTAINS, National Summary of State Information,” Accessed June 15, 2016.
USGAO (1994): “Water Pollution: Information on the Use of Alternative Wastewater Treatment Systems,” Discussion paper, USGAO.
Wu, J., R. M. Adams, C. L. Kling, and K. Tanaka (2004): “From Microlevel Decisions to Landscape
Changes: An Assessment of Agricultural Conservation Policies,” American Journal of Agricultural
Economics, 86(1), 26–41.

38

FIGURE I
National Maps of Water Pollution Data
(A) The River and Stream Network

(B) Wastewater Treatment Plants

(C) Water Pollution Monitoring Sites

Notes: In Panel A, rivers are colored by Stream Level from the National Hydrography Dataset. Streams
that flow into oceans, Great Lakes, Canada or Mexico and are the darkest. Streams that flow into these
are lighter; streams that flow into these are still lighter, etc. Panel B includes wastewater treatment
plants used in analysis (continental U.S., within 1km of a river, etc.). Panel C shows monitoring sites
appearing in years 1962-2001.

39

FIGURE II
Water Pollution Trends, 1962-2001
(B) Share Not Fishable

10

.1

.2

Saturation Deficit (Percent)
20
30

Share Not Fishable
.3
.4

.5

40

(A) Dissolved Oxygen Deficit

1962

1972

1982
Year

1992

2001

1962

1972

1982
Year

1992

2001

Notes: Graphs show year fixed effects plus a constant from regressions which also control for monitoring
site fixed effects, a day-of-year cubic polynomial, and an hour-of-day cubic polynomial, corresponding to
equation (1) from the text. Connected dots show yearly values, dashed lines show 95% confidence
interval, and 1962 is reference category. Standard errors are clustered by watershed.

40

FIGURE III
Effects of Clean Water Act Grants on Water Pollution: Event Study Graphs
(B) Share Not Fishable

>=30

27 to 29

24 to 26

Years Since Treatment Plant Received a Grant

21 to 23

18 to 20

15 to 17

9 to 11

12 to 14

6 to 8

3 to 5

0 to 2

-3 to -1

-6 to -4

-9 to -7

<=-10

>=30

27 to 29

24 to 26

Years Since Treatment Plant Received a Grant

21 to 23

18 to 20

15 to 17

12 to 14

6 to 8

9 to 11

3 to 5

0 to 2

-3 to -1

-6 to -4

-9 to -7

<=-10

-.06

-4

Share Not Fishable
-.04
-.02
0

Saturation Deficit (Percent)
-2
0
2

4

.02

(A) Dissolved Oxygen Deficit

Notes: Graphs show coefficients on downstream times year-since-grant indicators from regressions which
correspond to the specification of Table II. These regressions are described in equation (4) from the main
text. Data cover years 1962-2001. Connected dots show yearly values, dashed lines show 95% confidence
interval. Standard errors are clustered by watershed.

41

FIGURE IV
Effects of Clean Water Act Grants on Log Mean Home Values: Event Study Graphs
(B) Homes Within 25 Miles of River

>=30

27 to 29

24 to 26

Years Since Treatment Plant Received a Grant

21 to 23

18 to 20

15 to 17

9 to 11

12 to 14

6 to 8

3 to 5

0 to 2

-3 to -1

-6 to -4

-9 to -7

<=-10

>=30

27 to 29

24 to 26

Years Since Treatment Plant Received a Grant

21 to 23

18 to 20

15 to 17

12 to 14

6 to 8

9 to 11

3 to 5

0 to 2

-3 to -1

-6 to -4

-9 to -7

<=-10

-.02

-.005

Log Mean Home Values
0
.02

Log Mean Home Values
0
.005

.04

.01

(A) Homes Within 0.25 Miles of River

Notes: Graphs show coefficients on year-since-grant indicators from regressions corresponding
to the specification of Table V, columns (2) and (4). Connected dots show yearly values,
dashed lines show 95% confidence interval. Standard errors are clustered by watershed. Panels
A and B show different ranges of values on their y-axes. Data cover decennial census years
1970-2000.

42

TABLE I
WATER POLLUTION TRENDS, 1962-2001
Main Pollution
Measures
Dissolved
Oxygen
Not
Deficit
Fishable
(1)
(2)

Other Pollution Measures
Biochemical
Oxygen
Demand
(3)

Fecal
Coliforms
(4)

Total
Not
Suspended
Swimmable
Solids
(5)
(6)

Panel A. Linear Trend
Year
-0.240***
(0.0296)

-0.005***
(0.0003)

-0.065***
(0.0050)

-81.097***
(8.3260)

-0.005***
(0.0003)

-0.915***
(0.0921)

Panel B. 1972 Trend Break
Year
-1.027***
(0.147)
Year *
0.834***
1[Year>=1972]
(0.157)

-0.015***
(0.002)
0.011***
(0.002)

-0.124***
(0.020)
0.062***
(0.021)

-255.462***
(82.529)
179.134**
(81.457)

-0.018***
(0.002)
0.014***
(0.002)

-1.113*
(0.574)
0.203
(0.596)

-5.583
(0.902)

-0.118
(0.009)

-1.794
(0.148)

-2,213.510
(236.581)

-0.114
(0.010)

-26.363
(2.777)

5,852,148
17.78

10,969,154
0.25

1,273,390
3.98

2,070,351
2,958.11

10,969,154
0.50

1,720,749
49.75

1972 to 2001 change

N
Dep. Var. Mean

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Monitor Fixed Effects
Season Controls
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Time of Day Controls
Notes: Each observation in the data is a pollution reading. Data includes years 1962-2001. Dissolved
oxygen deficit equals 100 minus dissolved oxygen saturation, measured in percentage points. Season
controls are a cubic polynomial in day of year. Time of Day controls are a cubic polynomial in hour
of day. In Panel B, the year variables are recentered around the year 1972. The 1972 to 2001 change
equals the fitted value Year*29 + Year*1[Year≥1972]*29. Dependent variable mean refers to years
1962-1971. Standard errors are clustered by watershed. Asterisks denote p-value < 0.10 (*), < 0.05
(**), or < 0.01 (***).

43

TABLE II
EFFECTS OF CLEAN WATER ACT GRANTS ON WATER POLLUTION
Main Pollution
Measures
Other Pollution Measures
Dissolved
Biochemical
Oxygen
Not
Oxygen
Fecal
Not
Deficit
Fishable
Demand
Coliforms
Swimmable
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Downstream
-0.681***
-0.007**
-0.104**
-204.059**
-0.004*
* Cumul. # Grants
(0.206)
(0.003)
(0.041)
(98.508)
(0.002)
N
Dep. Var. Mean

55,950
17.092

60,400
0.328

28,932
4.411

34,550
5731.028

60,400
0.594

Total
Suspended
Solids
(6)
-0.497
(0.635)
30,604
42.071

Fixed Effects:
Plant-Downstream
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Plant-Year
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Downst.-Basin-Year
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Weather
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Notes: Each observation in a regression is a plant-downstream-year tuple. Data cover years 1962-2001. Dissolved
oxygen deficit equals 100 minus dissolved oxygen saturation, measured in percentage points. Dependent Variable
Mean describes mean in years 1962-1972. Standard errors are clustered by watershed. Asterisks denote p-value <
0.10 (*), < 0.05 (**), or < 0.01 (***).

44

TABLE III
COST EFFECTIVENESS OF CLEAN WATER ACT GRANTS ($2014 MN)
(1)

(2)

(3)

1. Total Costs

296,757

396,802

549,890

2. Federal Capital Costs

87,926

117,691

164,413

3. Local Capital Costs

37,296

49,958

68,309

4. Operation & Maintenance Costs

171,536

229,153

317,168

5. River-Miles Made Fishable

5,188

9,000

12,260

6. River Miles * Pct. Saturation Increase / 10

14,721

25,536

34,787

7. Annual Cost to Make a River-Mile Fishable

1.91
[1.35 , 3.22]

1.47
[1.04 , 2.48]

1.50
[1.06 , 2.53]

8. Annual Cost to Increase Dissolved Oxygen
Saturation in a River-Mile by 10%

0.67
[0.42 , 1.65]

0.52
[0.33 , 1.27]

0.53
[0.33 , 1.29]

Plants with Water Quality Data

Yes

Georeferenced Plants

Yes

Assume 25 Miles Downstream

Yes

Notes: Dollar values in $2014 millions. Brackets show 95% confidence intervals. Rows 2-3 are
aggregated from GICS microdata. Row 4 is calculated following the method described in
Appendix B.4. Row 5 is calculated by multiplying each grant by the parameter estimate in
Appendix Table VI, Row 13, Column 2, and applying the result to all waters within 25 miles
downstream of the treatment plant. Row 6 is calcualted by multiplying each grant by the
parameter estimate in Table II, Column 1, and applying the result to all waters within 25 miles
downstream of the treatment plant. Row 7 equals row 1 divided by thirty times row 5, since it
assumes water quality improvements accrue for 30 years. Row 8 equals row 1 divided by thirty
times row 6. Column 1 includes only plants analyzed in Column 2 of Table II. Column 2 includes
plants in continental U.S. with latitude and longitude data. Column 3 includes all plants and
grants with minimum required data (e.g., grants linked to the exact treatment plant even if
without latitude or longitude data) and assumes all plants have 25 miles of rivers downstream.

45

TABLE IV
PASS-THROUGH OF GRANTS TO MUNICIPAL SEWERAGE
CAPITAL SPENDING
(1)
Panel A. Federal Grant Funds
Federal Grant Funds
1.52***
(0.29)
Panel B. Grant Project Costs
Grant Project Costs
1.09***
(0.21)
City FE and Year FE
Real Costs
Basin-by-Year FE
Propensity Score Reweight

Yes

(2)

(3)

(4)

1.26***
(0.22)

1.13***
(0.27)

1.19***
(0.31)

0.93***
(0.16)

0.84***
(0.19)

0.89***
(0.23)

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Notes: Dependent variable is municipal sewerage capital investment. Municipal and grant costs are
cumulative since 1970. Grant project costs include federal grant amount and required local capital
expenditure. Municipal spending data from Annual Survey of Governments and Census of
Governments. Data include balanced panel of cities over years 1970-2001, see text for details.
Propensity score for appearing in the balanced panel of cities is estimated as a function of log city
population, log city total municipal expenditure, city type (municipality or township), and census
division fixed effects, where city population and expenditure are averaged over all years of the data.
Standard errors are clustered by city. Sample size in all regressions is 6,336. Asterisks denote pvalue < 0.10 (*), <0.05 (**), or 0.01 (***).

46

TABLE V
EFFECTS OF CLEAN WATER ACT GRANTS ON HOUSING DEMAND
Panel A. Log Mean Home Values
Cumulative Grants
Panel B. Log Mean Rental Values
Cumulative Grants
Panel C. Log Total Housing Units
Cumulative Grants

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-0.00022
(0.002507)

0.00076
(0.001409)

0.002486*
(0.001271)

0.00024
(0.000328)

0.00005
(0.001682)

-0.00078
(0.000832)

0.00007
(0.000714)

-0.00012
(0.000158)

-0.006965**
(0.003180)

-0.00031
(0.001176)

-0.00031
(0.000939)

-0.00016
(0.000241)

-0.006356*
(0.003275)

0.00010
(0.001878)

0.00144
(0.001592)

-0.00015
(0.000461)

Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
0.25

Yes
Yes
Yes
1

Yes
Yes
Yes
25

Panel D. Log Total Value of Housing Stock
Cumulative Grants

Plant FE, Basin-by-Year FE
Dwelling Characteristics
Baseline Covariates * Year
Max Distance Homes to River (Miles)

0.25

Notes: Analysis includes homes within a given distance of downstream river segments. Data include
decennial census years 1970-2000. Cumulative grants include grants in all previous years, not only
census years. See main text for description of dwelling and baseline covariates. Home prices and rents
are deflated to year 2014 dollars by the Bureau of Labor Statistics consumer price index for urban
consumers. Standard errors are clustered by watershed. Asterisks denote p-value < 0.10 (*), < 0.05
(**), or < 0.01 (***).

47

TABLE VI
CLEAN WATER ACT GRANTS: COSTS AND EFFECTS ON HOME VALUES ($2014BN)
Ratio: Change in Home
Values / Costs
p-value: Ratio = 0
p-Value: Ratio = 1
Change in Value of Housing ($Bn)
Costs ($Bn)
Capital: Fed.
Capital: Local
Variable
Total
Max Distance Homes to River (Miles)
Include Rental Units
Include Non-Metro Areas

(1)
0.06
(0.03)
[0.05]
[0.00]

(2)
0.26
(0.36)
[0.46]
[0.04]

(3)
0.22
(0.36)
[0.55]
[0.03]

(4)
0.24
(0.41)
[0.56]
[0.06]

15.92

89.25

73.7

91.97

86.24
35.81
166.1
288.15

102.26
41.81
197.36
341.44

102.26
41.81
197.36
341.44

114.16
48.00
222.81
384.97

1

25

25
Yes

25
Yes
Yes

Notes: All values in billions ($2014). Calculations include grants given in years 1962-2000. Ninety-five
percent confidence regions are in brackets. Estimates come from regression specifications corresponding
to Table V, columns (3) and (4).

48

Online Appendix:
Consequences of the Clean Water Act
and the Demand for Water Quality
David A. Keiser
Iowa State University
and CARD
dkeiser@iastate.edu

Joseph S. Shapiro
Yale University
and NBER
joseph.shapiro@yale.edu

A-1

Contents
A Expenditure on Water Pollution Abatement
B Data Details
B.1 Deflator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
B.2 National Hydrography Dataset (NHD) . .
B.3 Water Pollution Data . . . . . . . . . . . .
B.4 Grants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
B.5 Census Data from Geolytics . . . . . . . .
B.6 Municipal Expenditure Data . . . . . . . .
B.7 Additional Environmental Data1 . . . . . .
B.8 Data for Analyzing Heterogeneous Effects

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

3

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

4
4
4
4
8
10
12
12
13

C Spatial and Other Matching Across Datasets

14

D Cross-Sectional Water Pollution Around Wastewater Treatment Plants

15

E Sensitivity Analyses
E.1 Pollution Trends . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
E.2 Effects of Clean Water Act Grants on Pollution: Sensitivity and Heterogeneity . . . . . . . . .
E.3 Hedonic Estimates: Sensitivity and Heterogeneity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

16
16
17
19

F Interpreting Hedonic Estimates

21

1
We thank Olivier Deschenes for providing the weather data and Michael Greenstone for providing the 1972-1977 nonattainment data.

A-2

A

Expenditure on Water Pollution Abatement

This Appendix reviews available data on expenditures for abating water pollution and air pollution. Measuring such expenditures is difficult. The first attempt by the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) to measure
pollution abatement costs describes five challenges (Cremeans and Segel 1975) including determining counterfactual pollution abatement; the problem that many abatement technologies also have valuable byproducts;
the proper classification of capital goods used for abatement; the difficulty in recognizing business decisions
as environmental or not; and the separation of pollution abatement expenditures from expenditures for industrial safety and related purposes. These are only accounting challenges; an additional challenge is that
even correct accounting measures do not equal full economic costs. Our goal is simply to describe available
estimates, recognizing these caveats.
We consider three sets of estimates: BEA annual accounts for the period 1972-1994; Census abatement
cost surveys for manufacturing combined with EPA expenditure records for government; and EPA reports on
the costs of the Clean Water Act and Clean Air Act. All three methods suggest that total expenditure on
water pollution abatement since the Clean Water Act has exceeded $1 trillion ($2014), which is over $100
per person-year, or equivalently, annual expenditure just over half a percent of GDP. All three methods also
imply that expenditure on water pollution abatement has exceeded expenditure on air pollution abatement.
The first set of estimates comes from the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) for the years 1972-1994
(Vogan 1996).2 The BEA estimates aggregate expenditure on water pollution abatement in the period 19721994 of $1.3 or $1.4 trillion ($2014) when deflated using quantity or price indices, respectively. Private
business accounts for two-thirds of these expenditures, and government for the remaining one-third. The
BEA data report total air pollution abatement expenditures at $1.0 to $1.4 trillion ($2014) using quantity
or price indices, respectively, including expenditures by private households (e.g., for vehicles). This indicates
that water pollution abatement expenditures exceed air pollution abatement expenditures by 6 to 27 percent.
The second set of estimates comes from the Census Bureau for private industry and EPA for government
sources. The Census conducted the Pollution Abatement Costs and Expenditures survey annually between
1972 and 1994. We sum capital and operating costs from this survey, and linearly interpolate for the year
1987 (which had no survey). These data indicate total 1973-1994 abatement expenditures of $315 billion for
water pollution abatement and $338 billion for air pollution abatement ($2014). These numbers include only
the manufacturing sector. Our EPA data on the construction grants program indicate that local governments
spent about $215 billion in federal grant funds, supplemented by local expenditures, and a federal Revolving
Loan fund.3
The third set of estimates is from EPA reports on the costs of the Clean Air and Clean Water Acts (USEPA
1997, 2000). In 1990, the compliance cost of the Clean Air Act was about $25 billion ($1990). In 1994, the
cost of water pollution abatement was $44.6 billion ($1997), though $32 billion of this would have been spent
even without the Clean Water Act. These reports provide no evidence on trends in these numbers. Under the
strong assumption that they had been constant over the period 1972-2001, they imply costs of $2.5 trillion
2

The BEA reports both quantity and price deflators indexed to 1992. We deflate all BEA values to 1992. For comparability
with the rest of the paper, which reports figures in 2014 dollars, we then deflate these values to the year 2014 using the 1992
and 2014 Construction Price Index of Engineering News Records.
3
A study by the U.S. Conference of Mayors (Anderson 2010) estimates that local governments spent $1.4 trillion ($2008) on
wastewater treatment between 1956 and 2008. Another estimate of these expenditures is a report by the Congressional Budget
Office (CBO 1985) which reports that total annual wastewater spending by federal, state, and local governments was above
$7 billion (in 1983 dollars) in each year between 1972 and 1983. Extrapolating to the entire period 1972-2016 implies total
expenditure was above $753 billion (2014$).

A-3

for water pollution and $1.8 trillion for air pollution ($2014).

B

Data Details

For each dataset, this section provides additional details on the data and on tests undertaken to probe their
accuracy.

B.1

Deflator

To express investments in wastewater treatment capital in real dollars, we deflate all capital expenditures
by the Construction Cost Index of the Engineering News Record (ENR). Published annually since 1908, this
index reflects the cost of 200 hours of common labor including wages and fringe benefits, the cost of 2,500
pounds of fabricated structural steel, 1.128 tons of bulk portland cement, and 1,088 board feet of 2x4 lumber.
To obtain the index, ENR averages the cost across 20 large cities. The closest series published by the federal
government is the Census’ construction price index for single-family homes.
To express housing values and rents in real dollars, we deflate these values by the Bureau of Labor Statistics
Consumer Price Index for urban consumers.

B.2

National Hydrography Dataset (NHD)

EPA and USGS designed the general attributes of NHD, and a private contractor developed it. The first
version of NHD appeared in 2006, while version 2 with more detail was released in 2012.4 These data include
physical features of every surface water in the U.S. including rivers, streams, ditches, canals, lakes, ponds,
and others.
NHD includes a variety of identifying variables that the main text describes with more common language.
We use the term “watershed” to describe what hydrologists and NHD call an 8-digit hydrologic unit code
(HUC). We use the term “river” to describe what NHD calls a “levelpathi.” We use the terms “river basin”
or just “basin” to describe a 4-digit HUC. NHD classifies 1 million distinct rivers, though most are not conventional rivers (e.g., many “rivers” are seasonal streams less than one mile long), and only 70,000 levelpathis
are named. We use the phrase “river segment” to describe what NHD calls a “comid.” A comid is a unique
identifier code for a specific line segment in NHD. On average a comid is 1.2 miles long. A comid connects a
set of points, and we refer to these points as “stream nodes.” NHD also includes a more coarse partition of
rivers called reach codes which we do not utilize.
We use NHD’s “flowline” features to describe upstream and downstream relationships of rivers and streams.
In many cases, the “flowline” data include flows through lakes, ponds, and other types of water bodies.

B.3

Water Pollution Data

This section provides additional information on the data then explains how we extract and clean it. About 83
percent of the data come from rivers and the rest from lakes (Appendix Table I). The average monitoring site
4

Since the 1970s, the EPA has developed increasingly detailed hydrologic data on U.S. water networks. This sequence of data
includes Reach File 1 (created in 1975); Reach File 2 (created in 1987); and and Reach File 3 (available in 1993). Technically, the
National Hydrography Dataset Plus is an application of the National Hydrography Dataset, which also incorporates information
from the 30-meter National Elevation Dataset and the National Watershed Boundary Dataset.

A-4

appears in 10 different years and has 25 to 40 total readings per pollutant. About 25 percent of monitoring
sites are in metro areas but only 15 percent of the U.S. land area is in metro areas, so they sightly overrepresent metro areas. Monitoring is somewhat evenly spread through the 1970s, 1980s, and 1990s, though
much less common in the 1960s.
Plotting densities of the raw data helps illustrate some of their properties (Appendix Figure I). Dissolved
oxygen deficits follow a roughly normal distribution, while BOD, fecal coliforms, and TSS are more skewed.
The dissolved oxygen deficit distribution is smoother than the others because its sample size is bigger. Some
reports list pollution only out to two, one, or zero decimal points, which leads to heaping in the raw data and
visible pileups at some round numbers.
We download the Storet Legacy data from U.S. EPA’s Storet Legacy Data Center and Storet and NWIS
data from the Water Quality Portal. Several decisions are required to extract data from the three repositories
of water pollution data and to make them comparable. We describe steps for each issue in turn, and then
steps taken to make the three repositories comparable.
Ambient Monitoring in Rivers and Lakes. Our analysis includes only rivers and lakes. This excludes
estuaries, oceans, wells, pipes, canals, sampling inside industrial plants, and other sites, though these other
types are uncommon in the pollution data. In Storet Legacy, we identify streams and lakes using the Storet
Legacy station type field provided by the station files. We also remove measurements where the Primary
Activity is Effluent Permit Condition, Effluent(Sample), Biological, or Tissue. We also exclude records where
the Secondary Activity Category is Dredge, Core, Ground Water, or others that are clearly not river or
lake samples, such as Standard Deviation or Sum of Squares. Additionally in all three repositories, we
exclude records around dams since they are highly dependent on dam operations and often intended for dam
monitoring; these are identified from the word, “Dam,” in the station name or description.
In Modern Storet and NWIS, we limit the data to rivers/streams and lakes in a few steps. First, we
restrict the sample media to surface water. We also restrict the media subtype to Surface Water, which
removes typically less than 1 percent of records that are coded as other media subtype such as Effluent or
Groundwater. For Modern Storet, the media subtype field is only populated for approximately 20 to 30
percent of observations. Of those coded, typically less than 1 percent of records are classified as something
other than “Surface Water.” Thus, for Modern Storet, we keep records where the media subtype is missing to
preserve a large amount of data given that nearly all records that are coded are for surface water. Next, we
limit the site type to lake, reservoir, impoundment, or stream. We distinguish streams and lakes in the NWIS
station data using the provided monitoring location type name field in the station file. Streams are identified
as “Stream,” “Stream: Canal,” “Stream: Ditch,” or “Stream: Tidal stream.” Lakes are identified as “Lake,
Reservoir, Impoundment.” For Modern Storet, we also identify streams and lakes using the monitoring location
type name field. For Modern Storet, streams are identified as “River/Stream,” “River/Stream Ephemeral,”
“River/Stream Intermittent,” “River/Stream Perennial,” “Riverine Impoundment,” “River/stream EffluentDominated,” “Canal Drainage,” “Canal Irrigation,” “Canal Transport,” “Channelized Stream,” “Floodwater,” “Floodwater Urban,” or “Floodwater non-Urban.” Lakes are identified as “Lake,” “Reservoir,” “Great
Lake,” “Pond-Anchialine,” or “Pond-Stormwater.”
Measures of Water Pollution. Storet Legacy and NWIS classify each measure of water pollution
according to a single parameter code. These parameter codes classify water quality parameters according to a
broadly defined characteristic (e.g., biochemical oxygen demand) and the method for measuring the pollutant
(e.g., the temperature at which the measurement is taken and the incubation time period). For example, the
parameter code 00310 describes biochemical oxygen demand, measured at a temperature of twenty degrees
Celsius, over a five day incubation period. The parameter code 00306 describes biochemical oxygen demand,
also measured at twenty degrees Celsius, but only over a four day incubation period. For each measure

A-5

of water pollution that we use, we start by choosing the parameter code which has the most observations
in STORET Legacy. In nearly all cases, this parameter code corresponds to the parameter code given in
the EPA’s first major water pollution report after the Clean Water Act (USEPA 1974c). We also include
parameter codes which are comparable to this main code(s) (e.g., measured in different units or a different
device) if they have at least 10,000 observations in Storet Legacy. We use this rule because Storet Legacy
has the largest number of observations among the three repositories used in the study, and the largest share
of observations concentrated around the early 1970s when the Clean Water Act began. For NWIS data, we
use the same parameter codes as Storet Legacy to extract corresponding measures of water quality from the
Water Quality Portal.
Modern Storet does not use a parameter code, but rather identifies water quality parameters according
to characteristic names. We take several steps to match these characteristics in Storet to those pollutants in
Storet Legacy and NWIS repositories. We utilize concordance tables provided by EPA and the Water Quality
Portal that map Storet Legacy and NWIS parameter codes to Modern Storet “search names.”5
A single characteristic name often corresponds to multiple parameter codes. The EPA concordance provides the meaning of parameter codes, including information on sample preparation (e.g., details regarding
filter size), whether the measurement was in the field or laboratory, measurement units, result sample fraction
(e.g., total versus dissolved), result temperature basis, result statistical basis (e.g., mean, median), additional
comments, and additional measurement method details. We supplement this information with a similar table
from the Water Quality Portal website that provides a few additional details for each parameter code including
result time basis, result weight basis and result particle size basis.
Between these two files, we note which aspects distinguish certain parameter codes from others and use
these to restrict and subsequently match Modern Storet pollution records to Storet Legacy and NWIS records
by pollutant. In addition to the characteristic name, the main distinguishing aspect of a measure of water
pollution is the result sample fraction field that often identifies total versus dissolved measurements. For
biochemical oxygen demand and fecal coliforms, we also restrict based on the result temperature basis (20
degrees Celsius or missing and 45 degrees Celsius or missing respectively) and result time basis (5 day or
missing and 24 hours or missing respectively). For dissolved oxygen, we convert dissolved oxygen in mg/L to
dissolved oxygen saturation (%) using a standard formula (Lung 2001).6
Sample Exclusions. We impose several sample exclusions. We keep observations with non-missing
observation date, latitude, and longitude, within the continental U.S. We limit to latitude and longitude
observations which are located within a U.S. county, as defined by the 2010 edition of the year 2000 Census
Topologically Integrated Geographic Encoding and Referencing (TIGER) shapefiles. We also limit to observations within a U.S. hydrologic unit code (HUC), according to the 1994 1:250,000-scale HUC shapefile
of the U.S. Geological Survey. We define each monitoring site’s county and HUC based on its latitude and
longitude as of the year 2000 (for counties) and 1994 (for HUCs), which implicitly addresses the potential
5

The U.S. EPA provides several crosswalks to identify measurements in Storet that are comparable to those in the Storet
Legacy and NWIS repositories (ftp://ftp.epa.gov/storet/modern/reference\ tables/Characteristic\ Parameter\ Code\ Map/).
In particular, we use the crosswalk STORET\ Modern\ vs\ NWIS.xls. The water quality portal table links a parameter code
to characteristic name, measurement unit code, result sample fraction, result temperature basis, result statistical basis, result
time basis, result weight basis, result particle size basis, and medium. (http://waterqualitydata.us/public\ srsnames/)
DOmgl
6
The formula is DOperc = 468/(31.5+T
) where T is the water temperature in Celsius. We only apply this conversion for
observations which record both dissolved oxygen in mg/L and water temperature, and for station-days which do not already
have dissolved oxygen saturation (%) defined. When applied to stations which do have dissolved oxygen saturation defined,
regressing the reported level of dissolved oxygen saturation on the value obtained from this conversion obtains a coefficient of
0.996 with a standard error of 0.001.

A-6

issues of changing boundary definitions for counties and HUCs over time. We also limit analysis to ambient
monitoring. To limit the influence of outliers, for each reading above the 99th percentile of the distribution
of readings, separately by pollutant, we recode the result to equal the 99th percentile. To ease interpretation,
we define all pollution outcomes so that lower levels of the outcome represent cleaner water.
For NWIS, we exclude records of Spills, Hurricanes, and Storms by limiting to routine hydrologic events.
Modern Storet and Storet Legacy, unlike NWIS, provide no information on hydrologic events. We convert all
temperature readings to degrees Fahrenheit. For other pollutants, we keep all records with unit data that are
easily converted to standard units. For Storet Legacy and NWIS, we keep observations with missing units
since parameter codes are already assigned to specific units. For Modern Storet, we keep observations with
missing units except for dissolved oxygen and temperature. We exclude observations with missing units for
dissolved oxygen and temperature since we are unable to distinguish between mg/l and percent saturation in
the dissolved oxygen data and degrees C and degrees F in the temperature data.
Definitions of Geographic Variables. We use a few steps to define geographic variables. Storet
Legacy has separate files describing stations and describing actual pollution readings. Geographic identifiers
like latitude, and longitude appear in both. We prioritize values of these variables from station files. When
those are missing, we supplement them with values from the results files.
Types of Water Pollution. We use a few criteria to choose additional measures of pollution for
sensitivity analysis in Appendix Table IV. This is important—one of our repositories alone, Storet Legacy,
includes 16,000 different measures of water pollution. We partly take this list of additional pollutants from
the EPA’s (1974a) first major assessment of water pollution after the Clean Water Act was passed. These
additional pollutants include water temperature, ammonia-nitrogen (total as N), nitrates (total as N), total
nitrite plus nitrate, orthophosphate (dissolved as P),7 total phosphorus, total and dissolved chlorides, color,
total phenols, total dissolved solids, dissolved sulfate, total coliforms, and turbidity.8 Finally, we add total
nitrogen as a key measure of nutrient pollution, and lead and mercury as important heavy metals. Standard
water quality monitoring programs collect data on the main pollutants we study (BOD, dissolved oxygen,
fecal coliforms, and TSS). We interpret estimates for the pollutants in Appendix Table IV somewhat more
cautiously since fewer monitoring programs collect data on many of these pollutants, which makes estimates
with these other pollutants both potentially less precise and less representative.
Specific Monitor Networks. For NWIS, we identify stations that are a part of several networks
specifically designed by USGS to examine long-term trends in water quality. These networks are NASQAN,
NAWQA, and HBN. Station identifiers were obtained from USGS. We obtained NASQAN and HBN station
identifiers through a request from USGS. NAWQA site identifiers were downloaded from a USGS website using
filters on “stream” and “lake” for site types (http://cida.usgs.gov/nawqa queries public/jsp/sitemaster.jsp).
Our NASQAN and HBN samples include only the original NASQAN and HBN networks, which spanned the
years 1974-1995. Our NAWQA sample includes both the NAWQA networks focused on streams/rivers and
on lakes. We add “USGS-“ to the stationid field and match these station files to monitoring files provided by
the Water Quality portal. In several cases, monitoring was performed at these stations even when they were
not officially part of their designated networks. We include all monitoring results during the years 1962-2001.
Station Definitions. Some stations change name slightly—for example, the same station may have
7

The 1974 report includes total soluble phosphate to determine reference levels. We choose to use orthophosphate (dissolved
as P) instead. The number of records in Storet Legacy corresponding to total soluble phosphate (38,000) is far fewer than the
870,000 monitoring results for orthophosphate (dissolved as P).
8
We add dissolved chlorides and dissolved sulfate to this list since the unique pollutant parameter codes listed in the NWQI
Report for chlorides and sulfate refer to total chlorides and total sulfate in Storet Legacy, but dissolved chlorides and dissolved
sulfate in the NWIS.

A-7

similar names in Modern Storet and in Storet Legacy. In regressions that include station fixed effects or allow
station-level autocorrelation, we define a station as a unique latitude and longitude pair. For these reasons,
the main text generally refers to stations as “monitoring sites.”
In our data, the tuple of a station’s name, the name of the agency that manages it, and the repository
(Storet Legacy, Modern Storet, or NWIS) uniquely identifies a station. When we pool the three repositories,
5-10 percent of “stations” that appear unique by this definition have the same longitude and latitude as
another “station.” This is typically because a single station appears in both Storet Legacy and Modern
Storet but with slightly different station codes. This motivates our use of longitude and latitude to define
monitoring sites.
In a few cases, individual pollution readings (i.e., records) appear in both Storet Legacy and Modern
Storet. We identify and remove such duplicates based on station latitude and longitude, reading date and
time, and reading value.
Monitoring Depth. We do not account for reading depth since many depth values have missing units
and our inspection suggests different monitors use different depth units.
Measurement Limits We capture special cases where the pollutant could not be measured or the
measurement was outside of standard detection limits. For NWIS and Storet, we flag records with nonmissing information in the detection type field. For example, this includes records coded with “Historical
Lower Reporting Limit,” “Upper Reporting Limit,” or “Estimated Detection Level.” For flagged records, we
then let the result value equal the detection limit if the result value is missing and the detection limit is
not missing. We also restrict the detection limit to be greater than zero except for temperature. For Storet
Legacy, we use the “remarks” field to flag similar records. This includes remarks coded as “B,” “C,” “I,” “J,”
“K,” “L,” “M,” “N,” “O,” “P,” “T,” “U,” “W,” “Z,” and “$,” where the key is provided by the U.S. EPA
(http://www.epa.gov/storet/legacy remark.pdf). We make no changes to the reported measurement since
the remarks suggest that the reported measurement equals the result value. In one sensitivity analysis, we
take readings with the “Below Detection Limit” (BDL) field coded as “Lower Limit” or “Other,” and replace
them as half the listed value.
Measurement Time. For observations with missing information on the measurement time, we create a
missing hour indicator and include it alongside controls for a cubic polynomial in hour. For Storet Legacy
and Modern Storet, we also code this indicator for hour equal to 0 since there is a pileup of observations at
this hour.
Test of Dissolved Oxygen Data Quality. Standard hydrology textbooks predict that dissolved oxygen
deficits should increase with temperature, in summer (when flows are lower and temperatures higher), and
in morning. The time-of-day patterns of dissolved oxygen are due to photosynthesis adding oxygen during
the day and respiration removing oxygen at night. Appendix Figure II plots regressions of dissolved oxygen
deficits on binned indicators for each of these physical factors, while including monitor fixed effects. The
patterns closely follow standard chemistry predictions. We interpret this as one additional piece of evidence
that these data provide good quality measures of water pollution.

B.4

Grants

The average government manages multiple plants, and the average plant receives multiple grants. Governments include cities, towns, sewage or water districts, and environmental agencies. After 1987, small grants
to a few areas, mainly islands and Washington DC, continued through the year 2000. Two-thirds of U.S.
wastewater treatment plants in the analysis sample received at least one grant (Appendix Table II).

A-8

The $650 billion total cost mentioned in the main text includes only grants given in years 1972 or later
with non-missing award date. An additional approximately $135 billion in expenditure occurred due to grants
given in years before 1972.
A local government could receive at least three grants for a single project. The first grant was for creating
a facility plan, the second was for detailed engineering plans, and the third was for construction. Money was
disbursed as it was spent and EPA reviewed projects after completion. The grants data used for analysis
exclude the very few grants in the raw data that list either the federal or total (federal+local) cost as zero.
The microdata we obtain on grants are up to 50 years old, from an era when computers were rare, so we
sought to corroborate the accuracy of the data.
In order to test the accuracy of the microdata on 35,000 grants, we compare the grants against several
published reports describing this program. A USEPA (2000b) report and associated book (Stoddard, Harcum,
Simpson, Pagenkopf, and Bastian 2002) were based on detailed data describing these grants. Andy Stoddard
and Jon Harcum generously shared the microdata underlying these reports. The grants data they analyze
exactly mirror ours, with two exceptions. First, the aggregate nominal figure they report for grants ($61
billion) reflects both federal and associated municipal capital spending. Second, they only obtained records
of 10,000 grants. This appears to be because their data apply several exclusion criteria.
We also compared individual grants in the microdata we received against published reports we found
that list individual grants given in early years (USEPA 1974a,b). The grants in our microdata also appear
in these printed volumes, with the same plant and government authority listed. Grant dates are similar in
the microdata and 1970s reports, though some differ by several months. The dollar amounts of individual
grants have the same order of magnitude but the exact amounts differ. This may be because funds requested,
approved, and disbursed can differ, and can take over a decade to finalize.
One sensitivity analysis in our paper looks only at grants given for construction rather than engineering
plans. Following Stoddard, Harcum, Simpson, Pagenkopf, and Bastian (2002), we define a grant as for
construction if the grants microdata list the grant “Step” as equal to three or four, and if the grant also lists
the facility number of the plant receiving the grant.
Operating and Maintenance Costs. Clean Water Act grants involve three types of costs: federal
grants for capital, local matching expenditures for capital, and expenditures for operating and maintenance
(O&M). Our grants microdata report only the first two costs, so we estimate the third from other sources.
National data are consistent with the idea that the ratio of lifetime O&M costs to upfront capital costs
increased almost linearly from 130 percent in 1972 to 259 percent in 1996. We linearly extrapolate these values
to years before and after 1972-1996. These values reflect several sources. Two independent sources provide
identical reports that concrete structures of treatment plants have a useful life of 50 years but mechanical and
electrical components have a useful life of 15-25 years (American Society of Civil Engineers 2011 and USEPA
2002). We assume grants require O&M expenditures for 30 years.
We combine this 30 year statistic with the estimated ratio of O&M costs to capital stock in a typical year.
This ratio grew almost linearly from 3.7 percent in 1972 to 7.4 percent in 1996 (USEPA 2002). These values
reflect historic census records on O&M expenditures and perpetual inventory estimates of capital stocks (U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers 1994), both for sewerage infrastructure.
These values represent the most accurate estimates of O&M costs that we can discern. Nonetheless,
it is informative to compare these values against other estimates of these costs. One survey of 226 Clean
Water Act projects found a ratio of annual O&M costs to upfront capital costs of 3.76% to 3.96% (Lake,
Hanneman, and Oster 1979).9 The ratio was similar across different community sizes and government types.
9

This study reports the ratio as 3.96% on p. 42 and 3.76% on p. 110. The reason for the discrepancy is unclear.

A-9

These values are similar to the aforementioned numbers that we use, which report a ratio of 3.7% in 1972.
A second source reports the prediction that for a typical city of 25,000 people, the total cost of building a
treatment plant is about $4.6 million, and the expected real annual O&M cost is about $200,000 (USEPA
1979). The ratio of annual O&M costs to upfront capital costs in this second source is 4.3%, which is the
value for the year 1976 implied by the data we use. A third source is an ex ante engineering prediction that
lifetime O&M costs are 93 percent of upfront capital costs (Hitchcock and Giggey 1975).10 The reason why
the engineering predictions in this third study are smaller than the ex post realized costs we use is unclear,
though engineering predictions have underestimated the costs of energy and environmental investments in
other settings also. A fourth source indicates that nominal operations and maintenance cost per unit volume
treated increased perhaps more rapidly than these numbers suggest, by nearly 5 percent per year during the
period 1982-1988, which is large particularly since unit volumes treated if anything likely increased in this
period (U.S. Army Corps of Engineers 1994). Other studies report aggregate national trends in real total
operations and maintenance costs over parts of this period, which were fairly flat between 1977 and 1987 then
increasing, and in the real total value of the capital stock over this period, which increased steadily after 1977
(U.S. Army Corps of Engineers 1994; USEPA 2002).
The preceding paragraph describes several snapshots of operating and maintenance costs. They are in
the ballpark of the main estimates we use, which cover the period 1972-1996, though some numbers in the
previous paragraph would imply higher or lower operations and maintenance costs than our main estimates.
Linearly interpolating the values from the previous paragraph to form a complete time-series of these costs
would require strong assumptions on how to extrapolate data points for one or a few years out to several
decades. Section VII.C of the main text describes a more conservative and simple calculation, which is to ask
how cost estimates would change under the assumption that no operations and maintence costs are included
in the benefit-cost calculation.

B.5

Census Data from Geolytics

For each census tract, the Geolytics Neighborhood Change database reports mean or total values for the
relevant housing and population variables we use. We measure the mean home value in a tract as the total
value of specified owner-occupied housing divided by the total number of specified owner-occupied housing
units. In years 1970 and 1980, these data cover non-condominium housing units only. The housing data
comes from the census “long form,” which is given to 1 in 6 households. The actual census questionnaire has
homeowners estimate the value of their property as falling into one of several bins.
We use a version of these data in which Geolytics has concorded all tract boundaries to the year 2010
boundaries. We use information on resident demographics, total population, physical features of housing (e.g.,
the number of rooms), home values, and rents. Some regressions control for housing structure characteristics.
Because each observation is a census tract (which is subsequently aggregated to buffer a given distance from
a river), we measure these structural characteristics as the share of homes with a given characteristic. The
rental data for 1970 are “contract rents,” which report the amount paid from renter to owner; the rental data
for 1980-2000 are “gross rents,” which include the contract rent plus utilities and fuels, if these are paid by the
renter. As with home values, the actual census questionnaire has renters enter their contract rent as falling
into one of several bins.
10
This study reports O&M predicted costs for different categories of water pollution abatement expenditures. We obtain a
national number by combining the category-specific O&M predictions from this study with category-specific capital expenditures
under the Clean Water Act from Stoddard, Harcum, Simpson, Pagenkopf, and Bastian (2002).

A-10

The census home values data reflect self-reported home values, rather than actual transaction values. The
census data are also top-coded. Many studies find high correlation between self-reported home values and
sales price indices, either in the cross-section or time-series (James R. Follain and Malpezzi 1981; Ihlanfeldt
and Martinez-Vazquez 1986; John L. Goodman and Ittner 1992; DiPasquale and Somerville 1995; Kiel and
Zabel 1999; Banzhaf and Farooque 2013; Benı́tez-Silva, Eren, Heiland, and Jiménez-Martı́n 2015), suggesting
that self-reports provide some important information about true market values. Because home values are
the dependent variable in hedonic regressions, using self-reported home values in the presence of classical
measurement error may decrease the precision of estimates but not create attenuation bias (Griliches and
Hausman 1986; Bound and Krueger 1991).
These studies, however, also find some inaccuracies of self-reported home values. One issue is bias—in
most studies, homeowners overestimate the market value of their property by 5-10 percent. Another concern is
inertia—owner-occupants who have not purchased a home recently may be slow to update their beliefs about
a home’s value (Kuzmenko and Timmins 2011; Henriques 2013). This inertia appears to be consistent with a
simple Bayesian updating model, specifically, a Kalman filter (Davis and Quintin 2017). But this means that
homeowners may be slow to reflect changes in local amenities due to investments in surface water quality.
Longstanding rental tenants often receive tenure discounts, though we are not aware of direct evidence on
the speed with which such discounts adjust to changes in amenities. As one way to address these concerns,
in analyzing home values and rents, we report specifications which allow homeowners and renters up to 10
years to reflect changes in water quality.
In regressions involving home values, the controls for structure characteristics are allowed to have different
coefficients in each year, and include the following: number of bedrooms, number of housing units in building,
number of stories in building, heating fuel, cooking fuel, hot water fuel, heating equipment type, sewer type,
plumbing type, year built, air conditioning, kitchen, number of bathrooms, and water access. All variables are
expressed as share of housing units with the indicated characteristic. All categorical variables (e.g., number of
bedrooms) are expressed as the share of housing units with each possible category. The 1970 characteristics
are the following: distance to central business district; share of population that is black; share of population
over age 65; share of population under age 6; share with a college degree; share on public assistance; income
per family; and all the 1970 structure characteristics.
We define city centers for all Standard Metropolitan Statistical Areas (SMSAs) as follows. The definition
of central business district locations used in most research comes from the 1982 Census of Retail Trade. This
definition has two downsides in our setting—it is potentially endogenous to the Clean Water Act, since the
definition was constructed ten years after the Act and since cleaning up rivers might shift the location of
businesses; and it includes a limited number of cities. Instead, for each Standard Metropolitan Statistical
Area (SMSA), we use the 1970 Population Census to construct an original definition of the city center as the
latitude and longitude of the census block centroid which has the greatest population density. In cities with
a central business district defined from the 1982 Census of Retail Trade, this typically ends up defining close
but not identical definitions of city centers. For census tracts within an SMSA, we then define distance to
the city center as distance to the city center of that SMSA. For census tracts outside an SMSA, we define the
distance to the closest city center overall.

A-11

B.6

Municipal Expenditure Data

We impose a few sample restrictions to ensure that we accurately measure the response of municipal spending
to federal grants. We restrict the sample to governments appearing in all years 1970-2001.11 This is important
since the data report capital expenditures but not capital stocks, and missing some years of municipal expenditures data could underestimate the response of municipal spending to federal grants. We also restrict the
sample to municipalities and townships, which we collectively refer to as cities. This restriction excludes state
governments, county governments, special districts, school districts, and the federal government. Finally, we
exclude cities which have other governments with similar names in the same state, and cities that have sewer
districts, counties, or other nearby related governments that may receive or spend grants. We make these
exclusions because they help accurately measure sewerage capital and grant receipt. We identify such cities
both using listings of sewer districts and local counties in the survey and census of governments, and using
grants which list the authority receiving the grant as a sewer board, county agency, or other local government
that is not a city. Many grants go to water boards, sewer districts, county agencies, or other local governments
which have separate financial management from a city. Such grants would not appear in the city’s financial
records, but the grants data do not always distinguish which local government administered the grant. These
restrictions leave a balanced panel of 198 cities. As noted in the main text, because this sample is relatively
small, we report one specification using inverse propensity score reweighting to match the characteristics of a
broader sample of cities.12

B.7

Additional Environmental Data13

We measure county-year-day air temperature and precipitation using data from the National Climate Data
Center Summary of the Day files (file TD-3200). We use information on the daily maximum temperature,
daily minimum temperature, and daily total precipitation. We use only weather stations reporting valid
readings for every day in a year. To obtain county-level values, we take an inverse-distance weighted mean
of data from stations within a 300 kilometer radius of the county centroid. Weights equal a monitoring site’s
squared distance to the county centroid, so more distant monitoring sites receive less weight.
As mentioned in the main text, we report one specification controlling for two separate counts of polluting
industrial plants. The 1972 Census of Manufactures asked every U.S. manufacturing plant whether it used
more than 20 million gallons of water per year, and the roughly 10,000 plants indicating that they used this
much water appeared in the 1973 SWUM. For each wastewater treatment plant in our data, we count the
11

The census has these data for the year 1967 and then annually beginning in 1970; our sample begins in 1970 since we need
a balanced panel. All governments report data in years ending in 2 and 7 (1972, 1977, etc.). Other years contain a probabilistic
sample of governments. In most years, the largest cities measured by population, total revenue, or expenditure are sampled with
certainty. Among smaller cities, sampling probabilities vary by region, type of government, and size. The balanced panel is the
main limiting factor in our data extract, since less than 1,000 cities appear in all years of the data 1970-2001.The “year” in these
data refers to each local government’s fiscal year. We convert the data to calendar years using data from these surveys on the
month when each government’s fiscal year ends, assuming that government expenditure is evenly distributed across months. For
the few governments that don’t report when their fiscal year ends, we assume they report by calendar year.
12
We estimate the propensity score from a probit using all cities. The estimated propensity score is a function of the city’s log
mean total expenditure across all years 1970-2001 when it appears in the census or survey of governments, the city’s log mean
population, an indicator for being a municipality (rather than township), and census division fixed effects. Cities with lower
expenditure and in the West and South are significantly more likely to appear in the sample; conditional on the other variables,
population does not significantly predict appearance in the sample.
13
We thank Olivier Deschenes for providing the weather data and Michael Greenstone for providing the 1972-1977 nonattainment data.

A-12

number of manufacturing plants in the same county which use at least 20 million gallons of water in 1972.
We control for these counts, interacted with a downstream indicator and interacted with year fixed effects.
Although these data only directly measure total water use and not total water pollution emissions, the SWUM
survey questions and resulting report both focus on water pollution,14 and plants with extensive water use
also emit large amounts of water pollution. For example, the industries that consume the most water in
the 1978 version of these data (Becker 2016) – blast furnaces and steel mills, industrial organic chemicals,
petroleum refining, and paper mills – are also the industries that emit the most water pollution.
The current EPA PCS data list the first year a plant received a water pollution emissions permit. These
data suffer from incomplete reporting, since not all states and plants uploaded data to the EPA’s centralized
database. They also suffer from sample selection, since plants which closed may not appear in the data.
In counting the number of industrial pollution emitters from PCS, we exclude wastewater treatment plants
(Standard Industrial Classification 4952).
Some sensitivity analyses control for county×year×pollutant nonattainment designations. For years after
1977, these data come from the EPA Green Book. Data for years 1972-1977 are constructed from raw
monitors based on the reported nonattainment rule. We define ozone nonattainment to include all ozone
or nitrogen oxides designations, and we define particulate matter nonattainment to include Total Suspended
Particulates (TSPs), particulates smaller than 10 micrometers (PM10 ), and particulates smaller than 2.5
micrometers (PM2.5 ). Our binary measures of nonattainment include all partial, whole-county, and other
types of nonattainment.
Farms, confined animal feeding operations (CAFOs), and other agricultural or “non-point” sources are
not likely to be a major source of confounding variation during this time period since they were not regulated
under the first few decades of the Clean Water Act. The Safe Drinking Water Act was passed in 1974, just
after the Clean Water Act. It is not a likely source of confounding variation since its goal is to improve the
quality of tap water, not ambient river water. It also focused on establishing water standards and overseeing
local authorities that enforce those standards, rather than on providing grant funds to improve infrastructure.

B.8

Data for Analyzing Heterogeneous Effects

Appendix Table VII analyzes how the effects of grants on water pollution and housing values differs for certain
subsets of grants. This subsection describes how we define these subsets.
Row 1 of Appendix Table VII distinguishes grant projects which have a total cost (including federal and
local contributions) above $1.2 million, measured in $2014. This is the median cost.
Row 2 of Appendix Table VII describes grants to plants that have secondary or tertiary baseline abatement
technology. These plant-level abatement technology data come from the Clean Watershed Needs Survey. Only
available data for the 1978, 1984, and 1986 years of this survey cover all plants and include accurate plant
identifier codes.15
These abatement technology data have several limitations. Only about 40 percent of grants or real grant
dollars were given after 1978. Additionally, only having reports for 1976, 1984, and 1986 implies that without
some kind of interpolation, abatement technologies are only directly reported for three years which together
account for about 15 percent of grants or grant dollars. The CWNS data contain two possible measures of a
plant’s abatement technology: one is a field where the respondent writes in the level of treatment stringency
14

The SWUM microdata were recently recovered from a historic Census Univac system. Unfortunately the water pollution
data in that survey were not available. We thank Randy Becker for helping access and interpret the SWUM data.
15
The available microdata from the 1976 survey exclude over half the plants. The 1980 and 1982 surveys have incorrect plant
identifier codes that can only be linked with substantial classification error to other years of the survey.

A-13

(primary, advanced primary, secondary, advanced secondary, or tertiary). The other is a list of all the different
abatement technologies the plant uses. The 1984 plant codebook classifies lists of abatement technologies into
primary, secondary, and tertiary. Between these two reports, only 45 percent of plant-year observations
have the same level of treatment (primary, secondary, or tertiary). In the self-reported level of treatment,
a third of plants that report a change in the treatment level report a decrease in the level. In the lists of
abatement technologies, large shares of plants that report changes in an abatement technology reports its
disappearance–for example, plants are almost as likely to report losing a trickling filter or activated sludge
process (which are the two most common types of secondary treatment) as to report gaining one. We use
secondary and tertiary classifications based on listed abatement technologies, which appear to have a lower
level of gross reporting errors than the handwritten secondary or tertiary entries.
Row 3 of Appendix Table VII describes grants to plants with baseline pollution above the median. We
measure baseline pollution as the mean pollution level for each watershed as measured in the years 1962-1971.
Baseline pollution levels are calculated separately for dissolved oxygen and for the fishable standard.
Row 4 of Appendix Table VII considers states that have decentralized authority to implement the Clean
Water Act NPDES program.16 This measure indicates whether a state holds authority to administer NPDES
permits.
Row 5 of Appendix Table VII considers counties that have above-median shares of people who report
outdoor fishing or swimming in the previous year. We obtain these data from the confidential version of the
National Survey on Recreation and the Environment (NSRE) years 1999-2009. Fishing is defined as coldwater
or warmwater fishing in rivers, lakes, or streams. Swimming includes swimming in streams, lakes, ponds, or
the ocean. (A separate question that we don’t use asks about swimming in swimming pools.) Our sample
includes approximately 85,000 households. Earlier versions of the survey have been conducted intermittently
since 1960; however, county and state participation shares are unavailable from earlier years. The NSRE
is a partnership between the USDA Forest Service Southern Research Station, The National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration, the University of Georgia, the University of Tennessee and other federal, state
or private sponsors. The survey is a randomized telephone survey of households across the U.S. Unfortunately,
state- or county-level rates of fishing participation for the entire U.S. are not available from years before the
Clean Water Act.
Row 6 of Appendix Table VII uses data on environmental views from the “Total Green Index” of Hall
and Kerr (1991). States with Pro-Environmental Views are defined as those with above-median values of the
total green index.
Row 7 of Appendix Table VII uses data on city growth and amenities. To identify declining urban areas,
we follow Glaeser and Gyourko (2005) by taking 1970-2000 city population growth rate as reported in the
1972 and 2000 city data books (Haines and ICPSR 2010). We define declining urban areas as cities with
population above 25,000 in the year 1970 which had a population decline of five percent or more by the year
2000. High amenity areas are defined as counties in an SMSA with above-median total amenity value, as
reported in Albouy (2016), Appendix Table A1.
Row 8 of Appendix Table VII uses each monitoring site’s location to identify its census region.

C

Spatial and Other Matching Across Datasets

Conducting the analysis of this paper requires linking several datasets. To link monitors and treatment plants
to rivers, we use the fact that rivers in NHD are internally defined as 70 million distinct longitude and latitude
16

These data are obtained from https://www.epa.gov/npdes/npdes-state-program-information (accessed August 31, 2016).

A-14

points connected by straight lines. We refer to these points as stream nodes. We identify the location where
each treatment plant discharges waste using longitude and latitude values from the 1984-1996 CWNS. For
each monitor and treatment plant, we then find the nearest stream node. All treatment plants in the analysis
sample are within 0.6 miles of a stream node.
To measure distances upstream and downstream along rivers, we use files in NHD which list, for each
stream node, the node(s) that are immediately upstream and/or downstream. We recursively construct a
network tree that defines, for each treatment plant, all stream nodes that are upstream or downstream. We
construct this algorithm to follow these flow relationships when one river flows into another, when rivers cross
watersheds, or when the flow network passes through lakes, estuaries, and other types of water. Finally, we
calculate distances between stream nodes and sum them to measure the distance along a river between a
treatment plant and pollution monitor.
We also link treatment plants to upstream and downstream census tracts. For each treatment plant, we
construct buffers of a given radius around river segments upstream and downstream of the plant. We define
one buffer to include all homes within 1 mile of those rivers, and another buffer to include homes 0 to 25
miles from those rivers. Many census tracts span multiple buffers. For each tract, we calculate the share of
the tract’s area which is in each buffer. For each tract, we measure population and housing characteristics
within a buffer by multiplying the total within the tract by the share of the tract’s area within the buffer.
Finally, we link each grant to the exact wastewater treatment plant receiving the grant. The Freedom of
Information Act (FOIA) data we received list an identifier code for the facility receiving the grant. These
same identifier codes appear in the Clean Watershed Needs Survey (CWNS), so they let us precisely identify
the wastewater treatment plant receiving the grant. In some cases where the facility identifier code is missing,
CWNS itself lists the grant code which a plant used, and this grant code matches the grant codes used in the
FOIA data. These two links unique identify the facility receiving a grant for about 76 percent of grants and
87 percent of grant dollars.

D

Cross-Sectional Water Pollution Around Wastewater Treatment Plants

We use the following equation to estimate how water pollution changes as a river flows past a wastewater
treatment plant:
0
Qpdy = βdd + µpy + Xpdy
γ + pdy
Each observation in these data represents a plant-downstream-year tuple. Here Qpdy measures pollution at
plant p in year y and downstream location d. Location d = 1 includes areas downstream of the treatment
plant, and location d = 0 includes areas upstream of the treatment plant. The plant×year fixed effects µpy
imply that these comparisons are made within a river×year, so they measure how water pollution changes
as the river flows past the wastewater treatment plant. The coefficient β represents the mean difference in
pollution between downstream and upstream waters near a treatment plant. We include temperature and
precipitation controls Xpdy .
These comparisons are cross-sectional and do not analyze changes in a river over time. Because wastewater
treatment plants may locate near other pollution sources, such as urban runoff and industrial plants, these
regressions do not identify the effect of wastewater treatment plants on water pollution. Area characteristics
may also differ in the cross-section between upstream and downstream areas. Indeed, the average upstream
and downstream monitoring sites are 20 miles apart. Compared to upstream areas, downstream areas have

A-15

similar population density and share of families on welfare, though slightly lower share of adults with a college
degree and slightly greater share population black.17 These cross-sectional differences are another reason that
our research design exploits the timing of grants across treatment plants.
As a river passes a wastewater treatment plant, data show large and statistically significant increases in
pollution (Appendix Table V). Dissolved oxygen deficits rise by 1.2 percent saturation, which is an increase
of ten percent relative to the upstream pollution level. Fecal coliforms increase the most as a river passes a
treatment plant, by about 40 percent. Other pollutants increase by smaller amounts. The probability that a
river is not fishable rises by about 4 percentage points as a river passes a wastewater treatment plant.

E
E.1

Sensitivity Analyses
Pollution Trends

This subsection reports sensitivity analyses for pollution trends; most are qualitatively and quantitatively
similar to the main results.
Rows 2-6 of Appendix Table III consider important subsamples. Row 2 only uses long-term stations, which
begin operating by the year 1971 and report data through at least the year 1988, since the grants program
largely converted into a subsidized loans program in 1987. Row 3 restricts the sample to the largely metro
counties that had some home values data in all four decennial censuses 1970-2000; as mentioned earlier, the
1970-80 censuses excluded many non-metro areas. Rows 4-6 separately estimate results for the three pollution
data repositories – NWIS, Storet Legacy, and Modern Storet – since each has different coverage and affiliated
organizations which collect the data.
Rows 7-11 of Appendix Table III report sensitivity analyses prompted in part from discussing this analysis
with hydrologists. Row 7 limits the sample to include only stations which have at least 25 readings, since
these may have higher-quality data. Row 8 controls for the level of instantaneous stream flow, as measured
at the same station and time as pollution, and so is limited to to “stream gauge” observations recording both
streamflow and pollution. Row 9 uses data from only the months of July and August, since this is when
streamflows are lowest, temperatures are greatest, and pollution concentrations are highest. Row 10 takes
readings which indicate that they are below a monitor’s detection limit (“BDL”), and replaces them with half
the recorded value. (The main analysis uses the reported value for these BDL readings.) Row 11 specifies the
pollutants with skewed distributions (BOD, fecal coliforms, and TSS) in logs rather than levels.
Rows 12-13 of Appendix Table III reports an alternative water pollution index. Row 12 reports results
where each observation describes mean values for a river-year. In this specification, a “river” is defined as a
unique combination of a watershed and river code.18 Row 13 defines the dependent variable as an indicator
for whether more than 50 percent of pollution readings in the river-year are below the fishable or swimmable
standard.
Rows 14-16 of Appendix Table III report results separately for three small and well-documented networks
of high-quality monitoring sites, all managed by USGS. Row 14 shows estimates for the National Stream
Quality Accounting Network (NASQAN). Row 15 shows estimates for the National Water-Quality Assessment
17

The census tracts of downstream monitoring sites have population density of 835 persons per square mile; upstream areas
have density of 862. Downstream areas have 4.88 percent of families on welfare, while upstream areas have 4.81 percent of
families on welfare; downstream areas have 9.2 percent of adults with a college degree while upstream areas have 9.9 percent of
adults with a college degree, and downstream areas have 8.5 percent of population black while upstream areas have 7.7 percent
of population black. These values use 1970 census data.
18
A river here is defined as a “levelpathi” from NHD.

A-16

(NAWQA) (Smith, Alexander, and Wolman 1987; Alexander, Slack, Ludtke, Fitzgerald, and Schertz 1998;
Rosen and Lapham 2008). Row 16 shows estimates for the Hydrologic Benchmark Network (HBN), which
includes a small number of watersheds expected to have “minimal” effects from human activity (Alexander,
Slack, Ludtke, Fitzgerald, and Schertz 1998). HBN shows smaller trends than the main sample for BOD,
fecal coliforms, and TSS, which is consistent with anthropogenic causes of these pollutants in the national
data.
Rows 17-25 of Appendix Table III report other important sensitivity analyses. Row 17 allows arbitrary
autocorrelation within both watersheds and years. Row 18 limits the sample to lakes. An important paper
finds that dissolved oxygen in lakes has not changed since the Clean Water Act (Smith and Wolloh 2012), and
Row 18 corroborates that finding. But the lake point estimate for dissolved oxygen deficits is negative, all other
pollutants in lakes show downward trends, and nearly all of the other sensitivity analyses in Appendix Table
III also show statistically significant downward trends. These results suggest that broader trends in water
pollution differ from patterns evident in dissolved oxygen in lakes. Row 19 adds controls for temperature and
precipitation. These are relevant since climate change is increasing air temperatures, but hotter temperatures
can increase dissolved oxygen deficits. In row 20 each observation is the mean value in the county-year, and
regressions are generalized least squares weighted by the population in the county-year. This may better reflect
the trends experienced by the average person. Row 21 interacts the time-of-day and day-of-year controls with
river basin region fixed effects, to capture the idea that seasonality and time patterns may differ across space.
Rows 22-25 report estimates separately for each of the four census regions; all pollutants are declining in all
regions, though declines were more rapid in the Northeast.

E.2

Effects of Clean Water Act Grants on Pollution: Sensitivity and Heterogeneity

This subsection reports sensitivity analyses for effects of Clean Water Act grants on pollution. Rows 1-13 of
Appendix Table VI report the sensitivity analyses used for analyzing trends. Most of these give broadly similar
results to the main specification. The alternative definitions of the “fishable” and “swimmable” standards
do give more variable results—for example, defining fishable and swimmable as an indicator for whether 50%
of readings are below the standard shows that each grant decreases the probability that waters violate the
fishable standard by 2.4 percentage points, but does not significantly change the probability that waters are
swimmable.
We also estimate sensitivity analyses which we do not report for trends regressions, and most also give
similar results. Row 14 includes dummies for the range of distances from 0-25 miles, 25-50, 50-75, and 75-100
miles. These analyses show that the effect of grants on water pollution is concentrated within 25 miles.
For BOD and dissolved oxygen, small and statistically insignificant effects may appear at further distances.
Row 15 considers the subsample of plants with pollution monitoring sites at least 10 miles upstream and
downstream.
Rows 16-20 of Appendix Table VI describe other ways of measuring grants. Row 16 includes only grants
that are for physical construction, and excludes grants for architectural or engineering plans. Row 17 includes
separate indicators for each possible cumulative grant that a plant received. All grants appear to decrease
pollution, though later grants may have had larger effects, and most pollutants show a positive dose-response
function. Row 18 controls for both the cumulative number of grants to any plants within 25 miles upstream
and also (separately) for grants to plants within 25 miles downstream, which hardly changes estimates. This
control is designed to address the possible concern that facilities may be located near each other in rivers, and

A-17

nearby plants may receive grants at similar times.19 Row 19 includes controls for the number of grant projects
of three different magnitudes (roughly terciles of the grant size distribution). The smallest grant projects have
no clear effects on pollution, moderate-size projects lead to statistically insignificant decreases in pollution,
and the largest projects produce the clearest decreases in pollution. Row 20 replaces the cumulative number of
grants with a measure of the log of the cumulative real grant dollars provided, and indicates that a one percent
increases in grant size increases the probability that downstream rivers are fishable by about 1 percent. To
avoid excluding all the many plant×downstream ×year observations with zero cumulative grants, we specify
row 20 as ln(cumulativeDollars + 0.01).
Rows 21-26 of Appendix Table VI present several other important sensitivity analyses. Row 21 shows a
differences-in-differences specification using data only from downstream waters. This specification includes
plant fixed effects and water basin×year fixed effects, and reports the coefficient on a variable measuring
the cumulative number of grants a plant has received. Row 22 allows arbitrary autocorrelation of confidence
regions within year and within watershed. Row 23 includes monitoring sites on other rivers than the river
where the wastewater treatment plant is directly located. Row 24 excludes small wastewater treatment plants
that never received a grant. Row 25 shows unweighted OLS estimates. Row 26 adds several potentially
important control variables, each interacted with a downstream indicator: whether the county of the wastewater treatment plant was in nonattainment under the Clean Air Act, separately for each air pollutant; the
total population in the county-year of the wastewater treatment plant; and two indicators for the number of
polluting industrial plants in the county-year of the wastewater treatment plant, extracted from the databases
SWUM and PCS as described earlier.20
Finally, we estimate the effect of these grants on other pollutants (Appendix Table IV, column 2). We find
no effect of a grant on any of the industrial pollutants (lead, mercury, or phenols), and perverse signs for two
of the three. It is not impossible for a grant to affect these industrial pollutants, since some industrial waste
can flow through treatment plants, but the lack of substantive effects on any of these three and incorrect signs
are consistent with the idea that these grants are not correlated with unobserved variables like industrial
activity or industrial water pollution regulations. We also detect no effects of grants on most measures of
nutrients or more general water quality measures such as chlorides, stream flow, or temperature.
The main text uses these regressions to calculate the cost-effectiveness of grants. It is also useful to
consider how our cost-effectiveness estimates would change under different assumptions about crowd out.
Table III shows that it costs $0.53 million annually to increase dissolved oxygen saturation in a river-mile
by 10 percent, and $1.5 million annually to make a river-mile fishable. Our real pass-through point estimate
of 0.89 from column (4) of Table IV implies cost-effectiveness numbers of $0.47 million for oxygen and $1.34
million for the fishable standard. The 95 percent confidence region for our real pass-through estimate ranges
from 0.44 to 1.34, which implies a range of cost-effectiveness values between $0.23 million and $0.71 million
for oxygen, and between $0.66 million and $2.01 million for fishable. All these estimates represent the cost
per year to make a river mile fishable or to increase dissolved oxygen saturation by 10 percent for a year.
19

Around half of the plants we analyze have at least one other plant within 25 miles upstream or 25 miles downstream, and
the mean plant in our data has 1.7 other plants within 25 miles upstream or 25 miles downstream.
20
Because the SWUM data are only observed in 1972, they are interacted with a full set of year indicators, in addition to the
interaction with downstream indicators.

A-18

Heterogeneity
For several attributes of grants, we estimate regressions like equation (3), but include an additional interaction
of the main downstream×grants term with a given binary characteristic of grants.21 Appendix B.8 describes
measurement of these characteristics.
Columns (1)-(2) of Appendix Table VII report these estimates, and columns (5)-(6) use these regressions
along with data on grant costs to estimate cost-effectiveness. We compare these cost-effectiveness values
against the numbers in Table III, rows 7-8, column 3, to see how they compare to the average grant. Row
1 finds that grant projects above the median size ($1.2 million) cause larger decreases in pollution. Because
these larger grants cost more, however, columns (5)-(6) suggest they are slightly less cost effective than
the mean grant. Row 2 analyzes grants for plants that initially had more advanced (secondary or tertiary)
abatement technology. If plants face increasing marginal abatement costs, then grants given to plants with
better initial technology might be less cost-effective.22 Row 2 does not provide evidence to support this
hypothesis, and the point estimates actually suggest that grants to plants with tertiary technology are more
cost-effective. These estimates are imprecise, however, and we interpret them cautiously given the poor quality
of the data on abatement technologies (see Appendix B.8). Row 3 suggests that grants to more polluted areas
decrease pollution more and are slightly less cost-effective. Row 4 suggests that grants to state-years with
decentralization authority to manage NPDES permits are more effective, and have similar cost-effectiveness.
Rows 5-7 of Appendix Table VII study three additional dimensions of heterogeneity which are more relevant
to housing markets. We discuss them briefly here. Row 5 finds that grants to counties with a large share of
people who do outdoor fishing or swimming are significantly more cost-effective.23 These counties may be more
rural, so may face lower wage and construction costs. Row 6 finds that states with pro-environmental views
have slightly more cost-effective grants. Row 7 considers two sets of cities highlighted in the urban economics
literature—declining older cities (Glaeser and Gyourko 2005), and high amenity cities (Albouy 2016). Both
groups of cities have low cost effectiveness. High amenity areas may face high wages and construction costs,
while declining urban areas may have governments which are less effective at managing grants. Row 8
compares across the four census regions; only the Northeast has significantly lower cost-effectiveness, which
occurs in part because grants there are estimated to decrease pollution less.

E.3

Hedonic Estimates: Sensitivity and Heterogeneity

Appendix Table VIII reports sensitivity analyses for the effect of grants on home values. Columns (1)-(3)
report effects of grants on log mean home values for different radii. Columns (4)-(6) analyze rental values.
Columns (7)-(12) report estimates for residential characteristics like income, education, race, and age. If
residents value characteristics of neighbors and grants change those characteristics, then looking only at price
or quantity effects could poorly measure willingness to pay (Bayer, Ferreira, and McMillan 2007; Greenstone
and Gallagher 2008).
Each row describes different analyses. Row 2 excludes all housing units within a 1-mile radius in any
direction of the treatment plant, to address the possibility that grants change local disamenities from a
21

If Zpy is a characteristic of plant p in year y, we add the controls Gpy dd Zpy and Zpy ηdwy to equation (3). The term Zpy ηdwy
allows the downstream×basin×year fixed effects to vary with the binary characteristic Zpy .
22
Advanced abatement technologies can target pollutants which more basic abatement technologies do not target. So it is
plausible that the marginal abatement cost curve for an individual emitted pollutant is increasing, but the curve for ambient
levels of an omnibus measure of water pollution like dissolved oxygen or fishability is not substantially increasing over the range
of technologies we observe.
23
As described in Appendix B.8, the measure of swimming includes only natural water bodies and excludes swimming pools.

A-19

plant like noise or odor. Row 3 allows two-way clustering of standard errors by watershed and also by
year. The richest specifications of Table V include baseline controls interacted with year fixed effects; row 4
removes these baseline controls. Row 5 reports a differences-in-differences-in-differences regression comparing
upstream versus downstream home values.24 Row 6 reports unweighted OLS estimates. Row 7 replaces
downstream×basin×year fixed effects with downstream×year fixed effects and basin linear time trends. Row
8 reports estimates only for grants given in the year 1972. If communities in later years knew in advance a
plant would receive a grant, then estimates for later years could be confounded by homeowner expectations.
Row 9 reports the change in housing values around 1987 for plants that never received a grant. If homeowners
had accurate expectations about future grants, these plants may have experienced a decrease in home values
once the grants largely ceased. Row 10 allows grants to affect outcomes after 10 years, which may be important
if local public goods are only gradually incorporated into self-reported housing values.
Appendix Table VIII suggests little evidence that grants changed the composition of local residents
(columns 7-12). All these point estimates are small, and most are statistically indistinguishable from zero.
More broadly, these estimates do not change our qualitative conclusions about how grants affect housing
values (columns 1-6), though point estimates do vary. There is modest evidence that home values (though
not rents) increase within 0.25 or 1.0 miles of affected waters, though point estimates within 25 miles are
uniformly small and indistinguishable from zero. The unweighted estimates for housing (though not rents)
are more positive, which may suggest larger effects for less densely populated areas, where outdoor fishing
and swimming may be more common.
It is also useful to consider how alternative pass-through numbers would change the interpretation of our
results. The point estimate in column (4) of Table IV implies that each dollar of federal grants leads to 89
cents of additional municipal capital spending. In terms of Table VI, this point estimate of pass-through
would imply that the ratio of the change in housing values to costs is 0.27. The 95 percent confidence interval
of our pass-through estimate ranges from 0.44 to 1.34; in terms of Table VI, this implies the ratio of the change
in housing values to costs ranges between 0.18 and 0.55. Alternatively, one way to assess the importance of
crowdout is to ask: what value of pass-through would be needed to make the change in housing values exceed
costs? Table VI implies that for any pass-through rate above 0.24, costs exceed the change in housing values.
Heterogeneity
We now analyze variation across groups of grants in the ratio of a grant’s measured benefits to its costs. This
is useful to determine what types and levels of investment may be particularly valuable. For several attributes
of grants, we therefore estimate regressions like equation (6), but include an additional interaction of the main
grants term with a given binary characteristic of grants.25
Columns (3) and (4) of Appendix Table VII show regression estimates which allow the hedonic price
function to differ across census regions and other divisions of the data. Column 7 shows the ratio of measured
benefits to costs. Rows 1-4 consider heterogeneity most relevant for grants’ effects on pollution. The ratio
of measured benefits to costs is not significantly different from that of the average grant for any of these
rows. Row 5 considers grants to areas where a large share of people go fishing or swimming. The ratio of
measured benefits to costs here is double the ratio for the mean grant. Row 6 finds that grants to states with
pro-environmental views also have a greater ratio than that of the mean grant. Row 7 finds that grants to
24

In this sensitivity analysis, we draw a straight line through the treatment plant which is perpendicular to the river as it flows
through the treatment plant. We put homes upstream of this line in the upstream group, and similarly for downstream homes.
25
Formally, if Zpy is a characteristic of plant p in year y, we add the controls Gpy Zpy and Zpy ηwy to equation (6). The term
Zpy ηwy allows basin×year fixed effects to vary with the binary characteristic Zpy .

A-20

declining urban areas (Glaeser and Gyourko 2005) have actually negative (but statistically indistinguishable
from zero) ratios, while the ratio for high amenity areas (Albouy 2016) is greater. Finally, row 8 tests for
differences in the housing market response by census region. This specification finds that grants to the West
and Northeast have smaller ratios, while grants to the South have larger ratios around 0.84. None of these
ratios in rows 5-8 are significantly different than that of the mean grant.

F

Interpreting Hedonic Estimates

Section VII.C in the main text describes several reasons for why the hedonic model might provide a lower
bound on willingness to pay for Clean Water Act grants. This section describes several additional possible
reasons which we believe have weaker empirical support.
First, the effects of these grants could have been reflected in changes in housing supply or in the characteristics of local residents (Greenstone and Gallagher 2008). As discussed earlier, Table V and Appendix
Table VIII show little evidence of changes in either.
Second, people might not fully consider recreational demand or aesthetics when buying a home. Applications of the hedonic model generally assume that homeowners have complete information about the attributes
of the home they are buying, not least because a home is typically a person’s largest purchase. This common
assumption seems plausible in this setting.
Third, if homeowners already expected a grant in a given year, then that grant might affect home prices
before it was received. Qualitative evidence on such expectations is ambiguous. As Section II.A explains,
states were supposed to discuss priority lists in public hearings, which could provide public knowledge about
plants that might soon receive grants. The extent of such public knowledge is unclear, however, and both
priority lists and the national budget of the grants program changed substantially between years. Available
quantitative evidence does not show clear support for this idea. Homeowner expectations formed in the year(s)
before a grant would create a positive pretrend in home values, but Figure IV shows a flat pre-trend in the
ten years before a grant. If expectations played a large role overall, then grants given in the first year of the
program (1972) might have larger effects since these were largely unexpected. Row 8 of Appendix Table VIII
estimates only the effect of grants given in the year 1972, and finds similar effects to the overall estimates of
Row 1. Finally, we test for a change in home values in 1987, the year the grants largely concluded, for plants
that failed to receive a grant. The point estimates for this are negative but not statistically distinguishable
from either zero or the main estimates (Row 9).

References
Albouy, D. (2016): “What are Cities Worth? Land Rents, Local Productivity, and the Total Value of
Amenities,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 98(3), 477–487.
Alexander, R. B., J. R. Slack, A. S. Ludtke, K. K. Fitzgerald, and T. L. Schertz (1998):
“Data from selected U.S. Geological Survey national stream water quality monitoring networks,” Water
Resources Research, 34(9), 2401–2405.
American Society of Civil Engineers (2011): “Failure to Act: The Economic Impact of Current
Investment Trends in Water and Wastewater Treatment Infrastructure,” Discussion paper, ASCE.

A-21

Anderson, R. F. (2010): “Trends in Local Government Expenditures on Public Water and Wastewater
Services and Infrastructure: Past, Present and Future,” Discussion paper, U.S. Conference of Mayors Mayors Water Council.
Banzhaf, H., and O. Farooque (2013): “Interjurisdictional housing prices and spatial amenities: Which
measures of housing prices reflect local public goods?,” Regional Science and Urban Economics, 43, 635–648.
Bayer, P., F. Ferreira, and R. McMillan (2007): “A Unified Framework for Measuring Preferences
for Schools and Neighborhoods,” Journal of Political Economy, 115(4), 588–638.
Becker, R. A. (2016): “Water Use and Conservation in Manufacturing: Evidence from U.S. Microdata,”
Water Resources Management, 30(12), 4185–4200.
Benı́tez-Silva, H., S. Eren, F. Heiland, and S. Jiménez-Martı́n (2015): “How well do individuals
predict the selling prices of their homes?,” Journal of Housing Economics, 29, 12–25.
Bound, J., and A. B. Krueger (1991): “The Extent of Measurement Error in Longitudinal Earnings
Data: Do Two Wrongs Make a Right?,” Journal of Labor Economics, 9(1), 1–24.
CBO (1985): “Efficient Investment in Wastewater Treatment Plants,” Discussion paper, Congressional Budget Office.
Cremeans, J. E., and F. W. Segel (1975): “National Expenditures for Pollution Abatement and Control,
1972,” Survey of Current Business, 55(2), 8–11, 35.
Davis, M. A., and E. Quintin (2017): “On the Nature of Self-Assessed House Prices,” Real Estate Economics, 45(3), 628–649.
DiPasquale, D., and C. Somerville (1995): “Do House Price Indices Based on Transacting Units Represent the Entire Stock? Evidence from the American Housing Survey,” Journal of Housing Economics, 4,
195–229.
Glaeser, E. L., and J. Gyourko (2005): “Urban Decline and Durable Housing,” Journal of Political
Economy, 113(2), 345–375.
Greenstone, M., and J. Gallagher (2008): “Does Hazardous Waste Matter? Evidence from the Housing
Market and the Superfund Program,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(3), 951–1003.
Griliches, Z., and J. A. Hausman (1986): “Errors in Variables in Panel Data,” Journal of Econometrics,
31, 93–118.
Haines, M. R., and ICPSR (2010): “Historical, Demographic, Economic, and Social Data: The United
States, 1790-2002,” .
Hall, B., and M. L. Kerr (1991): 1991-1992 Green Index: A State-by-State Guide to the Nation’s Environmental Health. Island Press.
Henriques, A. M. (2013): “Are Homeowners in Denial about their House Values? Comparing Owner
Perceptions with Transaction-Based Indexes,” Mimeo, Federal Reserve Board.

A-22

Hitchcock, C. Y., and M. D. Giggey (1975): “Report to National Commission on Water Quality
on assessment of technologies and costs for publicly owned treatment works under public law 92-500,”
Discussion paper, Metcalf & Eddy, Inc.
Ihlanfeldt, K. R., and J. Martinez-Vazquez (1986): “Alternative Value Estimates of Owner-Occupied
Housing: Evidence on Sample Selection Bias and Systematic Errors,” Journal of Urban Economics, 20, 356–
369.
James R. Follain, J., and S. Malpezzi (1981): “Are Occupants Accurate Appraisers?,” Review of Public
Data Use, 9(1), 47–55.
John L. Goodman, J., and J. B. Ittner (1992): “The Accuracy of Home Owners’ Estimates of House
Value,” Journal of Housing Economics, 2, 339–357.
Kiel, K. A., and J. E. Zabel (1999): “The Accuracy of Owner-Provided House Values: The 1978-1991
American Housing Survey,” Real Estate Economics, 27(2), 263–298.
Kuzmenko, T., and C. Timmins (2011): “Persistence in Housing Wealth Perceptions: Evidence from the
Census Data,” Mimeo, Duke.
Lake, E. E., W. M. Hanneman, and S. M. Oster (1979): Who Pays for Clean Water? The Distribution
of Water Pollution Control Costs. Westview Press.
Lung, W.-S. (2001): Water Quality Modeling for Wasteload Allocations and TMDL. Wiley.
Rosen, M. R., and W. W. Lapham (2008): “Introduction to the U.S. Geological Survey National WaterQuality Assessment (NAWQA) of Ground-Water Quality Trends and Comparison to Other National Programs,” Journal of Environmental Quality, 37, S–190 to S–198.
Smith, R. A., R. B. Alexander, and G. Wolman (1987): “Water-Quality Trends in the Nation’s
Rivers,” Science, 235(4796), 1607–1615.
Smith, V. K., and C. V. Wolloh (2012): “Has Surface Water Quality Improved Since the Clean Water
Act?,” NBER Working Paper 18192.
Stoddard, A., J. B. Harcum, J. T. Simpson, J. R. Pagenkopf, and R. K. Bastian (2002): Municipal
Wastewater Treatment: Evaluating Improvements in National Water Quality. Wiley.
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (1994): “Consolidated Performance Report on the Nation’s Public Works:
An Update,” Discussion paper, US Army Corps of Engineers.
USEPA (1974a): “Awards Register Volume II. Grants Assistance Programs. Showing Projects Awarded in
Fiscal Year 1974.,” Discussion paper, USEPA.
(1974b): “Awards Register. Volume III. Grants Assistance Programs. Showing Projects Awarded in
Fiscal Year 1974.,” Discussion paper, USEPA.
(1974c): “National Water Quality Inventory. 1974 Report to the Congress. Volume II,” Discussion
paper, USEPA.

A-23

(1979): “1978 Needs Survey.. Conveyance and Treatment of Municipal Wastewater. Summaries of
Technical Data,” Discussion paper, USEPA.
(1997): “The Benefits and Costs of the Clean Air Act, 1970 to 1990,” Discussion paper, USEPA.
(2000): “A Retrospective Assessment of the Costs of the Clean Water Act: 1972 to 1997: Final
Report,” Discussion paper, USEPA.
(2000b): Progress in Water Quality: An Evaluation of the National Investment in Municipal Wastewater Treatment. USEPA.
(2002): “The Clean Water and Drinking Water Infrastructure Gap Analysis,” Discussion paper,
USEPA.
Vogan, C. R. (1996): “Pollution Abatement and Control Expenditures,” Survey of Current Business,
September, 48–67.

A-24

APPENDIX FIGURE I
Densities of Raw Pollution Readings
Panel B. Dissolved Oxygen Deficit

0

0

.005

.1

Density
.2

Density
.01
.015

.3

.02

.4

.025

Panel A. Biochemical Oxygen Demand

0

10

mg/L

20

30

-200

100

Panel D. Total Suspended Solids

0

0

.001

.005

Density
.002

Density

.01

.003

.004

.015

Panel C. Fecal Coliforms

-100
0
Saturation Deficit (Percent)

0

20000

MPN/100mL

40000

0

60000

400

mg/L

600

800

1000

.2
0

.1

Density
0

.1

Density

.2

.3

Panel F. Log Total Suspended Solids

.3

Panel E: Log Fecal Coliforms

200

-10

-5

0
ln(MPN/100mL)

5

10

-10

Notes: Data include years 1962-2001.

A-25

-5

0
ln(mg/L)

5

10

APPENDIX FIGURE II
Patterns in Dissolved Oxygen Deficits
Panel B. Hour

0

-.5

1

mg/L

mg/L
0

2

.5

3

Panel A. Month

1

2

3

4

5

6
7
Month

8

9

10

11

1

12

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24
Hour

0

.5

mg/L
1

1.5

2

Panel C. Air Temperature

<40

40-50

50-60
60-70
Air Temperature Bin

70-80

>80

Notes: Figures show coefficients from a regression of dissolved oxygen deficit on monitoring station fixed
effects and on dummy variables for the indicated controls. Data use only dissolved oxygen measured in
mg/L. Dissolved oxygen deficit is measured as 15 minus the reported level of dissolved oxygen in mg/L.
Data cover years 1962-2001.

A-26

APPENDIX FIGURE III
Water Pollution Trends, Other Pollution Measures, 1962-2001
Panel B. Fecal Coliforms

0

3

2000

mg/L
4

MPN/100mL
4000

5

6000

6

8000

Panel A. Biochemical Oxygen Demand

1972

2

1962

1962

1972

1982
Year

1992

1982
Year

1992

2001

2001

Panel D. Total Suspended Solids

.3

50

.4

100

mg/L

150

Share Not Swimmable
.5
.6

.7

.8

200

Panel C. Not Swimmable

1962

1972

1982
Year

1992

2001

1962

1972

1982
Year

1992

2001

Notes: These graphs show year fixed effects plus the constant from regressions which control for
monitoring site fixed effects, year fixed effects, day-of-year cubic polynomial, and hour-of-day cubic
polynomial, corresponding to equation (1) in the text. Connected dots show yearly values, dashed lines
show 95% confidence interval, and 1962 is reference category. Standard errors are clustered by
watershed.

A-27

APPENDIX FIGURE IV
Effects of Clean Water Act Grants on Water Pollution, Event Study,
Other Pollution Measures
Panel B. Fecal Coliforms

>=30

27 to 29

Panel D. Total Suspended Solids

>=30

27 to 29

24 to 26

Years Since Treatment Plant Received a Grant

21 to 23

18 to 20

15 to 17

9 to 11

12 to 14

6 to 8

3 to 5

0 to 2

-3 to -1

-6 to -4

<=-10

-9 to -7

-20

>=30

27 to 29

24 to 26

Years Since Treatment Plant Received a Grant

21 to 23

18 to 20

15 to 17

12 to 14

9 to 11

6 to 8

3 to 5

0 to 2

-3 to -1

-6 to -4

-9 to -7

<=-10

-.06

-10

-.04

mg/L
0

10

Share Not Swimmable
-.02
0
.02

20

.04

Panel C. Share Not Swimmable

24 to 26

Years Since Treatment Plant Received a Grant

21 to 23

18 to 20

15 to 17

12 to 14

6 to 8

9 to 11

3 to 5

0 to 2

-3 to -1

-6 to -4

-9 to -7

<=-10

>=30

27 to 29

24 to 26

Years Since Treatment Plant Received a Grant

21 to 23

18 to 20

12 to 14

15 to 17

6 to 8

9 to 11

3 to 5

0 to 2

-3 to -1

-6 to -4

<=-10

-9 to -7

-1

-3000

0

-2000

mg/L
1

MPN/100mL
-1000

0

2

3

1000

Panel A. Biochemical Oxygen Demand

Notes: Graphs show coefficients on downstream times year-since-grant indicators from regressions which
correspond to the specification of Table II. These regressions are described in equation (4) from the main
text. Connected dots show yearly values, dashed lines show 95% confidence interval. Data cover years
1962-2001. Standard errors are clustered by watershed.

A-28

APPENDIX FIGURE V
Effects of Clean Water Act Grants on Water Pollution
by Distance Downstream from Treatment Plant
Panel B. Not Fishable

Miles Downstream from Treatment Plant

20 to 25

15 to 20

10 to 15

5 to 10

0 to 5

-5 to 0

-10 to -5

-15 to -10

-25 to -20

-20 to -15

-.04

20 to 25

15 to 20

10 to 15

5 to 10

0 to 5

-5 to 0

-10 to -5

-15 to -10

-20 to -15

-25 to -20

-2

Share Not Fishable
-.02
0
.02

Saturation Deficit (%)
-1
0
1

.04

2

Panel A. Dissolved Oxygen Deficit

Miles Downstream from Treatment Plant

Panel D. Fecal Coliforms

20 to 25

15 to 20

10 to 15

5 to 10

0 to 5

-5 to 0

-10 to -5

-15 to -10

-20 to -15

-25 to -20

20 to 25

15 to 20

10 to 15

5 to 10

0 to 5

-5 to 0

-10 to -5

-15 to -10

-20 to -15

-25 to -20

-.4

-500

-.2

0

0

mg/L

.2

.4

MPN/100mL
500
1000

.6

1500

Panel C. Biochemical Oxygen Demand

Miles Downstream from Treatment Plant

Miles Downstream from Treatment Plant

Panel F. Total Suspended Solids

20 to 25

15 to 20

10 to 15

5 to 10

0 to 5

-5 to 0

-10 to -5

-15 to -10

-20 to -15

-25 to -20

20 to 25

15 to 20

10 to 15

5 to 10

0 to 5

-5 to 0

-10 to -5

-15 to -10

-20 to -15

-25 to -20

-4

-.02

-2

0

mg/L

2

4

Share Not Swimmable
-.01
0
.01
.02

6

.03

Panel E. Not Swimmable

Miles Downstream from Treatment Plant

Miles Downstream from Treatment Plant

Notes: Graphs show distance-from-plant times cumulative grant indicators from regressions which also
control for plant-by-distance, plant-by-year, and distance-by-water basin-by-year fixed effects. These
regressions are similar to equation (4) in the text, though with indicators for distance-from-plant rather
than years-since-grant. Connected dots show yearly values, dashed lines show 95% confidence interval.
Data cover years 1962-2001. Standard errors are clustered by watershed.

A-29

0

Dollars ($2014 Billion)
10
20
30

40

APPENDIX FIGURE VI
Federal and Local Wastewater Treatment Capital Spending 1960-1983

1960

1965

1970

Year

1975

State & Local

1980

1985

Federal

Notes: State and local data from CBO (1985). Federal data from GICS. All values deflated by
Engineering News Record construction price index. The vertical black line shows 1972, when
the U.S. government passed the Clean Water Act.

A-30

APPENDIX FIGURE VII
The Hedonic Model

A-31

APPENDIX FIGURE VIII
Ratio of Change in Housing Values to Grant Costs, by County

Notes: We divide treatment plants into ten deciles based on the population in the year 2000 which is
within a 25 mile radius in any direction of the river segments that are up to 25 miles downstream of the
plant and on the same river as the plant. For each decile, we calculate the total value of owned homes
and rentals satisfying the same criteria (within a 25 mile radius, etc.). To estimate the change in
housing values, we apply the regression estimates from column (4) of Table VI, and assume
improvements last 30 years. For each decile, we measure costs using the grants data. For each decile, we
divide the total change in housing values by total costs. Finally, we calculate the unweighted average of
this ratio across all plants in a county, and the map plots the result. Counties in white have no
treatment plants or missing data.

A-32

APPENDIX TABLE I
WATER POLLUTION DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS

Pooled

Biochemical
Oxygen
Demand

Dissolved
Oxygen Deficit

Fecal
Coliforms

Total
Suspended
Solids

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Mean

–

3.10

19.85

1,656.46

51.73

Standard Deviation

–

4.26

28.31

7,178.04

132.13

5th Percentile

–

0.30

-15.40

0.00

1.00

95th Percentile

–

10.00

80.46

6,000.00

210.00

10,991,992

1,285,357

5,883,715

2,086,392

1,736,528

Monitoring Sites

180,075

55,188

154,769

82,153

70,615

River Segments

96,674

35,596

86,941

50,073

44,889

Rivers

46,369

16,987

41,748

25,043

22,343

Number of Distinct . . .
Observations

Mean Years per Monitoring Site

10

11

10

11

10

Mean Readings per Monitoring Site

61

23

38

25

25

0.26

0.29

0.26

0.25

0.27

Storet Legacy

0.63

0.65

0.62

0.63

0.66

Storet

0.22

0.22

0.23

0.22

0.21

NWIS

0.14

0.14

0.15

0.15

0.12

Rivers

0.83

0.96

0.76

0.92

0.90

Lakes

0.17

0.04

0.24

0.08

0.10

0.07

0.06

0.08

0.06

0.05

Share in Metro Areas
Share from each repository:

Share from each type of surface water:

Share of readings from each Census Region:
Northeast
Midwest

0.27

0.23

0.25

0.24

0.39

South

0.50

0.59

0.49

0.53

0.41

West

0.17

0.13

0.18

0.17

0.15

1962-1971

0.08

0.14

0.08

0.07

0.04

1972-1981

0.32

0.38

0.28

0.43

0.30

Share of readings from ...

1982-1991

0.29

0.26

0.30

0.26

0.31

1992-2001

0.31

0.23

0.34

0.24

0.35

Share of readings from monitoring sites operating in ...
One Decade

0.28

0.27

0.31

0.28

0.33

Two Decades

0.30

0.30

0.31

0.29

0.31

Three Decades

0.29

0.25

0.29

0.32

0.27

Four Decades

0.13

0.18

0.09

0.11

0.09

Notes: Data cover years 1962-2001. Metro areas are defined as tracts from the 1970 census with non-missing home
values data. Dissolved oxygen deficit equals 100 minus dissolved oxygen, measured in percent saturation. River
segments are "comid"s, rivers are "levelpathi"s, as defined in the National Hydrography Dataset Plus, Version 2.1.

A-33

APPENDIX TABLE II
DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS FOR TREATMENT PLANTS AND GRANTS
All

Regression
Sample

(1)

(3)

Number of Plants

18,455

7,074

Number of Grants

20,430

9,670

Mean Number of Grants:
All Plants

1.11

1.37

Plants with ≥1 Grant

1.99

2.10

None

0.44

0.35

Exactly 1

0.24

0.27

Exactly 2

0.17

0.20

3 to 5

0.13

0.16

6 or More

0.01

0.02

Mean

8.05

9.22

5th Percentile

0.03

0.04

Share of Plants Receiving Following Number of Grants:

Federal Contribution for a Grant ($2014 Millions)

50th Percentile

0.86

1.16

95th Percentile

32.30

39.72

Mean

26.92

31.09

5th Percentile

0.10

0.12

Total Cost of a Grant Project ($2014 Millions)

50th Percentile

2.91

3.91

95th Percentile

108.35

135.76

Notes: Table counts multiple grants to the same plant in a single year as one grant.
Total cost of a grant project includes federal contribution, local capital cost, and
operating and maintenance costs. Grant values are deflated using the Engineering
News Record construction price index. Plants with zero grants, listed in columns (1)
and (2), are plants that appear in in 1976, 1978, 1984, 1986, or 1988 Clean
Watershed Needs Surveys (CWNS) with strictly positive population served, and
which do not appear in the federal grants data. These are the only five years of the
CWNS which were collected during the years of the grants program and which have
accurate identifier codes for treatment plants. Data cover years 1962-2001.

A-34

APPENDIX TABLE III
WATER POLLUTION TRENDS, SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS
Main Pollution Measures
Dissolved
Oxygen
Deficit
(1)
-0.240***
(0.030)

Other Pollution Measures

Not Fishable
(2)
-0.005***
(0.000)

Biochemical
Oxygen
Demand
(3)
-0.065***
(0.005)

Fecal
Coliforms
(4)
-81.097***
(8.326)

Not
Swimmable
(5)
-0.005***
(0.000)

Total
Suspended
Solids
(6)
-0.915***
(0.092)

-0.190***
(0.042)

-0.005***
(0.000)

-0.069***
(0.007)

-93.915***
(12.661)

-0.005***
(0.000)

-1.013***
(0.130)

3. Counties in Balanced Panel
of Home Values Data

-0.330***
(0.046)

-0.006***
(0.000)

-0.096***
(0.008)

-92.178***
(12.067)

-0.006***
(0.000)

-1.003***
(0.126)

4. USGS NWIS Repository

-0.215***
(0.027)

-0.004***
(0.000)

-0.066***
(0.009)

-103.894***
(16.902)

-0.005***
(0.000)

-0.875***
(0.181)

5. Storet Legacy Repository

-0.279***
(0.044)

-0.005***
(0.000)

-0.067***
(0.006)

-70.937***
(8.585)

-0.005***
(0.000)

-0.889***
(0.093)

6. Modern Storet Repository

-0.117***
(0.037)

-0.004***
(0.000)

-0.055***
(0.008)

-91.453***
(12.254)

-0.004***
(0.000)

-1.003***
(0.191)

-0.239***
(0.030)

-0.005***
(0.000)

-0.065***
(0.005)

-80.523***
(8.415)

-0.005***
(0.000)

-0.928***
(0.096)

8. Stream Gauge Observations,
Control for Flow

-0.288***
(0.024)

-0.005***
(0.000)

-0.077***
(0.009)

-97.988***
(14.882)

-0.006***
(0.000)

-0.961***
(0.214)

9. July-August Only

-0.259***
(0.045)

-0.005***
(0.000)

-0.068***
(0.007)

-86.831***
(8.603)

-0.004***
(0.000)

-0.870***
(0.105)

10. Readings Below Limit ("BDL")
Equal Half Listed Value

-0.240***
(0.030)

-0.005***
(0.000)

-0.068***
(0.005)

-80.881***
(8.331)

-0.005***
(0.000)

-0.917***
(0.092)

–
–

–
–

-0.014***
(0.002)

-0.030***
(0.002)

–
–

-0.015***
(0.001)

-0.003***
(0.000)

–
–

–
–

-0.003***
(0.000)

–
–

-0.004***
(0.000)

–
–

–
–

-0.005***
(0.000)

–
–

1. Main Estimates
Important Subsamples
2. Long-Term Stations
(≤1971 to ≥1988)

Standard Water Quality Tests
7. Exclude Stations with Less
than 25 Readings

11. Logs, Not Levels

Other Fishable and Swimmable Definitions
12. River-Year Means
–
–
13. River-Year Means,
50% Fish/Swim Defn.

–
–

A-35

APPENDIX TABLE III
WATER POLLUTION TRENDS, SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS (CONTINUED)
Standards
Constituent Pollutants
Dissolved
Biochemical
Oxygen
Oxygen
Fecal
Not
Deficit
Not Fishable
Demand
Coliforms
Swimmable
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Well-Documented USGS Networks
14. NASQAN Network
-0.237***
-0.004***
-0.040***
-55.013***
-0.007***
(0.027)
(0.000)
(0.013)
(8.154)
(0.001)

Total
Suspended
Solids
(6)
-1.615***
(0.437)

15. NAWQA Network

-0.317***
(0.037)

-0.005***
(0.001)

-0.086***
(0.021)

-91.404***
(18.533)

-0.008***
(0.001)

-0.913***
(0.311)

16. HBN Network
(Isolated, Natural Areas)

-0.352***
(0.080)

-0.002***
(0.001)

0.003
(0.014)

0.841
(1.929)

-0.006***
(0.001)

-0.146
(0.333)

Other Important Sensitivity Analyses
17. Cluster by Watershed And
-0.240***
and Year
(0.034)

-0.005***
(0.000)

-0.065***
(0.006)

-81.097***
(10.426)

-0.005***
(0.000)

-0.915***
(0.142)

18. Lakes

-0.069**
(0.035)

-0.001
(0.000)

-0.035***
(0.008)

-4.495**
(2.041)

-0.001*
(0.001)

-0.489***
(0.146)

19. Weather Controls

-0.239***
(0.030)

-0.005***
(0.000)

-0.065***
(0.005)

-81.692***
(8.293)

-0.005***
(0.000)

-0.977***
(0.091)

20. County-Year Means,

-0.227***

-0.004***

-0.100***

-100.941***

-0.004***

-1.349***

(0.054)

(0.000)

(0.015)

(13.335)

(0.000)

(0.323)

-0.241***

-0.005***

-0.066***

-77.773***

-0.004***

-0.885***

(0.031)

(0.000)

(0.005)

(7.283)

(0.000)

(0.097)

-0.475***

-0.006***

-0.071***

-75.657**

-0.007***

-0.793***

(0.126)

(0.001)

(0.011)

(31.541)

(0.001)

(0.159)

-0.261***

-0.005***

-0.064***

-74.061***

-0.005***

-0.783***

(0.035)

(0.000)

(0.008)

(12.501)

(0.000)

(0.179)

-0.187***

-0.004***

-0.062***

-90.399***

-0.004***

-0.812***

(0.047)

(0.000)

(0.007)

(12.394)

(0.001)

(0.079)

-0.256***
(0.056)

-0.004***
(0.000)

-0.098***
(0.020)

-56.476***
(11.308)

-0.004***
(0.001)

-1.706***
(0.291)

Population-Weighted
21. Flexible Seasonality and Time

22. Census Region: Northeast

23. Census Region: Midwest

24. Census Region: South

25. Census Region: West

Notes: Standard errors are clustered by watershed. Regressions include monitoring site fixed effects, season controls, and
hour controls, except where otherwise noted. See text for details. Data cover years 1962-2001. Asterisks denote p-value <
0.10 (*), < 0.05 (**), or < 0.01 (***).

A-36

APPENDIX TABLE IV
RESULTS FOR OTHER MEASURES OF WATER POLLUTION

Industrial Pollutants
1. Lead (μg/L)
Dependent Variable Mean
N
2. Mercury (μg/L)
Dependent Variable Mean
N
3. Phenols (μg/L)
Dependent Variable Mean
N
Nutrients
4. Ammonia (mg/L)
Dependent Variable Mean
N
5. Nitrates (mg/L)
Dependent Variable Mean
N
6. Nitrite Nitrate (mg/L)
Dependent Variable Mean
N
7. Nitrogen (mg/L)
Dependent Variable Mean
N
8. Orthophosphate (mg/L)
Dependent Variable Mean
N
9. Phosphorus (mg/L)
Dependent Variable Mean
N
(Continued next page)

Trend
(1)

Downstream *
Cumulative # of Grants
(2)

-0.099***
(0.004)
2.332
477,426

-0.336
(0.541)
22.809
20,524

-0.011***
(0.001)
0.265
437,351

0.019
(0.014)
0.285
16,090

-2.351**
(1.056)
79.095
147,509

11.162*
(6.045)
12.023
6,856

-0.039***
(0.002)
-2.371
1,646,149

-0.029**
(0.012)
0.433
35,216

0.002
(0.002)
-1.147
697,682

0.023
(0.035)
1.175
15,418

0.004***
(0.001)
-1.059
1,453,593

0.067**
(0.032)
1.321
26,782

-0.003**
(0.001)
3.139
739,175

2.119
(48.402)
2005.864
7,618

-0.024***
(0.003)
-3.482
825,871

-0.015*
(0.008)
0.224
11,756

-0.006***
(0.000)
0.248
2,375,437

0.001
(0.008)
0.344
35,430

A-37

APPENDIX TABLE IV
RESULTS FOR OTHER MEASURES OF WATER POLLUTION (CONTINUED)

General Water Quality Measures
10. Dissolved Chlorides (mg/L)
Dependent Variable Mean
N
11. Total Chlorides (mg/L)
Dependent Variable Mean
N
12. Total Coliforms (count/100mL)
Dependent Variable Mean
N
13. Color (PCU)
Dependent Variable Mean
N
14. pH (pH units)
Dependent Variable Mean
N
15. Total Dissolved Solids (mg/L)
Dependent Variable Mean
N
16. Dissolved Sulfate (mg/L)
Dependent Variable Mean
N
17. Stream Flow (Instanganeous, CFS)
Dependent Variable Mean
N
18. Temperature (F)
Dependent Variable Mean
N

Trend
(1)

Downstream *
Cumulative # of Grants
(2)

0.002
(0.001)
3.054
1,042,847

-8.638
(8.205)
106.341
16,340

-0.002
(0.002)
3.700
1,530,675

-16.476
(11.705)
146.167
19,602

-0.047***
(0.007)
6.453
703,289

-2841.798
(2094.212)
33388.102
12,668

0.001
(0.001)
3.340
632,713

1.381
(1.047)
32.260
11,496

0.007***
(0.001)
7.430
6,614,284

-0.006
(0.005)
7.508
65,370

0.000
(0.001)
5.418
1,884,714

-25.729*
(14.071)
443.611
28,186

-0.001*
(0.001)
3.67
805,268

-2.283
(2.482)
102.37
15,964

0.000
(0.001)
4.126
2,019,814

-55.421
(69.426)
2264.543
24,180

0.024***
(0.005)
60.061
11,027,029

-0.062
(0.052)
58.973
68,838

19. Turbidity (NTU)

-0.488***
-0.637
(0.049)
(0.432)
Dependent Variable Mean
21.546
26.419
N
2,433,788
30,592
Notes: Standard errors are clustered by watershed. Data cover years 1962-2001. All pollutants except
mercury, phenols, phosphorus, pH, temperature, and turbidity are in logs. Asterisks denote p-value < 0.10
(*), < 0.05 (**), or < 0.01 (***).

A-38

APPENDIX TABLE V
WATER POLLUTION UPSTREAM VERSUS DOWNSTREAM OF TREATMENT PLANTS
Main Pollution Measures
Dissolved
Oxygen
Not
Deficit
Fishable

Other Pollution Measures
Biochemical
Oxygen
Demand

Fecal
Coliforms

Not
Swimmable

Total
Suspended
Solids

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

1.234***

0.040***

0.611***

906.457***

0.052***

5.240***

(0.370)

(0.004)

(0.088)

(218.677)

(0.005)

(1.245)

N

59,150

63,698

31,452

37,446

63,698

33,392

Dep. Var. Mean

12.02

0.19

3.24

2,162.94

0.46

45.78

Plant-by-Year FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Weather

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Downstream

Notes: Each observation in a regression is a plant-downstream-year tuple. Data cover years 19622001. Dissolved oxygen deficit equals 100 minus dissolved oxygen saturation, measured in
percentage points. Dependent variable mean is for upstream pollution. Standard errors are
clustered by watershed. Asterisks denote p-value < 0.10 (*), < 0.05 (**), or < 0.01 (***).

A-39

APPENDIX TABLE VI
SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS: EFFECTS OF CLEAN WATER ACT GRANTS ON WATER POLLUTION

1. Main Estimates
Important Subsamples
2. Long-Term Stations
(≤1971 to ≥1988)

Main Pollution Measures
Dissolved
Oxygen
Deficit
Not Fishable
(1)
(2)
-0.681***
-0.007**
(0.206)
(0.003)

Other Pollution Measures
Biochemical
Oxygen
Demand
(3)
-0.104**
(0.041)

Fecal
Coliforms
(4)
-204.059**
(98.508)

Not
Swimmable
(5)
-0.004*
(0.002)

Total
Suspended
Solids
(6)
-0.497
(0.635)

-1.327***
(0.307)

-0.031***
(0.011)

-0.204
(0.128)

-447.958
(343.889)

-0.008**
(0.003)

-1.991
(2.006)

3. Facilities with Balanced
Panel of Home Values

-0.698***
(0.216)

-0.007**
(0.003)

-0.095**
(0.045)

-168.291
(110.788)

-0.004
(0.002)

-0.569
(0.728)

4. USGS NWIS Repository

-0.601
(0.864)

-0.014***
(0.005)

0.185
(0.213)

-11.489
(199.026)

-0.021**
(0.010)

4.382**
(1.802)

5. Storet Legacy Repository

-0.418
(0.254)

-0.007
(0.005)

-0.130**
(0.063)

-243.637*
(128.624)

0.000
(0.003)

-0.782
(0.552)

6. Modern Storet Repository

-1.076**
(0.470)

-0.007
(0.005)

-0.152*
(0.077)

-371.895**
(163.474)

-0.010*
(0.005)

-0.556
(0.408)

7. Only Years ≥1972

-0.689***
(0.211)

-0.009***
(0.003)

-0.120**
(0.057)

-102.068
(80.653)

-0.002
(0.002)

-0.403
(0.666)

-0.729***
(0.241)

-0.008***
(0.003)

-0.113**
(0.053)

-131.616
(122.135)

-0.004**
(0.002)

-0.313
(0.667)

-0.746*
(0.443)

-0.012**
(0.006)

-0.152
(0.129)

-79.395
(104.851)

-0.007
(0.006)

2.690
(1.901)

10. July-August Only

-1.299***
(0.384)

-0.015***
(0.004)

-0.134**
(0.060)

-102.118
(157.806)

-0.011***
(0.004)

-0.056
(0.917)

11. Readings Below Limit
Equal Half Listed Value

-0.683***
(0.206)

-0.007**
(0.003)

-0.103***
(0.040)

-203.296**
(98.556)

-0.004*
(0.002)

-0.499
(0.634)

–
–

-0.009
(0.007)

-0.009
(0.024)

–
–

-0.004
(0.009)

-0.024***
(0.005)

–
–

–
–

0.003
(0.006)

–
–

Standard Water Quality Tests
8. Exclude Stations with Less
than 25 Readings
9. Stream Gauge Observations,
Control for Flow

12. Logs, Not Levels

–
–
Other Fishable and Swimmable Definitions
13. 50% Fishable-Swimmable
–
Definition
–
(Continued next page)

A-40

APPENDIX TABLE VI
SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS: EFFECTS OF CLEAN WATER ACT GRANTS ON WATER POLLUTION (CONTINUED)
Main Pollution Measures
Dissolved
Oxygen
Deficit
Not Fishable
(1)
(2)
Other Distances Upstream and Downstream of Treatment Plant
14. Separate by Downstream Dist.
0 to 25 Miles Downstream
-0.609***
-0.009***
(0.187)
(0.002)
25 to 50 Miles Downstream
-0.122
0.007
(0.318)
(0.005)
50 to 75 Miles Downstream
0.029
0.002
(0.259)
(0.004)
75 to 100 Miles Downstream
0.845
0.000
(0.654)
(0.005)

Other Pollution Measures
Biochemical
Oxygen
Demand
(3)

Fecal
Coliforms
(4)

Not
Swimmable
(5)

Total
Suspended
Solids
(6)

-0.089**
(0.038)
-0.066*
(0.037)
-0.030
(0.051)
-0.195
(0.129)

-242.452***
(76.392)
144.737
(105.492)
147.027
(99.837)
-109.594
(121.537)

-0.002
(0.002)
0.004
(0.004)
0.001
(0.003)
0.006
(0.008)

-1.109**
(0.503)
-0.112
(1.175)
-0.073
(0.935)
0.047
(1.120)

-0.008***
(0.003)

-0.119***
(0.039)

-232.851**
(112.330)

-0.005**
(0.002)

-0.203
(0.556)

-0.010***
(0.004)

-0.127**
(0.051)

-116.894
(130.419)

-0.006**
(0.003)

-0.360
(0.787)

-0.853*
(0.509)
-1.066
(0.675)
-0.996
(0.942)
-2.168**
(1.008)
-4.006***

-0.009
(0.007)
-0.021**
(0.011)
-0.009
(0.013)
-0.028**
(0.013)
-0.043**

0.034
(0.119)
-0.222
(0.158)
-0.334*
(0.173)
-0.336
(0.259)
-0.539

-513.221*
(284.849)
-574.140*
(336.056)
-437.879
(395.305)
-755.137
(499.611)
-1115.660

-0.011
(0.008)
-0.017
(0.011)
-0.017
(0.014)
-0.023
(0.015)
-0.027*

1.213
(2.011)
0.779
(2.586)
0.562
(3.482)
-6.278*
(3.586)
-5.797

-0.803***
(0.214)

-0.008***
(0.003)

-0.099**
(0.048)

-279.674***
(89.902)

-0.002
(0.003)

-0.673
(0.654)

19. Cumulative Grants by Grant Project Amount
$0 to $0.4 million
1.124*
0.011
(0.626)
(0.008)
$0.4 to $3.5 million
-0.592
-0.005
(0.517)
(0.006)
> $3.5 Million
-0.971***
-0.009***
(0.213)
(0.003)

-0.115
(0.171)
-0.172*
(0.099)
-0.090**
(0.044)

-77.641
(374.399)
-76.235
(234.044)
-249.046*
(143.616)

0.012
(0.008)
-0.002
(0.006)
-0.006**
(0.003)

1.976
(2.814)
0.208
(1.419)
-0.714
(0.705)

-0.055
(0.077)

-300.132*
(180.673)

-0.008
(0.005)

-1.232
(1.197)

15. Plants with Monitors > 10 Mi. -0.744***
Upstream and Downstream
(0.218)
Other Specifications for Measuring Grants
16. Grants for Construction
-1.180***
(0.222)
17. Cumulative number of grants
One
Two
Three
Four
Five or More
18. Control for Cumulative
Upstream Grants

20. Log Cumulative Real Grant
Dollars ($Bn)
(Continued next page)

-0.942***
(0.309)

-0.009**
(0.004)

A-41

APPENDIX TABLE VI
SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS: EFFECTS OF CLEAN WATER ACT GRANTS ON WATER POLLUTION (CONTINUED)
Main Pollution Measures
Dissolved
Oxygen
Deficit
Not Fishable
(1)
(2)
Other Important Sensitivity Analyses
21. Differences-in-Differences
-0.619***
-0.009***
Downstream Areas Only
(0.157)
(0.002)
22. Cluster by Watershed
and Year

Other Pollution Measures
Biochemical
Oxygen
Demand
(3)

Fecal
Coliforms
(4)

Not
Swimmable
(5)

Total
Suspended
Solids
(6)

-0.083
(0.057)

-288.184***
(71.059)

-0.003*
(0.002)

-0.924**
(0.407)

-0.681***
(0.201)

-0.007**
(0.003)

-0.104**
(0.039)

-204.059**
(84.722)

-0.004*
(0.002)

-0.497
(0.608)

23. Include Monitors on
Other Rivers

-0.264
(0.191)

-0.004**
(0.002)

0.001
(0.048)

-198.913*
(104.392)

0.001
(0.002)

0.279
(0.745)

24. Exclude Plants with
No Grants

-0.627**
(0.252)

-0.007**
(0.003)

-0.074
(0.054)

-268.193*
(160.472)

-0.003
(0.003)

-0.233
(0.773)

25. Unweighted

-0.793***
(0.194)

-0.004**
(0.002)

-0.108**
(0.053)

-316.697**
(133.596)

-0.003
(0.003)

-0.738
(1.214)

26. Control for Downstream *. . .
Nonattainment, Industrial
Sources, Population

-0.814***
(0.180)

-0.009***
(0.003)

-0.110***
(0.036)

-219.371***
(70.975)

-0.007***
(0.002)

-0.369
(0.607)

Notes: "Long Term Stations" includes only stations which begin operating by 1971 and continue through at least 1988.
"Control for Stream Gauge Flow" includes only stations which report instantaneous stream flow at the same time they report
pollution, and it controls for streamflow. "Include Monitors on Other Rivers" includes monitors on rivers different than the
treatment plant, but that eventually flow into or out of the treatment plant's river. Data cover years 1962-2001. Standard
errors are clustered by watershed. Asterisks denote p-value < 0.10 (*), < 0.05 (**), or < 0.01 (***).

A-42

APPENDIX TABLE VII

HETEROGENEITY OF CLEAN WATER ACT GRANTS ON WATER POLLUTION AND HOME VALUES
Regressions

Dependent Variable
1. Cumulative Grants
... * Grant Projects
Above $1.2 Million
2. Cumulative Grants
... * Baseline Treatment:
Secondary
... * Baseline Treatment:
Tertiary
3. Cumulative Grants
... * Baseline Pollution
Above Median
4. Cumulative Grants
... * State Authority to
Administer NPDES
5. Cumulative Grants
... * Outdoor Fishing or
Swimming is Common
6. Cumulative Grants
... * States with ProEnvironmental Views
7. Cumulative Grants
... * Declining Urban
Areas
... * High Amenity Areas

Dissolved
Oxygen
Deficit
(1)
0.129
(0.404)
-0.874**
(0.432)

Fitted Values

Not
Fishable
(2)
-0.011
(0.010)
-0.010
(0.012)

Log Mean
Rents
(4)
-0.00068
(0.00044)
0.00067
(0.00043)

-0.589
(0.564)
-0.076
(0.595)
-1.266
(0.948)

-0.043***
(0.014)
0.025*
(0.015)
-0.008
(0.034)

0.00101
(0.00113)
-0.00128
(0.00115)
-0.00103
(0.00137)

-0.00061
(0.00048)
0.00047
(0.00051)
-0.00015
(0.00054)

----0.42
[0.24 , 1.69]
0.20
[0.11 , 0.70]

----1.60
[0.94 , 5.57]
0.72
[0.35, ∞)

-----0.42
(0.67)
-0.35
(1.00)

-0.379
(0.231)
-0.264
(0.297)

-0.008
(0.007)
-0.015
(0.009)

0.00054
(0.00085)
-0.00033
(0.00095)

-0.00024
(0.00033)
0.00011
(0.00043)

----0.75
[0.47 , 1.90]

----2.13
[1.40 , 4.52]

----0.19
(0.43)

-0.510**
(0.202)
-0.122
(0.173)

-0.008
(0.008)
-0.012
(0.007)

-0.00014
(0.00076)
0.00030
(0.00091)

0.00016
(0.00036)
-0.00050
(0.00042)

----0.52
[0.35 , 1.06]

----1.65
[1.10 , 3.27]

----0.07
(0.44)

-0.441**
(0.185)
-0.438
(0.281)

-0.018***
(0.006)
-0.003
(0.012)

0.00016
(0.00035)
0.00038
(0.00063)

-0.00005
(0.00019)
-0.00020
(0.00026)

----0.42
[0.28 , 0.84]

----1.73
[0.92 , 15.89]

----0.53
(0.68)

-0.632***
(0.166)
0.044
(0.322)

-0.012**
(0.005)
-0.017*
(0.010)

0.00015
(0.00048)
0.00026
(0.00062)

-0.00016
(0.00021)
0.00010
(0.00027)

----0.53
[0.28 , 5.78]

----1.08
[0.71 , 2.26]

----0.32
(0.33)

-0.027
(0.500)
0.381
(0.390)
-0.628
(0.532)

-0.020
(0.014)
-0.003
(0.011)
0.003
(0.015)

-0.00074
(0.00241)
-0.00091
(0.00069)
0.00110
(0.00243)

-0.00340**
(0.00133)
-0.00007
(0.00037)
0.00335**
(0.00134)

----N.A.
N.A.
0.91
[0.54 , 2.91]

----8.99
[3.65, ∞)
3.55
[2.06 , 13.09]

-----3.04
(2.81)
0.40
(0.45)

8. Cumulative Grants
(Reference: West)
... * Midwest

Cost Per Unit
Dissolved
Cost Per RiverOxygen
Mile Fishable
(5)
(6)
–
–
–
–
0.74
2.54
[0.51 , 1.32]
[1.66 , 5.46]

Change in
Housing
Values /
Costs
(7)
–
–
0.25
(0.26)

Log Mean
Home
Values
(3)
-0.00019
(0.00081)
0.00052
(0.00082)

-0.644*
-0.017
0.00012
-0.00023
0.59
2.31
0.05
(0.354)
(0.013)
(0.00079)
(0.00031)
[0.29 , ∞]
[0.90, ∞]
(0.87)
-0.446
-0.009
0.00012
0.00030
0.30
1.28
0.29
(0.421)
(0.016)
(0.00090)
(0.00035)
[0.22 , 0.49]
[0.79 , 3.48]
(0.45)
... * South
0.486
-0.003
0.00084
-0.00033
2.12
1.70
0.84
(0.446)
(0.017)
(0.00106)
(0.00046)
[0.48 , ∞]
[0.82 , 20.02]
(0.77)
... * Northeast
0.579
0.014
-0.00022
0.00032
13.00
28.86
-0.08
(0.475)
(0.016)
(0.00112)
(0.00046)
[1.23 , ∞]
[3.89 , ∞]
(0.86)
Notes: Each row 1-8 comes from a separate regression. Rows also control for downstream*year indicators interacted with the variable
examined in each row. The median grant project is $1.2 million. Data cover 1962-2001. Dollars are in $2014 Columns (5) and (6) are
in million dollars. Asterisks in columns (1)-(4) denote p-value < 0.10 (*), < 0.05 (**), or < 0.01 (***). Columns (5)-(7) reflect the
sum of the reference category and the interaction term of interest. Brackets in columns (5)-(6) show 95% confidence regions. N.A.
indicates non-positive cost-effectiveness.

A-43

1. Main Estimates

2. Exclude 1-Mile Radius
Around Treatment Plant

Log Home Values
0.25 Mi.
1 Mi.
25 Mi.
(1)
(2)
(3)
0.0008
0.0025*
0.0002
(0.0014)
(0.0013)
(0.0003)

APPENDIX TABLE VIII
SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS, HOME VALUES
Mean
Family
Log Rents
Income
0.25 Mi.
1 Mi.
25 Mi.
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
-0.0008
0.0001
-0.0001
-0.0002
(0.0008)
(0.0007) (0.0002)
(0.0003)

Families on
College
Black (%) Population Population
Public
Graduates
Under Age Age 65 or
Assistance
(%)
6 (%)
Older (%)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
0.0000
0.0000
-0.0001
0.0000
0.0000
(0.0000)
(0.0001)
(0.0001)
(0.0000)
(0.0000)

–
–

0.0023*
(0.0013)

0.0002
(0.0003)

–
–

0.0000
(0.0007)

-0.0001
(0.0002)

-0.0002
(0.0003)

0.0000
(0.0000)

0.0000
(0.0001)

-0.0001
(0.0001)

0.0000
(0.0000)

0.0000
(0.0000)

3. Cluster by Watershed
and Year

0.0008
(0.0033)

0.0025
(0.0027)

0.0002
(0.0005)

-0.0008
(0.0013)

0.0001
(0.0011)

-0.0001
(0.0002)

-0.0002
(0.0004)

0.0000
(0.0001)

0.0000
(0.0002)

-0.0001
(0.0002)

0.0000
(0.0000)

0.0000
(0.0000)

4. No baseline controls

-0.0002
(0.0025)

0.0016
(0.0023)

0.0000
(0.0006)

0.0000
(0.0017)

0.0005
(0.0013)

-0.0003
(0.0003)

-0.0013**
(0.0005)

0.0001
(0.0001)

-0.0002
(0.0002)

0.0003
(0.0002)

0.0000
(0.0000)

0.0000
(0.0001)

5. Triple-Difference
Regression

0.0057*
(0.0033)

0.0067**
(0.0031)

0.0010
(0.0012)

0.0025*
(0.0015)

0.0016
(0.0015)

0.0000
(0.0006)

-0.0007
(0.0006)

0.0000
(0.0001)

0.0000
(0.0003)

0.0003
(0.0005)

0.0000
(0.0000)

0.0000
(0.0001)

0.0049***
(0.0017)

0.0042***
(0.0016)

0.0010
(0.0008)

0.0015
(0.0012)

0.0011
(0.0012)

-0.0001
(0.0007)

-0.0001
(0.0004)

-0.0001
(0.0001)

0.0001
(0.0002)

-0.0002
(0.0002)

0.0000
(0.0000)

0.0001
(0.0001)

7. Year Fixed Effects and
Basin-by-Year Trends

0.0008
(0.0014)

0.0025*
(0.0013)

0.0002
(0.0003)

-0.0008
(0.0008)

0.0001
(0.0007)

-0.0001
(0.0002)

-0.0002
(0.0003)

0.0000
(0.0000)

0.0000
(0.0001)

-0.0001
(0.0001)

0.0000
(0.0000)

0.0000
(0.0000)

8. Grants Given in 1972

-0.0106
(0.0083)

-0.0030
(0.0078)

0.0018
(0.0026)

0.0036
(0.0052)

0.0043
(0.0051)

0.0009
(0.0014)

0.0012
(0.0017)

-0.0008***
(0.0002)

0.0005
(0.0006)

-0.0001
(0.0006)

-0.0001
(0.0001)

0.0001
(0.0002)

9. Plants Without Grants,
1987 Effect

-0.0046
(0.0043)

-0.0044
(0.0044)

-0.0008
(0.0012)

0.0010
(0.0026)

-0.0005
(0.0022)

0.0001
(0.0006)

0.0006
(0.0009)

-0.0001
(0.0001)

-0.0001
(0.0003)

0.0000
(0.0004)

0.0000
(0.0000)

0.0001
(0.0001)

10. Effect 10+ Years
After a Grant

0.0017
(0.0018)

0.0015
(0.0015)

0.0002
(0.0003)

0.0002
(0.0006)

0.0001
(0.0005)

0.0001
(0.0001)

0.0001
(0.0002)

0.0000
(0.0000)

0.0001**
(0.0000)

0.0000
(0.0001)

0.0000
(0.0000)

0.0000
(0.0000)

–

–

–

–

0.0000
(0.0003)

–

–

–

–

-0.0002
(0.0001)

-0.0001
(0.0002)

0.0000
(0.0000)

0.0000
(0.0001)

-0.0001
(0.0001)

0.0000
(0.0000)

0.0000
(0.0000)

–

–

–

–

0.0000
(0.0003)

–

–

–

–

-0.0002
(0.0001)

-0.0001
(0.0002)

0.0000
(0.0000)

0.0000
(0.0001)

-0.0001
(0.0001)

0.0000
(0.0000)

0.0000
(0.0000)

6. OLS

11. Urban treatment plants

12. Urban treatment plants
excluding own-town

Notes: Unless otherwise noted, all regressions include homes within 25 miles of the river of interest. Regression specification corresponds to column (4) of Table V. Regressions
weighted by denominator of response variable. Rows 11-12 are limited to treatment plants located in a Census designated Place (city, town, or village); row 12 excludes
housing units in the same Census-designated Place as the treatment plant. Data includes decennial census years 1970-2000. Standard errors clustered by watershed. Asterisks
denote p-value < 0.10 (*), < 0.05 (**), or < 0.01 (***).

A-44

