NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

A POSITIVE THEORY OF FISCAL
DEFICITS AND GOVERNMENT
DEBT IN A DEMOCRACY

Alberto Alesina
Guido Tabellini

Working Paper No. 2308

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue

Cambridge, MA 02138
July 1987

The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in Financial
Markets and Monetary Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2308
July 1987

A Positive Theory of Fiscal Deficits and Government Debt in a Democracy

ABSTRACT

This paper considers an economy in which policyniakers with different
preferences concerning fiscal policy alternate in office as a result of
democratic elections. It is shown that in this situation government debt

becomes a strategic variable used by each policymaker to influence the choices
of his successors. In particular, if different policymakers disagree about
the desired composition of government spending between two public goods, the
economy exhibits a deficits bias. Namely, in this economy debt accumulation

is higher than it would be with a social planner. According to the results of
our model, the equilibrium level of government debt is larger: the larger is
and the more
the degree of polarization between alternating governments;
likely it is that the current government will not be reelected. The paper has

empirical implications which may contribute to explain the current fiscal
policies in the United States and in several other countries.

Alberto Alesina

Guido Tabellini

Department of Economics

GSIA
Carnegie—Mellon University

Pittsburgh, PA 15213
and

National Bureau of Economic Research
1050 Massachusetts Avenue

Cambridge, MA 02138

UCLA

Los Angeles, CA 90024

"This deficit is no despised orphan. It's President
Reagan's child, and secretly, he loves it, as David Stockman

has explained: The deficit rigorously discourages any idea
of spending another dime on social welfare".
New York Times. January 25. 1987.

1.

INTRODUCTION

Budget deficits and debt accunimulation can serve two purposes: they

provide a means of redistributing income over time and across generations; and
they serve as a means of minimizing the deadweight losses of taxation

associated with the provision of public goods and services. This paper
focuses on the latter issue. Thus, as in Barro (1979), Brock—Turnovsk.Y (1980)
and Lucas—Stokey (1983), public debt is modeled as a means of distributing tax
distortions over time.

Barro (1985), (1986), (1987) has shown that this normative theory of
fiscal policy can explain quite well the behavior of public debt in the United

States and in the United Kingdom. However, this theory may not provide a
complete explanation of two recent facts: a) the rapid accumulation of
government debt in several industrialized countries including the United
States, in relatively peaceful times; b) the large variation in the debt

policies pursued by different countries with similar economic conditions.

This paper attempts to explain these facts by remQving the assumption
that fiscal policy is set by a benevolent social planner who maximizes the
welfare of a representative consumer. We consider an economy with two
policymakers who randomly alternate in office and pursue different

objectives. Different policymakers exist because the private agents have
different views about fiscal policy and vote for their preferred

policymaker. Thus we focus on a positive rather than a normative theory of
fiscal policy.'
The crucial point emphasized in this paper is that in this situation

public debt is used strategically by each government to influence the choices
of its successors. Thus, the time path of public debt is the result of the
strategic interaction of different governments which are in office in

different periods. This leads to fiscal policies which differ sharply from

those which would be chosen by a social planner, certain of her future
reappointment.2

The main features of our mode) can be summarized as follows: there is a
constant population of individuals with the same time horizon, acting as
consumers, workers and voters. They are identical in all respects except in
their preferences about two public goods, supplied by the government and

financed by means of distortionary taxes on labor. Different individuals have
different preferences on the composition of public consumption. The
policymaker is appointed at discrete intervals by means of democratic
elections, and is chosen among two candidates (or "political parties"). Each
party maximizes the utility function of a different group of consumers (its

"constituency"). Alternatively, one may interpret the disagreement between
the policymakers in terms of different "ideological" views about social
welfare.
This paper shows that the equilibrium stock of debt tends to be larger
than with a benevolent social planner certain of her future reappointment.
Intuitively, disagreement among alternating governments and uncertainty about
the elections' outcome prevent the party in office from fully internalizing
the cost of leaving debt to its successors. This suggests the possible
existence of a deficit bias in democracies (or with any other form of
government where alternation between different policymakers is possible).
More generally, our paper suggests that differences in political institutions
can contribute to explain the variance in the debt policies pursued by
different countries or by the same country at different points in time.

According to the results of our model, the equilibrium level of public debt
tends to be larger: (i) the larger is the degree of polarization between
alternating governments; (ii) the more likely it is that the current

government will not be reappointed; (iii) the more likely it is that the
government is constrained to provide at least a minimum level of each kind of

public good. These implications of the model are, in principle, empirically
testable.

The outline of the paper is as follows: the model is presented in Section

2. Section 3 analyzes its static properties. The optimal and time consistent
fiscal policies of an hypothetical social planner are described in section
4. Sections 5 and 6 characterize the dynamic economic and political
equilibrium in a two period version of the model. Sections 7 and 8 extend the

2

basic model by considering its infinite horizon version and more general
specifications of the policymakers' objective functions and constraints.

The

conclusions and the normative implications of our analysis are summarized in
the final section.

2. THE MODEL

The model is derived from Lucas—Stokey (1983). There is a constant
population of 14 individuals, acting as consumers, workers and voters. All of
them are born at the beginning of period zero and have the same time

horizon. We consider both the finite horizon case (two periods) and the
infinite horizon case. Consumer i has the following separable objective
function, wi:

=

(1)

Ps>O;
1
E0f z 6t[u(c)+v(x?)+a. h(gt)+(1_a.)h(ft)]};
•1

t=0

where c is private consumption; x is leisure time; g and f are two different
public goods in per capita terms; and .5

is

the discount factor. The functions

u(.), v(.) and h(-) are continuous, at least three times continuously

differentiable, strictly increasing and strictly concave. E0 is the
expectation operator conditional on the information set available at time 0.
Each consumer is identified only by her preference on the two public goods;
this difference is parameterized by the coefficient

Note that a1

is

not

constrained to lie in the interval [0,11. Some consumers may attribute
negative utility to certain types of public goods, such as military
expenditure.
Each consumer is endowed with one unit of labor that can be transformed

with a linear technology into one unit of non—storable output. The government
can tax the consumers by means of a proportional tax on labor income

The

tax rate is constrained to be identical across consumers.
Thus, the intertemporal budget constraint faced by each consumer is:
T
t

where

c

.

b'

+

T
z

t=o

(1—t )(1—xt)

(2)

is the present value at time zero of one unit of output at time t,

i.e. j= h

where q is the inverse of the gross interest rate in period

3

I and

=

1; b0 is the amount of government debt held by the consumer at the

beginning of period zero. For simplicity throughout the paper we assume
With identical tax rates for all consumers, the superscript i on c and
x can be dropped since all the consumers make the same choices of consumption
and leisure.
The goverrinlent can at no cost transform the output produced by the
private sector in the two nonstorable public goods, g and f. Thus, in each

period the government chooses the level and the composition of public
consumption, the tax rate and the amount of borrowing (lending) from the

consumers. For simplicity, we assume that the government can issue only fixed
interest debt with one period maturity. This assumption prevents each
government from manipulating the term structure of public debt in order to

bind its successors, as in Lucas—Stokey (1983). We also assume no default
risk: each government is committed to honoring the debt obligations of its
predecessors.4 Under the final hypothesis that the economy is closed to the
rest of the world, the resource constraint (in

ct +

xt

+

g

÷ t

1;

per—capita terms) is given by:

t:O,1...T.

(3)

In this economy there are two "political parties", denoted 0 and R, which
can hold office. The parties are the political representatives of different

"pressure groups", i.e. of the different (groups of) consumers. Since all
consumers make identical choices regarding consumption and leisure, the

parties "care" identically about these variables, but they have different

preferences about the composition of public consumption. Their preferences
are as follows (the superscripts identify the party):
T
=
t=o

= E0fz

t

[u(c)+v(x)+h(g)IJ;

(4)

[u(ct)+v(xt)+h(ft)]}.

(5)

Thus, party 0 is identified with the consumer (or "constituency") with a1 =
and party R is identified with the consumer (or "constituency") with
a1 =

0.

This assumption greatly simplifies the algebra. The more general case

4

with arbitrary values of

for the two parties will be analyzed in Section 8.

We assume that the preferences of party 0 and R do not change over time and
that a prohibitive barrier prevents the entry of a third party.

Elections are held at the beginning of each period. A 'period" is thus
defined as a term of office. The electoral results are uncertain: party D is
elected with probability P and party R with probability 1—P. For expositional

purposes P is temporarily assumed to be an exogenous constant: in Sections 6
and 7 we complete the model with a political equilibrium in which every
consumer/voter rationally votes for her most preferred party.

The private sector is atomistic. Thus the "representative consumer"
solves (2) and (3)Jtaking tt. g and f as given. Since tt is the same for
every consumer, the solution of this problem is characterized by:

uc(ct)(l_it) =

ctuc(ct) =

o

v(x)

(6)

(7)

E I.Jc(ct+i)

where uc and v, denote the derivative of u(.) and v(.) with respect to their
arguments (the arguments of the functions u(.) and v(.) will be omitted when

there is no possibility of confusion). In (7), the expectation reflects the
uncertainty of consumers about the future tax policy due to their uncertainty
about the identity of future governments.

3. TAXES AND PUBLIC SPENDING FOR A GIVEN DEFICIT

A crucial assumption of this paper is that a government cannot bind the
taxation and expenditure policies of its successors; this is true whether the

successor belongs to the same or to the opponent party. The only way in which
the fiscal policy of the current administration can influence the actions of

its successors is through the law of motion of public debt. Since here the
optimal fiscal policy can be time inconsistent, the model is solved by means

of dynamic programming. The solution is a sub-game perfect equilibrium of the
game in which each government plays against its successors and "against" the

private sector. It is convenient to separate the government's optimization
problem into two stages: the intraperiod problem of choosing taxes and public

5

consumption for a given fiscal deficit; and the intertemporal problem. of

choosing the size of the deficit. Since the government objective function is
time—separable, this separation into two stages simplifies the exposition but
involves no loss of generality.

Each government maximizes its own objective function, either (4) or (5),

under the constraints given by (3), (6) and (7). Inspection of the two
parties' objective functions and of their constraints easily yields the
following results:

i) in any period, only one kind of public good is

produced: party D supplies only g and party R only f.5 ii) For a given fiscal
deficit, both parties choose the same tax rate and the same level of public

consumption, although on different goods; thus private consumption and

leisure are identical under either party. For a given deficit, the two
parties differ only with respect to the desired composition of the public
goods.

These two results, together with the resource constraint (3), enable us
to rewrite the static optimization problem faced by the party in office as:

Max u(ct) + V(xt) + h(1_ct_xt)

(8)

ct xt
subject to:

H(bt+i. bt.

xt):(ct_bt)uc(ct)+ 6 Et uc(ct+i)bt÷i_(l_xt)vx(xt)

0.

(9)

This problem is solved for given values of the debt at the beginning and end

of period t, namely bt and bt+i. Equation (9) has been obtained by
substituting (6) and (7) into (2) to eliminate rt.

It represents the

government budget constraint, as a function of ct, Xt, bt and bt+i. Needless
to say, the government does not choose x and c directly: it chooses taxes and

public spending, affecting x and c indirectly. Throughout the paper we will
assume that the government's optimum is an interior point of its feasible

set. The necessary first order conditions (if, say, party D is in office)
imply:

Hx(hg_uc) = Hc(hg_Vx)

(10)

where H denotes the derivative of H with respect to the variable i. Through—

6

out the rest of the paper we assume that the second order conditions of this
problem, reported in Section 1 of the Appendix, are satisfied.
The first order conditions, namely equation (10) together with the
constraints (3) and (9), implicitly define the optimal private and public
consumption and leisure choices in period t as a function of bt and bt+i;

c*(bt, bt÷i), x*(bt, bt+i), g*(b, bt÷i), f*(bt, bt÷i).
Note that, recalling point (ii) on page 7, we have g*(b, bt+i) =

f*(bt,

bt+i)

for any bt, bt+i. With virtually no loss of generality we shall assume for
the rest of the paper that at the optimum the labor supply function is upward
sloping.6

In Section 2 of the Appendix several useful results regarding the partial

derivatives of c*, x, g* and f* are established. For example it is shown
that c* and x are increasing in bt. The intuition is that if bt increases
more interests have to be paid in period t. With a given end of period debt
(bt+i). the government is forced to reduce public consumption and to raise

taxes. The private sector's response to the higher tax rates and to the
larger initial public debt is to increase its consumption of both leisure and
output.

The solution of this static optimization problem defines the indirect
utility of both parties in period t as a function of the debt at the beginning

and at the end of the period. Let us indicate this function for the party in

office as Re(b, bt+i). This function is identical for both parties (since
g* =

f*

and both parties choose the same tax rate). Section 2 of the appendix

proves the following:

Lema 1
____

is

continuous and differentiable, strictly decreasing in bt

and strictly concave in both bt and bt÷i.

Thus, not surprisingly, the party in office gets disutility by inheriting

debt from the past. The utility function of either party whenever it does
not hold office can also be easily characterized. Specifically, letting
RN(bt, bt+i) denote the utility function of either party if not elected in
period t, we have:

7

RN(bt, bt+i) =

u(c*(bt,

= Re(b,

bt+i) -

bt÷i) +

v(x*(bt,

h(g*(bt,

bt+i))

bt+i)) =

(11)

It is shown in Section 2 of the Appendix that RN(.) is continuous and

differentiable and it is strictly increasing in bt. Thus, the party out of
office benefits from the debt inherited from the past, since it makes the
private sector wealthier in the current period.

4. FISCAL POLICY UNDER A SOCIAL PLANNER

In this section we characterize the solution of the intertemporal problem

faced by an hypothetical social planner. This solution will serve as a
benchmark to characterize the effects of the elections.
A social planner has two characteristics: a) she does not face elections,
thus she is "reappointed' with probability 1 each period; b) she adopts as her
preferences a weighted average of the preference of the citizens, (i.e. of
equation (1)).

For expositional purposes, let us consider the effects of these two

characteristics separately, starting with a). Thus we consider the case of a
policymaker, say party D, that is certain of being reappointed each period.
It is easy to verify that the optimal policy would always balance the budget,

as in Lucas—Stokey (1983). However, since we rule out the possibility of
making binding commitments, we are interested in the time-consistent fiscal

policy, which may or may not coincide with the optimal policy. In the
infinite horizon case, the social planner faces the following problem of
dynamic programming:

Ve(b) = Max {Re(b, bt÷i) +

6Ve(b+l)}

(12)

The first order conditions are:

R(bt, bt+i) +

6V(bt+i)

= 0

(13)

8

V(bt) =

(14)

R!(bt,bt+i)

where R?(.) 1: 1, 2, denotes the partial derivative of Re(.) with respect to

its ith argument. From (13) and (14) it follows that in the steady state
(i.e., for bt =

bt+i

R(b, b) +

=

b) we obtain:

oR(b,

b) = o

(15)

Substituting the expressions far R(.) and R?(.) derived in section 3 of the
Appendix, equation (15) simplifies to:
*
c1 b=O

(h _uc)
6U

Since generically 4

t 0,

(16)

equation (16) can be satisfied if and only if b =

0;

that is, if and only if in the steady state the government issues no debt.
Thus, by using a simplified version of the proof given in Section 5 of the
Appendix, we can prove the following result:

Proposition 1

The steady state level of government debt is zero and it is locally
stable.

Thus, the optimal and time consistent policy coincide: the social planner

would never issue public debt.7 A slight generalization of these arguments
shows that analogous results hold for the finite horizon case.
We now turn to the problem of choosing the optimal composition of public

expenditures. A social planner would choose a point on the "Pareto frontier"

of the economy. Thus, she would maximize a weighted average of the utility
functions of the citizens, namely:

w'=

N

.

6tLu(c)+v(x)+h(g)+(1a)h(f)1

w' =
1=1

N

N

where a

=z
1=1

(17)

t=O

X.a1
and
•

are arbitrary weights such that

9

E

i=1

=

11

1.

Obviously every point of the Pareto frontier is associated with a different

choice of weights. It is easy to show that Proposition 1 applies identically
to this case. Furthermore, the optimal composition of public expenditures
satisfies the following condition:

=

(l-a)hf

(18)

Thus, the social planner equates the social marginal utility of the two types

of public good. The optimal composition of the two goods depends on the
choice of weights, &.

5.

ALTERNATING GOVERNMENTS IN THE NO PERIOD MODEL

To provide the basic intuition, we consider here the simplest possible

case, with a time horizon of two periods. This case greatly simplifies the
analysis by eliminating the private sector's uncertainty about the future tax

policy. Consider the last period of the game: here both parties must collect
the same tax revenue, since they inherit the same initial debt and are forced

to leave the same end of period debt, namely 0. Thus, in the first period
(labeled period 0) consumers face no uncertainty about the tax rate of period
1.

It follows that the interest rate is independent of the electoral outcome

and of P. This in turn implies that the functions Re(.) and RN(.) defined in
Section 3 are also independent of P.
Suppose that party U holds office at the beginning of the first period.
The amount of debt that this party chooses to leave to the following period
(b1) can be found by solving the following problem:

Max V(b0) =

Given that b0 =

Re(b0,b1)

0,

+ s[P Re(b1,O) +
(1_P)RN(b1,O)]

(19)

the first order condition can be written as:

R(O, b1) =

— 6[P

R!(bi, O)÷(l-P)R(b1,O)]

(20)

The left hand side of (20) can be interpreted as the marginal utility in

10

period 0 of leaving debt to the future. We denote it by MV. The right hand
side can be interpreted as the expected marginal cost of inheriting debt
tomorrow, discounted to the present by 6.

More precisely, it is the negative
It is

of the discounted expected marginal disutility of next period debt.

denoted by MC. Equation (20) implies that at the optimum MV = MC. This
necessary condition is reproduced graphically in Figure 1. MV is drawn with a
negative slope since Re(.) is strictly concave (see !.emma 1). MC is drawn as

an upward sloping curve. This need not be the case, since RN(.) is not
necessarily concave. However, the slope of MC must always be greater than the
slope of MV, since otherwise the second order conditions would be violated.
Intuitively, consider a small movement from b1 in Figure 1 to b1 +
and "small".

e

C

>0

If at (b1+c) we have MV > MC, then b1 can not be an optimum,

since a movement away from b1 increases total utility. Hence, MC must always
intersect MV from below.

Equation (20), and the corresponding Figure 1, implicitly define the

optimal end of period debt, 5 as a function of P. We are interested in
characterizing this functional relationship:

Proposition 2

is a strictly decreasing function of P. for any value of P in the
interval 10,1].

Proof: The partial derivative of MV with respect to P is zero, since, as
shown above, neither Re(.) nor RN(.) depend on P. By the same argument, and
using (9), we have:

0) —
ic. = —o(R(51,

R,(b1,

0)) = —& h' g(51, 0).

(21)

In (21) g is the derivative of g* respect to its first argument, b1. Lemma
2.1 in Appendix has established that g c 0. Thus, an increase in P shifts
the MC curve upwards, say to the dotted curve of Figure 1. Since MC always
intersects MV from below, this implies that b1 must fall with the increase of
P.

Q.E.0.

The proof of this result is also suggestive of the intuition. The costs

11

I....
•et

•.0"
S...

of leaving debt to the future arise from two sources: the tax distortions
associated with the higher taxes tomorrow, and the reduced public consumption

of tomorrow. However, the second cost only arises if the party currently in
office is reappointed next period and it can choose the desired public good.
Thus, the larger is the probability of being reelected, the more the party in
office internalizes the cost of leaving debt to the future (i.e., the higher

is MC). As a result, the larger is the probability of being reelected, the
smaller is the debt left by each government to its successor. In more
colorful terms, by leaving debt to the future, today's government can force
its successor to "pay the bills" and spend less on the public good that is
worthless for today's government.

Thus, Proposition 2 implies that the level of debt left to the last
period (bi) is larger in a democracy then with a social planner; namely the
social planner would choose to balance the budget in both periods, while
either one of the two parties chooses to run a budget deficit in the first

period leaving a positive amount of debt to be repaid in the last period. In
this sense the electoral uncertainty creates a sub—optimal deficit bias. This
bias is stronger for the party with the smaller probability of reappointment.

6. POLITICAL EQUILIBRIUM

In this section we analyze voting behavior. Consider the elections held
at the beginning of period 1, and assume that, say, party 0 is in office in

period zero. Each voter votes for the party that is expected to deliver the
highest utility in period 1. Thus voter i votes for party 0 if and only if
the expected utility with D elected is not lower than the expected utility if

R is elected. Since both parties choose the same tax rate in period 1,
consumption and leisure are the same in period 1 regardless of the electoral
outcome. Thus voter i votes for party 0 if and only if:8

(aih(g(O, b1)) -

(ic1i)h(f*(O,

b1)] =

h(gt(O,

bi))(2ai - 1)

0

{22)

In deriving the right hand side of (22) we used the fact that g*(O, b1) =

f*(0,

b1). Since h(g*(b1)) >

Let

0,

condition (22) is equivalent to

us assume that there is uncertainty about the distribution of voters

13

preferences, namely about the distribution of the parameters a.j across

consumers. In particular the preferences of the median voter are not known
with certainty.9 Given a known distribution over the preferences of the
median voter and given (22) it follows that the probability that party U will
be elected is given by:

P =

[prob. am

(23)

where am is the value of a corresponding to the median voter. From (23) it is
apparent that P is a constant from the point of view of period zero. In
particular, P is not a function of b1. Again, this result is due to the fact
that, for any given level of debt inherited from period 0, both parties choose
the same level of taxes and public expenditure (although on different

goods)

in period 1.

Note that the results implying policy convergence do not apply to this

model. Since binding commitments are not available, and the horizon is
finite, both parties can only credibly announce to the voters the time—

consistent fiscal policy characterized in the preceding sections. For
example, party 0 cannot convince the voters that if elected in period 1 it

would supply a positive amount of f. Such an announcement would not be
believed, because the voters know that the only time consistent policy for
party D is to set f = 0 if elected; in fact the voters know that party U

maximizes the objective function (4) when in office. This argument is
developed more in detail in Alesina (1986 and 1987).
Thus, we have shown that the equilibrium of Section 3 is unique and
represents a time—consistent politico—economic equilibrium based on fully

rational behavior of consumers/voters. Using propositions 1 and 2, we are now
ready to summarize the results obtained so far in the following:

Proposition 3

A democracy in which citizens disagree about the composition of public
expenditures exhibits higher deficits and debt accumulation than an economy
with a social planner who is appointed for ever.

14

7. THE INFINITE HORIZON CASE
In the finite horizon case, debt in the final period of the game has to

be repaid in full. In this section we show that our results generalize to the
infinite horizon case, in which the debt need not be fully retired. In order
to avoid the multiplicity of equilibria that inevitably arises in infinite
horizon dynamic games, we restrict each government to selecting strategies
contingent only on the stock of debt outstanding at the beginning of its term

of office. This implies that we do not explore the reputational equilibria

which may exist. We can characterize the solution only in the
a particular case that greatly simplifies the

neighborhood of P =

analysis. If P =

the optimization problem faced by the two parties is

identical. Thus, the fiscal deficit, the tax rate and the level of public
expenditure is the same for both parties: the only difference across parties

is about which public good is supplied. As in the two period case, this fact
eliminates consumers' uncertainties about future taxes so that Re(.) and

are independent of P. Intuitively the basic results should extend to any
value of P, however the formal proof for the general case is much harder to
establish.

We proceed assuming P exogenous and then show that there exists a

rational electoral equilibrium compatible with this assumption. The dynamic
programming problem solved by the party in office is:

ve(b) =

Max

{Re(b, bt+i) +

opVe(b+l) + o(1_P)VN(bt+l)}

(24)

bt+i

where Ve(.) and VN(.) are the value functions of the party if elected and if

non-elected respectively. Thus:

vN (bt) =

+
(1_P)VN(bt+l))
RN(bt, bt+i) + 8(pVe(b+l)

(25)

The first order conditions are:

R(bt, bt+i) =

_6[PV(bt÷i)

+

(1_P)V(bt+i)J.

(26)

Equation (26) has exactly the same interpretation of (20) in Section 5: the
left hand side of (26) represents the marginal utility of leaving debt to the

15

future (MV); the right hand side is the expected marginal cost of inheriting

debt tomorrow (MC). Thus, the diagram of Figure 1 still applies identically.
MV is downward sloping since Re(.) is concave. MC can be either upward
sloping or downward sloping (since vN(bt ) is not necessarily concave), but
has to intersect MV from below for (26) to characterize an interior

optimum.'° From (26) we obtain:

Proposition 4

In a neighborhood of P =

the steady state level of public debt is

always positive and locally stable if the sufficient condition c.2 of Lemma
2.1 in Section 2 of the Appendix is satisfied.

Proof: See Section 4 of the Appendix.

The condition alluded in the text is needed to insure that the total
derivative of the level of the steady state debt on public expenditure is

negative. Intuitively, an increase in the steady state level of debt requires
an increase in the flow of interest payment to the private sector. To finance
this interest flow the government is forced in general, to both tax more and
spend less on public goods.

Thus, as in the two—period model, alternating governments which disagree
over the composition of public consumption have a tendency to issue more

public debt than the social planner. The intuition is still as in the
previous section: since governments are not certain of winning the election
they do not fully internalize the costs of leaving debt to their successors.
In the two period model, these costs take the form of higher taxes and lower
public consumption in order to repay the debt in the final period of the

game. Here, instead, these costs correspond to the payment of interest on the

stock of debt outstanding."
As in the previous section, we can ask what are the consequences on

public debt of changing the probability of electoral outcomes. A local answer
is given by the following result:

16

Proposition 5

rn a neighborhood of P =

under the same condition of Proposition 4,

and the additional sufficient condition:

H

bt÷i

OandVe_VN
so
bb
bb

the stock of public debt issued by either party in the steady state is a
decreasing function of the probability of that party winning the elections.

The proof is contained in Section 5 of the Appendix.12

The intuition is the same as for the previous results. If P rises, the
party in office internalizes more of the costs of issuing debt; thus its

policy is to reduce the stock of debt outstanding. This result reinforces the
positive implications of the model, already discussed in Section 4: the debt
policy of the party in office is influenced by its probability of winning the

elections. The lower is this probability, the larger is the stock of debt
issued in equilibrium and in the steady state by this party.13
We finally show that there exists a political equilibrium which implies a
constant P =

At the beginning of period t, voter i votes for party D if

and only if her lifetime utility is greater if in period t D is elected rather

than R. Suppose that both parties choose the same tax rate and the same level
of public consumptionjin period t (even though they choose public goods of
different kinds) so that they run the same deficit and leave the same amount

of debt to the future. In this case the voters' expected utility from period
ti-i to infinity is independent of which party is elected in period t. As a
result, under this assumption, the voter's behavior is as described in the

previous section: voter i votes for party 0 if and only if i

as in

Section 6. Like in that section, the probability that party D be elected in
period t is then:

P =

(27)

prob(czm

Finally, assume that the distribution over the possible value of am is such
that:

prob(am >

(28)

17

If (28) holds, then P =

but in this case we showed that the time

consistent policy for both parties is indeed to set the same tax rate and the

same level of public consumption, although on different goods. Thus, we can
conclude that there exists a distribution of the median voter's preferences
supporting the economic equilibrium described in propositions 4 and 5 as a
rational political equilibrium.

8. EXTENSIONS

In this section we extend the results presented above in several

directions. First of all we generalize the objective functions of the two
parties to:

T
=

z

(29)

t =0

I
=

(30)

t=0

for any value of l>a>O. In this case both parties assign positive utility to
both public goods, although with different weights. Note that if a > 1 the
results obtained with a=l are strengthened since party 0(R) attributes

negative utility to good f(g): thus neither party ever would supply a positive
amount of this good (an analogous argument holds for a <

0).

To fix ideas,

throughout this section we consider l>a>½; thus party 0(R) attributes more

value to good g(f) (the alternative case is completely symmetric). The
coefficient a parameterizes the extent of the disagreement: the farther a is
from

the larger the disagreement.

The second extension of the model is that we allow for downward rigidity
in the level of public consumption. We assume that a minimum level of both
public goods must be provided. Thus we impose;

f k

and g k

(31)

These constraints may reflect institutional or technological factors limiting

the flexibility of the government in solving its problem. For example, a

18

minimum level of defense spending might have to be provided or the level of
social security cannot be reduced below a certain minimum. The case of
different minimum levels of public consumption in the two goods complicates
the algebra without qualitatively changing the results.
We rule out as uninteresting the case in which both constraints in (31)

are binding. Then, the optimal composition of public consumption for, say,
party 0 is determined by the following first order conditions:

(32)

(1—a)h

The first order condition for party R is analogous to (32), except that a is
replaced by (1-a). Condition (32) holds with a strict inequality if and only

if the constraint is binding. Thus, if the constraint is not binding, the
government equates the marginal utility of the two kinds of public goods.

The symmetry of this procedure suggests three simplifications which hold
i) The two
in the two period case and in the infinite horizon for P =
parties supply the same amount of the good they prefer and of the less
preferred one (the superscript indicate which party supplies the good):

gD =

fR;

gR =

f0;

gD > fD•

(33)

ii) The tax rate and the size of the fiscal deficit chosen by the two parties
is identical. iii) The constraint in (31) is binding for party D if and only
if it is also binding for party R.

It follows that the first order conditions of the static problem of the
government are analogous to those stated in Section 3, and that Lemmas 1 and

2.1 (in Appendix) still apply identically. In particular, the difference
between party D's utility if elected and if not elected can be expressed,
using (33) as:

Re(b, bt+i) — RN(bt, bt+i) = (2a—l)(h(g0)—h(f0))

(34)

which is positive by (33). The expression of (Re_RN) for party R is
symmetric.
We now turn to the characterization of the dynamic equilibrium in the two

period model. The extension to the infinite horizon for P =

19

is

straightforward and yields analogous results. The equilibrium is still
characterized by the condition that the marginal utility of leaving debt to
the future (MV) is equal to the marginal cost of inheriting debt from the past
(MC)— - see (20) and Figure 1. Moreover, MV is still as in Section 5.

However, the relationship between MC and P now depends on whether or not the
constraints stated in (31) are binding in the final period of the game. If
these constraints are binding, then using (34) and assuming that party D is in
office in period 0, we have:
aMC =

e

—

(R1,

N

R1)

=

— ó(2al)hg

D

g1 > 0

(35)

The results of Section 5 apply here: a decrease in the probability of being

elected shifts MC to the right and thereby increases the debt issued in the

first period. Uncertainty about the outcome of the election generates a
deficit bias, as in the previous sections. Furthermore, note from (35) that

the higher is the effect of P on the level of debt. Hence,
for a given P < 1, the larger is the disagreement, the larger is the deficit.
the higher is a,

If instead the constraints in (31) are not binding, then we have:

c. - 6(R
Thus, for P <

-

R)

=

-6(2a-l)(hg g -

hff)

O

(36)

1, party 0 would still choose not to balance the budget in

period 0 (except in the particular case in which the right hand side of (36)

happens to be 0). In this sense, the debt policy of the party in office
differs from that of the social planner. However the government may now issue
more or less debt than the social planner depending upon the sign of (36). In
< 0 then we have a surplus bias, rather then a deficit
particular if
bias. It can be shown that the sign of the inequality (36) depends upon the
value of the third derivative of the function h(.)J4 The intuition is as
follows. If the constraints in (31) are not binding, then a higher public
debt inherited from the past results in a reduction of expenditures on both
public goods: g < 0 and f9 < 0. Hence, each government internalizes the
cost of leaving debt to its successors, whether or not it expects to be
reelected. If If?I >
then the party in office (here D) reduces the

IgI,

non—preferred public good (f) by more than the preferred one (g) as initial

debt increases. In this case, the marginal disutility of debt is higher if

20

non—elected than if elected:

—

R

<

0.

As a result, in equilibrium the

government runs a surplus rather than a deficit.

Consider the situation in which the constraint in (31) is just binding
for, say, party D:

cshg(90) =

(37)

(1—cz)hf(k)

Equation (37) defines the threshold value of k such that (31) is just

binding. The implicit function theorem applied to (37) establishes that such
value of k is a decreasing function of a. The same result applies to party
R. It follows that the higher is a, the more likely it is that the
constraints in (37) are binding, and hence that a deficit bias results in

equilibrium. Conversely, for a given a, the larger is the minimum level of
public goods (k) that has to be supplied, the more likely it is that the

constraints in (37) are binding. Hence, the higher is k, the more likely it
is that the party in office in the first period runs a fiscal deficit.
These results can be generalized to a stochastic setting in which each
government is uncertain about the level of the constraint faced by its

successors. Consider, for example, a situation in which k is expected to rise
in the future, so that future governments are perceived as very likely to be

constrained. This may generate an incentive for the party currently in office
to run a deficit, since future governments are likely to be prevented from
repaying the deficit by reducing the public good that they value less (and

that today's government values more). This contrasts with the optimal fiscal
policy: as Lucas and Stokey (1983) have shown, the optimal policy here would

be to run a surplus, not a deficit, so as to smooth the tax distortions over
time in anticipation of the larger future public expenditures.
We can summarize the foregoing discussion in the following:

Proposition 6

The greater is the degree of polarization between the two parties, a,the
more the fiscal policy chosen by the two parties differs from that chosen by

the social planner. Moreover, the greater the polarization, the more likely
it is that the equilibrium exhibits a deficit bias.

21

CONCUJSIOHS

This paper shows how budget deficits and government debt can be used by

each policymaker to influence the fiscal policy chosen by its successors. In
this context, public debt becomes a strategic variable which links today's
government to its successors.

If there is disagreement between political parties this strategic

interaction generates a sub—optimal path of government debt. In particular,
if the citizens disagree about the desired composition of public consumption,
then, in general, the government has a tendency to overissue public debt
relative to the case of full agreement or to the case in which future

reappointment of the current government is certain. This tendency is stronger
the greater is the degree of political polarization and of downward rigidity
in public spending.

From a positive point of view, these results provide new insights on how
to explain the current behavior of fiscal deficits in the United States and

the difference in various countries' experience. In the United States the
current administration has shown rather different views about the desired
composition of government spending relative to the past and (presumably)

relative to future administrations. This paper shows that in this case it is
perfectly rational for the current administration to incur into deficits and

debt accumulation to a much larger extent than previous administrations. An
analogous result has been independently obtained in a very insightful paper by

Persson and Svennson (1q86). They consider the case of two policymakers with
different views about the level rather than the composition of government

expenditure. They show that the "conservative" policymaker (i.e. the one
which likes less public expenditure) chooses to leave deficits in order to

force its "liberal" successor to spend less. Conversely, the "liberal"
policymaker would leave a surplus to its conservative successors. In
addition, according to our results, different countries' experiences can be
related to differences in the degree of political polarization, in the

political stability, and in the flexibility of the government decision process

concerning public consumption. More generally, this paper shows that fiscal
deficits are the aggregate outcome of the political conflict between different

groups of citizens. In this respect the positive predictions of our model
coincide with those of some political science and sociological literature (for

22

instance Lindberg and Mayer (1984) and the references quoted therein).

However, the methods of our analysis and our explanation differ sharply from
those of that line of research.

23

APPENDIX

1. Second order sufficient conditions

a) Static Optimum Problem: The second order sufficient conditions imply that
the Hessian of the Lagrangian function corresponding to problem (8) is

negative definite. They are, in addition to the strict concavity of u(.),
v(.), and h (.):

=H

s 0;

xx

2
aM

(A.1)

=

(A.2)

Hc

where H(•) is defined in (9).

b) Dynamic Optimum Problem: The conditions are that H(•) is quasiconcave
with respect to all of its arguments. In addition to (A.1) and (A.2), we need
the following sufficient conditions:
2
a

=
Fib

abt+i

2(u)2 —

H +

2Uc

(A.3)

b

t÷1 t+1

ucuccc

0

(A.4)

Hxx(ct_bt) S 0

(A.5)

Throughout the paper it is assumed that (A.1) —

(A.5)

always hold.

2. Lemma 2.1

(i)

*
g1 < 0

and

*

> 0

uc + ucc (ct —

if:

bt)

0

(c.1)

24

(ii) 4>0 and g(b, b) ÷g(b, b) CO for b

0 if: (c.1) holds and if:

Hxx(•hg_Uc)+VxxHc + UccHx(hg_Vx)/Uc

h

H—H
x
C

gg

(c.)

I

Proof: We apply the implicit function theorem to the following two equations8
reproduced from the text:

H(.)E(c_b)u(c) +

a

uc(ct+i)bt+i —

(l_xt)v

= 0

H(hg•U) — Hc(hg_Vx) = 0

*
Let

ac

c1 =

*

(9)

(10)

*
ac
=

C2

bt

6

,

, and

=
c

so on. Then, by applying the

act

implicit function theorem we obtain:

r
-I
L

*

G}1 [Gb
I

HxJ

I

(A.6)

LHti

611 [Gbi
LH

Lx2

Solving

Hx_j

LHt+li

(A.6) and (A.7), and letting A = GxHx_GxHc we obtain:

4

= - (Hx Gb —

Gx)IA

(A.8)

4

= — (G Hb - 6b H)/A

(A.9)

4

=G

4

= — GcHbtl/A

Nb

(A.10)

Hb1/A

çA.11)

25

Using the fact that g =
=

[Gbt(hx_Hc)

g =
+

—(4+4), we
+

obtain:

Hbt(Gc_Gx)]/A

(A.13)

[Hbtl(Gc_Gx)]/A

g=

(A.12)

[Gbt(Hx_Hc)1(Gc_Gx)(Hbt+Hbtl)]/A

(A.14)

Some algebra establishes that:

=

_(Ucc+hgg)Hx

+

hggHc

+

(Vx_hg)Hcc

(A.15)

+
Cx = — (Uc_hg)Hxx —
hggHx
(Vxx+hgg)Hc

(A.16)

Gb = Ucc(hg_Vx)

(A.17)

=

(Ct_bt)Ucc+Uc

(A.18)

=

_(l_Xt)Vxx +

(A.19)

Hb = —u

(A.20)

Hb1 = 6Uc(Ct+1) + sbt+i

ucc(Ct+i)4(bt+i, bt+2)

(A.21)

We now use the sufficient conditions reported in Section 1 of the Appendix to

sign these expressions. By using (A.1) and after some algebra, it can be

> 0.

shown that A

Gc =

Rewrite Cc as:

—

+ hgg(Hc_Hx) — (hg_Vx)Hcc

(A.22)

By manipulation of (10) and (6), it can be shown that Hc_Hx c 0. Using (A.1)
it follows that Gc >

0.

Consider (Gc—Gx):

Cc_Cf —

(A.23)

From (10), the sign of (hg—uc) is the same as the sign of Hc=Uc + ucc (ct_t)t).

26

The sign is positive if c>1 in Lemma 2.1 holds. Hence, Gc_Gx > 0. We then have

gcO. To show that 4 > 0, rewrite the numerator of 4 as:
GbHc —

=
GCHbt

Uchgg(Hc_Hx)

-

UcuccHx

-

uc(hg_vx)Hcc

+

ucc(hg—vx)Hc

(A.24)

The first two terms on the right hand side of (A.24) are positive. The last
two terms can be rewritten as:

(hg—vx)[— Ucc(Uc+Ucc(Ct_bt))+(Ct_bt)(2(Ucc)2 —

ucuccc)]

(A.25)

By (c.1) and (A.4), the expression inside the square brackets of (A.25) is

non—negative. Hence,}the right hand side of (A.24) is positive, which in turn

implies 4 > 0.

In order to show that 4 >

0,

consider the numerator of 4

in (A.8):

HbGX —

=

HxGbt

(A.26)

—ucl(hg—uc)Hxx+vxxuc+hgg(Hc_Hx)]_Hxucc(hg-vx)

0.

By (c.2), the right hand side of (A.26) is positive. Hence 4 >

Note

that, as emphasized in footnote 6, condition c.1 holds if and only if the
labor supply function is upward sloping.

Finally, recalling the previous discussion, in order to prove that g =

cO in

the steady state, we have to show only that Hb + Hb
t
t+1
bt=bt+i=bt+2. From (A.20) and (A.21) it follows:

Hb+Hb1 = _Uc(Ct) + óUc(ct+i)
If bt =

bt+i

=

bt+2. then 4 =

Hb + Hb

=

0 if

+ 6bt+iucc(ct+i)4(bt+i, bt+2)

4+i; thus

(A.27) simplifies to:

— (l_6)Uc + sbt+iucc4

which is negative if 4 > 0 and bt+i

(A.27)

(A.28)

0.

Q.E.D.

3. Proof of Lemma 1

Continuity of Re(.) follows from the fact that the maximization is

27

performed on a compact feasible set, and from the continuity of u(•), v(•) and
h(•) (see the theorem of the maximum in Hildenbrand (1974)). Differentiability

follows from the fact that c*, x and g* are continuously differentiable, as
implied by the application of the implicit function theorem to (10). Strict

concavity can be proved as follows: Let b =

ob

+

(1—o)b,

b

b,

O<e<1; let b1 be similarly defined. We want to show that Re(b, b÷1) >

eRe(b, b÷1) ÷ (1_e)Re(4, 4+)•

4 = x(b],

Let

c7 =

c*(b7, b÷1),

b1t+i) be the values of ct, xt chosen at the optimum, given (b,

consider Re(b, b÷1):

Re(b, 4÷)

= u(c)+v(4)+h(1-4-4)

uIoc-t-(1_e)4J÷v(ex

+

h(1-o4

(A.29)

÷(1—e)x)-s-

—(1—0)4 — e4—(1—e)x)

(A.29) follows from the definition of c, 4 and from the quasi—concavity of
H(.). Moreover, by the strict concavity of u(•), v(.) and h(S), the right
hand side of (A.29) is strictly greater than:

o[u(c)÷v(x)+h(1-c —

x)]

+

(1—e)[u(4)+v(4)-t-h(1—4—4)]

=

(A.30)
=

oRe(b, b1)÷(1_B)Re(b, b÷1)

It follows that Re(.) is strictly concave in both bt and bt+i.

Finally, from the envelope theorem and from the first order conditions

28

from which equation (10) in the text is derived we obtain:

(h—u)
c

aRE

FIb <0

t

C

t

aRe
ab

=

t+1

e =
R2

(A.31)

(h _u)
c

FIb

>

>0, if FIb

t+1

0.

(A.32)

ti-i

Q.E.D.

4. Proof of Proposition 4
Equation (26) in the text implicitly defines bt+i as a function of bt and
P:

=

B(bt.

a2B(b

B12 =

,

P). We will use the following notation: B1 =

aB(b , P)

ab

t

P)

ab
t

,

and so on. We prove stability first. This involves

showing that 1B11 < 1.

By the envelope theorem:

V(bt+i) = R7(b+1, bt+2)

(A.33)

Plugging (A.33) in (26) of the text, differentiating with respect to bt and
then setting bt =

bt÷i,

we obtain:

R1+R2B1÷&PR71B1 + oPR2(Bl)2so(1_P)VbBi = 0

(A.34)

where R? denotes the second derivative of Re with respect to its ith and ,jth

arguments. Solving (A.34) with respect to B, we find that both roots are
positive and real, and that one lies inside and the other outside the unit

circle. Specifically, the stable root is:

B =-

(Re +opRe ÷(i P)VN b
(A.35)

1

26PR2
where B =

(R2

÷•

+ o(1_P)Vb)2

—

29

4(R2)2&P

> 0

If the second order condition stated in footnote (12) holds, then it can be
shown that the right hand side of (A.35) is always included in the open

interval (0,1). The root inside the unit circle is the solution to the
dynamic programming problem (since Ve(.) is decreasing in bt); thus the steady
state is locally stable.

In order to prove that the steady state debt is positive, note that, with

and using (24) — (25) in the text, we obtain:

P =

V(bt+i) =

R(bt+i.

bt÷2) +

Bi(bt+t)(R(bt+i

bt+z) -

R(bt+i.

bt÷2) (A.36)

Then, substitute (A.33) and (A.36) into (25) of the text and use (11) to

simplify. In the steady state, we obtain:

+

— B1h9g2 + oPh9[g1+81g21

=

0

(A.31)

Let us proceed by contradiction and suppose that, the steady state level of

public debt is 0. Equations (A.20) (A.21) together with (A.31) imply that
=

—6R?.

Substituting this expression in (A.37) and using (11) of the text

again to simplify, we obtain:

(P-1)(g + B1 g)8hg = 0

(A.38)

By Proposition 1, if c.1 and c.2 of Lemma 2.1 hold then g + g

CO and g <

0. Since B1 c 1, (A.38) then yields a contradiction, unless P=1. A slightly
more elaborate argument (which again makes use of equation (A.38)) also rules

out the possibility of a negative debt in the steady state. Needless to say,
(A.38) is satisfied if and only if P=1, i.e. in the case of the social
planner.

Q.E.D.

5. Proof of Proposition 5

In order to prove this result we first need this preliminary lemma.

30

Lema 5.1

0

0 and

if

-

0

(c.3)

Proof:

Using (11) and (A.36):
N
N

= (R2

—

R)B12

*

=

(A.39)

—hgg2 B12

Note that B12 is implicitly defined by equation (25) with P replaced by (1-P)
since we are now considering the party out of office, while (25) in the text
was derived assuming D in office (and C is reelected with probability P).
From (26) in the text we then have:

o(1_p)ve(b 1 + 6PV(bt÷i)

R(bt. bt+i) +

= 0

(A.40)

Differentiate (A.40) with respect to bt:

Rl+R2Bl+o(1_P)VbBl + 6PVbBl = 0

(A.41)

Applying the implicit function theorem to (A.41):

e

oB1V —v

dB

)

R22+6 (l_P)Vbb+oPVbb

Differentiating (A.32), we obtain

< 0 and

>

0.

Hence, by the

condition In footnote (12) (with P replaced by (1—P)), the denominator on the
—
right hand side of (A.42) is negative. As a result, if
<0, then
B12 >

0.

Moreover, if Hb
t+1

> 0 and if c.1 holds, then g > 0 (see Section

avN

2 of the Appendix). Equation (A.39) then Implies that

<

0.
Q.E.D.

We now turn to proove Proposition 5. We want to show that

31

=0

> 0, where MV and MC correspond to the left and right hand

and

side of (26) in the text, respectively. If this holds and since the slope of
MV is algebraically lower than the slope of MC, the equilibrium level of

public debt then falls if P rises. (See Figure 1 in the text).
= 0
follows because, with P =
ge(.) is
The fact that
we differentiate the

> 0,

independent of P. In order to prove that
right hand side of (25), and we obtain:

aMC
i-F— =

aV(bt+i)

N

_[V(bt÷l)_Vb(bt+l)+(1_P)

,

(A.43)

I

Consider now the first two terms on the right hand side of (A.43). Using
(11), (A.33) and (A.36), they can be rewritten as:

-

N

Vb

*

=

*
+
81g2)hg
(g1

(A.44)

By Lema 2.1, if c.1 and c.2 hold, then

*

*

*

+ g2 C 0 and g1 C 0. Since

0< B1 < 1, the right hand side of (A.43) is negative. This, together with

Lemma 5.1 and (A.41), implies that - > 0
Q.E.D.

32

Footnotes

*We are grateful to Richard Cantor, Daniel Heyan, John Van Huyck, John
Lott, Susan Vitka and to several of our colleagues at Carnegie-Mellon and UCLA
for helpful discussions and comments on a preliminary version of this paper.

1. There exists a large literature on the political economy of fiscal

policy. Earlier contributions such as Niskanen (1971), Buchanan—Wagner
(1979), Brennan—Buchanan (1981) and those surveyed by Muller (1979),
Brunner (1979) and Peacock (1979) were based upon the questionable notion

of "fiscal illusion" and voters' irrationality. This assumption can be
easily criticized theoretically; in addition Cameron (1978) shows that

even empirically this assumption does not perform well. More recent
contributions have studied the "size of government" in general equilibrium
models based upon full rationality, for example see Meltzer-Ricbard

(1981), Becker (1985), Lindbeck (1985), Lindbeck—Weibull (1985). These
models are static: thus they do not address the issue of public debt and

of deficits. Cukierman—Meltzer (1986) have recently provided a rational
politico—economic model of public debt. In their model, unlike in ours,
public debt is used for intergenerational transfers, taxes are non—
distortionary, and the median voter theorem applies.

2. Persson-Svensson (1986) have independently developed a model which
captures a similar idea and is a natural companion to ours. Their paper
differs from ours in the following respects: (i) they focus on the
disagreement about the level of public expenditures, whereas we

concentrate on disagreement about its composition. (ii) they consider a
two—period model in which the current government is sure that it will not
be reappointed, while we have a probabilistic change of government and we
study both a two period and an infinite horizon model; (iii) they do not

explicitly consider voting behavior, while we develop a voting equilibrium

compatible with the economic equilibrium; (iv) they consider a small open
economy, thus they assume an exogenously given world interest rate; we
instead consider a closed economy, thus the interest rate is endogenously

determined. The result of the present paper and those of Persson and
Svensson (1986) are briefly compared in the conclusion.

3. Our results generalize to arbitrary values of b0. (See also footnote

33

7). The.general results are available from the authors; they were
enclosed in an earlier version of this paper.

4. The issue of government debt repudiation has been recently addressed by
Bental—Kantorowicz—Peled (1986), and Grossman—Van Huyck (1986).

5. Throughout the paper we disregard the possibility of 'cooperation" between
the two parties. Presumably both parties could benefit by agreeing to
compromise to a certain constant composition of public spending. This
agreement could be sustained as a sub—game perfect equilibrium by means of
reputational strategies as described in a different context by Alesina
(1986, 1987).
6.

It can be shown that the condition for an upward sloping labor supply
function is:
Uc + ucc(ct -

bt)

0

This assumption is adopted for simplicity of exposition. All our results
generalize to the case of a downward sloping labor supply at the optimum

if a very weak sufficient condition is satisfied. This condition is:

((hg_vx)ucc(HcHx) }+tuc(uccHx+'xxHc

+(uc(hg_vx)[uccc(bt_ct)_2ucc])

((uc_hg)[vxxx(1_x)_2vxx]).

It can be shown (see Lemma 2.1 in Appendix) that the three terms on the

right hand side are all positive, if the second order conditions of

problem 8 are satisfied. Thus we require that these three terms dominate
the left hand side (which is also positive).

7. If b0

0, the optimal and the time consistent policies need not be the

same. (See Lucas—Stokey (1983), footnote 2 page 64). The time consistent
policy is to run a surplus (if b0 > 0) or a deficit (if b0 < 0) until the
condition of zero outstanding debt is reached. The time inconsistency of
the optimal policy can be explained as in Rogers (1986): If b0 * 0, then
the consumers carry a positive (or negative) amount of wealth to

subsequent periods. The elasticity of labor supply is different before
and after consumers have committed to a saving decision. This difference
generates an incentive for the government to "surprise" the private sector
with an unexpected change of tax policy and hence makes the optimal policy

time inconsistent. As it will be apparent in the next sections of the

34

paper, our positive results on the deficit bias hold irrespectively of the
value of b0.

8. For simplicity, and with no loss of generality we assume that indifferent
voters vote for party D. We are also assuming that the costs of voting
are zero and everybody votes. Minor changes of notation would allow us to
consider the case in which indifferent voters randomize their ballot or do
not vote.

9. An additional source of uncertainty about electoral results can arise from
an uncertain number of abstensions. If there is uncertainty about the
distribution of the perceived costs of voting by different voters, there
would be uncertainty about electoral results even if the value of

a1

were

known for each consumer. On the costs of voting see for example Ledyard
(1984).

10. The condition that MC intersects MV from below can be stated formally as:

R1+ 5(PVb + (1_P)Vb)

c

11. This result has implications for the 'size of government". An increase in
the steady state of debt in general requires an increase in fiscal

revenues to finance higher interest payments. Under very general
conditions, the size of government as measured by the amount of fiscal

revenues is higher in the two-party system than in the social planner

case. Proof of this statement is available from the authors.
12. The condition in the text of Proposition 5 is only sufficient, and could

be weakened at the price of some additional cumbersome computations. This

0

condition can be interpreted as follows: the requirement that H,.
•"t+ 1

insures that the government does lot decrease its gross cash flows by
>

issuing one additional unit of public debt——i.e., that
b

requirement that Vb_Vb S 0

0,

The

is related (but not equivalent) to the

condition that g* be a concave function of bt and bt+i ——
=

since if =½

h(g*(bt,bt+l)).

13. Note that if P j

the steady state level of debt would be different for

the two parties. Namely, if P 'C

the level of debt that party 0 would

choose in the steady state and when in office is higher than the

corresponding level for party R. This suggests that if P $

35

one should

observe a change of direction in the trend of debt whenever a new party is

elected. Presumably, the fluctuations of debt would be bounded between
these two steady states.
14. Since g0>f0 and since from (32):

Dlahff
—

U

}.......

it

follows that

< 0 if hggg

0,

and

> 0 if hggg >

0

and

sufficiently large. In the former case, the government runs a surplus; in
the second one a deficit.

36

References

Alesina, Alberto (1986) "Credibility and Policy Convergence in a Two—Party
System with Rational Voters" mimeo.

(1987)

___________

"Macroeconomic Policy in a Two-Party System as a

Repeated Game" Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.

Barro, Robert (1919) "On the Determination of the Public Debt" Journal of
Political Economy, 87, 940—7.
_____________

(1985)

"Government Spending, Interest Rates, Prices and Budget

Deficits in the United Kingdom, 1730—1918' working paper, University of
Rochester.

____________

(1986)

"U.S. Deficits since World War I" the Scandinavian

Journal of Economics, 88, 193—222.

___________ (1987)

"Macroeconomics" John Wiley and Sons, New York 2nd

Edition.

Becker, Gary, (1985) "Public Policies, Pressure Groups and Deadweights
Costs" Journal of Public Economics, 28, 329—41.

Bental, Benjamin, Devorah Kantorowicz, Dan Peled (1986) "Should Government
Debt be Safe? An Analysis of Debt Repudiation" mimeo, November.

Brennan, Geoffrey and James Buchanan (1980) "The Power to Tax" Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, England.

Brock, William and Stephen Turnovsky (1980) "Time Consistency and Optimal
Government Policy in a Perfect Foresight Equilibrium" Journal of Public
Economics, 13, 183-212.

Brunner, Karl (1978) "Reflections on the Political Economy of Government:
The Persistent Growth of Government" Schweizerische Zeitschrift
Volkwirtschaft und Statis, (September) 649—80.

Buchanan, James and Richard Wagner (1977) "Democracy in Deficit" Academic
Press, New York, N.Y.

Cameron, David (1978) "The Expansion of the Public Economy: A Comparative
Analysis" American Political Science Review, 12, 1243—61.

Cukierman, Alex, and Allan Meltzer (1986) "A Political Theory of Government
Debt and Deficits in a Neo Ricardian Framework" mimeo (November).

Grossman, Herschel and John Van Huyck (1986) "Sovereign Debt as a Contingent
Claim: Excusable Default, Repudiation and Reputation" Brown University
working paper No. 85-11, August.

37

l-fildenbrand, 4ernes (1974) "Core and Equilibria of a Large Economy"
Princeton University Press, Princeton, N.J.

Lindbeck, Assar (1985) "Redistribution Policy and the Expansion of the
Public Sector" Journal of Public Economics, 28, 3019—28.

Lindbeck, Assar and Jorgen Weibull (1985) "Balance — Budget Redistribution
as Political Equilibrium" Institute for International Economic Studies,
Discussion Paper (November).

Lindberg, Leon and Charles Maier (1985) (ed.) "The Politics of Inflation and
Economic Stagnation" Brookings Institution, Washington.

Lucas, Robert (1986) "Principles of Fiscal and Monetary Policy" Journal of
Monetary Economics, January.

Lucas, Robert and Nancy Stokey (1983) "Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy in
an Economy without Capital" Journal of Monetary Economics, 12, 55—93.

Meltzer, Allan and Scott Richard (1981) "A Rational Theory of the Size of
Government" Journal of Political Economy, 89, 914-27.

Mueller, Dennis (1979) "Public Choice" Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge England.

Niskanen, William (1971) "Bureaucracy and Representative Government"
Aldine—Atherton, Chicago, Illinois.
Persson, Torsten and Lars Svennson

(1984) "Time—Consistent Fiscal Policy and

Government Cash-Flow" Journal of Monetary Economics, 14, 365—14.

________ and __________ (1986)

"Checks and Balances on the Government Budget"

mimeo (November).

Peacock, Alan (1979) "Economic Analysis of Government and Related
Theories" St. Martin, New York, NY.

Rogers, Carol (1986a) "The Effects of Distributive Goals on the Time—
Inconsistency of Optimal Taxes" Journal of Monetary Economics, 11, 251—
69.

___________

(1986b)

Government Debt"

"Time—Consistency and the Maturity Structure of
mimeo.

38

