                                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            DESIGNING WOMEN:
CONSUMER GOODS INNOVATIONS IN BRITAIN, FRANCE AND THE UNITED STATES, 1750-1900

                                              B. Zorina Khan

                                           Working Paper 23086
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w23086


                         NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                  1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                    Cambridge, MA 02138
                                        January 2017




    I have benefited greatly from discussions with Steve Broadberry, Ann Carlos, Neil Cummins,
    Claude Diebolt, Lars Heide, Naomi Lamoreaux, Gilles Postel-Vinay, Sreemati Mitter, Mohamed
    Saleh, and seminar participants at the National Bureau of Economic Research, LSE, Toulouse
    University, Paris School of Economics, the Association Française de Science Economique,
    Cambridge University, Queen’s University at Belfast, the panel on Women and Innovation at
    Indian Institute of Management Bangalore, and the Society for the History of Technology. Esther
    Brubaker provided invaluable assistance with the compilation and analysis of the data. I am
    grateful for the support of the National Science Foundation, the Center for the Protection of
    Intellectual Property, the Hoover National Fellows Programme, and the IP2 Center at Stanford
    University. Thanks are especially due to the Economic History Group at the London School of
    Economics, which provided a supportive and stimulating environment during the completion of
    this project. All language translations are my own. Liability for errors is limited to the author. The
    views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
    National Bureau of Economic Research.

    NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
    peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
    official NBER publications.

    © 2017 by B. Zorina Khan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
    paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
    notice, is given to the source.
Designing Women: Consumer Goods Innovations in Britain, France and the United States,
1750-1900
B. Zorina Khan
NBER Working Paper No. 23086
January 2017
JEL No. B54,D12,L26,N40,O31,O34

                                         ABSTRACT

Economic studies typically underestimate incremental changes in consumer goods and design
innovations that enhance allocative efficiency and structural dynamics. This paper assesses over
12,000 innovations by female patentees and participants in industrial fairs and prize-granting
institutions in Britain, France and the United States, compared to parallel samples of some 60,000
patented and unpatented innovations by men. These data uniquely allow for the systematic
assessment of women’s creativity within the nonmarket household sector and outside the patent
system. The analysis distinguishes between improvements in consumer final goods, changes in
designs, and other forms of technological creativity. The results indicate that women, especially
nonpatentees, were significantly more likely than men to be associated with innovations in
consumer final goods and design-oriented products at the boundary of art and technology. Even
those who did not commercialize their products or work outside the home pursued such
improvements to benefit their families. The patterns suggest that framing women’s creativity in
terms of a “gender difference” rather than a “gender gap” might yield useful analytical insights.
A general implication is that, by inaccurately gauging consumer innovations within the household
and in the market, economic research likely underestimates the extent of technological progress
and advances in welfare.


B. Zorina Khan
9700 College Station
Bowdoin College
Brunswick, ME 04011
and NBER
bkhan@bowdoin.edu
INTRODUCTION

                                             “Women have been scientists and warriors, but there
                                              have never been any female inventors.” --Voltaire1


The underrepresentation of women inventors has never been as stark as the Voltaire epigraph

might indicate, even in early France, but it is perplexing that a technology gender gap is still

persistent and pervasive in the twenty-first century. Many scholars have already produced

significant research that illuminates women’s contributions to technological improvements and

their commercialization across time and place. However, systematic examination of broad

patterns and general tendencies has been quite limited, and more cross-national comparative

analysis is needed to better understand how institutional variation is related to female

participation in the market for technology. This study therefore examines the sources and nature

of technological discoveries by women in the three leading industrial nations of Britain, France

and the United States, over the course of the nineteenth century.

         Prior empirical research on women’s inventive activity has primarily drawn on patent

records. Application fees and high transactions costs likely deterred many women inventors

from participating in the patent system, especially in Europe where the expense of patent

applications and grants was many times greater than annual per capita income. Accordingly, a

different perspective on women and technology can be gained from combining patent records

with less-restrictive industrial exhibitions that included unpatented inventions and innovations.

This paper examines over 12,200 observations drawn from a dozen annual exhibitions

throughout the United States and Europe, and includes information on women who were

associated with patented discoveries, as well as innovations that would not have qualified for


1
 “On a vu des femmes très savantes comme il en fut de guerrières; mais il n'y en a jamais eu d'inventrices.”
Voltaire, Dictionnaire philosophique, Voltaire, éd. Lequien, 1829, tome 4, article « Femme », p. 354.

                                                         3
patent protection. These observations were matched with information from a number of other

sources, including lawsuits, information about commercialization, city directories and

manuscript population censuses.

       These extensive data on female patentees and participants in industrial exhibitions offer

unique insights on women’s contributions to technological invention and innovation in Britain,

France and the United States during the early industrial period. Systematic examination of the

patterns for both patents and prizes at state and national exhibitions illustrate ways in which

women in all jurisdictions overcame institutional and cultural constraints and employed

entrepreneurial abilities that ensured their inventions were valued in the marketplace. Bolstered

by a supportive patent system, American women inventors primarily demonstrated their

comparative advantage in household and domestic innovations, whereas many of their successful

European counterparts exploited links with family firms to engage in extensive industrial

commercialization. Nevertheless, the general patterns indicate that women’s creativity in these

jurisdictions was characterized by more similarities than differences.

       The results raise fundamental questions about conventional perspectives regarding the

scope and nature of technological innovation. The economic analysis of technological advances

typically fails to capture improvements in consumer final goods and designs. Moreover, a

general lacuna exists in empirical scholarship regarding creativity that lies at the borders of

aesthetics and utility, of art and technology narrowly defined. In particular, the “machine-

centric” orientation of patent rules and records frequently misses subtle changes in consumer

final goods, especially in the case of product designs that extend beyond alterations in the visual

appearance of the item. As this study shows, women tended to make disproportionately greater




                                                  4
contributions in just such areas, and part of the “gender gap” arguably owes to the analytical gap

in current approaches to technological innovation.



THE SCOPE AND NATURE OF TECHNOLOGICAL CREATIVITY

                                             “A newe way by her invented” --Amy Everard (1637)

The conventional approach to the economics of technology centers on advances in producer

goods and inputs that cause outward shifts in the production possibility frontier of a society. A

number of theorists (Romer 1990, Grossman and Helpman 1991, Gualerzi 2012) have

incorporated consumer goods in their models of economic growth. Luigi Pasinetti (1981), in

particular, highlights the central and mutually reinforcing roles of demand, consumption, and

human learning in attaining dynamic growth outcomes. Allocative efficiency, on the other hand,

comprises movements along the production possibility frontier, that improve consumer welfare

without increasing productive possibilities, holding other things constant. Although it is

acknowledged that improvements in the nature and quality of consumer products and design

innovations might have a direct impact on household utility, such innovations are difficult to

measure and quantify. Both theoretical and empirical economic studies have tended to

underestimate incremental changes in consumer goods and design innovations that enhance

allocative efficiency and structural dynamics.

       During the past decade, significant advances have been made in the economic analysis of

new goods (Bresnahan and Gordon 2008). Tratjenberg (1989), for instance, assessed the

uniqueness and degree of substitutability of one product relative to others in the same class. At

the same time, many of these studies evince a bias towards the “great invention” model of

technological change, which characterizes inventions in terms of discontinuities, and ignores or



                                                 5
dismisses the incremental nature of all inventive activity.2 Bresnahan and Gordon (2008, p. 12)

contend that fundamental differences exist between “new goods which open up whole new

product categories and other new goods which increase quality or variety within product

categories …new goods that establish entire new categories (like the automobile) will be

economically more important than improvements that occur within categories.” This heuristic of

approaching technological innovation in terms of broad categories -- “the” jet plane, telephone,

radio, automobile, or computer – fails to accurately characterize the inventive process. Just as

important, it has negative implications for the economic analysis and valuation of women’s

technological contributions, which tend to lie well within the boundaries of such categories.3

        It is ironic that a similar orientation was evident among nineteenth-century feminists,

who wished to prove male-female equivalence. Their political objective required highlighting

heroines of invention, and examples of women, however atypical, who fulfilled their conceptual

requirements.4       Accordingly, they idealized women who patented “great inventions,” or

technically-demanding machines that were regarded as comparable with the most valuable men’s

discoveries; and determined “to make no note of the inventions of women unless it is something

quite distinguished and brilliant. We must not call attention to anything that would cause us to

lose ground.”5 The women’s movement increasingly denigrated traditionally female activities

such as housework, and attempted to downplay the importance of incremental “feminine




2
  Khan and Sokoloff provide an empirical analysis of supposed “great inventors” and demonstrate the incremental
nature of conventional great inventions, and the similarity of “great inventors” to their “ordinary” counterparts.
3
  For a discussion of “macroinventions” and “microinventions” see Joel Mokyr, Lever of Riches: Technological
Creativity and Economic Progress, New York: Oxford University Press, 1992.
4
  Judith McGaw, “Inventors and other Great Women,” p. 219: “Similarly, emphasizing woman’s capacity to invent
outside the domestic sphere, an approach characteristic of earlier feminist efforts and one that shapes Macdonald’s
and also Stanley’s work, evidently left popular conceptions of inventors and invention virtually unaltered.”
5
  Cited in Jeanne Weiman, The Fair Women. Chicago: Academy, 1981, p. 429.

                                                         6
technologies.”6 The organizers of the Women’s Pavilion at the World’s Columbian Exposition in

1893 were concerned to find that their submissions mainly included ordinary household products

such as kitchen tools and apparel.7

         Traditional economic theory has additional shortcomings when applied in historical

context. For instance, the analytical bias towards free trade based on comparative advantage

implies that mercantilism and nationalism are characterized as a deviation from efficiency. The

United States was the first country to offer patent protection that was contingent on a global

definition of novelty; that is, the invention had to be new to the world. However, mercantilism

was a central approach of European societies in the nineteenth century, that was also evident in

their technology policies. As such, their definition of novelty in technological innovation was

restricted to national boundaries, and the objective was often to re-create, or offer patents of

importation for, foreign technologies that could have been obtained more cheaply through free

trade.8 Within the context of a closed economy, the re-creation of foreign goods increased

domestic consumption possibilities. This form of import substitution was especially directed

toward designs, dyes, colours, the decorative arts, and luxury goods, where women’s innovations

were disproportionately represented.

         Scholars in the history of technology and gender studies have directed a great deal of

attention to the question of how to adequately capture the contributions of women (Bray 2013).
6
  Reva Siegel, “Home as Work: The First Woman’s Rights Claims Concerning Wives Household Labor, 1850–
1880,” vol. 103 Yale Law Journal (1994): 1073–1217.
7
  As an official Women’s Bureau Bulletin declared: “If the steady increase in the numbers of patents granted women
is accounted for merely by the increase in the number of patented hairpins, hair curlers, and such trifles in feminine
equipment, it is without large significance either to civilization or as an indication of women’s inventive abilities.”
U.S. Department of Labor. Women’s Contributions in the Field of Invention. Women’s Bureau Bulletin, No. 28.
Washington, D.C.: GPO, 1923, p. 13.
8
  At the Royal Society of Arts, early awards were offered for the domestic production of verdigris, Turkey red dyes,
madder, and marbled paper that was of similar quality to the items imported from Europe (Khan 2016). In France,
Mlle Manceau received awards from the Industrial Expositions and the Conservatory for Arts and Trades because
her firm re-created a type of bonnet that was original to Italy. She was able to export the bonnets to other cities in
Europe, the United States, and “remarkably” to Naples and Florence as well, possibly because of the lower price of
her products.

                                                           7
Judith McGaw (1996), for example, calls for an extension of the scope of technology beyond

hardware, to incorporate the skills and knowledge that belong to women.                            However, her

discussion of “feminine technologies” seems equally narrowly focused, highlighting innovations

related to women’s biological and social differences.9 The feminist perspective has only recently

expanded their conception of what constitutes technology to also incorporate design studies

(Wajcman 2000, Shepard 2012).10 As such, both from an economic and social perspective, it is

useful to investigate the technological activities of women in Britain and Europe in terms of their

contributions to consumer and design-related innovations.



PATENT SYSTEMS AND EXHIBITIONS
                                                             “Go invent something, for it pays much better”
                                                                               --New York World (1889)11


Institutions, or the rules and standards that frame human interaction, create opportunities and

boundaries for women that have varied by place and time. In order to better understand the

fundamental nature and sources of women’s experience regarding technological innovations, it is

therefore necessary to adopt a comparative perspective. The datasets for this study (see

Appendix for specific details) comprise the most extensive sample of women inventors and

innovators during the industrial era, including over 12,200 observations across three countries.

The measures of women’s contributions were drawn from patent records and from numerous

9
  Gearhart-Sema (2016) argues that women “should not have to inhabit the largely Western- and male-dominated
paradigm of the scientific inventor,” and that policy and efforts to understand female creativity should encompass
traditional knowledge.
10
   The Maryland Institute noted that “there is in woman’s mind and hand full capacity for excellence in the art of
Design, and that the practice of them is congenial to her sphere” (Annual Report of the Board of Managers,
Maryland Institute for the Promotion of the Mechanic Arts, 1850, p. 110).
11
   The epigraph is from an article about a U.S. woman patentee who manufactured little bags to hold powder puffs
that “filled a long felt want,” and “now advises women who toil at fancy work for the shops for a pittance to ‘go
invent something, for it pays much better’.” The story was reprinted in the Daily Tribune of Bismarck, North
Dakota (Thursday, October 31, 1889). The first woman from this state to obtain a patent was Ella G. de Laney, of
Conway, who invented an improvement in kettle-cleaners (Patent No. 560,060, dated May 12, 1896).

                                                         8
exhibits at industrial expositions, and include data on the type of invention, commercialization,

co-inventors, prizes that were awarded, litigation, and inventive careers.12

        Patents have been widely used by economists as a systematic measure of some types of

inventive activity, and their sales or licensing allow us insights into the market for technology.

These data are especially valuable because they enable women, who are typically invisible to

history owing to a lack of documentation, to become visible once again (Khan 2005, 2016a).

At the same time, patent protection is limited to inventions that fall within the set of items that

satisfy the rules for patentability, which implies that certain types of creativity are not

represented. It is difficult to find analogous information about technological discovery and

commercialization outside the patent system, but many historians and economists have used

exhibits and prizes from industrial exhibitions as a means of gauging various sorts of creativity

(Warner 1979, Darney 1982, Cordato 1989, Moser and Nicholas 2013). Patent systems differ

across countries, and the laws and their enforcement have also changed over time; industrial

exhibitions exhibit significantly higher variance in key dimensions, so it is important to first

understand the nature of these institutions (Khan 2013).

        Today it is difficult to retrieve information about female pioneers who devised new

inventions and innovations. Patent records offer an admittedly narrow window on inventive

activity by women, but even this limited glimpse often reveals significant systematic details that

cannot be replicated elsewhere (Khan 2016b). Early examples include English patentees Sara

Jerom and William Webb, who filed in 1635 for legal protection for a machine to slice wood into

thin pieces to make items such as bandboxes. Two years later, the patent specification

(description) of Amy Everard, a widow, declared her intention “to use and exercise within

12
  These data were supplemented by additional information that were obtained from biographies, city directories and
from manuscript population censuses, which offered details about occupations, age, marital status, households,
wealth, and location, among others.

                                                        9
England and Wales the mistery, skill, and invention of making, ordering, or contriving of saffron

into a manner or forme which shall dissolve into tincture and of divers other vegetables (as of

roses, gilliflowers, and the like), into an essence, after a newe way by her invented.” The British

patent registers also record the 1715 and 1716 patents granted to Thomas Masters of

Philadelphia, for a means of curing Indian corn and for making straw bonnets; protection was

obtained on behalf of his wife Sybilla, who was thus the first American colonist to obtain a

British patent.

         The British patent system has been in continuous operation since 1624, when the Statute

of Monopolies offered patent grants for fourteen years (Khan 2005). The registration system did

not require examination about whether the applicant was the true inventor, and patents were

often bestowed on individuals who simply acquired an invention, such as importers of foreign

discoveries.13 Prior to 1852, procedures for obtaining a patent were extremely costly in terms of

time and money, requiring the payment of fees varying from £100 (four times per capita income

at mid-century) to £300. Patent agents and lawyers could help to negotiate the bureaucracy and

legal pitfalls, but at an additional cost. The system also inhibited the diffusion of information,

and made it difficult for inventors outside of London to conduct patent searches, increasing the

likelihood that their property rights would later be subject to adverse judicial rulings. Reforms in

the system occurred in 1852 and in 1884.14 The time series (Figure 1a) show that these changes

had a significant impact on all inventors, including women patentees. The patterns suggest that




13
   For buyers and sellers alike of patent rights, the legal and economic risks associated with a registration system
likely reduced the net expected value of trade in the market for technological innovations (Khan 2005, 2013).
14
   The patent application process was rationalized in one Patent Office, and patent term varied according to
willingness to pay for extensions to the life of the property right. The initial grant was contingent on a payment of
£25, an extra £50 was due after three years, and after seven years patentees were required to pay £100 to maintain
the patent to full term. The costs fell further after 1883, when only £4 was charged for the initial term of four years,
and the remaining £150 could be paid in annual increments.

                                                           10
the cheaper patents after 1884 disproportionately benefited women, who typically would have

had lower financial resources and access to capital markets.

          The French patent system was similar to the British, but French women were relatively

more successful at negotiating the process of obtaining patent rights and appropriating returns

from their efforts, in part because of their association with family firms (Khan 2016a).15 The

proportion of patents that was issued to women increased substantially after the 1844 legal

reforms, rising from 1.6 percent to 3.0 percent of total grants in France. Despite the significantly

higher fees for long-term protection, French women were more likely than men to file for these

higher-valued patents. Working requirements legally meant that the invention had to be put into

practice within two years from the initial grant; however, enforcement was lax, since the patentee

could point to unforeseen events which had prevented compliance with the provisions of the

law.16 In short, in both Britain and France, wealthy inventors clearly had a greater ability to file

for patent protection, to commercialize their inventions, and to enforce their rights at law; and

the system disadvantaged the creators of incremental inventions.

         United States patent policy made a deliberate departure from European and colonial

precedents (Khan 2010). The American patent system differed in part because it was not

intended to generate revenues for the state, but instead offered strong incentives for inventive




15
   Access to property rights in invention was also hampered by fees that were several multiples of average income,
and the registration system left the sorting of claims about priority, novelty, and general validity to the costly arena
of the courts. The 1791 statute stipulated patent fees from 300 livres through 1500 livres, based on the declared
term of the patent. After the reforms of 1844, fees fell but were still out of reach of the working class, ranging from
500 francs ($100) for a five-year patent, 1,000 francs for a ten-year patent and 1,500 for a patent of fifteen years,
payable in annual installments.
16
   French rules about access likewise made it difficult to obtain information about patented inventions, because
viewers had to state their motives; foreigners had to be assisted by French attorneys; and no extract from the
manuscript could be copied until the patent had expired. Patent assignment documents were filed in the office of the
Prefect for the district, but since there was no central source of information it was difficult to trace the records for
specific inventions. If the patent was assigned the annual fees for the entire term of the patent had to be paid in
advance.

                                                          11
activity, regardless of the identity of the inventor.17 As a result, in the federal patent system,

creative women had the same standing as their male counterparts. The examination system that

was set in place in 1836 enabled early reviews of the basic validity of the patent grant, and the

judicial system strongly enforced patents that had survived this technical filter. In a key

departure from patent rules in Britain and France, in the United States only the true inventor was

permitted to apply for patent protection, so American patent records offer more accurate indexes

of inventive activity by women.18 U.S. patent fees were deliberately kept low so that the filter

was technical creativity rather than financial standing.19 Another important feature of the U.S.

system was that it was extremely favorable to trade in patent rights, and markets for inventions

were the most extensive in the world (Khan 2013a, Lamoreaux and Sokoloff 1996). Strong

enforcement of these property rights, and efficient capital markets, meant that impecunious

creators of useful inventions were readily able to find outside capital to fund their patent

applications and ventures. American patent institutions also encouraged cumulative invention

and trade in technology by requiring immediate public disclosure of the specifications of patents,

and by helping to widely disseminate this information (Khan 2014b).

         Patent records offer invaluable insights, but also have well-known problems as measures

of inventive activity. Most significantly, some inventions are not patentable, not all inventors

apply for patents and the propensity to patent differs across countries, industries and individuals,

17
   The text of the first U.S. Patent Act of 1790 specified “That upon the petition of any person or persons that he,
she, or they, hath invented of discovered any useful art, . . . it shall be lawful . . . to cause letters patent to be made
out in the name of the United States” (my emphasis).
18
   For instance, Ella E. Boland’s British patent for a curtain pole bracket included Joseph Boland, her husband, as a
co-inventor whereas, in order to avoid invalidity, her U.S. patent was in her name alone. U.S. Letters Patent No.
593,920, dated November 16, 1897; and GB189726731 (A) 1898-02-12, the specification of which notes that the
invention was intended “to avoid the necessity of climbing upon chairs, tables, and step ladders which are dangerous
and inconvenient for any one and especially for ladies.” She sold half of the patent rights to her U.S. patent to a
merchant tailor in Pittsburgh. Ella Boland also bought the rights to another curtain pole patent belonging to Otto E.
Wagener, suggesting efforts at commercialization of the invented item.
19
   Patentees in the nineteenth century paid a fee of $30 to $35 to the Patent Office (average per capita income
nationally was approximately $128 at this time, and $180 in the inventive Northeast region.)

                                                            12
and patented inventions vary greatly in terms of value. One way to supplement patent

information is to consider prize-granting institutions, although these are associated with their

own drawbacks (Khan 2013, 2015, 2016). Exhibitions, for instance, did not require potential

exhibitors to pay entry fees, and thus provide information on a larger and more diverse

population of innovations. There were minimal rules about the identities of the exhibitors, and

no examination process for eligibility of exhibits, so these fairs were functionally equivalent to a

low-cost registration system. Panels of judges in decentralized committees granted prizes, based

on a wide array of criteria that ranged from novelty to aesthetics and even idiosyncratic

characteristics of the entrants.20

         As the Appendix shows, the nonpatent sources used in this study include the Royal

Society of Arts in England, the Exhibitions of National Industry in France, the Paris Universal

Exhibition of 1855, the 1876 Centennial Exhibition and the 1893 World’s Columbian

Exposition. Mechanics’ institutes in the United States sponsored industrial fairs in most large

American cities, on a roughly annual or biennial basis, and these were sampled to construct a

panel data set of technological innovations from major cities—including Boston, New York,

Philadelphia, San Francisco, Cincinnati, and St. Louis—over the course of the nineteenth

century. The organizers of many industrial exhibitions encouraged women to submit entries,

expecting that their “taste and delicacy” would lead to visually appealing displays that would

attract more visitors to the events. Special gallery spaces were often set aside for a “Woman’s

Department,” with the intention of encouraging female participation.21                         These unpatented



20
   The Centennial rules, for example, provided that “awards should be based upon inherent and comparative merit;
the elements of merit being held to include considerations relating to originality, invention, discovery, utility,
quality, skill, workmanship, fitness for the purposes intended, adaptation to public wants, economy and cost.”
(Report of the United States Centennial Commission, J.B. Lippincott, 1877, p. 15.)
21
   See the Report of the Exhibition, 1887, p. 16. “Another notable feature of the Exposition were the inventions of
women. It has been so often reiterated that women are not inventors, that many have fallen into the trap of believing

                                                         13
innovations illustrate that considerable and diverse creativity was indeed occurring outside the

formal patent system, and the records of exhibits are especially useful for identifying innovations

with subject matter that was not eligible for a patent.

         In all three countries, women’s patenting is significantly below the number of patents that

men filed, over the entire period (Figure 1). However, the variation in women’s patenting is

similar to the general population of inventors, suggesting that women responded to many of the

same factors.22 This is not to say that the experience of male and female inventors was identical.

One notable exception relates to legal rules, which comprise a significant institution that can

constrain or enable inventive activity and innovation. During much of the nineteenth-century,

while single women had the same legal rights as men, married women in all three countries were

subject to the rules of coverture, which vested legal rights in their husband (Khan 2005, 2016a).23

Coverture affected women’s economic activities negatively: legal reforms that removed such

laws altered the economic costs and benefits associated with women’s involvement in

commercial activity, and significantly increased inventive activity by female patentees (Khan

2005). Similarly, women’s entrepreneurship was likely constrained by their legal disability

under the law. Investors and creditors would be less inclined to offer funding if they were

uncertain about their ability to enforce their rights, leading to greater capital imperfections for

women relative to men.24



the statement. To all such, the eye evidence which they received at the Fair, that the inventive genius of women is
rapidly developing, will be a beneficial correction of their misapprehension” (The Repository, vol 51, 1874, p. 396).
22
   For instance, patenting for both men and women was responsive to major economic cycles (Sokoloff 1988, Khan
2005). Like other patentees, women inventors appear to have varied their efforts to accommodate changes in market
demand and expected profitability (Khan 2000).
23
   By law, a woman’s husband controlled any property she owned or acquired, as well as her earnings and wealth.
Married women were prohibited from entering into contracts, could not be sued, and could trade on their own
account only if authorized by their husband.
24
   Commercial exploitation of patented innovations depended on the right to contract, to produce the invented
article, to assign or purchase patent rights, and to prosecute infringers. The implications for women in business
were sufficiently important that entire legal treatises were directed to the analysis of the law towards the wives of

                                                         14
GENERAL PATTERNS OF INNOVATION
                                                     “The world is in perpetual motion, and we must invent
                                                     the things of tomorrow… Act with audacity.”
                                                       -- Barbe-Nicole Clicquot Ponsardin (1777-1866)25


As economic actors, nineteenth-century women have a visible presence largely as unskilled

workers in factories, as sole proprietors, petty producers and, to a lesser extent, as passive

investors in securities markets. Middle-class women, in particular, have often been characterized

as members of a “separate sphere” who had retreated from activity in the market economy in

accordance with social norms. The patent and exhibition records reveal a much more complex

reality, in which women of all backgrounds and marital status were engaged in creative

endeavours that encompassed the entire range of technological discovery, from conception

through commercialization. As contemporary feminists highlighted, a number of women’s

inventions were technically-sophisticated and made lasting contributions to industrial machines

and production innovations. However, this emphasis on male-equivalence overlooked or

actively disregarded the fact that the majority of women’s inventions exploited their comparative

advantage in household activities and consumer-oriented technologies.

        Table 1 provides summary statistics on patenting by women in the three countries, which

reveals a striking similarity among the central tendencies (and the exhibitions data also mirror

the general patterns for these variables). The majority of these female inventors were or had

been married, although the percentage of single women inventors is marginally higher than in the

age-specific general population.26 Significantly, even those who did not work outside the home



businessmen, including those who were active partners in the family firm. See, for instance Bressolles, Paul, De la
femme du commerçant : examen critique de la jurisprudence, Paris: Rousseau, 1888.
25
   Cited in Tilar J. Mazzeo, The Widow Clicquot: The Story of a Champagne Empire and the Woman Who Ruled It,
New York: Harper Collins, 2008, p. 181.
26
   Marriage for women was more common in the United States, where both the age at first marriage and the
proportion of never-married “spinsters” were lower than in Europe (Hussey and Ponsonby, 2016). Clark (2016)

                                                        15
were engaged in devising creative improvements. As such, rather than retreating to a “separate

sphere,” these women worked in a context that productively combined household and

nonhousehold activities. Families often provided resources and a social context that had the

potential to increase women’s inventive activities.27 French women inventors demonstrated

greater productivity at both invention and commercialization, in part because they were able to

exploit family connections, as well as the tangible and intangible assets of relatives and of family

businesses (Khan 2016). Similarly, the 1881 UK census shows that the 30-year old housewife

Caroline Newman Bintcliffe was married to a builder, and living in the same London household

as her brother-in-law Harry Parkins, a manufacturer of stationery. In 1897, she obtained a patent

for envelopes, which records her occupation as a stationer. By the census of 1911, a family

business had developed, where Caroline was now a “manufacturing stationer,” assisted by her

adult son.

         The data on co-inventors in the Table reflects some of the mechanisms that promoted

inventive activity by women. The majority of U.S. women patentees (92.4 percent) had no co-

inventors, indicating the independent nature of female inventive activity, and this was also true to

a lesser extent for the French and British inventors (74.5 and 81.7 percent, respectively). The

Prest siblings -- Thomas, James and Mary – of Blackburn, Lancaster, were all joint applicants for

an 1898 patent to protect their improvements in cycle tyres. Less common was the example of

the long-term collaboration between sisters Eva and Cecilia MacKenzie of Inverness, who

together obtained six patents between 1895 and 1913, including two improvements in hairpins



employs a sample of English women authors, 44 percent of whom were single, although the sample size is very
small (144 born from 1800-1880).
27
   Women patentees could and did benefit from family resources, regardless of their marital status, especially in the
case of wealthy households. For instance, the Honourable Maude Agnes Lawrence, of Belgravia, in 1911 was living
at home with her elderly mother and 14 servants, including a butler. Lawrence was appointed Director of Women
Establishments, H.M. Treasury, and made a DBE in 1926. Her estate was valued at £172, 382 at her death in 1933.

                                                         16
that included their mother Mrs. Georgina MacKenzie.28 A significant fraction of multiple-

inventor patents included unrelated males, typically from the same geographical location. Many

of the co-inventor listings in the United States testified to women’s collaborations with

machinists, engineers, pattern makers, toolmakers, manufacturers, and artisans, who, according

to patent law, were required to have made a substantive contribution to the invention in order to

be granted co-inventor status.

         Women inventors who intended to appropriate financial returns from their efforts also

benefited from markets in patents. The ability to assign part of their property rights provided a

means of compensating intermediaries who helped with funding, advice on commercialization,

and litigation about property rights and related issues. Intermediaries helped inventors to

mobilize venture capital and to exploit their inventions in other ways, and some also took

positions in inventions as partners or outright owners. For instance, Maria Beasley transferred

part of the rights in an uncompleted invention to James Henry of Philadelphia, in exchange for

advance financing to complete her machine. Patentees in need of the services of lawyers who

might help with such transactions as foreign patent filing were able to pay upfront, by assigning

part of their patent rights. Alberta Mary Caspar of London, England obtained an 1884 patent

(GB13442) for improvements in imitation stained glass; when she proceeded to file for an

American patent a few months later, she assigned half of her patent right to Eugene Pearl, a

patent lawyer in New York.29 The tendency to file for patent rights in foreign countries may be


28
   By 1911, when they applied for another patent for improvements in ladies’ and children’s apparel, the sisters
listed their occupation as “manufacturers.” In France, Madame Houel and her daughter provide insights into the
relationship between entrepreneurial mothers and their children. Mme Houel received a favourable citation from the
jury at the 1823 exposition in Paris. She had created a form of paint that dried quickly without a strong smell, which
could be used on wood and metal. In 1839, her daughter exhibited her own improvements on this paint, for which
the jury granted her a bronze medal.
29
   US340485A, which was granted in 1886. This patent received two citations in patent documents belonging to
inventors from the late twentieth century, indicating that it was a somewhat influential technology.


                                                         17
regarded as an index of higher-valued inventions, so it is worth noting that 22.2 percent of the

U.K. women’s patents came from overseas, primarily from the United States. Foreign women

who entered the competitive American market were likely associated with inventions that were

in the higher tails of the distribution for expected returns.

        The number of patents per person indicates greater investments in inventive capital and

professionalism in patenting activity. The patterns for multiple inventions (as gauged by both

patents and exhibits) are significantly different in France, relative to the other two countries. In

Britain and the United States, two-thirds of women’s patents were issued to inventors who never

filed a second patent, whereas almost three-quarters of French patents (including improvements)

were for multiple patents. For instance, Sophie-Geneviève Mercier obtained 15 patents between

1842 and 1855, the majority for various inventions to treat laundry, and two for cleaning cutlery,

which all required some familiarity with chemical processing. In France, professional patenting

was associated with greater ownership of manufacturing companies and other related businesses

(Khan 2016a). In short, women were active on both sides of the market for inventive rights, as

buyers and sellers, and as recipients of titles on behalf of their firms.

        Entrepreneurship requires flexibility to meet new opportunities, and this characteristic

can be observed in many of the women in this sample -- indeed, one might argue that all

individuals who participated in patenting or exhibitions had to some extent demonstrated

entrepreneurial abilities. Table 2 suggests that participation in business and in the labour market

provided obvious advantages for women that furthered their ability to appropriate returns from

their creativity. Still, in an era when labour force participation rates were low for married

women, it is illuminating to find evidence in these records for significant entrepreneurial and

commercial activities among the participants in patenting and exhibiting of inventions. This is



                                                  18
especially evident in the French context, where manufacturers accounted for a disproportionate

number of occupations (47.4 percent of patentees and 62.6 percent of exhibitors).30 The

exhibitions data are also valuable for revealing women’s activities in commercialization and

innovation. Mme Désirée Debuchy inherited a large-scale and prosperous textile-making

enterprise in Tourcoing (Nord), which under the ownership of her husband, had won medals each

year from 1827 up to the time of his death. Under her management, the juries at the 1849 and

1855 exhibitions rewarded the products for their good taste, low prices, success in the

marketplace, and their competitiveness with English goods.

         The much higher fees for patents likely explains the frequency of the professional and

teaching classes among the European women patentees, relative to the United States. The

democratic nature of the American patent system is evident in the higher percentage of patentees

from the artisan and worker classes (26.9), as compared to Britain (8.8) and France (10.6).

These patterns are reinforced by the difference in the occupations of women who obtained

patents, and those who participated in exhibitions, which were much less costly and therefore

associated with lower financial barriers. The proportion of professional women/teachers is

roughly the same for patents and exhibitions in the United States; but varies markedly in France,

where this category accounts for 23.2 percent of known occupations for patentees, and just 6.3

percent for exhibitors. Of course, not all innovative women had formal occupations. In the

United States, 33.7 percent of female patentees who could be traced were listed as keeping house

or without occupations, relative to 45.7 percent in the U.K., and 38.0 percent in France. As

might be expected, this figure is higher for participants in exhibitions.



30
  For instance, the Joly sisters obtained a full-term patent on corsets, and listed themselves as corset-makers in
1848; however, by 1853 the sisters were manufacturing envelopes that were secure enough to use for confidential
business transactions, for which they had obtained another patent.

                                                         19
       Prior research into the occupations and patenting of ordinary and “great inventors”

indicates that the majority tended to produce job-related inventions (Khan 2005), suggesting a

correlation between occupation and industry. The industrial distribution of patents filed by

working women yields evidence that female inventive activity was related to experience they had

obtained in the course of their jobs, but their inventions also responded to perceived market

demand. Elizabeth Barnston Parnell of Sydney, Australia, a professional metallurgist, obtained

several British patents for her improved methods of processing ores and furnaces, which met a

need in the production of complex minerals with sulphides of copper, lead, zinc, silver and

antimony. The E.B. Parnell Sulphur process, and an improved furnace, were successful in trial

experiments, and created a great deal of interest among investors. Lizzie H. Goggs, an art dealer

in Liverpool, obtained a patent for making metallic paints, along with T. T. Irvine, her partner in

The Fine Art Company. A more esoteric example is offered by Elizabeth French, a medium and

practitioner of “galvanic medicine,” who obtained an 1875 U.S. patent for an electro-therapeutic

device, that received some nine long-term patent citations.

       Manufacturers were also likely to be responsible for inventions that were related to their

enterprises. For instance, Martha Kerr, a manufacturer of washing machines in Liverpool, filed a

patent claim for a spring lever washing machine. French widows who inherited businesses that

had been founded or managed by their husbands, in particular, were the least likely to offer

exhibits in traditionally female industries such as apparel and household items; instead, 18.1

percent of their awards were in technical fields, and one-third were in the textile industry (Khan

2016a). Similarly, Eliza Rippingille became the head of a flourishing lamp and stove

manufacturing company when her husband and father-in-law both died on the same day, and she

obtained a patent along with the foreman of the Aston Brook Lamp Works, the Birmingham



                                                20
branch.31 However, the causality was sometimes reversed, when inventors established

manufacturing enterprises to appropriate returns from their inventive activity, either on their own

accord, or along with partners and investors who provided financial or physical capital to float

the business.

        Nevertheless, since all women participated in household activity, it is not surprising that,

regardless of their formal occupations, a significant fraction of their contributions were related to

personal experience and to their role in the home and the family. Victoria Isabella Heliodora

Bundsen, an internationally famous opera singer and prima donna alto, obtained a British patent

in 1898, for a folding umbrella. Lydia Huntley Sigourney, a notable American “poetess” from

Hartford, Connecticut, exhibited an improved silk stocking at the Massachusetts Mechanics

Institute in 1853. Sophronia Dodge, a resident of the state of Iowa which suffers from cold

winters, patented an appliance in 1872 for raising dough that “does the work thoroughly and

perfectly in the coldest weather.” Eliza Scofield Wood, an American farmer’s wife, invented a

wring mop bucket, for which she submitted two patents, in 1889 and 1891. This household-

orientation was especially evident in the case of exhibitions, where women of all backgrounds

tended to display unique works of arts and craft, clothing, household and domestic enterprise.

When Margaret P. Colvin of Battle Creek, Michigan, exhibited the Triumph rotary washing

machine at the Philadelphia Centennial Exhibition, she noted that her invention was “the

successful result of years of experiment by a practical woman, to accomplish the perfect

cleansing of all fabrics, from carpets to laces, without rubbing. With this machine, a child of

twelve years can do more work, and do it better, than two women by ordinary methods”

(Official Catalogue, 1876, p. 87).


31
  The Rippingilles were noted for their manufacturing of such appliances (advertised as “world renowned patent oil
cooking & warming stokes, lamps, &c.”)

                                                        21
CONSUMER TECHNOLOGIES AND DESIGN INNOVATIONS

                                                        “It is need in the market that causes industrial progress.
                                                        When a need manifests itself, everyone starts working to
                                                                                                            32
                                                        develop a solution.” –Universal Exposition, 1855


According to some scholars, a specialization by gender was evident in the nineteenth century,

whereby men were associated with "production, competition, and material gain," whereas

women belonged to a sphere that encompassed "ideal virtues, beauty, and consumption" (Owen

2001, p. 16). At the same time, such dichotomies fail to capture the interactions between

production and consumption, and the similarities between material incentives and the desire (at

times competitive) to improve household welfare through innovations. An alternative approach

might suggest that it is both need in the market and need in the household that causes social

progress. Khan (2000), for instance, shows how women on the American frontier

disproportionately devised improvements to remedy their lack of access to household help. The

data on the industrial distribution of inventions and innovations, as well as the information on

women’s occupations, allow us to explore such issues and the distinctive nature of female

creativity in this era.

           The information in the prior section showed that feminine technologies were likely to

vary significantly from those of male inventors, especially in the context of unpatented

innovations. The category of arts and education in Table 3 comprises a stark distinction between

the industrial allocation of women’s inventions at exhibitions and patents, most evident in the

86.7 percent of the entries attributed to women who applied for awards at the Royal Society of

Arts in London. Among the inventors who worked outside the home, a third of the women

exhibitors in the United States were identified in official records as professional artists and


32
     Rapport sur l'exposition universelle de 1855 présenté à l'Empereur, Paris: 1856, p.148.

                                                            22
designers. Many of these artists, who were responsible for the patenting of such items as corsets,

tapestries, and apparel inventions, were devising improvements at the boundary of design, art

and technology. These descriptive statistics suggest that an understanding of “feminine

ingenuity” requires a broader perspective than the conventional focus on production

technologies, machinery and industrial inventions, that dominate the patent records and empirical

research in the history of technology.

         This section therefore considers the patterns of women’s inventive activity and

innovation in terms of their contributions to consumer final goods and improvements in

designs.33 Table 4 identifies the observations from both the patent records and from the

exhibitions that were related to consumer goods; as well as design-related inventions that had

been granted utility patents. About 46.1 percent of the patented inventions in France were

consumer final goods, a figure that did not diverge greatly from the 43.4 percent for the United

Kingdom. American patents by women were significantly less likely to be consumer-oriented,

but this category still comprised almost one third of all inventions. As might be expected, the


33
   The current study is based solely on utility patents (granted for new and useful functional improvements); and
does not include design patents, copyrights or trademarks. However, it is interesting to note that, in the United
States, patterns for design patents are similar to utility patents, since women accounted for just 3.2 percent of
designs granted in 1900, and 13.1 percent in 1995 (Howard and Eric Setliff 2000, p. 269). The law of product
designs and commercial art requires a precarious balance on the borders of patent, copyright, and trademark laws.
French protection of the work of silkworker guilds in 1711 evolved into the pioneering design law of 1806, but some
items could still be copyrighted. In England, designs were first covered by the copyright protection laws of 1787.
The 1862 case in the Circuit Court of New York, Jonas Drury and Lavinia Drury, His Wife, V. John Ewing and
Sarah 0. Ewing, His Wife, Et Al. illustrates that some design innovations were also covered by copyright (Lavinia
Drury had copyrighted a “system of taking measures for, and cutting ladies' dresses, with instructions for its
practical use,” which the defendants had infringed, and was issued an injunction.) In the 1880 census, Lavinia
Drury’s occupation is listed as an “inventor of scale for cutting garments,” and she exhibited both inventions at
exhibitions and county fairs in Ohio.
           The U.S. statute of 1842 allowed for the protection of industrial designs, but early patent examiners found
it difficult to distinguish between utility and aesthetics. Several hundred design patents actually covered trademarks,
and there was also overlap with utility patents: “The Patent Office, until of late, held that new shapes, patterns, etc.,
whose object and purpose is utility, were patentable as designs; but it now, and correctly, holds that only those
things,— mentioned in section 71 of the Act of July 8, 1870, as patentable subjects,—whose object and purpose is
aesthetic or ornamental, are properly patentable as designs.” (Simonds 1874, p. 166). Possibly the most iconic
design patent is US Patent D11,023, granted in 1879 to the French sculptor Auguste Bartholdi to protect his creation
of the Statue of Liberty.

                                                           23
proportion of utility patents that were related to changes in designs was lower than was the case

for consumer final goods, and these patterns were more similar across countries.

         Patents for corsets, bonnets, skirts, shoes, and other forms of apparel accounted for a fifth

of the patents filed in all three countries (Table 3).34 Some of these grants were for machinery

and producer inventions, but the majority of the improvements in clothing (broadly defined)

typify the sort of consumer final goods that were difficult to distinguish from designs. When

Beatrice McMaster of Surrey, England, obtained Patent No. 15, 739 (1916) for a glove for

waiters, she motivated her invention by noting that “cloths or serviettes rapidly become dirty and

are unsightly in appearance,” and employed the word “elegant” four times to describe her

invention, adding that she preferred to add an edging of lace when the item was used by a

woman. Other women’s patents similarly frequently appeared to conflate the item’s

attractiveness in appearance with its functional utility.35 Such inventors were arguably

responding to the nature of demand in the market for these items, since appealing appearance

comprised a valuable form of product differentiation for women’s clothing. Moreover, because

the potential market was large, such “feminine technologies” as corset innovations could prove

to be extremely profitable, encouraging several professional women inventors to specialize in


34
   Swanson (2011, p. 2) notes that “As American women donned their corsets, they had a daily intimate relationship
with a heavily patent-protected technology.” Male observers in all three countries made disparaging remarks about
this (factually true) tendency of women to contrive improvements in clothing. “There is no need to make mention
here of patents for mechanical inventions, taken on behalf of the woman when she runs a trading house or factory or
workshop. It is easy to see, in this case, the idea is due to a manager, a worker; ...Now, where we find the hand and
mind of the woman herself is in the patented manufacturing of new corsets.” de Neuville, A. “Le genie de
l’invention chez les femmes.” La Revue mondiale: ancienne Revue des revues 32, no. 1 (1900): 184–91.
35
   Searches in early patent specifications for high-frequency adjectives regarding aspects of beauty or appearance
results disproportionately in those by female inventors. See for instance, the specification for US 1234735 (1917)
filed by Mrs. Margaret Davidson of Philadelphia for an invention “to provide an attractive and useful head covering
chiefly designed for feminine wear,” which included nine phrases relating to un/attractiveness. She also noted that
“Of course, the quality and beauty of the cap will be entirely governed in direct ratio to its economic cost, for
instance, when the cap is employed for morning wear it will be relatively plain, but when a cap of the above
character is utilized as a dress garment it may be more or less elaborate in its aspect.” Ethel Eva Levien’s 1900
application was quickly processed within a month, and she was granted GB6929 for “improved women’s cycling
knickers,” that were “more graceful in appearance and more convenient in every way from a hygienic point.”

                                                         24
such creations (Khan 2005).36 In France, Mlle Caroline-Françoise Lukkow assigned the rights to

her orthopedic corset invention even before the patent was granted, to Auguste Daubian, a

medical doctor, indicating a strong belief in the commercial value of the improvement.

         A significant number of the inventors who obtained patents for consumer final goods and

design-related innovations were associated with the American Arts and Crafts movement. As

Zipf (2007) noted, invention and technological innovation were central to the Arts and Crafts

ideal.37 Mary Louise McLaughlin of Cincinnati, Ohio, an American ceramic painter and potter,

influenced numerous artists and potters throughout the country.38 Diffusion of technical

information at exhibitions was more likely in the case of changes of appearance that were

evident on their face, such as innovations in decorated ceramics. French potters had created an

underglaze technique which was on display at the 1876 exhibition in Philadelphia and, after

viewing the pieces, Mary Louise McLaughlin was able to replicate it. This re-invention was not

patented, probably because the technique was not sufficiently different from the French

precedents, but the method quickly spread among artists and artisans, and the products were

known throughout the United States as “Cincinnati faïence.” In 1894, she obtained a patent for a

new ceramics process involving “the application of decorations of clay or of clay mixed with

mineral colors to the inner surface of the mold, in order to produce, after casting, an inlay of clay

36
   Corset-related inventions comprised 5.4 percent of female patenting in France, and 5.8 percent in the United
States. However, although women filed corset improvements disproportionately, it should be noted that men
obtained approximately 90 percent of the total patents for corsets that were issued during the nineteenth century.
37
   Zipf (2007, p. 60) points out that “By participating in the Arts and Crafts movement, women inventors improved
their mechanical knowledge, found jobs to support the development of their ideas, and learned how innovation could
enhance artistic production. They also experienced less social pressure by capitalizing on their traditional social
roles. Because of these advantages, women inventors involved in the Arts and Crafts production were better
equipped to develop their ideas into useful and marketable products.”
38
   McLaughlin is regarded as “a leading exponent of the art pottery movement in the United States. Her
contributions, both technical and aesthetic, were critical to Cincinnati’s rise as a center of pottery production in the
United States” https://www.brooklynmuseum.org/eascfa/dinner_party/heritage_floor/mary_louise_mclaughlin. She
was one of the women who published manuals that played an important role in the diffusion of technical
information. (See, for instance, M. Louise McLaughlin, China Painting: A Practical Manual for the Use of Amateurs
in the Decoration of Hard Porcelain, Cincinnati: Robert Clarke, 1877; Susan Stuart Frackelton, Tried by Fire: A
Work on China Painting, New York: Appleton, 1886.)

                                                          25
in the body of the ware.” McLaughlin was a competitor of Maria Longworth Nichols, who

established the influential Rookwood Pottery in Cincinnati in 1880. Longworth herself obtained

patent US361231A in 1887 for “the chromatic ornamentation of pottery… By these means I

obtain greater depth and richness of color and more delicate blending of color with color, and

transition from shade to shade, than by any admixture of colors before application.”

         The Rookwood establishment was careful to get patent protection for its innovations, and

also acquired related patent assignments from outside inventors. At its peak, the pottery

employed several hundred men and women, who were trained in the firm’s methods, and also

proceeded to make their own innovations. Some of these artisans moved to other companies,

and even opened their own establishments, and this labour mobility created the possibility for

conflict over the ownership and use of intellectual property rights. Laura Anne Fry, a Rookwood

employee, designed a method of creating subtle gradations of colour using an atomizer, which

she patented in 1889.39 Fry had used the resources of the pottery over the course of several years

to experiment and perfect her method. After Fry moved from the Rookwood Pottery to work for

a competing firm, she filed a lawsuit against her former employers for their infringement of her

method. The court was instructed to consider “whether the step she took in the art required the

exercise of the inventive faculty”, and the case was dismissed on the grounds of want of

invention, despite the widespread use of the Fry method.40 Judge William H. Taft’s decision




39
   US399029A (1889) sprayed wet clay to the ceramic item: “As the coloring-matter is blown from the tube of the
atomizer and carried therefrom in a cloud of line, almost imperceptible, particles, it may be readily directed upon the
article in such manner as may be found best adapted to produce the desired effect, the application being freely made
where the color is to be intense, and more delicately made in proportion as the color effect is to be delicate, or
otherwise varied as the taste, skill, or ingenuity of the operator may dictate.”
40
   The Daily Evening Bulletin of San Francisco, California (Saturday, March 07, 1891; Issue 128), among other
newspapers, publicized her discoveries, reporting that “Miss Laura A. Fry of Chicago is a bright young artist who
has discovered a secret which has puzzled many a learned chemist. She has taken out a patent for applying color to
pottery and china… her invention is remarkable for its extreme simplicity and ease of application.”

                                                          26
noted that, even if Fry’s patent were upheld, her dealings with the Rookwood Pottery implied a

license for them to freely use her invention.41

        Many of these inventions were related to pursuits in which women specialized, and some

(predominantly male) patent examiners may have found it difficult to distinguish the degree of

novelty in such applications.42 For instance, Mary Tillinghast applied in 1881 for a patent to

protect an invention for “a new article of manufacture of artistic character, which may be termed

Needle-Woven Tapestry, … for purposes of decoration or for any artistic use it presents an

extremely rich appearance and is of great value.” Tillinghast, a notable artist in her own right,

had been a former associate and employee of Candace Wheeler, who is regarded as a leading

pioneer in the field of interior and textile designs. Wheeler also applied for a patent for an

invention regarding the “art of embroidering tapestries” in July 1881. This led the patent office

to declare an interference, which occurs when it seems that two individuals have made the same

invention. However, ultimately each woman was granted her own patent in 1882, implying that

further investigation had revealed the differences in their techniques.

        The ceramics industry and the Arts and Crafts movement highlight the close relationship

between many female-intensive creative pursuits and improvements in designs and consumer

final goods. Thousands of women joined formal and informal clubs, and increasingly attended

schools of art and design, gaining technical knowledge and learning-by-doing that contributed to

their inventive capital (Zipf 2007). A specialization by gender was evident in the pottery and

glass industry, where women worked as painters or decorators, whereas men dominated the more

technical aspect of firing the items in professional kilns. Women’s participation in the entire

process from shaping to firing the end product received a substantive boost when inventors such

41
 Fry v. Rookwood Pottery Co. (Circuit Court, S. D. Ohio, W. D. No. 4,531, December 1898) was initiated in 1892.
42
 Sarah J. Noyes, the first woman to be employed as a patent examiner in the United States, was hired in 1873.
Noyes, a specialist in chronological devices, was appointed First Assistant Examiner of the Electrical Division.

                                                       27
as Susan S. Frackelton and Ellen M. Ford obtained patents for small portable kilns that could be

used at home to finish decorated items. As Ford’s patent description noted: “it is no small

advantage to an artist anywhere to have the means of acquiring practice in firing, thus being able

to accomplish the entire work of decorating from beginning to end, and increasing his own

abilities and talents by the additional knowledge which such experience affords” (Patent 262391,

1882).

         Although these examples indicate the degree to which women were participating in

patents for consumer good inventions, it might be expected that their creativity extended well

beyond the boundaries circumscribed by formal intellectual property. The information from

exhibitions and prize-granting institutions testifies to creativity regarding items that were largely

unpatentable (Khan 2013). Sponsors of exhibitions like the Massachusetts Mechanics Institute

provided benefits to many women in terms of training, invention and commercialization. Their

efforts included allocating space for women at the annual exhibitions, education in design and

vocational training, and the provision of facilities so women could practice their craft. In the

case of the Maryland Institute, the influence of women members helped to ultimately change its

orientation from mechanics, to a school of art and design (Glickman 1993). However, the

majority of participants in annual exhibitions comprised middle-class women, many of whom

had no intention of engaging in the marketplace and had no further interest in appropriating

financial returns from their creativity. Their recorded activities offer valuable evidence

regarding the nature of female innovativeness within the household.

         As Table 4 indicates, the difference between the inventive activity of men and women is

especially striking in terms of items displayed at exhibitions, and this gender difference remains

statistically significant in multivariate regressions (not reported here). At the Royal Society of



                                                 28
Arts in England, approximately a half of the innovations for which men received awards were in

the consumer good and design-related categories, whereas almost all of the items females

submitted were consumer final products that included some aspect of improvements in design.43

Over ten percent of the premiums were given for contributions by women, and many received

favourable notice for excellence in such consumer goods as improvements in starch. In 1824,

awards were given to women from various parts of the United Kingdom who had made bonnets

using local materials. However, the majority of these female recipients obtained awards in “the

Polite Arts,” among which a typical example is Hannah Chambers’ design for a candelabra.

Mary Pingo, who won four design-related prizes between 1758 and 1762, was a member of the

noted Pingo family of engravers and medallists. Similarly, in France Madame Amélie de

Dietrich was credited with being the first to introduce decorative designs into industrial products

made from cast iron, in her innovative business enterprise.

         The contrast between men and women’s activity at exhibitions is even more evident

among the participants in the major American cities, as the lower quadrant of Table 4 shows.

Only 19.1 percent of men’s exhibits consisted of consumer final products, and even fewer of

them were changes in the design of products. By way of contrast, three quarters of the women’s

exhibits were consumer goods, and designs constituted an even larger proportion. The variance

in the technical inputs of items that women offered was extremely high, ranging from

43
  The Society of Arts adopted progressive policies towards women, and was the first such institution in Britain to
include women among its members. “The ingenious, of both sexes, are invited to submit their works and their
inventions to the inspection of the Society, …and thereby secure to themselves not only honour and profit, in the
present instance, but have also the pleasing consciousness that their names will stand recorded to posterity, among
those who have contributed to the increase of the Arts, the Manufactures, and the Commerce of their Country”
(Transactions of the Society of Arts, Volume 16, 1798, p. xvii). The original 1753 prospectus for the Society noted
that “Ladies as well as Gentlemen are invited into this Subscription, as there is no Reason to imagine they will be
behind Hand in a generous and sincere Regard for the Good of their Country.” Patrons of the Society included the
“bluestocking” Elizabeth Montagu who joined in 1758, the Countess of Denbigh, and the Duchess of
Northumberland (Wood 1913). Ann Birch Cockings (c. 1766-1844) was employed as a Housekeeper/Registrar of
the Society from 1802 to 1844, and wielded a great deal of influence that went well beyond her presumptive job
description.

                                                         29
embroidered rugs, pleating, and varieties of lace, featherwork, and artificial flowers (made from

wax, paper, silk, feathers, and other materials), to commercially successful dishwashers and

sewing machine components.44 Many of these changes in materials or designs or new colours

would not have met the rules for patentability, but the reports of the juries testify to the degree of

creativity evinced by the women who received awards for such improvements.

        Economic historians have shown that inventive activity and innovation responds to

incentives and to changes in the factors that influence the returns to the creators of new

technologies (Sokoloff 1988, Khan 2005). Like their male counterparts, women were able to

appropriate returns from their investments in creativity through a diverse array of channels.

Most notably, professional patentees like Helen Augusta Blanchard earned large fortunes from

royalties and assignments in several countries, and from the establishment of their own

manufacturing enterprises.45 To some extent, all women who chose to follow the official

procedures to obtain patents can be regarded as committed to inventive activity, and this is

especially true in Britain and France where patents were contingent on the payment of high fees.

The exhibitions data are more representative of the general population of creative women, whose

efforts varied in terms of market and technical value to a greater extent than for patentees. The

fraction of women exhibitors that earned medals was closer to the patenting rates: only 25 (0.5

percent) obtained a gold medal, 157 (3.1 percent) silver medals, and 86 (1.7 percent) received

bronze medals (Khan 2013). Relative to male exhibitors and to female patentees, women at

exhibitions were significantly less likely to receive the top financial awards and gold medals, in

44
   This commercial diversity is sometimes evident in the backgrounds of individuals, as evidenced by exhibitor Mme
Minnetta Mourgeanna, who was listed in city directories as an artist, photographer, hair dresser, and maker of hair
restorers and toiletries. Similarly, Mrs. A. O. Cook of San Francisco participated in numerous fairs, winning cash
prizes and medals for her innovations in preserved flowers, wax shells, statuary, hair jewelry and other decorative
devices.
45
   Helen Blanchard was associated with the Blanchard Overseaming Company of Philadelphia, and the Blanchard
Hosiery Machine Company. She obtained 21 U.S. sewing machine patents through 1895, and her patenting career
(which included patents in Britain) continued until the year before her death in 1916.

                                                        30
part due to the type and quality of their inventions.46 Still, for professional women who

participated in exhibitions, such recognition provided valuable advertisement and publicity that

could enhance their reputations, and lead to more profits for traders.47 For women who “kept

house” the returns were likely more variable, ranging from enhanced personal and household

utility, to greater influence among their peers.

        At a national level, some of these inventions were responsible for increases in market

demand and supply, export industries, and employment for children, men and women. An

example is the industry for hats and bonnets in the United States, which in 1830 amounted to $10

million with exports of half that value (Case 1872). Scientific American (vol. 1, 1859, p. 206)

published the first-hand account of twelve-year-old Betsy Metcalf, who independently devised a

method to make hats from braided straw that she and her aunt had bleached with the smoke from

“brimstone.” She earned as much as $1.50 per day for several years, and instructed residents in

nearby towns, leading to a flourishing women’s bonnet industry in the region. Sophia

Woodhouse of Connecticut similarly obtained a large silver medal and twenty guineas from the

Royal Society of Arts, for information about another type of bleached straw material that could

be used to make bonnets, and she also obtained an American patent for the process. Numerous

other women obtained premiums and cash awards for unpatentable changes in materials




46
   The 1850 exhibition of the Maryland Institute for the Promotion of Mechanic Arts rewarded creativity by gender:
they presented men with gold and silver medals, whereas women received butter knives, ladles, teaspoons, pencils
and thimbles.
47
   For instance, Dr Carrie Wolfsbruck, a young and attractive dentist, gained an international reputation (probably
the first and only celebrity dentist!) after she exhibited her work on artificial teeth, fillings, and dentures.
Wolfsbruck, the first woman to graduate from NY State Dental School, earned her degree in 1889. (She was likely
born in 1863, as shown in the 1900 census, although she was cavalier in the declaration of her date of birth on her
several passport applications.) The British Journal of Dental Science, vol. XL (Jan-Dec. 1897) featured her in an
article on “Women who Pull Teeth,” noting that “This lady has received a medal for artificial work.” Newspaper
articles across the country mentioned her, and amusingly reported her winnings in Monte Carlo. Wolfsbruck
progressed from having a practice in an unfashionable part of New York city to an office on Madison Avenue.

                                                         31
associated with new or improved products that were valued in the household and in the

marketplace.


CONCLUSION
                                            “The economy of the household is generally as much the source
                                            of family wealth as the labor and enterprise of man”
                                                    --(Women’s Rights Convention, New York, 1852)

Technology comprises a major factor in economic growth and transformation, and feminist

researchers point to the central role of gender in the history of technology. According to Bray

(2007, p. 38), “in the Western nations which pioneered industrialization … technology is firmly

coded male.” Historians have called for more studies that expand the scope of technology

research beyond hardware, to incorporate the skills and knowledge that belong to women.48

Many reject implicit or explicit assumptions that men are producers of machines, whereas

women feature exclusively as consumers of technology. Such concerns are reflected in the

dissatisfaction of economists with the current state of theoretical and empirical approaches to

technology, especially in the effort to measure and account for innovations that transform or

adapt characteristics of existing products and new goods.

        This paper contributes to the existing literature by offering the first large-scale empirical

study of women inventors in Britain, France and the United States, during the period of the first

and second industrial revolutions. The panel dataset of over 12,200 observations includes patent

records, prizes and exhibits at industrial fairs and related institutions, as well as biographical

information from city directories and population censuses. Although it is inherently impossible

to determine the representativeness of such a sample relative to the entire population of

innovators, we would expect that these combined data would offer broader insights than could be

48
  Wajcman (2010) notes that in conventional approaches “technology tends to be thought of in terms of industrial
machinery and military weapons, the tools of work and war, overlooking other technologies that affect most aspects
of everyday life. The very definition of technology, in other words, is cast in terms of male activities.”

                                                       32
obtained from smaller numbers of individuals and inventions. Together, the combined samples

reflect the different facets of inventive activity, by capturing machine-oriented discoveries that

were likely to be protected by patents, as well as the unpatentable inventions and innovations that

women were making. Moreover, the analysis allows for the systematic assessment of women’s

creativity within the nonmarket household sector.

       Economists have investigated the “gender gap” in many contexts, including that of

patenting (Ding et. al 2006). Whittington and Smith-Doerr (2008) find that differences in the

organization of work settings affect the likelihood of women’s involvement in scientific

patenting. Similarly, this study shows that patent systems were associated with differences in the

inventive activity of women, relative to institutions with less exclusive rules. Patent systems in

Britain and France, which required exorbitant fees and costs as a precondition for the grant of

property rights in invention, served as a filter which excluded or deterred women without

financial backing or connections, and in part resulted in lower proportions of patents for

household inventions in these countries. Exhibitions, on the other hand, were administered by

committees and judges, who imposed their own arbitrary standards on prizes, perhaps in part

accounting for the lower propensity of women to gain the highest awards. Nevertheless,

participation in these events could also lead to nonmonetary returns or gains in reputation that

benefited manufacturers, professionals, and homemakers alike.

       The results in Britain, France and the United States together challenge the standard

conclusions about the nature of women’s economic and social involvement in the nineteenth

century, and their role in industrialization. Middle-class women did not choose to retreat away

from the marketplace and from participation outside the domestic sphere, as many have claimed.

The experience of women in France, in particular, highlights the hidden nature of their extensive



                                                 33
participation in business, entrepreneurship, and management oversight of sole proprietorships, as

well as large-scale corporations. It is worth noting that their inventive and commercial

endeavours were not limited to a specific period, but ranged over the entire life cycle, and were

typically not interrupted by marriage. Indeed, many of their discoveries were motivated by the

challenges they encountered in the course of their duties as mothers, wives and managers of

households.

       One of the major difficulties in accounting for the role of women in technological

progress arises because their contributions defy unique categorizations and lie at the intersection

of well-defined conventional boundaries. The distinction between consumption and production

becomes blurred when the process of consuming creates insights that allow users to transform

the set of available goods. In particular, the experience of women inventors who did not work

outside the home illustrates the skills and creativity that can be derived from learning by using.

Perhaps the most valuable result of the empirical analysis of women’s patenting and creativity is

that it highlights the prevalence of innovations in consumer goods and designs. These extensive

quantitative records, that allow us to trace so many thousands of examples of female ingenuity

within the home and market, support the conclusion that women in general tended to specialize

in technological change that is embedded in new varieties of standard goods, and subtle changes

in function and perceived value that accompany design improvements at the interstices of art and

technology. A pessimistic perspective is therefore that it is unlikely that empirical analysis will

ever be able to fully measure the contributions of such designing women. A more optimistic

conclusion is that these findings suggest that economic research underestimates the extent of

technological progress and advances in consumer welfare attained within households and the

market economy.



                                                 34
    Figure 1 a) Britain: Women and Total Patenting, 1800-1900

        350                                                            16000


        300                                                            14000

                                                                       12000
        250
                                                                       10000
        200
Women




                                                                                   Total
                                                                       8000
        150
                                                                       6000
        100
                                                                       4000

         50                                                            2000

          0                                                            0
              1800 1810 1820 1830 1840 1850 1860 1870 1880 1890 1900

                                     Women           Total




    Figure 1 b) France: Women and Total Patenting, 1791-1855

        120                                                                 4500

                                                                            4000
        100
                                                                            3500

        80                                                                  3000
Women




                                                                            2500
                                                                                    Total




        60
                                                                            2000

        40                                                                  1500

                                                                            1000
        20
                                                                            500

         0                                                                  0
              1800 1805 1810 1815 1820 1825 1830 1835 1840 1845 1850 1855

                                     Women           Total




                                          35
               Figure 1 c) United States: Women and Total Patenting, 1850-1895

                       350                                               30000

                       300                                               25000

                       250
                                                                         20000
                       200
               Women




                                                                                 Total
                                                                         15000
                       150
                                                                         10000
                       100

                        50                                               5000


                         0                                               0



                                       U.S. women       U.S. Total




           Fig 1 d) Patenting by Women in Britain and the United States, 1830-1895

                       350

                       300

                       250

                       200

                       150

                       100

                       50

                        0
                             1851




                             1866
                             1830
                             1833
                             1836
                             1839
                             1842
                             1845
                             1848

                             1854
                             1857
                             1860
                             1863

                             1869
                             1872
                             1875
                             1878
                             1881
                             1884
                             1887
                             1890
                             1893




                                             U.S.      U.K.



Notes and Sources: See Appendix. The data for women patentees from France and the United

States consist of all patents granted. The information for women patentees in the United

Kingdom consists of a random sample.

                                                36
                         TABLE 1: SUMMARY STATISTICS
          PATENTING BY WOMEN INVENTORS IN BRITAIN, FRANCE AND AMERICA

                     US                         UK                            FRANCE


Multiple Patenting
                     Patents   Percent          Patents         Percent       Patents   Percent
One patent filed     2683      66.6             2133            69            368       36.8
Two or Three         874       21.7             659             21.3          346       34.6
Four to Nine         324       8                285             9.2           227       22.7
Ten or More          149       3.7              14              0.5           60        5.6


Coinventors
                     Patents   Percent          Patents         Percent       Patents   Percent
Female, Related      19        6                45                      5.8   20        7.8
Male, Related        115       36.3             214                    27.6   99        38.8
Female, Unrelated    35        11               84                     10.8   36        14.1
Male, Unrelated      148       46.7             432                    55.7   100       39.2
No coinventors       3857      92.4             2526                   81.7   746       74.5


Marital Status
                     Patents   Percent          Patents         Percent       Patents   Percent
Single               127       21.2             --              --            296       29.6
Married              240       40               --              --            414       41.4
Widowed              233       38.8             --              --            290       29


Foreign Patents      Patents   Percent          Patents         Percent       Patents   Percent
Women                167       4                          565          18.3   45        4.5
Total                34668     6.3                   3483              22.1   80        7.5


Notes and Sources: Coinventors’ relationships were determined by whether the individuals had the same

surname, which will tend to be an underestimate. See Appendix for sources.




                                                     37
                                    TABLE 2
    DISTRIBUTION OF OCCUPATIONS AMONG WOMEN PATENTEES AND EXHIBITORS,
                  IN BRITAIN, FRANCE AND THE UNITED STATES
                                  (percentages)


                                    U.S.                    U.K.                  FRANCE



      OCCUPATIONS               Patents     Exhibits     Patents            Patents         Exhibits

      Artisan/worker                 26.9       11.7          8.8                 10.6            8.8

      Artist/designer                 6.4       32.9            7                      0          5.7

      Businesswoman                  18.4        2.5          5.3                      9          7.6

      Corsetmaker                     9.7        3.2            7                     9.8              5

      Manufacturer
                                     19.3       28.6         24.6                 47.4           62.6

      Mechanical                      3.5        3.9          5.3                      0          4.1

      Professional/elite             11.1        7.8         35.1                 17.9                 6

      Teacher                         4.7        9.5            7                     5.3         0.3



      Percentage who did not

      work outside the home       33.7       41.1           45.7                38.0           50.5



Notes and Sources: The percentages for jobs outside the home are based on all women with listed

occupations, exclusive of those who did not work outside the home (keeping house, at home, none).

Occupations in the United States were obtained from city directories, and from the population census.

British occupations were included in patent documents and in the population census. French occupations

were drawn from the patent documents and from the reports of the exhibitions. See appendix for sources.



                                                    38
                                          TABLE 3
                INDUSTRIAL DISTRIBUTION OF PATENTS AND EXHIBITS BY WOMEN
                                        (percentages)



                                            U.S.                          U.K.              FRANCE



INDUSTRY                        Patents     Exhibits            Patents   Exhibits          Patents         Exhibits

Agriculture                           2.1           1.8             1.8           1.1                 1.7       0.3

Apparel                              17.3          20.3            20.7           6.5                 19         25


Chemicals/Medical                     8.3           3.6             7.8           0.0                 12        5.0

Machines, Engines and

Transport                            21.3           1.2            17.2           1.5                 7.6       1.7

Food                                  0.7           2.7             4.7           0.0               10.3        3.1

Household/Building                   32.1          31.7            23.0           0.0               17.8          9

Industrial                            4.2           2.4            13.6           1.5                 8.6      11.9


Arts and Education                    5.4          32.7             5.4          86.7                 5.0      14.6

Textiles                              5.8           1.1             3.6           2.7               15.3       28.9

Miscellaneous                         2.8           2.6             2.3           0.0                 2.7       0.5




    Notes and sources: Entries were allocated to industry of final use. See Appendix for sources.




                                                          39
                                                   TABLE 4

        PATENTS AND EXHIBITS: CONSUMER FINAL GOODS AND DESIGN INNOVATIONS



                                        U.S.                          U.K                   FRANCE

PATENTS                     Number      Percent            Number     Percent               Number       Percent

Women

Consumer final products           704       30.7              1340              43.4             461         46.1

Design innovations                458       19.9               480              15.5             222         22.2



EXHIBITS                    Number      Percent            Number     Percent               Number       Percent

Women

Consumer final products         2250        74.4               243              92.4             394         61.1

Design innovations              2468        81.6               246              93.5             195         30.2

Men

Consumer final products           593       19.1              1210              54.9             -----       ----


Design innovations                380       12.2              1190              54.3             -----       ----




  Notes and Sources:

  Consumer final goods exclude furniture and appliances. Design innovations relate to all entries, including

  capital goods. Percent refers to the percentage of total observations for patents and exhibits by gender

  (women’s patents; women’s exhibits; men’s patents; men’s exhibits.) See Appendix for sources.




                                                      40
                                             APPENDIX

                                    SOURCES OF DATA FOR PROJECT



DATA                     Location          Period        Total Sample    Women

                                                         Number         Number   Percent

UNITED STATES


PATENTS                  National          1790-1895     22,000         4200*    0.8

                                                         (of 561805)

PRIZES

American Institute       New York          1847-1870     5656           38       0.7

Centennial Exhibition    Pennsylvania      1876                         641

Exhibition of Industry   New York          1853                         104

Franklin Institute       Pennsylvania      1840-1897     5068           106      2.1

Mechanics Institute      Massachusetts     1837-1874     4617           596      12.9

Mechanics Institute      Ohio              1850-1881     3772           356      9.4

Mechanics Institute      California        1858-1897     4855           787      16.2

Mechanics Institute      Missouri          1858-1870     2272           296      13.0

World's Fair             Illinois          1893                         102



Total U.S. Prizes                                        26,240         3026




                                                    41
FRANCE

PATENTS                   National           1791-1855        5000              1001*       2.4
                                                              (of 41808)
PRIZES

Exhibitions of            National           1798-1850        (21833)           382         1.7

National Industry

Paris Exposition          International      1855             (10731)           263         2.5

Total Prizes                                                                    645


BRITAIN



PATENTS                   National           1750-1900        15,700            3091        1.1
                                                              (of 288046)

PRIZES

Royal Society of Arts     National           1750-1850        2466              263         10.7

BRITAIN, FRANCE,

U.S.



TOTAL PATENTS                                                 42,700            8289

TOTAL PRIZES                                                  28,706            3934

TOTAL                                                         71,406            12223

Notes and Sources:

The data in parentheses include total populations of patents or prizes which are not included in the

dataset. *Patents for women in the United States and France comprise the total numbers filed in each

country. The data from the exhibitions and other prize-granting institutions, U.S. general patent grants,

and British patents were obtained from random samples.




                                                    42
BIBLIOGRAPHY

Berg, M., “Product innovation in core consumer industries in eighteenth-century Britain,” in M.

Berg and K. Bruland, eds., Technological revolutions in Europe: historical perspectives

(Cheltenham,1998):138-60.

Beattie, Cordelia and Matthew Frank Stevens (eds), Married women and the law in premodern

northwest Europe, Woodbridge : Boydell Press, 2013.

Bianchi, M., “Novelty, preferences and fashion: when goods are unsettling,” J. Econ. Behavior &

Organization, 47 (2002): 1-18.

Bils, Mark, and Peter J. Klenow, "The acceleration in variety growth." The American Economic

Review 91.2 (2001): 274-280.

Blanc, Étienne, Traité de la contrefaçon en tous genres et de sa poursuite en justice, Paris: H.

Plon, 1855.

Blaszczyk, Regina Lee, Imagining Consumers: Design and Innovation from Wedgwood to

Corning, JHU Press, 2000.

Bray, Francesca. "Gender and technology." Women, science, and technology: a reader in

feminist science studies, 3rd edn. Routledge, New York (2013): 370-384.

Bray, Francesca. "Gender and Technology." Annual Review of Anthropology 36 (2007): 37-53.

Bresnahan, Timothy F. and Robert J. Gordon (eds), The Economics of New Goods, Chicago:

University of Chicago Press, 2008.

Bresnahan, T. F. and Gordon, R. J., 'Introduction', in T. F. Bresnahan and R. J. Gordon, eds.,

The economics of new goods (Chicago and London, 1997), pp. 1-28.

Bulletin des lois de la République Française, various years.




                                                 43
Catherine Cangany. "Fashioning Moccasins: Detroit, the Manufacturing Frontier, and the Empire

of Consumption, 1701–1835." The William and Mary Quarterly 69.2 (2012): 265-304. Web.

Leon Case et al., The Great Industries of the United States: Being an Historical Summary of the

Origin, Growth, and Perfection of the Chief Industrial Arts of this Country, Hartford: J. B. Burr

& Hyde, 1872.

Catalogue Officiel, Exposition des Produits de L’industrie de Toutes les Nations, 1855, 2e

edition, Paris, E. Panis, 1856.

Census Office of the United States, Manufactures of the United States in 1860: Compiled from

the Original Returns of the Eighth Census, James Madison Edmunds, U.S. Government Printing

Office, 1865.

Christie‐Robin, Julia, et al., "From Bustles to Bloomers: Exploring the Bicycle's Influence on

American Women's Fashion, 1880–1914," Journal of American Culture 35.4 (2012): 315-331.

Clark, Linda L. Women and Achievement in Nineteenth-Century Europe, Cambridge:

Cambridge University Press, 2008.

De Colmont, Achille, Histoire des Expositions des Produits de l'Industrie Français, Paris:

Guillaumin, 1855.

Cordato, Mary Frances, Representing the Expansion of Woman's Sphere: Women's Work and

Culture at the World's Fairs of 1876, 1893, and 1904. New York University, 1989.

Cowan, Ruth Schwartz, "From Virginia Dare to Virginia Slims: women and technology in

American life." Technology and Culture (1979): 51-63.

Darney, Virginia Grant, "Women and World's Fairs: American International Expositions, 1876-

1904" (Ph. D. dissertation, Emory University, 1982).




                                                44
De Neuville, A., “Le genie de l’invention chez les femmes,” La Revue mondiale: ancienne

Revue des revues, 1900, 184-190.

Ding WW, Murray F, Stuart TE. Gender differences in patenting in the academic life sciences.

Science. 2006 Aug 4;313(5787):665-7.

Ellis, Anita J. The Ceramic Career of M. Louise McLaughlin. Ohio University Press, 2003.

Gamber, Wendy. ""Reduced to Science": Gender, Technology, and Power in the American

Dressmaking Trade, 1860-1910." Technology and Culture 36.3 (1995): 455-82.

Gearhart-Sema, Terra L. "Women's Work, Women's Knowing: Intellectual Property and the

Recognition of Women's Traditional Knowledge." Yale Journal of Law & Feminism 21.2

(2016): 374-403.

Glickman, Gena Debra, A study of the role of women in the transformation of the curriculum at

the Maryland Institute for the Promotion of Mechanic Arts from 1825-1875, University of

Maryland College Park, PhD Dissertation.

Goldin, Claudia, "The Economic Status of Women in the Early Republic: Quantitative

Evidence," Journal of Interdisciplinary History 16 (1986): 377-93.

Grossman, Gene M. and Helpman, Elhanan. Innovation and growth in the global economy.

Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1991.

Gualerzi, Davide, “Growth theory, structural dynamics and the analysis of consumption,” in

Structural Dynamics and Economic Growth, (eds. Richard Arena, Pier Luigi Porta) Cambridge

University Press: Cambridge, UK, 2012.

Howard, Ella and Eric Setliff, “`In A Man’s World’: Women Industrial Designers,” in Kirkham,

Pat (ed), Women Designers in the USA, 1900-2000: Diversity and Difference, New Haven: Yale

University Press, 2000: 269-290.



                                               45
Hunt, Jennifer, et al. "Why are women underrepresented amongst patentees?" Research Policy,

42.4 (2013): 831-843.

Khan, B. Zorina, The Democratization of Invention: Patents and Copyrights in American

Economic Development. NBER and Cambridge University Press (2005).

Khan, B. Zorina, “Invisible Women: Entrepreneurship, Innovation and Family Firms in

Nineteenth-Century France,” Journal of Economic History, vol. 76 (1) 2016a: 163-195.

Khan, B. Zorina, “Prestige and Profit: The Royal Society of Arts and Incentives for Innovation,

1750-1850,” unpublished working paper, 2016b.

Khan, B. Zorina, “Inventing Prizes: A Historical Perspective on Innovation Awards and

Technology Policy,” Business History Review, vol. 89 (4) 2015: 631-660.

Khan, B. Zorina, “Inventing in the Shadow of the Patent System: Evidence from 19th-Century

Patents and Prizes for Technological Innovation,” NBER Working Paper No. w20731, December

2014.

Khan, B. Zorina, “Of Time and Space: Technological Spillovers among Patents and Unpatented

Innovations during Early U.S. Industrialization,” NBER Working Paper No. 20732, December

2014b.

Khan, B. Zorina, “Selling Ideas: An International Perspective on Patenting and Markets for

Technology, 1790-1930,” Business History Review, vol. 87 (Spring) 2013a: 39–68.

Khan, B. Zorina, “Going for Gold: Industrial Fairs and Innovation in the Nineteenth-Century

United States,” Special Issue on Innovation without Patents, Revue Economique, vol. 64 (1)

2013b: 89-114.

Khan, B. Zorina, “Premium Inventions: Patents and Prizes as Incentive Mechanisms in Britain

and the United States, 1750-1930” in Dora L. Costa and Naomi R. Lamoreaux (eds),



                                               46
Understanding Long-Run Economic Growth: Geography, Institutions, and the Knowledge

Economy, NBER and University of Chicago (2011): 205-234.

Khan, B. Zorina, “Looking Backward: Founding Choices in Innovation and Intellectual Property

Protection,” in D. Irwin and R. Sylla, eds., Founding Choices: American Economic Policy in the

1790s, Chicago, IL: NBER and University of Chicago, 2010: 315-342.

Khan, B. Zorina and Kenneth L. Sokoloff, “Institutions and Technological Innovation during

Early Economic Growth: Evidence from the Great Inventors of the United States, 1790–1930,”

in Institutions and Economic Growth, ed. Theo Eicher and Cecilia Garcia-Penalosa (Cambridge,

Mass., 2006), 123–58.

Khan, B. Zorina and Kenneth L. Sokoloff, “Institutions and Democratic Invention in 19th

Century America,” American Economic Review, vol. 94 (May) 2004: 395-401.

Khan, B. Zorina. "“Not for Ornament”: Patenting Activity by Nineteenth-Century Women

Inventors." Journal of Interdisciplinary History 31 (2) 2000: 159-195.

Khan, B. Zorina. "Married women's property laws and female commercial activity: Evidence

from United States Patent Records, 1790–1895." The Journal of Economic History 56 (2) 1996:

356-388.

Khan, B. Zorina and Kenneth L. Sokoloff, "`Schemes of Practical Utility': Entrepreneurship and

Innovation among `Great Inventors' During Early American Industrialization, 1790-1865,"

Journal of Economic History, vol. 53 (2) 1993: 289-307.

Lamoreaux, Naomi R. and Kenneth L. Sokoloff, “Long-Term Change in the Organization of

Inventive Activity,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 93 (Nov. 1996): 12686–

92.

Macdonald, Anne L., Feminine Ingenuity: Women and Invention in America, New York, 1992.



                                               47
Martineau, Rowena, “Science and Technology: Where Are the Women?” Agenda: Empowering

Women for Gender Equity, No. 38, Techno-Innovation (1998): 12-18.

McGaw, Judith A. “Inventors and Other Great Women: Toward a Feminist History of

Technological Luminaries”. Technology and Culture 38.1 (1997): 214–231.

Moser, Petra and Tom Nicholas, “Prizes, Publicity, and Patents: Non-Monetary Awards as a

Mechanism to Encourage Innovation,” Journal of Industrial Economics, 61 (2013): 763–88.

Owen, Nancy E., Rookwood and the Industry of Art: Women, Culture, and Commerce, 1880–

1913. Athens, Ohio: Ohio University Press, 2001.

Pasinetti, Luigi L., Structural Change and Economic Growth (1981).

Perpigna, Antoine, Manuel des inventeurs et des brevetés (8e édition), Paris: A. Perpigna, 1852.

Romer, Paul M. “Endogenous technological change,” Journal of Political Economy,

98(5) 1990, Part 2: S71–S102.

Shephard, Arlesa J. "Waterproof Dress Patents as Evidence of Design and Function From 1880

Through 1895." Clothing and Textiles Research Journal 30.3 (2012): 183-199.

Simonds, William Edgar, Manual of Patent Law: With an Appendix Upon the Sale of Patents,

New York: The Author, 1874.

Sokoloff, Kenneth L., “Inventive Activity in Early Industrial America: Evidence from Patent

Records, 1790–1846,” Journal of Economic History, XLVIII (1988): 813–850.

Stephan, Paula E., and Asmaa El-Ganainy, "The entrepreneurial puzzle: explaining the gender

gap," Journal of Technology Transfer, 32.5 (2007): 475-487.

Swanson Kara W., “Getting a grip on the corset: gender, sexuality and patent law,” Yale journal

of law and feminism, vol. 23 (1) 2011: 23-57.

Styles, J., “Product innovation in early modern London,” P. & P., 168 (2001): 125-31.



                                                48
Trajtenberg, Manuel, “The welfare analysis of product innovations, with an application to

computed tomography scanners,” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 97 (2)1989:444-79.

Wajcman, Judy. "Reflections on gender and technology studies: in what state is the art?." Social

studies of science 30.3 (2000): 447-464.

Wajcman, Judy, “Feminist theories of technology,” Cambridge Journal of Economics, Vol. 34,

No. 1 (January 2010): 143-152.

Walls, Nina De Angeli, Art, Industry, and Women’s Education: The Philadelphia School of

Design for Woemn, 1848-1932, PhD Dissertation, University of Delaware, 1995.

Warner, Deborah, “Women Inventors at the Centennial,” in Martha Moore Trescott (ed.),

Dynamos and Virgins Revisited: Women and Technological Change in History: An Anthology

(Metuchen, N.J., 1979), 102–119.

Whittington, Kjersten Bunker, and Laurel Smith-Doerr. "Women inventors in context:

Disparities in patenting across academia and industry." Gender & Society, vol 22 (2) 2008: 194-

218.

Zipf, Catherine W., Professional Pursuits: Women and the American Arts and Crafts Movement

Univ. of Tennessee Press, 2007.




                                               49
