                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               DIVERSITY IN INNOVATION

                                      Paul A. Gompers
                                      Sophie Q. Wang

                                     Working Paper 23082
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w23082


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   January 2017




Support for this research was provided by the Division of Research at the Harvard Business
School. Lauren Cohen provided helpful comments and suggestions. Kevin Huang provided
excellent research assistance. Paul Gompers has invested in and consulted for venture capital
firms. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Paul A. Gompers and Sophie Q. Wang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Diversity in Innovation
Paul A. Gompers and Sophie Q. Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 23082
January 2017
JEL No. G2,G24,G3,J01,J11,J16,J24,J7,O15,O3

                                          ABSTRACT

In this paper we document the patterns of labor market participation by women and ethnic
minorities in venture capital firms and as founders of venture capital-backed startups. We show
that from 1990-2016 women have been less than 10% of the entrepreneurial and venture capital
labor pool, Hispanics have been around 2%, and African Americans have been less than 1%.
This is despite the fact that all three groups have much higher representation in education
programs that lead to careers in these sectors as well as having higher representation in other
highly-compensated professions. Asians, on the other hand, have much higher representation in
the venture capital and entrepreneurial sector than their overall percentages in the labor force. We
explore potential supply side explanations including both education attainment as well as relevant
prior job experience. We also explore the correlation between diversity and state-level variations.
Finally, we discuss how these patterns are consistent with homophily-based hiring and
homophily-induced information flows about career choices. We end the paper by discussing
areas for future research.


Paul A. Gompers
Harvard Business School
Baker Library 263
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
pgompers@hbs.edu

Sophie Q. Wang
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center
1805 Cambridge Street
Cambridge, MA 02138DRESS HERE
sophieqzwang@gmail.com




A online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w23082
1     INTRODUCTION                                             3
2     DATA CONSTRUCTION                                        3
3     GENDER AND ETHNICITY TRENDS FOR ENTREPRENEURS AND VCS    4
3.1     Summary Statistics                                     4
3.2     Time Series Trends                                     5
    3.2.1 Gender Trends                                        6
    3.2.2 Ethnicity Trends                                     6
    3.2.3 Gender and Ethnicity Interactions                    7
3.3     Industry Patterns                                      8
    3.3.1 Gender Patterns                                      8
    3.3.2 Ethnicity Patterns                                   9
4     POTENTIAL EXPLANATIONS                                  10
4.1     Potential Supply-Side Explanations                    10
    4.1.1 Overview of Education and Employment Statistics     10
    4.1.2 Additional Data Descriptions                        12
    4.1.3 Gender Trends                                       12
      4.1.3.1   The Case for Women Entrepreneurs              12
      4.1.3.2   The Case for Women Venture Capitalists        13
    4.1.4 Ethnicity Trends                                    14
      4.1.4.1   The Case for Minority Entrepreneurs           14
      4.1.4.2   The Case for Minority Venture Capitalists     15
4.2     Potential Social and Cultural Explanations            17
    4.2.1 Overview of State-Level Variations                  17
    4.2.2 Variations of State Level Characteristics           18
      4.2.2.1   Political Leanings                            18
      4.2.2.2   Unionization Rates                            19
      4.2.2.3   Religious Affiliations                        20
      4.2.2.4   GDP Per Capita                                20
      4.2.2.5   Improvements in Education                     21
      4.2.2.6   Parental Benefits                             21
5     DISCUSSION OF POTENTIAL MODELS AND CAUSAL INFERENCE     22
6     CONCLUSION                                              25




                                               2
1    Introduction
        Two of the most striking patterns in labor economics in the past half-century have been the increase

in female labor market participation along with the growing ethnic diversity of the American workforce.

Given the rising rate of labor participation among females in all parts of the world, there has not been a larger

factor affecting global labor supply and demand dynamics. As an example of the magnitude, female labor

market participation in the US has nearly doubled from 1950, going from 33% to 57% in 2016.1 Further, the

overall US increase has been shared broadly across fields in the economy, including the professional fields of

law, medicine, and business. Similarly, the growth in Asian, African American, and Hispanic populations in

the US has led to dramatic increases in the diversity of the labor pool.

        In this survey we document a sharply contrasting phenomenon in the innovation sector which we

identify as both young entrepreneurial firms (idea generation), and the venture capital industry (capital

provision). After carefully documenting these contrasting trends in innovation, we examine both supply and

demand factors that could help explain the substantial underrepresentation of woman, African American, and

Hispanics. Finally, we end by discussing potential areas for future research in this area. Our goal is two-fold.

First, we seek to shed light on the facts. What have been the dynamics of participation for women and

minorities over the past twenty five years in the venture capital and entrepreneurial sectors? Second, we hope

to offer some potential hypotheses for the patterns we see. Our goal is not to provide definitive explanations

for the patterns. Rather we hope our results can provide the foundation for meaningful research on these

important questions.

        We motivate our analysis by examining patterns of female and minority participation in the venture

capital and entrepreneurial markets over time. Additionally, we compare these patterns to the participation

rates in other highly-compensated professions. The time series patterns and cross sectional comparisons for

each group motivate our search for potential explanations for the different experience of women and

minorities in the innovation sector.




1  United States Bureau of Labor Statistics (2016) http://www.bls.gov/opub/ted/2000/feb/wk3/art03.htm ,
https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/LNS11300002).

                                                        3
        Figure 1 shows the evolution of female labor market participation in professional industries in the US

along with total US female labor market participation. The figure shows our estimate of the relative fraction

of each category entering the labor force or a particular profession who are female. We think looking at flow

variables is more relevant to changing participation barriers because the current stock of labor within a

profession represents the historical experience with past barriers to entry. As can be clearly seen, total female

labor market participation has stayed roughly constant over the 25 years since the early 1990s: roughly 45-

46% of the total US labor force was female. Moreover, while the professional fields of medicine and law

started the period well below economy-wide levels of female participation (dark and light violet dashed lines,

respectively), they both saw a marked increase through the present day. In fact, not only have they fully

converged, but at present both stand slightly above the economy-wide rate of 46.78%; 49.84% for medicine

and 50.84% for law. From starting points of just 26.58% (for medicine) and 35.52% (for law) in the early

1990s, these increases represent substantial shifts in terms of economic magnitude in such a short period of

time. Figure 1 also shows the evolution of female entry into the innovation sector over this time period,

showing in solid blue entrepreneurs and in red venture capital. In stark contrast to other professional fields,

women in the innovation sector both began the early 1990s at much lower levels, and did not show nearly the

same convergence tendency – ending the period at roughly the same 10% levels. We will explore, document,

and dissect this empirical fact in greater detail throughout the paper, but it is worth noting that these trends

are occurring over a time period during which, by most metrics, “innovation activity” became a more central

part of the US economy (e.g., employment and wages in the innovation economy have grown at a much

faster rate than the overall economy). Similarly, research has shown that the venture capital and

entrepreneurial sectors are responsible for large wealth accumulation and job creation given their rapid

growth. Finally, in many top business schools, jobs in the venture capital and entrepreneurial sector are

among the most highly sought positions.

        One potential argument might be that the finance- and business-related sectors have seen this same

lack of female participation growth. Figure 2 explores this hypothesis, comparing innovation sectors to the

two largest finance and business-related professions produced in business school over this time period:


                                                       4
consulting and investment banking. Figure 2 looks at how the female participation entry rates in venture

capital and entrepreneurship from 2010-2015 compare to women’s entry rates into consulting and investment

banking. The lower level of female labor market participation does not appear in other finance-related

professions: consulting and investment banking have three to four times the female participation rates as

innovation, and much closer to economy-wide levels

        Figures 3 and 4 explore the same patterns in the African American population. Figure 3 shows the

African American labor market entry participation has increased from about 11% in 1990 to 12% in 2010-

2015. The share of undergraduate degrees being granted to African Americans students increased by more

than 50%, from 6% of BAs granted in 1990 to 9.2% in 2010-2015. The pattern of African American entry

into the legal and medical professions has not changed dramatically over the 25 year period, remaining around

5% in each profession.      Similarly, the rate of African American participation in venture capital and

entrepreneurial sectors has not grown either. Strikingly, however, the rate is substantially lower than their

participation in law or medicine, always less than 1%.

        Figure 4 compares the African American entry participation rates for venture capital and

entrepreneurship to consulting and investment banking for the most recent five year period, 2010-2015.

Figure 4 shows that the entrepreneurial and venture capital entry rates for African Americans (0.83% and

0.67% respectively) are an order of magnitude lower than their participation in entry to consulting and

investment banking (8.8% and 6.09% respectively.) Consulting and investment banking participation rates

are also much closer to those economy-wide. Overall, the results suggest that in other business-related fields,

African Americans have increased in representation dramatically, while their fraction of the innovation sector

has remained small.

        The time-series for Asian labor market participation is shown in Figures 5 and 6. The pattern for

Asians is quite different than from women and African Americans. Asians increased slightly as a fraction of

total US labor market entrants rising from 4% in 1990 to roughly 5% in 2010-2015. The fraction of all BA

degrees granted is roughly in line with entry into the labor force. The striking pattern, however, is the large

increase in entry rates to all professional-degree sectors we tabulate. As a fraction of physicians entering the


                                                         5
labor force, Asians grew from 10% in 1990 to nearly 30% in 2010-2015. While not as dramatic, Asian labor-

market participation in the venture capital and entrepreneurial sectors also rose dramatically. Among new

venture capitalists and entrepreneurs entering the market, Asians grew from 10% and 5% to 18% and 15%,

respectively.

           The Asian labor-market participation in other finance related field has been similarly high. From

2010-2015 Asians represented 18% of new entrepreneurs and 15% of new venture capitalists while they were

16.9% of new consultants and 24.8% of new investment bankers. These levels are three to four times the

overall labor market entry rates for Asian Americans. The overall pattern of these summaries indicates that

Asians started the period over-represented in the innovation sector relative to their labor market participation

rates and increased substantially from that level.

           Finally, we examine the experience of Hispanics in Figures 7 and 8. Hispanics have witnessed the

fastest increase in entry to the labor force, rising from 9% of total US labor market entrants in 1990 to nearly

16% in 2010-2015. Likewise, the fraction of BAs granted to Hispanic students has also more than doubled,

from 4.2% in 1990 to 9.5% in 2010-2015. The relative evolution in professional-degree sectors, however,

shows a slightly divergent pattern from the prior three groups. Hispanic entrepreneurs and venture capitals

have increased markedly, from about 1% each in 1990 to nearly 5% of new entrepreneurs and 3.2% of new

venture capitalists in 2010-2015. These rates and increases are much higher than for Hispanic doctors and

lawyers.

           If we look at the most recent five year period, we see that Hispanic venture capital market entry and

entry into the entrepreneurial sector are roughly comparable to Hispanic entry rates into consulting and

investment banking.       These rates are, however, still three to five times lower than Hispanics overall

percentages of labor market entry. So while the entry rates have improved, they still represent an overall lack

of Hispanic representation in the innovation sector.

     More broadly, in this survey we establish eight main empirical facts:




                                                        6
   I.) The empirical regularity of a low level of female, African American, and Hispanic labor market

       participation in the innovation sector along with a high and growing participation of Asians as

       both entrepreneurs and the venture capitalists that fund them.

  II.) When the fraction of the entrepreneurial pool (i.e., educational, training, and work-experience

       typical in this sector) for women, African Americans, and Hispanics is compared to the

       observed venture capital and founder participation of these groups, each group has

       meaningfully and persistently lower representation than would seem appropriate given their

       proportions of those with requisite backgrounds to enter the sectors.

 III.) The time-series evolution and the cross-sectional (e.g., cross-industry) dynamics of this

       phenomenon show no increase for female or African American entry into the innovation sector

       and large relative increases of both Asians and Hispanics.

 IV.) This same pattern is not present for women across similar fields in terms of required training

       (e.g., medicine and law that require additional, professional masters human capital accumulation)

       for which women dramatically increased their entry while Hispanics and African Americans saw

       no increases in these sectors.

  V.) This same pattern is absent for women and African Americans in otherwise equivalent finance-

       and business-related jobs (with, on-average, nearly identical past experience profiles) such as

       investment banking or consulting where they are represented in much higher percentages.

 VI.) This empirical fact is not driven by adequately trained women or African Americans (MBAs and

       science related advanced degrees have been increasing over the sample for both groups, and

       there has been a relatively sizable pool of technical and MBA-trained women in the underlying

       age-cohorts).

VII.) We document and explore the geographic concentration of this phenomenon, along with

       parallel trends in ethnicities within the innovation space.

VIII.) We document and explore the powerful school-based networks and prior work-based networks

       out from which innovators and venture capitalists are borne.


                                                 7
        We end by discussing the potential explanations for the underrepresentation of female, African

American, and Hispanic labor market participation in the innovation space (and its unique features) over time

through the present-day. We consider which of these explanations are most consistent with the empirical

facts we observe. In particular, what portion of the dynamics we observe appear driven by optimal labor

supply-side choices (e.g., actively deciding not to go into VC for utility maximizing reasons), and which might

be more subject to demand-side explanations (e.g., search frictions caused by homophily in which agents only

engage close acquaintances to begin ventures or join small VC teams, tending to associate with others of the

same gender or ethnicity).

        The survey is of broad interest to four distinct sets of researchers. First, any researcher in innovation

and entrepreneurship interested in human capital supply and demand may find the analysis helpful. Second,

labor economists that study similarly disparate labor market outcomes in their sub-field may take away

something instructive from the dynamics we document. Third, given the equilibrium organizational structure

of firms in both venture capital and early entrepreneurial ventures, those interested in organizational behavior

and social psychology manifested in the small group setting – importantly with large, steep incentivize

compensation payoffs in an actual field setting – may find this an interesting laboratory to explore. Lastly,

any policy maker or academic interested in the causes and consequences of gender and ethnicity gaps in labor

market participation will find the survey an important source for “facts” about a key labor-force segment

from which to structure further study.

        The remainder of the survey is organized as follows: Section 2 describes how we construct the

dataset for entrepreneurs and venture capitalists. Section 3 describes the time-series trends and industry

patterns along the dimensions of gender and ethnicity. Section 4 explores possible explanations. It presents

statistics based on the supply side factors: namely, education and prior work experience. It also explores social

and cultural factors based on state-level variations. Section 5 discusses economic models consistent with the

empirical patterns observed in the data. Section 6 concludes.




                                                       8
2       Data Construction

           The core data used in this paper are derived from several different sources. We start with

VentureSource, a database that contains detailed information on venture capital investments. Our data cover

the period from 1990 through mid-2016. We start our analysis in 1990 because the data become reasonably

comprehensive at that point in time. For each portfolio company, we have the identities of the individuals

involved with the firm including founders, venture capital investors, angel investors, board members, and

early hires. We focus on the portfolio company founders as well as the venture capitalists on the board of

directors. Throughout the paper, we will refer to company founders as “entrepreneurs”. In addition to

information about the people involved in the company, we also have information on the portfolio company’s

location and industry. A founder enters the data in the year in which they receive their first round of

financing.2 A venture capitalist enters the data in the year they make their first investment for which they sit

on the board of directors.

           For each individual entrepreneur and venture capitalist in the dataset, we collect a broad range of

biographical information such as gender, ethnicity, education, and prior job experience. We collect this

information from a variety of sources, including a leading online resume website, web searches, SEC filings

and news articles. The education information includes the academic institution attended along with the

specific type of degree granted. Degree types include undergraduate, postgraduate non-business (Ph.D., M.S.,

J.D., and M.D.), and postgraduate business (MBA). For prior job experience, we record the company names

as well as job titles.

           Entrepreneur and venture capitalist genders are primarily determined based on first names. In the

cases of unisex names, we determine gender by reading news articles and web pages mentioning or containing

pictures of the individual. To identify ethnicity, we use the name-matching algorithm developed by Kerr and

Lincoln (2010) to determine the most likely ethnicity based on their first and last names. Due to the ambiguity

in identifying African Americans names, anyone who was classified as White is then searched on the Internet



2
    We do not have information on founding dates, hence, we time entry as the time of first funding.

                                                             9
for photos based upon the full name, the company name and the company location. The African American

designation is then based upon review of the photos. Individual entrepreneurs and venture capitalists are

classified into six non-overlapping ethnic groups: White, East Asian, Indian, Hispanic, African American, and

all others. In this paper, we group East Asian and Indian as Asian. Our overall match rates for both gender

and ethnicity exceed 99%.3

         In this paper, we choose to focus on entrepreneurs that have received venture financing. Although

this by no means captures the full spectrum of entrepreneurs, venture financing remains an important source

of entrepreneurial capital. For instance, Kaplan and Lerner (2010) found that more than 60% of true IPOs

had venture financing. Considering only 1/6 of 1% of all companies are venture backed, this represents a

powerful source of high potential, fast-growing, innovative companies. Further, venture backed companies

also have a large impact on the overall economy. Gornall and Strebulaev (2015) found that companies

previously backed by VCs account for 44% of the research and development spending among US public

companies. Thus, the demographic trends of entrepreneurs who had access to venture capital represent those

of a vital source of economy-wide innovation.



3     Gender and Ethnicity Trends for Entrepreneurs and VCs

3.1    Summary Statistics

         Table I provides a summary of the data for both entrepreneurs and venture capitalists in our sample

aggregated across the entire period from 1990 to mid-2016. Overall, we have data on 42,502 entrepreneurs

(those members of the company that VentureSoure classifies as a founder), where 91.1% are men and 8.6%

are women.4 We have data on 11,555 venture capitalists with a similar gender breakdown: 91.2% are men and

8.5% are women.5 This type of gender segregation has been documented anecdotally in the popular press.



3 For entrepreneurs, 108 (0.3%) of them are missing gender and 189 (0.4%) of them are missing ethnicity. For VCs, 25
(0.2%) of them are missing gender and 40 (0.4%) of them are missing ethnicity.
4 We do not make the important distinctions between “woman” and “female" in this paper. This in no way means that

we equate these two concepts, but we acknowledge that addressing these distinctions is beyond the scope of this paper.
5
  Note that the percentages don’t add up to 100% because a small fraction of entrepreneurs and venture capitalists with
gender ambiguous names could not be found on web searches.

                                                          10
Gompers Mukharlyamov, Weisburst, and Xuan (2017) documented that nearly 80% of venture capital firms

had never hired a female investor.67

        Patterns of ethnic concentration are also apparent. For entrepreneurs, 79.6% are White, where the

largest ethnic minority is Asian, representing 15.8%. Hispanic (3.8%) and African American (0.4%) are

severely underrepresented relative to their proportions in the general population. Within the venture capital

community, an even higher percentage are White (86.3%), while Asian venture capitalists make up a smaller

percentage (10.6%) than they do for entrepreneurs. Hispanic and African American investors represent even

smaller fractions of the venture capitalists at 2.5% and 0.3%.

        Overall, we observe a general lack of gender and ethnic diversity among the entrepreneur and

venture capitalist communities, where the imbalance is somewhat worse for venture capital. Among ethnic

minorities, however, Asian populations represent the largest share.


3.2    Time Series Trends

        In this section, we explore the time series changes in the entry intensities of women and ethnic

minorities in our data. For entrepreneurs, we classify the entry of an entrepreneur as the year the startup

receives its first venture capital financing. Anyone listed as a “founder” in the portfolio company is

considered an entrepreneur. For venture capitalists, because we can only identify a venture capitalist when

they take a board seat at a portfolio company, the entry date is recorded as the first time they do so.8 We

cannot observe when the individual was actually hired at the venture capital firm. Similarly, because typically

only partner level venture capitalists get to sit on boards of a portfolio company, we only observe senior hires.

        Compared to measuring the diversity of the entire stock of entrepreneurs and venture capitalists, we

focus here on measuring their entry rates. We choose to do this not only because it is challenging to observe

the stock (it is hard to observe when an entrepreneur leaves their firm or a venture capitalist retires), but also



6 Moreover, we will see later that the female venture capitalists on average make fewer deals than their male
counterparts, representing 7.0% of the board seats taken up by venture capital investors.
7
  No other survey or popular press article has ever looked at the entire population of venture capitalists and
entrepreneurs. Most accounts have been relatively small, cross sectional surveys done for popular media consumption.
8 Since the average venture capitalist in our sample makes on four deals, we only record the entry of the venture

capitalist based on the first deal.

                                                        11
because the entry rate is a more sensitive measure to track the changes in demographic trends. The stock of

venture capitalists and entrepreneurs will represent the sum of all the past barriers to entry and differences in

supply. However, one must take necessary precautions while comparing it with other stock variables such as

the labor force proportions.


3.2.1   Gender Trends

        As described in the introduction, Figure 2 plots the gender breakdown of entering entrepreneurs and

venture capitalists from 1990 to mid-2016 (averaged over every 5 years) and shows that female investors

made little progress over the past 25 years. Over this period, women represent more than 45% of labor force

participants consistently. Meanwhile, the proportions of entering female entrepreneurs and female venture

capitalists remain extremely low.

        For women entrepreneurs, the entry rate was around 7% in the 1990s and early 2000s, and rose

gradually to about 11% since then. For women venture capitalists (VCs), the rate was around 6% in the early

1990s and rose to around 9% in the late 1990s, but stayed at the same level ever since, displaying no secular

trends. Hence, the trend for women entrepreneurs is mildly positive, while for women VCs it is non-existent.

In a sharp comparison, the proportion of women in high skilled occupations such as medicine and law

experienced dramatic increases during this period and are substantially higher in 2016.


3.2.2   Ethnicity Trends

        For entrepreneurs, the percentage of minorities has steadily increased from 1990 to present, driven

primarily by the growth of Asian entrepreneurs, and to a lesser extent also by Hispanic entrepreneurs, as

shown in Figure 9. Hispanic entrepreneurs grew from 1% in the early 1990 to almost 5% by 2016, although

this is still lower than their representation in the labor market entry pool: 9% in the early 1990 and 16% post

2010. Meanwhile, Asian entrepreneurs grew from 9% to 18% in the same period, while their fraction of labor

market entry increased from 3% to 5%. Hence, Asians are consistently over-represented among

entrepreneurs comparing to their underlying labor force proportions by a factor of around three times. Finally,




                                                       12
African American entrepreneurs remain an extremely small fraction of the entrepreneurial pool, with virtually

no presence in the early 1990s and still less than 1% by 2016, despite being a stable 12% of the labor force.

        For venture capitalists, Figure 10 shows that the level of ethnic diversity is even worse than that of

entrepreneurs, while they exhibit broadly similar ethnic patterns and growth trends. Hispanic venture

capitalists grew from 1% to 3% over this period, while Asian venture capitalists started at 6% and grew

rapidly to 15%. African American venture capitalists, however, remain a tiny fraction and are less than 1% by

2016. Similar to entrepreneurs, Asians venture capitalists are over-represented compared to their labor force

share, while Hispanics are under-represented and African Americans remain severely under-represented.

Observing such vastly different levels of representation among the minority groups, in the remainder of the

analyses, we will separate out the experience of Asians from those of the under-represented minorities,

namely, Hispanics and African Americans.




3.2.3   Gender and Ethnicity Interactions

        In this section, we explore the interaction between gender and ethnicity, i.e, is the experience of

women similar across various ethnicity groups. Given the mild growth in entry rate of women entrepreneurs,

we can see from Figure 11 Panel A that it is driven by the sizable increase in the entries of White female

entrepreneurs from 5.3% to 7.5%, as well as moderate increases of Asian female entrepreneurs from 1.6% to

2.6%. The contributions of Hispanic and African American women remain very small percentages.

        However, for women venture capitalists, Figure 11 Panel B shows that there is actually little secular

change in the entry rates of White women over the past 25 years. Meanwhile, the growth in minority women

venture capitalist is driven by a steady increase in Asian female venture capitalists from 0.2% to 1.5%. Similar

to what we saw for entrepreneurs, Hispanic and African American women remain very small percentages of

venture capital industry entry.

        Moreover, it is also interesting to note that female representation is generally higher for Asians than

for Whites. Throughout this period, 11% of Asian entrepreneurs are women, while only 8% of White



                                                      13
entrepreneurs are women. This pattern is similar for venture capital. Asian women represent roughly 50%

greater percentages of Asian VCs than do White women.

        Hence, the interaction of gender and ethnicity shows that White female entrepreneurs and Asian

female venture capitalists are the drivers for the small level of improvement in gender diversity. Meanwhile,

the base rates for women participation are moderately higher for Asians than Whites.




3.3   Industry Patterns

        In this section, we examine the industry patterns of gender and ethnicity representation within the

venture capital and entrepreneurial sectors. These patterns may help identify critical mechanisms that affect

diversity. Venture-financed portfolio companies are classified into industries based upon VentureSource

industry codes. We group companies into seven broad industry segments: Business and Financial Services,

Consumer Goods, Consumer Services, Energy and Utilities, Healthcare, Industrial Goods and Materials, and

Information Technology. This categorization is based on the industry code available in VentureSource. These

classifications are highly correlated with venture capital investor specialization found in Gompers, Lerner,

Kovner, and Scharfstein (2010).

        For entrepreneurs, the unit of observation is an entrepreneur-company pair. We have 42,478

observations. There are two important points to keep in mind. First, a given company may have multiple

entrepreneurs associated with it. Second, a given entrepreneur may start multiple companies. In both cases,

they will enter the data multiple times. For venture capitalists, correspondingly, the unit of observation is the

venture capitalist-portfolio company pair, where we have 42,988 observations. Similarly, a venture capitalist

may sit on the board of multiple deals, while a firm may have multiple venture capital investors. In both cases,

they will enter the data multiple times as well. For our analysis below, we look at gender and ethnic patterns

of founders and venture capitalist entry. As such, each founding event is an observation for an entrepreneur.

If a firm has two founders, both are included as observations for entrepreneurial entry.              If a given

entrepreneur starts multiple companies, each new company will represent an entrepreneurial entry

observation. Venture capitalists only enter the sample once, the first time that they take a board seat.

                                                       14
3.3.1   Gender Patterns

        We first explore the gender patterns across industries. In Table III, we see pronounced variations of

gender diversity across different industries for entrepreneurs. In the entire sample, women represent 8.6% of

all entrepreneurs.   Certain industries have substantially more women founders.         In particular, women

represent 19.7% of founders in the Consumer Goods industry and 13.6% of founders in Consumer Services.

Additionally, women represent 9.8% of Healthcare entrepreneurs. On the other hand, women entrepreneurs

are only 6% of Information Technology entrepreneurs, the smallest percentage in what is the largest venture

capital-backed industry. These patterns are consistent with anecdotal accounts of women pursuing more

entrepreneurial opportunities in companies that focus on the consumer.

        Table IV explores the same patterns for gender diversity across venture capitalists sorted by industry.

For venture capital, while women represent 8.6% of all venture capitalists in our individual-level data, they

represent only 7.0% of the board seats taken up by all venture capitalists when the unit of observation is

changed to the VC-portfolio company pair. This is driven by the fact that women, on average, have

conducted fewer deals and sit on fewer boards.

        In terms of industry breakdown, there are both similarities and differences between the gender

patterns of entrepreneurship and venture capital. In particular, Healthcare has the highest representation of

women VCs at 10.5%. For Consumer Goods and Consumer Services, women venture capitalists make up

8.2% and 7.2%, which are slightly above average, but much less pronounced than the double-digit

proportions of women entrepreneurs in these consumer-focused industries. Like the representation of

women entrepreneurs in Information Technology, IT also has the lowest proportion of women VCs at 5.5%.

        Our results suggest systematic differences in industry patterns of female participation in venture

capital and entrepreneurship. Consumer products and services as well as Healthcare feature higher levels of

female participation. IT, however, has substantially lower female presence.


3.3.2   Ethnicity Patterns

        Like the gender patterns, the ethnicity patterns within venture capital and entrepreneurship can help

shape the hypotheses that we test later in the paper.        We explore the industry patterns of minority

                                                      15
entrepreneurs and venture capitalists in Table V. Overall, White entrepreneurs make up for 79.6% of the

entire population, while the largest ethnic minority is Asian representing 15.8%. Table V shows that among

the Asian entrepreneurs, Information Technology has the highest proportions at 19.0% and is significantly

higher than all other categories. After IT, Business and Financial Services as well as Consumer Services are

both between 14.8% and 15.0% Asian entrepreneurs. Many startups in these industries have high IT content

as well. Among the Hispanic entrepreneurs, all industries are roughly evenly distributed with the largest

category being Consumer Goods (4.4%) which is close to the overall Hispanic average of 3.8%. African

American entrepreneurs are a very small fraction of the overall pool and each industry. Among the African

American entrepreneurs, the largest category is Consumer Services (0.8%).

        Within the venture capital community in Table VI, White venture capitalists make up an even higher

proportion at 86.3% than they do for the entrepreneurial sample. Asian venture capitalists make up 10.6%,

significantly smaller than Asian entrepreneurs. Among the Asian venture capitalists, the largest categories are

Information Technology (11.8%) followed by Energy and Utilities (11.5%). Although IT remains the top

industry for Asians, the pattern across other industries is different than it is for Asian entrepreneurs. African

American and Hispanics represent substantially smaller proportions of the venture capital sector. African

American venture capitalists do between 0 and 0.4% of deals in all sectors with Consumer Services being

highest at 0.4%. Hispanic venture capitalists do roughly 2% across all sectors with Consumer Goods being

the largest at 3%.

        The comparison of venture capital and entrepreneurs ethnic breakdowns across industries provides

several insights. First, ethnic minorities have lower representation among venture capitalists than they do

among entrepreneurs. Second, Asians are a large fraction of Information Technology entrepreneurs and

venture capitalists while industry patterns for Hispanics and African Americans are weaker. In the next

section, we explore several potential explanations for the patterns we observe.




                                                       16
4       Potential Explanations
          The prior section documented that women, African American, and Hispanics are dramatically

underrepresented in the entrepreneurial and venture capital communities and that their entry into these

industries has not changed dramatically over the past 25 years. On the other hand, Asian have grown

dramatically in both sectors and have representations in the industries that are several times their overall

averages in the labor force and levels similar to other highly compensated professions.

          We explore two potential types of explanations for these patterns; supply-side and social/cultural

explanations. Our analysis is meant to be suggestive. Among supply-side factors would be a training

mismatch between women and underrepresented minorities and the type of training/education that leads to

careers in venture capital and entrepreneurship. Second, we explore social and cultural explanations for the

patterns in our data. These might include implicit and explicit biases that lower female and underrepresented

minorities entry into venture capital and entrepreneurship. Alternatively, differences in the career aspirations

or network information effects may influence the career choices of women and underrepresented minorities.




4.1      Potential Supply-Side Explanations

          Since becoming a successful entrepreneur or venture capitalist requires the acquisition of relevant

training in terms of education and work experience, we explore the demographic trends in education and

career choices to determine whether the dramatic underrepresentation of women, African Americans, and

Hispanics is due to a shortage of supply of females and minorities with the relevant backgrounds. We first

look at the education and career histories of venture capitalists and entrepreneurs in our sample. Then we

look at the supply of women and minorities with similar backgrounds to determine whether supply is

constraining entry.


4.1.1     Overview of Education and Employment Statistics

          In Table VII we present statistics on the education backgrounds of entrepreneurs in our sample. We

collect educational background from company web pages and online resume/recruiting websites.                    We



                                                        17
observe that entrepreneurs go to a large variety of undergraduate institutions. MIT, Stanford, and UC

Berkeley are the top 3 undergraduate institutions, while many of the top 20 colleges are known for their

strong science and engineering departments. Interestingly, two foreign institutions, Tel Aviv University and

the Technion are also among the top undergraduate colleges, highlighting the role of Israeli entrepreneurs in

the entrepreneurial community. Among the entrepreneurs who obtain a post-graduate education, only 30% of

them have MBAs, but the vast majority (70%) of entrepreneurs have non-business post-graduate degrees,

further suggesting the relevance of a technical background. The top 20 institutions make up 40% of all

entrepreneurs with non-business post-graduate degrees, with Stanford, MIT, Harvard, UC Berkeley and USC

in the top five.    The areas of concentration for entrepreneurs can be seen in Table VIII for both

undergraduate and non-MBA graduate degrees. The choice of undergraduate and graduates institutions is

reflected in degree choices. The vast majority of undergraduate concentrations are in science and engineering

related fields. For graduate degrees, the pattern is even stronger. The vast majority of non-MBA graduate

degrees are in engineering, science, and math.

        In terms of entrepreneurs’ work experience, Table IX shows the critical role of technology

experience, nine out of the top ten past employers are technology giants such as Microsoft, IBM, Sun, Google,

Oracle, Cisco, Intel, and Apple. As documented in Gompers, Lerner and Scharfstein (2005), the most

prolific “spawners” are originally venture-backed companies themselves. The other two sources of

entrepreneurs are universities (Stanford, MIT) as well as global consulting firms (McKinsey, Accenture). The

top 20 past employers account for 13% of all entrepreneurs.

        Overall, the education and employment backgrounds of our entrepreneurs indicate a strong pattern.

The majority of entrepreneurs come to the table with strong science and engineering backgrounds having

received advanced degrees and work experience in major technology companies. A substantial minority of

the entrepreneurs in our sample, however, come with strong business backgrounds and an MBA.

        We next turn to the backgrounds of venture capitalists in our sample. In Table X we see that more

liberal arts colleges are represented for undergraduate degrees. Harvard, Stanford, and the University of

Pennsylvania are the top 3 undergraduate colleges, while the top 20 colleges represent 37% of all


                                                     18
undergraduate institutions, higher than that of the entrepreneurs (29%). For those who obtain post-graduate

degrees, 56% have an MBA, nearly double the proportion of entrepreneurs who have one. The concentration

of the top 20 MBA programs among all MBAs is 76%: Harvard Business School alone accounts for 22% of

the MBAs for venture capitalists. The top five business schools, Harvard, Stanford, University of

Pennsylvania, Columbia, and Chicago, account for more than half of all MBAs.

         Among the non-MBA graduate institutions that we see in Table X, the list looks quite similar to the

MBA institutions with 49.4% of degrees represented by the top five universities. Stanford, Harvard, MIT,

University of Pennsylvania, and Columbia are the top five institutions. Among non-MBA graduate degrees,

Table XI shows that law and medicine represent nearly half of the non-MBA graduate degrees, very different

from the pattern with saw with entrepreneurs in which law and medical degrees only represented about

17.8% of non-MBA graduate degrees.

         The work experience of venture capitalists also shows some difference from the experience of

entrepreneurs in Table XII. Investment banks, private equity, and other venture capital firms make up for

half of the top 20 past employers. This includes Goldman Sachs, Morgan Stanley, Bain, Merrill Lynch, and

Lehman Brothers, suggesting that the analytical skills developed in financial firms are potentially seen as

useful for the evaluation of investment opportunities. We also find a large number of consulting firms

including McKinsey, Bain, BCG, Ernst and Young, and Accenture among the top employers. The remaining

top 20 employers are large technology companies like Microsoft, IBM, Cisco, and Google. Overall, the

number of former employers is quite high and the top 20 past employers account for 10% of all venture

capitalists.

         The education and work history of venture capitalists and entrepreneur provide a clear picture of two

different sets of skills and training. Entrepreneurs primarily major in computer science, engineering, or the

sciences, have advanced scientific degrees from strong technical universities, and have worked in major

technology companies. Venture capitalists, on the other hand, have more business backgrounds. They

primarily study economics, business, or finance, pursue an MBA from a top business school (or have a

professional degree like a JD or MD), and have investment banking, consulting, or large technology company


                                                      19
experience.    This clear pattern in backgrounds allows us to explore various explanations for the low

representation of women, African Americans, and Hispanics in the two sectors as well as the large and

growing representation of Asians.




4.1.2     Potential Supply-Side Explanations

          We explore the supply-side hypothesis for underrepresentation of women, Hispanics, and African

Americans as well as the growth in Asians by examining the education and employment experience for these

groups in the relevant degree programs and professions. Our notion of a supply-side explanation for the

patterns that we see would predict that given the types of skills and training we saw in the prior section for

venture capitalists and entrepreneurs, women, Hispanics, and African Americans may not pursue degrees or

jobs in sectors that prepare them to be entrepreneurs or ventures capitalists.9

          We obtain the number of bachelors, masters and doctoral degrees in science and engineering

awarded by US institutions from the National Science Foundation as well as MBA data from the National

Center for Education Statistics and the HBS admissions office. In terms of the aggregate demographic trends

for different occupations, we retrieve that from the US Equal Employment Opportunity. The time series

data on educational achievement is available from the early 1990s to 2012. The demographic trend for

occupations is more limited. Information with detailed industry breakdown starts in 2003.


4.1.3     Gender Trends

4.1.3.1   The Case for Women Entrepreneurs

          Our first set of supply-side tests looks at the representation of women in college and post-graduate

degrees and industries that foster entrepreneurship.           Since a technical education is prevalent among

entrepreneurs, we look at the demographic trends for advanced degrees in these technical disciplines. In




9
  If we were to find a low fraction of women, Hispanics, and African Americans in the degree programs and jobs that
prepare for entrepreneurship and venture capital, it would still beg the question of why those groups were not pursuing
that type of experience. For now, we just compare the relative frequency of these groups who have similar backgrounds.

                                                          20
Figure 14, we show that the proportion of science and engineering degrees granted to women has grown

substantially over the past 25 years. This is true at all degree levels; bachelors, masters, and doctoral degree.

For science and engineering PhDs, the fraction of degrees granted to women grew from below 30% in the

1990s to above 40% in 2012. Women also earned 46% of the masters degrees in science and engineering,

while the proportion of bachelors degrees in science and engineering is above 50%. Based on the aggregate

data, it does not appear there is a shortage of supply of women in entrepreneurship when it comes to relevant

educational backgrounds.10

         We also noted that experience at a major technology company is the most common work experience

for entrepreneurs. Hence, we look at the proportion of women in software and computer related industries.

In Figure 15, we see that the aggregate proportion of women in software has actually been slowly declining

over the past decade, dipping below 30% by 2014. This decline reflects not fewer women entering the

software industry (the absolute number of women entering software has actually increased), but the rate of

increase for women has been slower than the rate of increase for men. We see a similar decline in computer

and electronics manufacturing. Therefore, even though women increasing share of science and engineering

degrees, we do not observe a corresponding increase in the women’s share in the related professions in the

aggregate data we have. The data also reveal that women’s experience in the investment banking industry has

also been declining since 2003 while the proportion of consultants who are women has increased.

         There are two observations that we can draw from the data. First, over the sample period, women

have been a much lower share of entrepreneurs (especially in IT) than they are in computer science and

engineering degrees or professionals in the software and computer manufacturing industry.                    Women

entrepreneurs are about one-third to one-fourth of the fraction that they are in science and engineering

degrees or professions in software/computer manufacturing.                Clearly, the low level of females in

entrepreneurship cannot be explained by a lack of trained and skilled women. Second, the most recent trend




10However, this does not rule out a potential mismatch between the subfields in which the degrees are obtained and the
subfields conducive to entrepreneurial activities.

                                                         21
in the software and computer manufacturing industries show movement away from greater participation that

may not augur well for future increases in female entrepreneurs.


4.1.3.2 The Case for Women Venture Capitalists

           In this section, we explore whether the supply of women with training and backgrounds matching

the venture capital industry are in short supply. As we saw in the previous section, venture capitalists tend to

have MBA degrees and experience in investment banking or consulting. Figure 14 shows that the overall

fraction of MBA degrees granted to women has increased steadily from around 35% in 1990 to 47% in 2013.

Meanwhile, for Harvard Business School (as a proxy for top MBA programs) the fraction of MBAs granted

to women grew from 27% in 1990 to 36% in 2012. In 2016, the percentage of women among Harvard MBAs

is 42%.

           Similarly, the fraction of women in occupations relevant to venture capital is quite high. Figure 15

shows that the percentage of those entering the investment banking industry who are women has declined

slightly from 38% in 2003 to 34% in 2014. Meanwhile, the fraction of those taking a position in consulting

has risen slightly from 41% in 2003 to 44.5% in 2012. In both cases, although there has not been explosive

growth in women’s participation, the overall proportions of women in investment banking and consulting

have been five to seven times as high as it is in venture capital.

           In short, for both entrepreneurship and venture capital, there is a remarkable growth of women who

have obtained the relevant educational degrees. In terms of relevant job experience, the growth has not been

as high and, in some cases, women’s share has slightly declined, but it remains substantially higher than the

fraction of new venture capital investors who are women.11 Overall, the evidence we presented in this section

argues against a purely supply-side explanation for the low female levels in entrepreneurship and venture

capital.




11Again, one must take caution here in interpreting the occupation data. Since it represents the stock of employees, we
cannot differentiate entries from exits when it comes to their respective attribution to the overall changes.

                                                          22
4.1.4     Ethnicity Trends

4.1.4.1   The Case for Minority Entrepreneurs

          In this section we examine the education and work experience of ethnic minorities and compare it to

the characteristics of entrepreneurs in our sample that we tabulated in the previous section. As discussed

above, entrepreneurs tend to have advanced scientific or engineering degrees and have work experience in

major technology companies. We first examine minority representation as a percentage of the advanced

degrees in science and engineering that are granted each year. In terms of Ph.D. degrees, Figure 16 shows that

the fraction of Ph.D.s granted to Asians has grown slightly (from 4.2% of all science and engineering Ph.D.s

granted to 6.1%). Hispanic Ph.D.s have nearly doubled from around 2% in 1990 to almost 4% in 2012.

African American Ph.D.s have grown the slowest, only increasing from about 2% to just under 3%. The

experience of ethnic minorities in masters degrees is somewhat different. Figure 17 shows that there is a

dramatic improvement in the fraction of science and engineering masters awarded to under-represented

minorities. The fractions granted to African Americans and Hispanics were both about 2% in 1990. By 2012,

it had grown very rapidly to 7.5% for African Americans and nearly 6% for Hispanics. In contrast, the

fraction of science and engineering masters granted to Asians was higher than other minorities in the 1990s at

6%. However, it grew only modestly to about 7% in early 2000s and displayed no secular growth afterwards.

          The education data provides several observations.        Underrepresented minorities have done

particularly well improving their representation among science and engineering masters degrees, but have

done less well at increasing the fraction of Ph.D.s. Asians grew primarily as a fraction of Ph.D.s granted in

science and engineering. Part of the explanation for a difference in the rate of entrepreneurship in these

ethnic minority groups could be difference in the Ph.D.s granted. This, however, cannot explain the entire

experience. Asians have a much higher representation in our entrepreneur sample than they are in Ph.D.

degrees while Hispanics and African Americans have much lower representation.

          In terms of jobs in science and technology related fields, Figure 18 shows that the fraction of the

software and computer manufacturing employment that are African Americans and Hispanics has remained

very low, staying between 3% and 5% over the past decade with no discernable trend. In contrast, the

                                                      23
fraction of Asians in computer and peripheral manufacturing grew rapidly from 15% in 2003 to 25% to 2014

while the fraction of Asians in software has remained steady at 25%.12

         The employment data raises an important observation. Despite improvements in advanced degrees

in science and engineering, African Americans and Hispanics are not entering sectors of the economy that

spawn large numbers of entrepreneurs. Asians, on the other hand, increased their fraction of advanced

science and engineering degrees only slightly, but were a large and increasing percentage of sectors that foster

entrepreneurs. While we do not know what explains the difference in industry choices after receiving an

advanced science and engineering degree, it is certainly important to understand this dynamic if we are to

understand why underrepresented minorities remain a small fraction of the entrepreneurial talent pool. Finally,

it is worthwhile noting that for all three minority groups, their representations in these job categories

(software and computer manufacturing) are still higher than their representation within our sample of

entrepreneurs.


4.1.4.2 The Case for Minority Venture Capitalists

         We now turn our attention to understanding whether supply issues could affect the entry of

minorities into the venture capital sector. As mentioned earlier, venture capitalists typically receive an MBA

from a top 20 program and have experience in consulting or investment banking. Figure 19 shows an

astounding increase in the growth of African American MBAs, doubling from 7% in the mid-1990s to 15% in

2013. Meanwhile, the fraction of MBAs granted to Hispanics also grew steadily from 3% to 7%. The fraction

of MBAs granted to Asians, unlike advanced degrees in science and technology, did not change markedly

over the sample period. Moreover, the fraction of Asian MBAs grew moderately from 6% to 9% in 2007, but

then started decreased to 7.9% in 2013.

         In Figure 20 we examine the fraction of new hires in the consulting and investment banking industry

that are an ethnic minority. Figure 20 shows that African Americans and Hispanics have not dramatically




12 In our dataset of entrepreneur and venture capitalist characteristics, we are not able to identify whether a given person
is a US citizen or not. However, it is reasonable to believe that part of the growth of Asians in technology related jobs is
driven by immigration. However, this is less of an issue for venture capital and finance related careers.

                                                            24
increased their representation within these two sectors. The fraction of new hires in the consulting industry

who are Hispanic consultants grew from 3.9% to 5.1% over the eleven-year period ending in 2014. This

change is broadly consistent with the increased flow of Hispanic MBAs.13 Similarly, the fraction of Hispanic

investment bankers grew from 4.7% to 6.2%. However, the fractions of African American professionals did

not grow for consulting and even declined for investment banking despite the rapid growth of African

American MBAs. African American’s remained about 9% of new hires in consulting and decreased from

about 7.5% of new investment bankers to about 6% in 014. On the other hand, despite an absence of growth

of MBAs granted to Asians, the fraction of Asian consultants grew rapidly over this period from 11% to 19%,

and the fraction of Asian investment banker grew from 15% to almost 25%.

         These patterns raise several questions. First, there appears to be relatively little effect of changes in

educational attainment on entry into venture capital. Asians did not increase their fraction of new MBAs, but

increased their representation in the venture capital sector. Hispanics and especially African Americans

dramatically increased their attainment of MBAs, but did not have a similar increase in venture capital entry.

The trend in entry into consulting and investment banking follows the trend of the venture capital sector.

Asians increased their entry into both investment banking and consulting while African Americans and

Hispanics did not. Again, as with the minority entrepreneur representation, the trends in related professions

that foster entry into venture capital seem to follow the same time series patterns. Similarly, we are struck by

the very large divergence, especially for African Americans, between their representation of both degrees and

related jobs and their fraction of new venture capitalists. African American venture capitalists are only a small

fraction of what we would classify as the potential pool of new venture capitalists. In the next section we

explore potential social and cultural explanations for this pattern.


4.2     Potential Social and Cultural Explanations


4.2.1    Overview of State-Level Variations


13In essence, we need to interpret the stock of consultants in relations to the flow of MBA degree holders. We assume a
simplistic model where we hold constant the ratio of the consultant fractions to MBA degree fractions over time. The
data would imply a turnover of 60% over this period, which is plausible.

                                                          25
        In this section, we explore the potential cultural and social factors that may be relevant to gender and

ethnic diversity using state-level variations. There is a long literature in labor economics that looks at state

level variation and how it affects labor market outcomes. Much of this literature looks at how variation in

state laws or regulations affects particular groups of potential employees.         For example, Bertrand and

Mullainathan (2004) look at state level variation in labor market discrimination. Similarly, Beegle and Stock

(2003) look at state level variation in disability discrimination laws and their effect on employment prospects

for disabled workers. Gruber (1993) also uses state laws that affect mandatory maternity benefits on female

employment. We do two types of analyses in this section. First, we look at the states that have the highest

and lowest participation by women and ethnic minorities in venture capital and entrepreneurship. Second, we

look at a variety of state measures (percent Republican, length of mandatory maternity benefits, college

graduation rates, etc.) to look at correlation of these measures with representation in the venture capital and

entrepreneurial pool of our groups.

        In Table XIII, we summarize the variations of gender and ethnic diversity across the states. For each

state, we look at the fraction of all venture capitalists and all entrepreneurs that enter our data who are female

or an ethnic minority. Entrepreneurs are matched to states by looking at the headquarters location in the

VentureSource data. We focus on the 28 states with more than 100 entrepreneurs. We assign venture

capitalists to states based on the location of their first deal (identified by board representation) in which the

venture capital firm has an office.14 We focus on the 26 states with more than 50 venture capitalists.

        States show significant variation in representation of women in venture capital and entrepreneurship.

The fraction of entrepreneurs who are female varies from 13.4% in Washington D.C. to 3.0% in Utah. The

top five states include New York, Oregon, Connecticut, and Michigan. States while the five states with the

lowest fraction of entrepreneurs who are women include Indiana, New Hampshire, Tennessee and Florida.

Similarly, the fraction of venture capitalists who are female ranges from 11.4% in Washington to 4.1% in

New Hampshire. The top states for women venture capitalists include Pennsylvania, Colorado, New Jersey



14We do not observe in which office location a given venture capitalist works. Hence, we assign the location based
upon the first deal that is in a state in which the venture capital firm has an office.

                                                       26
and Connecticut (which average 10.7% female venture capitalists), while the bottom five states include

Florida, Missouri, Utah and Maryland (which average 5.0% female venture capitalists). The differences

between the top states and bottom states are large and statistically significant.

        In terms of ethnic diversity given the patterns we saw in the first section of this paper, we explore the

state level variation for under-represented minorities and Asians separately. The percentage of entrepreneurs

who are underrepresented minorities is highest in Florida at 11.0%, followed by New York, Pennsylvania,

Wisconsin, and Kansas. The top five states have 6.2% of the entrepreneurial pool that are Hispanic or

African American. Hispanic entrepreneurs drive the percentages in Florida, New York, and Pennsylvania.

States with the lowest level of entrepreneurs who are ethnic minorities include New Hampshire, Oregon,

Minnesota, Virginia, and Washington which average 2.1% underrepresented minorities in the entrepreneurial

pool.

        We also compute the percentage of entrepreneurs who are underrepresented minorities relative to

the underrepresented minority population of the state. We match Hispanic entrepreneurs to the Hispanic

population percentage and the African American entrepreneurs to the African American population

percentages. The results suggest that the high level of underrepresented minority entrepreneurs in a state is

primarily driven by higher representation in the state population. Adjusting for population averages actually

reverses the state rankings, although the difference is not significant.

        The top state for under-represented minority within the sample of venture capitals is Indiana at 6.1%,

followed by Florida, Illinois, New York, and Michigan. Among these states, Hispanics venture capitalists

drive the results for Indiana, Florida, and New York and African Americans drive the results for Illinois and

Michigan. 5.0% of the venture capitalists in these five states are underrepresented minorities. The bottom

five states for underrepresented minority representation in venture capital in our sample are Tennessee,

Missouri, New Hampshire, Wisconsin, and Pennsylvania that average less than 1.3%. Once again, the relative

rankings are reversed once we computer the representation of underrepresented minorities in the venture

capital pool relative to the state population averages. Higher levels of underrepresented minorities within

states are driven primarily by higher percentages of those groups living within the state.


                                                        27
        The pattern for Asian entrepreneurs and venture capitalists displays a different pattern. The fraction

of the entrepreneurial pool that is Asian is the highest in California at 22%, followed by New Jersey,

Washington D.C., New York and Illinois.          In these top five states, Asians represent 16.2% of the

entrepreneurial pool. Similarly, the top state for Asian within the venture capital sample is also California in

which 16% of all venture capitalists are Asian. The other states with the highest Asian fraction of venture

capitalists are Michigan, Oregon, New Jersey and Utah. The top five states average 11.6% of the venture

capital pool who are Asian. The states with the lowest level of Asians in the entrepreneurial sector include

Minnesota, Utah, Tennessee, Missouri, and Ohio which collectively average 4.7% Asian. For the venture

capital industry, Tennessee, Missouri, Florida, Maryland, and New Hampshire have the lowest percentage of

venture capitalists who are Asian. When we look at the fraction of venture capitalists who are Asian with the

states population percentage, we see a different result from what we saw for Hispanics and African

Americans. States with the highest levels of Asian in the population have the highest deviation in Asian

representation in the entrepreneurial and venture capital sectors. Moreover, examining the off-diagonal

entries of Table X, we also see an interesting positive correlation between gender diversity and Asian

participation for both entrepreneurship and venture capital.        States with the highest level of female

representation also have the highest level of Asian participation in both venture capital and entrepreneurship.




4.2.2   Variations of State Level Characteristics

        Given the significant variations of gender and ethnic diversity across states, we examine the

correlation of a variety of state-level variables with the diversity measures for entrepreneurs and venture

capitalists at the state level. Our choice of state level variables is only meant to be suggestive and meant to

motivate future research to explore actual mechanisms that may be at work. We are motivated to explore

variables that capture social attitudes, economic well-being, education outcomes, and the protection of

women’s rights. We believe that these four broad areas provide fruitful insights into the broad sets of issues

that could be operative. The specific variables that we explore include political leanings, unionization rates,



                                                      28
religious affiliations, GDP per capita, improvements in education and state laws regarding maternity/family

leave benefits.

        There are several important caveats in interpreting the results in this section: The list of variables is

by no means exhaustive, but simply reflects our priors about what mechanisms might be at play. Among the

myriad state level variables, we choose to look at the fraction of the state that affiliates with the Republican

party, the percentage of the labor force that is unionized, the fraction of the state’s population that identifies

with a Christian religion, the level of GDP per capita, the mandatory length of maternity/family leave benefits,

and the growth in the state’s college graduation rates. In the next section, we discuss why we believe that

these variables are instructive for examining cultural and social factors that might play a role in influencing

diversity in the venture capital and entrepreneurial sectors. While we discuss potential explanations for a

relationship, we do not want to infer causality at this point. Our goal is to lay the foundation for future work

on these topics.

        All the regressions presented will be single variable correlations between the state-level variable and

the diversity measure, not a multivariate regression. More importantly, our purpose here is not to identify

causation, but rather to suggest patterns in the data that may hint at future research.




4.2.2.1 Political Leanings

        We might expect that social attitudes towards gender and ethnic diversity may be related to political

beliefs about the role of social policy in alleviating gender and ethnic disparities. In the recent decades, there

has been an increased ideological polarization along the party lines documented for example in Abramowitz

and Saunders (1998) and Layman and Carsey (2002), where the Republican Party has consistently taken

conservative positions on welfare, racial, and cultural issues. To the extent that there are social and cultural

differences correlated with party affiliation, we might expect that it would have effects on diversity within

entrepreneurship and venture capital. Historically, Republicans have been more likely to believe that the free

market should be left to sort out labor market outcomes and less likely to support policies like affirmative




                                                        29
action. Hence, we expect that the percentage of registered Republicans in a state would be negatively

correlated with gender and Ethnic diversity.

        For this analysis, we use the self-identified party affiliation from Gallup in 2010 within each state as a

percentage of the total voting age population. We tabulate the relationship between the state level variable

and diversity in two ways. In Table XIV, we examine whether the difference in diversity (as measured by the

difference in the average fraction of the entrepreneurial/venture capital population that is female,

underrepresented minorities, or Asian) is significant between the top five states and the bottom five states. As

before, we focus on the set of states that have sizable observations of both entrepreneurs and venture

capitalists. Among them, the states with the highest percentages of Republicans are Utah, Pennsylvania,

Georgia, Tennessee, and Arizona, which have an average percentage of the voting population identifying with

the Republican Party of 31.6%. The five states with the lowest percentages of self-identified Republicans are

Massachusetts, Connecticut, Maryland, New York and California that average 20.0%. In this case, we see that

the fraction of entrepreneurs who are female is 6.3% in the five most Republican states, significantly lower

than 9.5% in the five least Republican states. Similarly, the fraction of entrepreneurs who are Asian is 8.2% in

the most Republican states compared with 13.6% in the least Republican states. The relationship between the

Republican affiliation and female representation in the state’s venture capital sector is statistically less

significant, but is nominally in the same direction.         For underrepresented minorities, the fraction of

entrepreneurs is unrelated to the states Republican percentage. The fraction of venture capitalists that are

Hispanic or African American is, however, negatively correlated with the Republican percentage.

        We examine the relationship in a single-variate regression by regressing the percentage of the state’s

entrepreneurs/venture capitalists that are female, Asian, or an underrepresented minority on the state-level

variable. In Table XV we find a significantly negative correlation between the fraction of both entrepreneurs

and venture capitalists who are female and the percentage Republican. Similar patterns exist for Asians

entrepreneurs. However, because the variation in the state level of Hispanic and African American

representation is so low, we do not obtain any statistically significant results. These results are consistent with

our predicted relationship between Republican Party identification and diversity.


                                                        30
4.2.2.2 Unionization Rates

        Next, we turn to the level of union membership within a state. Hunt (1999) hypothesized that unions

may promote diversity. The level of unionization within a state might similarly reflect the view that social

policy has a role in leveling the playing field. We would expect to see a positive correlation between the level

of unionization and gender and ethnic diversity. However, since the level of union memberships could be

correlated with a variety of other variables, any relationship observed here cannot be interpreted as causal.

        In Table XIV, we see that the states with the highest unionization rates are New York, Michigan,

New Jersey, Washington, and Illinois, averaging 21.2% in these states. Our data on the percentage of the

labor force that is unionized comes from the website www.unionstats.com which publishes the data from

Hirsh and MacPherson (2003). Our level of unionization averages the rate of union membership in 1990,

2000, and 2010. North Carolina, Georgia, Texas and Virginia have the lowest levels of union membership,

averaging only 5.7%. We see that the percentage of the entrepreneurs who are female is 9.4% in states with

high unionization rates, significantly larger than 6.6% in states with low unionization rates. The difference the

fraction of venture capitalists who are female is also significant; high union states have 9.4% of the venture

capital industry who are female versus 6.8% in the low union states. Asian entrepreneurs and venture

capitalists also fare better in states with high unionization rates, although the differences are less statistically

significant. Our single variate regressions including all the states in Table XV show consistent patterns that

are significant for both women and Asians. States with high levels of union membership have significantly

more women and Asians in their venture capital and entrepreneurial ecosystems than do low union

membership states.


4.2.2.3 Religious Affiliations

        Religious beliefs can often influence social attitudes as well as social interactions. The role of religion

may also play a role in social factors that influence diversity. In particular, in states with a higher percentage

of the population that identifies as Christian, attitudes towards women in the workplace may be more

conservative. If more women choose to forego careers outside the home in these states, there may be fewer

                                                        31
women in the entrepreneurial and venture capital industries.         However, religious affiliations are also

correlated with many other variables, reminding us not to take the correlation here with any causal

interpretation.

        We get state level religious affiliation data from the 2010 Gallup survey. The states with the highest

percentage of the population identified as practicing Christians are Tennessee, Texas, North Carolina,

Georgia and Pennsylvania, averaging 83% as shown in Table XIV. On the other hand, Oregon, Washington,

New Hampshire, Colorado, and California have the smallest proportions, averaging 70%. While the

differences are not statistically significant, the group of high Christian states have lower percentages of both

the entrepreneurial and venture capital industry that are female or Asian. Interestingly, the fraction of

entrepreneurs who are an underrepresented minority is higher in the high Christian states.

        In Table XIV, our single variate regressions confirm these patterns. The fraction of the venture

capital and entrepreneurial pool who are female or Asian is negatively related (and significant) to the

percentage of the population that identifies as Christian. The results for underrepresented minorities goes in

the opposite direction for both entrepreneurs and venture capitalists, although it is only significant for

underrepresented entrepreneurs. This result may arise from the fact that Hispanics and African Americans

may be more likely to affiliate with the Christian religion and, hence, states with high African American or

Hispanic populations may have greater fractions of the population that are Christian as well as more

entrepreneurs and venture capitalists from those ethnic groups.


4.2.2.4 GDP Per Capita

        In addition to the political and social factors, we also examine measures of economic performance.

States with high levels of GDP per capita may have greater resources that can be spent on programs to

promote diversity in the innovation sector. This might include more money for scholarships, tax breaks for

hiring, and state-funded training programs. As before, the causal mechanisms (if any) may have multiple

channels. In fact, some scholars might look for the causality to run in the opposite direction. We do not

intend to infer causality, only an empirical correlation with economic performance and diversity.




                                                      32
        We get data on state level GDP per capita from 1997-2010 (in constant 2009 dollars) from the

Bureau of Economic Analysis. We average the level of GDP per capita for states across these years. We then

rank states on the basis of GDP per capita. The five states with the highest GDP per capita in Table XIV are

Connecticut, Massachusetts, New York, New Jersey and Washington, averaging $55,913. The five states with

the lowest GDP per capita are Florida, Arizona, Tennessee, Utah and Michigan, averaging $40,286. The

fractions of the entrepreneurs and venture capitalists in a given state who are female are higher in states with

higher GDP per capita. In the high GDP per capita states, 9.5% of entrepreneurs are female versus 6.5% in

the low GDP per capita states. For the venture capital sector, high GDP per capita states have 10.0% of the

venture capital pool who are female versus 6.4% in the low GDP per capital states. The case is similar for

Asian entrepreneurs. In high GDP per capita states, 12.6% of entrepreneurs are Asians versus 7.4% for the

low GDP per capita states. The fraction of Asian venture capitalists as well as underrepresented minority

entrepreneurs and venture capitalists do not show a relationship between GDP per capita and diversity.

        Single variate regressions in Table XV reveal similar patterns. The fraction of venture capitalists and

entrepreneurs who are female shows a strong positive correlation with state-level GDP per capita. Similarly,

the fraction of the entrepreneurial pool who are Asian also shows a positive and statistically significant

relationship with the state-level GDP per capita.


4.2.2.5 Improvements in Education

        There has been extensive research examining education as a determinant of economic growth

including Barro (2013). We might expect that as educational attainment improves, the experience of women

and underrepresented minorities in the innovation sector would improve. If there are more opportunities to

receive the types of education and training that lead to careers in venture capital and entrepreneurship, then

the playing field might become more level.

        For each state, we calculate the percentage increase of the state population that has a college degree

from 1980 to 2000 using information from the Census Bureau’s Population Surveys and the 2010-2014

American Community Surveys. The five states with the largest increases in percentage of the population with

college degrees are Massachusetts, New Jersey, Maryland, Connecticut, and New Hampshire, with an average


                                                      33
increase of 11.4% in Table XIV. On the other hand, the states with the smallest increases in the percentage of

the population with college degrees are Arizona, Utah, Texas, California, and Tennessee, with an average

increase of 6.5%.       Although the differences in educational improvements are remarkable, there is no

statistically significant difference in terms diversity outcomes between the five highest and the five lowest

states. Similarly, the single variate regression using the increase in college degrees in Table XV also yield no

statistically significant results.


4.2.2.6 Parental Benefits

         A variety of research has examined the role of maternity benefits on the choice of employment for

women.      Dustmann and Schonberg (2012) provide evidence that an expansion in maternity benefits has a

strong impact on mothers’ return to work after childbirth. Similarly, Gottlieb, Townsend, and Xu (2016) look

at changes in Canadian maternity benefits and the choice of women to start businesses. We therefore look at

whether state-level variations in the mandated maternity/family leave benefits are correlated with diversity

outcomes, especially for women. We expect that if the effects are causal, then only female participation in

venture capital and entrepreneurship should be affected.

         We obtain the benefit scores from the National Partnership for Women and Families that grades

each state’s laws concerning paid job protection, family and maternity leave, and flexible use of sick leave.

The five states with the highest grades are California, Oregon, New Jersey, Connecticut, and Washington that

have an average score of 87 as shown in Table XIV. There are seven states with the lowest grade (0):

Maryland, Virginia, Georgia, North Carolina, Pennsylvania, Missouri, and Texas. We find that states with the

highest grade have higher proportions of entrepreneurs who are female (9.3% vs. 7.3%) and a higher fraction

of venture capitalists who are female (9.7% vs 7.3%) than the states with the lowest grades.

         The single variate regressions in Table XV provide support for greater gender diversity. The

statistical significances are moderate, while the signs are consistent for both the fraction of female

entrepreneurs and female venture capitalists. Surprisingly, we find that there also appears to be a positive

relationship between maternity/family leave benefits and the fraction of venture capitalists who are Asian.

We do not have a clear explanation for this particular correlation.


                                                       34
        In summary, with at least moderate statistical significance, we find greater gender diversities are

correlated with state measures of lower Republican Party affiliation, higher unionization rates, lower Christian

identification, higher GDP per capita, and stronger state laws for maternity/family leave benefits. We also

find broadly similar patterns between these state-level characteristics and the fractions of entrepreneurs and

venture capitalists who are Asian. Surprisingly, there appear to be no strong patterns in the level of Hispanics

and African American participation in venture capital and entrepreneurship and our state-level variables. This

may be due, in part, to the extremely low level of representation for these ethnic minorities in the innovation

sector more broadly.

        These results suggest that there may be room for social and cultural factors in the heterogeneity of

diversity across states. Policies that appear to be aimed at “leveling the playing field” towards women seem to

actually improve gender diversity. Similarly, more liberal attitudes towards social policy seem to improve

women representation as well. We cannot say, however, whether the mechanism works by increasing the

predisposition of women to choose a career in venture capital and entrepreneurship or whether there is

debiasing in the actual hiring decisions themselves. We also find, interestingly, that the representation of

Asians in both the venture capital and entrepreneurial ecosystem are correlated with factors that also improve

women’s representation. While we do not intend these results to be interpreted in any causal manner, we do

think that these correlations provide a fruitful foundation for future research.



5    Discussion of Potential Models and Causal Inference
        The demographic patterns and trends surveyed in this paper have highlighted the overall lack of

gender and ethnic diversity in both entrepreneurship and venture capital. Women have entered into

entrepreneurship and venture capital at rates much lower than their entry rates into other highly compensated

professional fields such as medicine or law. The representation of women in science and technology

advanced degrees (as a precursor to entrepreneurship) and MBAs (as a precursor to entry into venture capital)

are again much higher than the representation of women in the innovation sector. Also, the relative

percentage of both sectors who are female has not increased measurably over the past twenty-five years.



                                                       35
         Similarly, the fractions of Hispanics and African Americans are also much lower than their general

population compositions, despite the improvements in their educational attainments in advanced science and

engineering degrees or MBA programs.          While the experience of Hispanic entrepreneurs and venture

capitalists has improved some, there has been no increase in the representation of African Americans in either.

         These patterns stand in stark contrast to the experience of Asians who both started at a higher level

of participation in entrepreneurship and venture capital, but then increased over the past two and a half

decades at a substantially faster rate. The percentage of the venture capital and entrepreneurial sector who are

Asian is substantially larger than their percentage in the overall population. This growth comes despite little

change in the observed level of education attainment of Asians.

         However, at least based on the aggregate data, we find that the lack of diversity is unlikely due to a

shortage of supply of candidates with the relevant educational or industry backgrounds. Therefore, in this

section, we discuss other possible explanations, ranging from demand side preferences to information and

search frictions.

         One potential demand-side explanation for the lack of diversity is related to the notion of

“homophily”, which is the tendency of individuals to associate with similar others. As surveyed in McPherson,

Smith-Lovin, and Cook (2001), the notion that “similarity breeds connection” has robust and profound

effects in network structures of every type, including “marriage, friendship, work, advice, support,

information transfer, exchange, co-membership, and other types of relationship.” A direct implication of this

“birds of a feather” phenomenon is that venture capitalists prefer to hire, invest in, or coinvest with those

that are similar to themselves in characteristics such as gender and ethnicity.

         Indeed, Gompers, Mukharlyamov, and Xuan (2016) show that coinvestment patterns in venture

capital are driven by social similarities, where venture capitalists who are more similar in terms of gender,

ethnicity, school background, and work history are more likely to collaborate. Further, they also show that

this homophily driven collaboration reduces performance.15



15
 Cohen, Frazzini, and Malloy (2008) show that homophily also works at the school ties level in the investment
management arena between buy side analysts and CEOs.

                                                        36
            Moreover, the typical venture capital firm is small in size, with a median of 3 partners in our dataset.

Hiring decisions are made infrequently. Further, expansion in the VC industry has occurred mostly at the

extensive margin (i.e., the creation of new, small (3-partner) VC firms), as opposed to the intensive margin

(existing firm expansion). This could be due to optimal scale considerations given the output (e.g., the

information collection, processing, etc. could work best on small nimble teams), or due to inefficiencies (e.g.,

industry-wide equilibrium fee structures provide incentives to maintain small teams). Thus, aggregate new

hiring in this industry is driven by the (aggregated) decisions of small teams. From social psychology, small

groups are both more likely to be homophilous, and more likely to have biases aggregate into expressed

decision-making (Klocke (2007)). Thus, a slight – even subconscious - preference over certain demographic

characteristics could aggregate into a sustained overall lack of diversity at an industry level.

            Put differently, in a firm making a singleton new hire, a slight gender preference may result in the

hiring of a man over a woman. Even though the gender preference can be thought of as a continuous variable

and any slight bias could be small, the hiring outcome is binary. In this setting, even a very small bias towards

hiring someone of the same gender or ethnicity could lead to persistent low representation from those groups

not already in the venture capital industry. The aggregation of such binary outcomes across firms can result in

the overall lack of diversity across an entire industry.16

            Nonetheless, the demand-side explanation at the hiring level of a venture capital firm does not

explain the lack of diversity among entrepreneurs, since the decision to become an entrepreneur typically does

not depend on the hiring decision of any particular firm. Teams of entrepreneurs come together to exploit

new ideas and innovation. There is no preexisting firm with a given gender or ethnicity makeup. One

potential hypothesis is that the homophily-based hiring preferences affected the gender and ethnicity makeup

of the previous jobs where entrepreneurs worked. This explanation is partially consistent with the data where

we found the educational attainments of women and African Americans did not increase their participation in

the occupations that are most relevant for entrepreneurship. However, it is worth noting that these

technology firms tend to include large organizations, where the small-group dynamics outlined before would


16   A careful identification of the causal impact of this in the VC space is explored in Cohen, Gompers, and Wang (2016).

                                                             37
not apply as acutely. Furthermore, it does not offer an explanation as to why the fractions of women and

minorities in these occupations are still much higher than that the entrepreneurial and venture capital

communities.

        Going further, as suggested by sociologists as well as economists, in addition to homophily-based

preferences on the demand side, homophily in a network could also have a large effect on the spread of

information and behavior. Starting with Granovettor (1973), researchers have documented the importance of

the social network in obtaining information about various occupations. The model proposed by Calvo-

Armengol and Jackson (2004) emphasized the implication of homophily for such access to job information

leading to persistent correlations of employment across agents. Education scholars have also researched

career aspirations in middle school, high school, and college and their correlation with gender and ethnicity.

This work (Riegle-Crumb, Moore, and Ramos-Wasda (2010)) finds that even at an early age, there are

differences in career aspirations in math and science between men and women and between various ethnic

groups. Therefore, an information-based explanation predicts that a venture capital firm is more likely to

encounter job candidates that are more similar to its existing employees because those types of individuals

know more about the sector and may aspire to get jobs in venture capital or startups, irrespective of their

demand preferences.

        The information-based explanation can also be applicable to the decision to become an entrepreneur,

given that the knowledge on how to pursue entrepreneurial activities is essential, while such information may

be acquired through social interactions. Kerr and Mandorff (2016) shows that within-ethnicity social network

interactions facilitate the acquisition of sector-specific knowledge, which lead to the clustering of

entrepreneurial activities among immigrants. As such, further research using additional data measuring social

interaction along gender and ethnicity lines could be useful in understanding the patterns and trends in

occupational choices.

        One question from both a research and a policy perspective are what types of forces can dislodge the

homophily-induced inertia in these types of organizations. In the context of venture capital, if the inertia

stems from subtle subconscious biases in preference in hiring, the greater awareness of these biases may


                                                     38
change hiring practices. Our results in the prior section showing a relationship between more liberal social

policies (unionization, lower Republican Party identification, and more liberal maternity/paternal leave

policies) might be correlated with less bias in the hiring decisions for venture capitalists in those states.

Similarly, these more liberal social policies may improve the information flow to women about potential

careers in venture capital and entrepreneurship.

        Similarly, other subtle treatment effects, as Gompers and Wang (2017) show, may induce more

equitable hiring. Gompers and Wang show that when existing male partners at venture capital firms have

more daughters, the probability of hiring a female investment professional goes up. A fruitful area for future

research would be to examine other subtle treatments that may change these types of biases for ethnic

minorities as well.

        In the context of entrepreneurs, a question arises about whether the lack of female and

underrepresented ethnic minority entrepreneurs is due to few venture capitalists who are female or an

underrepresented minority or vice versa.        We know that homophily exists in the venture capitalist-

entrepreneur pairs, shared gender and ethnicity are more likely to lead a venture capitalist and an entrepreneur

to pair up. Does the inertia in the venture capital ecosystem create barriers for women, Hispanic, and African

American entrepreneurs? This seems like a critical question to address. Alternatively, is the lack of female,

Hispanic, and African American venture capitalists driven by a lack of female, Hispanic, and African

American entrepreneurs? If this is the case, then policies that would promote greater information about

careers in the entrepreneurial sector might increase female, Hispanic, and African American entrepreneurs

and venture capitalists.



6    Conclusion
        In this survey we document a systematic and persistent lack of female, Hispanic, and African

American labor market participation in the innovation sector – through both entrepreneurs and the venture

capitalists that fund them. In addition to documenting this empirical regularity, we explore its time-series

evolution and cross-industry dynamics. We show that this same pattern is not present across similar highly-



                                                       39
compensated, professional fields in such as medicine or law, nor in jobs with nearly identical human-capital

profiles such as investment banking or consulting. We find that this empirical fact is not driven by a lack of

supply of highly trained women, Hispanics, or African Americans. The representation of women, Hispanics,

and African Americans in MBA programs as well as advanced science and engineering degrees has been

substantially higher than their representation in the venture capital and entrepreneurial sectors for the past

two decades.

        We contrast this experience with that of Asians over the same time period. Asians started the time

period with a much higher representation, compared to their percentage of the labor force, in the venture

capital and entrepreneurial sector. That rate of participation increased dramatically as well over the past

twenty-five years. This dramatic increase comes despite there being no dramatic increase in the fractions of

MBA degree recipients or recipients of advanced science and engineering degrees who are Asian. Contrasting

the experience of Asians with other ethnic minorities seems to be a fruitful area for future research.

        We also explore geographic concentration of this underrepresentation of female, Hispanic, and

African American labor market participation. Lastly, we examine the school- and prior work-based

institutions out from which innovators and venture capitalists tend to emerge.

        The primary goal of this survey is to document the empirical regularities and relationships in the

innovation labor market that will serve researchers, policy makers, and practitioners. We hope that the

summaries serve as the beginning of more formal and structured research approaches to explore these human

capital phenomena. Given the primary importance of labor as a factor of production in the innovation space,

the strong regularities we document regarding female and minority labor market participation represent an

important feature of real-world markets for which we need to understand the causes - and perhaps more

importantly – the consequences. Future research should thus in particular focus on systematic and careful

identification techniques in order to the move the discussion forward in a careful and positive direction.




                                                       40
References
Abramowitz, A., and K. Saunders, “Ideological Realignment in the U.S. Electorate”, The Journal of Politics, 60,

(1998), 634-652.


Barro, R., “Education and Economic Growth,” Annals of Economics and Finance, 14-2(A), (2013) 277-304.


Bertrand, M., and S. Mullinathan, “Are Emily and Greg More Employable than Lakisha and Jamal? A Field

Experiment on Labor Market Discrimination,” American Economic Review 94, (2004), pp. 991-1013.



Calvo-Armengol, A., and M. Jackson, “The Effects of Social Networks on Employment and Inequality,”

American Economic Review, 94 (3), (2004)


Cohen, L., A. Frazzini, and C. Malloy, “The Small World of Investing: Board Connections and Mutual Fund

Returns,” Journal of Political Economy, 116 (2008), 951–979.


Dustmann, C., and U. Schonberg, “Expansions in Maternity Leave Coverage and Children's Long-Term

Outcomes,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 4 (2012), 190-224.


French, K. R., and J. M. Poterba, “Investor Diversification and International Equity Markets,” American

Economic Review, 81 (1991), 222–226.




                                                        41
Granovettor, M. “The Strength of Weak Ties,” American Journal of Sociology, 78, (1973), pp. 1360-1380.


Gompers, P., A. Kovner, J. Lerner, and D. Scharfstein, “Performance Persistence in Entrepreneurship,”

Journal of Financial Economics 96, pp. 18-32.


Gompers, P., J. Lerner, and D. Scharfstein, “Entrepreneurial Spawning: Public Corporations and the Genesis

of New Ventures, 1986 to 1999,” The Journal of Finance, 2 (2005), 577 – 614.


Gompers, P., V. Mukharlyamov, and Y. Xuan, “The Cost of Friendship,” Journal of Financial Economics, 119

(2016), 626–644


Gompers, P., V. Mukharlyamov, E. Weisburst, and Y. Xuan, “Gender Effects in Venture Capital,” Working

Paper (2015).


Gompers, P., and S. Wang, “Daddy’s Little Girls: The Effects of Children’s Gender on Hiring and

Performance in Venture Capital,” HBS Working Paper (2017)


Gornall, W. and I. Strebulaev, “Financing as a Supply Chain: The Capital Structure of Banks and Borrowers,”

Working Paper (2015).


Gottlieb, J., T. Richard, and T. Xu, “Experimenting with Entrepreneurship,” University of British Columbia

working paper, (2016).


Gruber, J., “The Incidence of Mandated Maternity Benefits,” American Economic Review, 84(3), 1994, p. 622-

641.




                                                    42
Hirsch, B., and D. Macpherson, "Union Membership and Coverage Database from the Current Population

Survey: Note," Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 56, (2003), 349-54.


Hunt, G., “Laboring for Rights: Unions and Sexual Diversity Across Nations,” Philadelphia: Temple

University Press, (1999).


Kaplan, S. N. and J. Lerner, “It ain’t broke: The past, present, and future of venture capital,” Journal of Applied

Corporate Finance 22(2) (2010), 36–47.


Kerr, W. R., and W. F. Lincoln, “The Supply Side of Innovation: H-1B Visa Reforms and U.S. Ethnic

Invention,” Journal of Labor Economics, 28 (2010), 473–508.


Kerr, W. R., and M. Mandor, “Social Networks, Ethnicity, and Entrepreneurship,” Harvard Business School

Working Paper, (2015).


Klocke, U., “How to Improve Decision Making in Small Groups: Effects of Dissent and Training

Interventions,” Small Group Research, June 2007 38: 437-468


Layman G., and T. Carsey, “Party Polarization and Party Structuring of Policy Attitudes: A Comparison of

Three NES Panel Studies,” Political Behavior, 24 (2002), 199-236.


McPherson, M., L. Smith-Lovin, and J. M. Cook, “Birds of a Feather: Homophily in Social Networks,”

Annual Review of Sociology, 27 (2001), 415–444.


Riegle-Crumb, C., C. Moore, and A. Ramos-Wada, “Who Wants a Career in Science or Math? Exploring

Adolescents’ Future Aspirations by Gender and Race/Ethnicity,” Science Education 95 (2010), 458-476.




                                                        43
     Figure 1. Female Ratio in Venture Capital, Entrepreneurship, Law and Medicine (1990-2015)

Figure 1 compares female participation entry rates in venture capital and entrepreneurship from 1990 to 2015
to female entry rates in law, medicine and labor force.




  Female Bachelor Data is retrieved from http://www.bls.gov/cps/demographics.htm#race, bachelor degree conferred to female by
year. Female Labor Force data is retrieved from http://www.bls.gov/cps/demographics.htm#women. Female lawyer/physician data
is retrieved from http://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/data/pums.html, female lawyers/physicians under 35 in 2000, 2005,
           2010. Female lawyer/physician in 1990 is estimated from female lawyer/physician between age 35 and 50 in 2000.

                            Figure 2. Female Ratio in Financial Service Industry after 2010

Figure 2 compares female participation entry rates in venture capital and entrepreneurship from 2010 to 2015
to female entry rates in investment banking and consulting.




               Data is retrieved from https://www.eeoc.gov/eeoc/statistics/employment/jobpat-eeo1/index.cfm




                                                             44
Figure 3. African American in Venture Capital, Entrepreneurship, Law and Medicine (1990-2015)

Figure 3 compares African American entry rates in venture capital and entrepreneurship from 1990 to 2015
to African American entry rates in law, medicine and labor force.




  Bachelor Data is retrieved from http://www.bls.gov/cps/demographics.htm#race, bachelor degree conferred by ethnicity. Labor
     Force data is retrieved from http://www.bls.gov/cps/demographics.htm#women. Lawyer/physician data is retrieved from
http://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/data/pums.html, lawyers/physicians under 35 in 2000, 2005, 2010. Lawyer/physician
                               in 1990 is estimated from lawyer/physician between age 35 and 50 in 2000.

                    Figure 4. African American in Financial Service Industry after 2010

Figure 4 compares African American entry rates in venture capital and entrepreneurship from 2010 to 2015
to female entry rates in investment banking and consulting.




                Data is retrieved from https://www.eeoc.gov/eeoc/statistics/employment/jobpat-eeo1/index.cfm



                                                             45
              Figure 5. Asian in Venture Capital, Entrepreneurship, Law and Medicine (1990-2015)

Figure 5 compares Asian entry rates in venture capital and entrepreneurship from 1990 to 2015 to Asian entry
rates in law, medicine and labor force.




  Bachelor Data is retrieved from http://www.bls.gov/cps/demographics.htm#race, bachelor degree conferred by ethnicity. Labor
     Force data is retrieved from http://www.bls.gov/cps/demographics.htm#women. Lawyer/physician data is retrieved from
http://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/data/pums.html, lawyers/physicians under 35 in 2000, 2005, 2010. Lawyer/physician
                               in 1990 is estimated from lawyer/physician between age 35 and 50 in 2000.

                                 Figure 6. Asian in Financial Service Industry after 2010

Figure 6 compares Asian entry rates in venture capital and entrepreneurship from 2010 to 2015 to female
entry rates in investment banking and consulting.




                Data is retrieved from https://www.eeoc.gov/eeoc/statistics/employment/jobpat-eeo1/index.cfm


                                                             46
            Figure 7. Hispanic in Venture Capital, Entrepreneurship, Law and Medicine (1990-2015)

Figure 7 compares Hispanic entry rates in venture capital and entrepreneurship from 1990 to 2015 to
Hispanic entry rates in law, medicine and labor force.




  Bachelor Data is retrieved from http://www.bls.gov/cps/demographics.htm#race, bachelor degree conferred by ethnicity. Labor
     Force data is retrieved from http://www.bls.gov/cps/demographics.htm#women. Lawyer/physician data is retrieved from
http://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/data/pums.html, lawyers/physicians under 35 in 2000, 2005, 2010. Lawyer/physician
                               in 1990 is estimated from lawyer/physician between age 35 and 50 in 2000.

                               Figure 8. Hispanic in Financial Service Industry after 2010

Figure 8 compares Hispanic entry rates in venture capital and entrepreneurship from 2010 to 2015 to female
entry rates in investment banking and consulting.




                Data is retrieved from https://www.eeoc.gov/eeoc/statistics/employment/jobpat-eeo1/index.cfm


                                                             47
           Figure 9. Percentage of Minority Entrepreneurs Compare to Labor Force (1990-2016)

Figure 9 compares the entry rates of entrepreneurs to the labor force participation rate by ethnicity from 1990

to 2016.




                      Figure 10. Percentage of Minority VC Compare to Labor Force (1990-2016)

Figure 10 compares the entry rates of venture capitalists to the labor force participation rate by ethnicity from
1990 to 2016.




           Source: http://www.bls.gov/cps/demographics.htm for minority in US labor forc



                                                              48
             Figure 11. Interaction of Gender and Ethnicity (1990-2016)

Figure 11 looks at the entry rates of female in venture capital and entrepreneurship by ethnicity.

                 Panel A: Ethnic Compositions for Female Entrepreneurs

    12.00%


    10.00%


     8.00%
                                                                        Hispanic Female Entrep

     6.00%                                                              Asian Female Entrep
                                                                        African Am Female Entrep
     4.00%                                                              White female Entrep

     2.00%


     0.00%
         1990-94      1995-99      2000-04        2005-10     2010-16




                       Panel B: Ethnic Compositions for Female VCs

12.00%


10.00%


 8.00%
                                                                          Hispanic Female VC

 6.00%                                                                    Asian Female VC
                                                                          Afri Am Female VC
 4.00%                                                                    White Female VC

 2.00%


 0.00%
     1990-94       1995-99      2000-04      2005-10        2010-16




                                             49
               Figure 12 Industry Patterns of Female Entrepreneurs and VCs

Figure 12 looks at female participation rate in venture capital and entrepreneurship by industry.


   25.00%

                                              Female Entrepreneur                Female VC
                                              Entrepreneur Average               VC Average
                           19.7%
   20.00%




   15.00%
                                      13.6%


                                                                        10.5%
                                                                    9.8%
   10.00%
                               8.2%
             7.6%                                                               7.4% 7.5%
                                          7.2%      7.1%
                                                           6.6%
                    5.8%                                                                      6.0%
                                                                                                     5.5%
    5.00%




    0.00%
            Business and   Consumer   Consumer      Energy and    Healthcare    Industrial    Information
              Financial     Goods      Services      Utilities                  Goods and     Technology
               Service                                                          Materials




                                                    50
                     Figure 13 Industry Patterns of Minority Entrepreneurs and VCs

  Figure 13 looks at minority participation rate in entrepreneurship and venture capital by industry.

   20.00%
                                    African American Entrepreneur          Asian Entrepreneur
   18.00%
                                    Hispanic Entrepreneur
   16.00%


   14.00%


   12.00%


   10.00%


    8.00%


    6.00%


    4.00%


    2.00%


    0.00%
               Business and       Consumer        Consumer          Energy and       Healthcare     Industrial Goods    Information
             Financial Service     Goods           Services          Utilities                        and Materials     Technology



    20.00%
                                             African American VC                 Asian VC             Hispanic VC
    18.00%

    16.00%

    14.00%

    12.00%

    10.00%

     8.00%

     6.00%

     4.00%

     2.00%

     0.00%
                Business and      Consumer         Consumer          Energy and        Healthcare    Industrial Goods    Information
              Financial Service    Goods            Services          Utilities                        and Materials     Technology




Note: The error bars denote 1.96 times the standard error.



                                                               51
                   Figure 14. Female Degree Recipients in Science and Engineering and MBA

This figure plots the percentage of female doctorate recipients by fields. Female PhD refers to the percentage of female
among all US doctorate recipients. Female SE refers to the percentage of female among all US science and engineering
doctorate recipients.




Source: Female PhD, Master, Bachelor data is retrieved from http://www.nsf.gov/statistics/degreerecipients/#tabs-1. Female MBA data is retrieved
from National Center for Education Statistics, Master's degrees conferred by degree-granting institutions, by sex, race/ethnicity, and field of study.
http://nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/2015menu_tables.asp




                                                                          52
                       Figure 15. Female Professionals in Technology, Consulting, Finance

This figure plots the percentage of female professionals in IT. Female Software refers to female ratio in Software
Publishing industry (NAICS 51121) and Female Computer Mfg refers to female ratio in Computer & Peripheral
Equipment Mfg (NAICS 33411). Female Consulting refers to female ration in consulting industry (NAICS 54161) and
Female IB refers to female ratio in Investment Banking industry (NAICS 52311).




                          Source: https://www.eeoc.gov/eeoc/statistics/employment/jobpat-eeo1/index.cfm




             Figure 16. Science and Engineering Doctorate Recipients by Minority Ethnic Groups


                                                          53
This figure plots Science and Engineering doctorate recipients by US minority ethnic group. The Y axis is the percentage
of SE doctorate degrees conferred to an US minority ethnic group.




                                       Source: http://www.nsf.gov/statistics/degreerecipients/#tabs-1

               Figure 17. Science and Engineering Master Recipients by Minority Ethnic Groups

This figure plots Science and Engineering Master Degree recipients by US minority ethnic group. The Y axis is the
percentage of SE Master degrees conferred to an US minority ethnic group.




                                       Source: http://www.nsf.gov/statistics/degreerecipients/#tabs-1

                                    Figure 18. Minority Professionals in Technology



                                                              54
This figure plots the percentage of Asian/underrepresented minority professionals in IT. Software refers to Software
Publishing industry (NAICS 51121) and Computer Mfg refers to Computer & Peripheral Equipment Mfg (NAICS
33411). Asian refers to Asian American.




                          Source: https://www.eeoc.gov/eeoc/statistics/employment/jobpat-eeo1/index.cfm




                                                          55
                  Figure 19. US Masters in Business Recipients by Minority Ethnic Groups

This figure plots MBA recipients by US minority ethnic group. The Y axis is the percentage of MBA degrees conferred
to an US minority ethnic group.




Source: National Center for Education Statistics, Master's degrees conferred by degree-granting institutions, by sex, race/ethnicity,
and field of study. http://nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/2015menu_tables.asp




                                                                   56
                           Figure 20. Minority Professionals in Finance and Consulting

This figure plots the percentage of Asian/underrepresented minority professionals in Finance and Consulting.
Consulting refers to consulting industry (NAICS 54161) and IB refers to Investment Banking industry (NAICS 52311).
Asian refers to Asian American.




        Source: https://www.eeoc.gov/eeoc/statistics/employment/jobpat-eeo1/index.cfm




                                                          57
                                            Table I. Summary Statistics

This table reports summary statistics for the sample of US entrepreneurs and venture capitalists by gender and ethnicity
from 1990 to 2016. Minority is defined as the sum of African American, Asian and Hispanic. White is defined as non-
Hispanic White. There are a few people whose gender/ethnicity cannot be identified (less than 1%), hence the sum of
gender/ethnicity category is slightly less than the total number of observations.


        Entrepreneur                                                                               VC
 Gender          # of obs               % of total                     Gender                 # of obs        % of total
 Male              38,727                 91.12%                       Male                     10,544          91.25%
 Female             3,667                  8.63%                       Female                      986           8.53%
 Total             42,502                  100%                        Total                    11,555           100%

 Ethnicity             # of obs         % of total                     Ethnicity              # of obs        % of total
 White                   33,809           79.55%                       White                     9,969          86.27%
 African                                                               African
 American                    188           0.44%                       American                     37            0.32%
 Asian                     6,717          15.80%                       Asian                     1,219           10.55%
 Hispanic                  1,599           3.76%                       Hispanic                    290            2.51%
 Minority                  8,504          20.01%                       Minority                  1,546           13.38%
 Total                    42,502           100%                        Total                    11,555            100%




                                                           58
                                     Table II Gender Diversity across Ethnic Groups (Aggregate)

                             Table II reports ethnicity breakdown of US entrepreneurs and venture capitalists.

                                                                       African
                                                          White       American        Asian     Hispanic
                               Entrepreneurs
                               Total Obs                  33,809         188         6,717        1,599
                               Female Pct                  8.1%         12.8%        10.8%        10.4%
                               SE                          0.1%         2.4%         0.4%         0.8%

                               Venture Capital
                               Total Obs                   9,950          38         1,218         289
                               Female Pct                  8.1%         13.4%        11.1%        10.0%
                               SE                          0.3%         5.5%         0.9%         1.8%




                                         Table III. Industry by Gender (Entrepreneurs)

This table summarizes industry by male entrepreneurs and female entrepreneurs. The observation unit is deal level. Non US deals are
excluded. Some deals cannot be matched to a specific industry, hence the sum of categories is slightly less than one.

                       Industry Group                                            Obs         Male       Female
                       Business and Financial Service                            8,990      92.25%       7.60%
                       Consumer Goods                                             916       79.91%      19.65%
                       Consumer Services                                         7,518      86.27%      13.57%
                       Energy and Utilities                                       550       92.00%       7.09%
                       Healthcare                                                6,778      90.04%       9.77%
                       Industrial Goods and Materials                             693       92.50%       7.36%
                       Information Technology                                   17,032      93.62%       6.04%

                       Total                                                    42,478      91.12%       8.62%




                                                                   59
                                       Table IV. Industry by Gender (Venture Capitalist)

This table summarizes industry by male VC and female VC. The observation unit is deal level. Non US deals are excluded. Some deals
cannot be matched to a specific industry, hence the sum of categories is slightly less than one.


                        Industry Group                                            Obs         Male       Female
                        Business and Financial Service                            8,080      93.95%       5.80%
                        Consumer Goods                                             535       91.78%       8.22%
                        Consumer Services                                         4,555      92.51%       7.18%
                        Energy and Utilities                                       687       93.45%       6.55%
                        Healthcare                                               10,469      89.32%      10.52%
                        Industrial Goods and Materials                             803       91.66%       7.47%
                        Information Technology                                   17,844      94.35%       5.51%

                        Total                                                    42,988      92.84%       7.05%


                                             Table V. Industry by Ethnicity (Entrepreneurs)

This table summarizes entrepreneurs’ industry by ethnicity and race. The observation unit is deal level. Non US deals are excluded. Some
deals cannot be matched to a specific industry, hence the sum of categories is slightly less than one.


                                                                                            African
          Industry Group                                            Obs        White       American        Asian     Hispanic
          Business and Financial Service                            8,990      80.24%       0.57%         14.81%      3.87%
          Consumer Goods                                             916       83.73%       0.66%         10.92%      4.37%
          Consumer Services                                         7,518      79.57%       0.76%         14.99%      4.28%
          Energy and Utilities                                       550       86.36%       0.00%         10.73%      2.36%
          Healthcare                                                6,778      84.45%       0.28%         11.39%      3.47%
          Industrial Goods and Materials                             693       83.69%       0.00%         12.27%      3.75%
          Information Technology                                   17,032      76.60%       0.32%         19.02%      3.60%

          Total                                                    42,478      79.55%        0.44%        15.81%       3.76%




                                                                    60
                                          Table VI. Industry by Ethnicity (Venture Capitalist)

This table summarizes VC industry by ethnicity and race. The observation unit is VC deal level. Non US deals are excluded. Some deals
cannot be matched to a specific industry, hence the sum of categories is slightly less than one.


                                                                                          African
         Industry Group                                            Obs        White      American        Asian      Hispanic
         Business and Financial Service                            8,083      88.61%      0.19%          9.20%       1.81%
         Consumer Goods                                             536       89.37%      0.00%          7.28%       2.99%
         Consumer Services                                         4,555      88.30%      0.37%          9.33%       1.89%
         Energy and Utilities                                       687       86.46%      0.15%         11.50%       1.75%
         Healthcare                                               10,473      89.13%      0.15%          8.83%       1.76%
         Industrial Goods and Materials                             803       86.67%      0.25%         10.83%       2.24%
         Information Technology                                   17,844      85.68%      0.15%         11.72%       2.21%

         Total                                                    42,988      87.43%        0.18%       10.21%        1.99%




                                                                   61
                                                                Table VII. Education (Entrepreneurs)

This table summarizes education of entrepreneurs in the sample. The total number of degrees is less than the total number of entrepreneurs because some
entrepreneurs are missing education history in our sample either due to they did not finish a certain degree or we cannot find it online.

                                       College                                                                        Business School
                                                            Obs    Percent                                                                       Obs Percent
    1   Massachusetts Institute of Technology                  426 3.12%                1   Harvard University                                     586 16.03%
    2   Stanford University                                    411 3.01%                2   Stanford University                                    330 9.03%
    3   University of California (Berkeley)                    351 2.57%                3   University of Pennsylvania                             245 6.70%
    4   Harvard University                                     341 2.50%                4   University of Chicago                                  138 3.77%
    5   Cornell University                                     228 1.67%                5   Northwestern University                                127 3.47%
    6   University of Pennsylvania                             218 1.60%                6   University of California (Berkeley)                    119 3.25%
    7   University of Michigan                                 198 1.45%                7   Columbia University                                    101 2.76%
    8   Princeton University                                   174 1.27%                8   University of California (Los Angeles)                 100 2.74%
    9   Yale University                                        173 1.27%                9   Massachusetts Institute of Technology                   87 2.38%
   10   University of California (Los Angeles)                 163 1.19%               10   New York University                                     66 1.81%
   11   University of Illinois (Urbana Champaign)              155 1.13%               11   Dartmouth College                                       47 1.29%
   12   University of Texas (Austin)                           143 1.05%               12   Santa Clara University                                  45 1.23%
   13   Tel Aviv University                                    137 1.00%               13   University of Michigan                                  43 1.18%
   14   Dartmouth College                                      131 0.96%               14   University of Southern California                       42 1.15%
   15   Technion Israel Institute of Technology                125 0.92%               15   Babson College                                          37 1.01%
   16   Brown University                                       120 0.88%               16   Duke University                                         36 0.98%
   17   Duke University                                        119 0.87%               17   University of Texas (Austin)                            36 0.98%
   18   Columbia University                                    114 0.83%               18   University of Washington                                35 0.96%
   19   Boston University                                      113 0.83%               19   Boston University                                       34 0.93%
   20   University of Washington                               111 0.81%               20   Pepperdine University                                   33 0.90%
        Top 20 Total                                         3,951 28.93%                   Top 20 Total                                         2,287 62.55%
        Sample Total                                        13,657  100%                    Sample Total                                         3,656  100%




                                                                                62
           Table VII. Education (Entrepreneurs) Continued

                    Graduate School (Non-MBA)
                                                 Obs Percent
 1   Stanford University                           732 8.66%
 2   Massachusetts Institute of Technology         401 4.75%
 3   Harvard University                            353 4.18%
 4   University of California (Berkeley)           236 2.79%
 5   University of Southern California             142 1.68%
 6   University of Pennsylvania                    140 1.66%
 7   Cornell University                            131 1.55%
 8   Columbia University                           127 1.50%
 9   Carnegie Mellon University                    119 1.41%
10   University of Illinois (Urbana Champaign)     117 1.38%
11   University of Michigan                        111 1.31%
12   New York University                            99 1.17%
13   University of California (Los Angeles)         96 1.14%
14   California Institute of Technology             87 1.03%
15   University of Wisconsin (Madison)              87 1.03%
16   University of Texas (Austin)                   83 0.98%
17   University of Washington                       83 0.98%
18   Yale University                                82 0.97%
19   Boston University                              76 0.90%
20   Oxford University                              71 0.84%
     Top 20 Total                                3,373 39.91%
     Sample Total                                8,451  100%




                                63
                               Table VIII. College and Graduate Majors (Entrepreneurs)

This table summarizes degree and majors of entrepreneurs in the sample. The total number of degrees is less than the total number
of entrepreneurs because some entrepreneurs are missing education history in our sample either due to they did not finish a certain
degree or we cannot find it online.


                              Undergraduate Majors of Entrepreneurs                      Count      Percent
                      1       Electrical Engineering                                      1,205      14.31%
                      2       Computer Science                                            1,020      12.12%
                      3       Economics                                                     585       6.95%
                      4       Business                                                      580       6.89%
                      5       Engineering                                                   387       4.60%
                      6       Mathematics                                                   356       4.23%
                      7       Physics                                                       342       4.06%
                      8       Mechanical Engineering                                        302       3.59%
                      9       Biology                                                       278       3.30%
                      10      Chemistry                                                     241       2.86%
                      11      Finance                                                       213       2.53%
                      12      Computer Engineering                                          203       2.41%
                      13      Political Science                                             189       2.24%
                      14      Accounting                                                    175       2.08%
                      15      History                                                       147       1.75%
                      16      Marketing                                                     144       1.71%
                      17      Psychology                                                    122       1.45%
                      18      English                                                       116       1.38%
                      19      Chemical Engineering                                          108       1.28%
                      20      Communication                                                  94       1.12%

                              Total                                                        8,419 100.00%

                              Graduate Degrees of Entrepreneurs                          Count      Percent
                      1       Master (Non MBA)                                            4,058      59.89%
                      2       PhD                                                         2,012      29.69%
                      3       JD                                                            433       6.39%
                      4       MD                                                            268       3.96%

                            Total (Non MBA)                                                6,776 100.00%
                Note: 3,656 out of 14,134 Entrepreneurs have an MBA degree.




                                                                64
Table VIII. College and Graduate Majors (Entrepreneurs) Continued



      Graduate Majors of Entrepreneurs
      (Non MBA)                                      Count   Percent
 1    Computer Science                                 636    16.38%
 2    Electrical Engineering                           572    14.73%
 3    Law                                              374     9.63%
 4    Medicine                                         275     7.08%
 5    Business                                         180     4.64%
 6    Physics                                          165     4.25%
 7    Engineering                                      163     4.20%
 8    Chemistry                                        155     3.99%
 9    Computer Engineering                             116     2.99%
 10   Biology                                          114     2.94%
 11   Mechanical Engineering                            83     2.14%
 12   Economics                                         63     1.62%
 13   Mathematics                                       50     1.29%
 14   Science                                           49     1.26%
 15   Chemical Engineering                              38     0.98%
 16   Material Science                                  36     0.93%
 17   Biomedical Engineering                            33     0.85%
 18   Education                                         30     0.77%
 19   Psychology                                        30     0.77%
 20   Finance                                           28     0.72%

      Total                                           3,883 100.00%




                                  65
                                           Table IX Entrepreneurs Past Employment

This table summarizes employment history of venture capitalists and entrepreneurs in the sample. The total number of past
employers is less than the total number of VC/entrepreneurs because some people are missing employment history in our data and
those are dropped.

                Entrepreneur (1990 to 2016)                                                 VC (1990 to 2016)
     Past Employer                   Freq.         Percent                    Past Employer                 Freq. Percent
 1   Microsoft                         557          1.56%                1   McKinsey & Company               110  1.54%
 2   IBM                               551          1.55%                2   Goldman Sachs                     77  1.08%
 3   Sun Microsystems                  348          0.98%                3   Morgan Stanley                    50  0.70%
 4   Google                            330          0.93%                4   Microsoft                         48  0.67%
 5   Oracle                            295          0.83%                5   IBM                               44  0.62%
 6   McKinsey & Company                293          0.82%                6   Bain & Company                    40  0.56%
 7   Cisco Systems                     282          0.79%                7   Cisco Systems                     35  0.49%
 8   Intel                             251          0.70%                8   Merrill Lynch                     35  0.49%
 9   Apple Computer                    244          0.69%                9   Boston Consulting Group           33  0.46%
10   Hewlett-Packard                   219          0.61%               10   Lehman Brothers                   33  0.46%
11   Yahoo                             195          0.55%               11   Ernst & Young                     26  0.36%
12   Stanford University               175          0.49%               12   Summit Partners                   24  0.34%
13   Goldman Sachs                     166          0.47%               13   Hewlett-Packard                   23  0.32%
14   Motorola                          152          0.43%               14   Robertson Stephens                23  0.32%
15   Accenture                         119          0.33%               15   Credit Suisse First Boston        22  0.31%
16   Andersen Consulting               117          0.33%               16   Sun Microsystems                  21  0.29%
17   AT&T                              104          0.29%               17   Google                            21  0.29%
18   MIT                               103          0.29%               18   Deutsche Bank                     20  0.28%
19   Digital Equipment                  99          0.28%               19   Apax Partners                     18  0.25%
20   Bain & Company                     95          0.27%               20   Accenture                         18  0.25%

     Top 20 Total                         4,695     13.18%                   Top 20 Total                         721    10.12%
     Sample Total                        35,617                              Sample Total                       7,128




                                                              66
                                                               Table X Education (Venture Capitalists)

This table summarizes education of venture capitalists in the sample. The total number of degrees is less than the total number of VCs because some VCs are missing
education history in our sample either due to they did not finish a certain degree or we cannot find it online.

                                         College                                                                             Business School
                                                                Freq. Percent                                                                            Freq. Percent
    1   Harvard University                                        478  4.88%                  1   Harvard University                                     1,192 22.04%
    2   Stanford University                                       395  4.03%                  2   Stanford University                                      628 11.61%
    3   University of Pennsylvania                                323  3.29%                  3   University of Pennsylvania                               508  9.39%
    4   Yale University                                           254  2.59%                  4   Columbia University                                      275  5.09%
    5   Princeton University                                      250  2.55%                  5   University of Chicago                                    239  4.42%
    6   Dartmouth College                                         209  2.13%                  6   Northwestern University                                  209  3.86%
    7   Cornell University                                        196  2.00%                  7   Dartmouth College                                        125  2.31%
    8   University of California (Berkeley)                       194  1.98%                  8   University of California (Los Angeles)                   118  2.18%
    9   Duke University                                           164  1.67%                  9   New York University                                      110  2.03%
   10   Massachusetts Institute of Technology                     158  1.61%                 10   Massachusetts Institute Of Technology                    100  1.85%
   11   University of Virginia                                    146  1.49%                 11   University of Virginia                                    90  1.66%
   12   Brown University                                          128  1.31%                 12   University of California (Berkeley)                       85  1.57%
   13   University of Michigan                                    115  1.17%                 13   University of Michigan                                    81  1.50%
   14   University of Illinois (Urbana Champaign)                 106  1.08%                 14   INSEAD                                                    76  1.41%
   15   Georgetown University                                      92  0.94%                 15   Duke University                                           70  1.29%
   16   University of California (Los Angeles)                     86  0.88%                 16   Yale University                                           55  1.02%
   17   Columbia University                                        83  0.85%                 17   Cornell University                                        44  0.81%
   18   Tufts University                                           83  0.85%                 18   Indiana University (Bloomington)                          42  0.78%
   19   Williams College                                           80  0.82%                 19   University of North Carolina (Chapel Hill)                38  0.70%
   20   University Of North Carolina (Chapel Hill)                 69  0.70%                 20   Boston University                                         37  0.68%
        Top 20 Total                                            3,609 36.82%                      Top 20 Total                                           4,122 76.22%
        Sample Total                                            9,803                             Sample Total                                           5,408




                                                                                 67
     Table X. College and Graduate (Venture Capitalists) Continued

                      Graduate School (Non-MBA)
                                                  Freq. Percent
 1    Stanford University                          395 9.42%
 2    Harvard University                           311 7.41%
 3    Massachusetts Institute of Technology        204 4.86%
 4    University of Pennsylvania                   121 2.88%
 5    Columbia University                          119 2.84%
 6    University of California (Berkeley)          105 2.50%
 7    New York University                            82 1.95%
 8    Northwestern University                        82 1.95%
 9    Yale University                                79 1.88%
10    Oxford University                              73 1.74%
11    University of Michigan                         71 1.69%
12    Cornell University                             68 1.62%
13    University of Virginia                         62 1.48%
14    University of Chicago                          53 1.26%
15    Cambridge University                           48 1.14%
16    Georgetown University                          44 1.05%
17    University of California (Los Angeles)         42 1.00%
18    University of Southern California              41 0.98%
19    Duke University                                36 0.86%
20    Boston University                              35 0.83%

      Top 20 Total                                2,071   49.37%
      Sample Total                                4,195




                                 68
                           Table XI. College and Graduate Majors (Venture Capitalists)

This table summarizes degree and majors of venture capitalists in the sample. The total number of degrees is less than
the total number of venture capitalists because some venture capitalists are missing education history in our sample
either due to they did not finish a certain degree or we cannot find it online.

                            Undergraduate Majors of VC                         Count     Percent
                     1      Economics                                            634      16.72%
                     2      Business                                             412      10.86%
                     3      Engineering                                          379       9.99%
                     4      Electrical Engineering                               288       7.59%
                     5      Finance                                              132       3.48%
                     6      Computer Science                                     129       3.40%
                     7      Accounting                                           123       3.24%
                     8      Biology                                              120       3.16%
                     9      Mechanical Engineering                               120       3.16%
                     10     History                                              114       3.01%
                     11     Chemistry                                            111       2.93%
                     12     Mathematics                                          111       2.93%
                     13     Science                                               93       2.45%
                     14     Political Science                                     90       2.37%
                     15     Physics                                               72       1.90%
                     16     Social Studies                                        51       1.34%
                     17     English                                               49       1.29%
                     18     Chemical Engineering                                  47       1.24%
                     19     Industrial Engineering                                45       1.19%
                     20     Law                                                   45       1.19%

                            Total                                               3,793    100.00%




                                                           69
Table XI. College and Graduate Majors (Venture Capitalists) Continued

       Graduate Degrees of VC                         Count     Percent
 1     Master (Non MBA)                                1,278     54.11%
 2     JD                                                462     19.56%
 3     PhD                                               438     18.54%
 4     MD                                                179      7.58%

      Total (Non MBA)                                     2,362 100.00%
     Note: 5,408 out of 9,803 Venture Capitalists have an MBA degree.


      Graduate Majors of VCs (Non MBA)                  Count     Percent
1     Law                                                 467      33.94%
2     Medicine                                            188      13.66%
3     Science                                             146      10.61%
4     Electrical Engineering                              106       7.70%
5     Business                                             51       3.71%
6     Chemistry                                            43       3.13%
7     Engineering                                          43       3.13%
8     Computer Science                                     38       2.76%
9     Biology                                              32       2.33%
10    Economics                                            27       1.96%
11    Physics                                              24       1.74%
12    Chemical Engineering                                 22       1.60%
13    Public Administration                                18       1.31%
14    Mechanical Engineering                               17       1.24%
15    Finance                                              15       1.09%
16    Industrial Engineering                               12       0.87%
17    International Relations                              12       0.87%
18    Accounting                                           11       0.80%
19    Pharmacology                                         11       0.80%
20    Mathematics                                          28       0.72%

      Total                                              1,376 100.00%




                                   70
                                          Table XII Venture Capitalist Past Employment

This table summarizes employment history of venture capitalists in the sample. The total number of past employers is less than the
total number of VC/entrepreneurs because some people are missing employment history in our data and those are dropped.

                                                         VC (1990 to 2016)
                                           Past Employer                 Freq. Percent
                                      1   McKinsey & Company               110  1.54%
                                      2   Goldman Sachs                     77  1.08%
                                      3   Morgan Stanley                    50  0.70%
                                      4   Microsoft                         48  0.67%
                                      5   IBM                               44  0.62%
                                      6   Bain & Company                    40  0.56%
                                      7   Cisco Systems                     35  0.49%
                                      8   Merrill Lynch                     35  0.49%
                                      9   Boston Consulting Group           33  0.46%
                                     10   Lehman Brothers                   33  0.46%
                                     11   Ernst & Young                     26  0.36%
                                     12   Summit Partners                   24  0.34%
                                     13   Hewlett-Packard                   23  0.32%
                                     14   Robertson Stephens                23  0.32%
                                     15   Credit Suisse First Boston        22  0.31%
                                     16   Sun Microsystems                  21  0.29%
                                     17   Google                            21  0.29%
                                     18   Deutsche Bank                     20  0.28%
                                     19   Apax Partners                     18  0.25%
                                     20   Accenture                         18  0.25%

                                          Top 20 Total                          721     10.12%
                                          Sample Total                        7,128




                                                                71
                                                               Table XIII. Female/Minority Ratio by State

       This table sort states by fraction of female, underrepresented minority and Asian Entrepreneurs and VCs. It only includes states with more than 100 entrepreneurs or
       more than 50 VCs.

                                                                                       Fraction of Entrepreneur/VC                      Deviation From State Population
                                                                                                   Underrepresent                           Underrepresent
                            Variables                                                 Female          Minority                 Asian            Minority         Asian
 Female Entrepreneur Fraction Rank
                         Top 5 States          NV, DC, NY, OR, CT                    13.79%                3.32%              10.74%              -28.38%               6.31%
                      Bottom 5 States          UT, TN, NH, IN, UT                     4.69%                4.56%               6.04%              -11.34%               4.30%
                               p value                                              0.006***               0.521              0.036**               0.146               0.258
Under-represented Entrepreneur Rank
                         Top 5 States          FL, NY, PA, WI, OH                     9.04%                6.17%               8.71%              -14.92%               5.92%
                      Bottom 5 States          NH, OR, MN, VA, WA                     7.36%                2.05%               7.53%               -9.53%               3.64%
                               p value                                                0.310               0.025**              0.577                0.369               0.160
   Asian Entrepreneur Fraction Rank
                         Top 5 States          CA, NJ, DC, NY, IL                    10.23%                3.96%              16.17%              -35.35%               9.63%
                      Bottom 5 States          MN, UT, TN, MO, OH                    6.02%                 3.74%              4.70%                -9.28%               2.75%
                               p value                                               0.020**               0.685             0.004***              0.021**            0.001***

           Female VC Fraction Rank
                          Top 5 States         WA, PA, CO, NJ, CT                    10.70%                2.12%               8.01%              -17.40%               3.80%
                       Bottom 5 States         NH, FL, MO, UT, MD                     4.99%                2.67%               5.57%              -16.37%               3.11%
                                p value                                             0.000***               0.557               0.060*               0.877               0.645
          Under-represented VC Rank
                          Top 5 States         IN, FL, IL, NY, MI                     7.77%                5.01%               7.72%              -20.03%               4.59%
                       Bottom 5 States         TN, MO, NH, WI, PA                     6.75%                1.30%               5.37%              -10.87%               3.71%
                                p value                                               0.517              0.001***              0.173                0.113               0.656
             Asian VC Fraction Rank
                          Top 5 States         CA, MI, OR, NJ, UT                     8.42%                2.42%              11.55%              -19.21%               6.10%
                       Bottom 5 States         TN, MO, FL, MD, NH                     5.20%                2.49%               4.48%              -18.33%               2.28%
                                p value                                              0.016**               0.940             0.004***               0.912              0.040**




                                                                                        72
                                                                            Table XIV. Sort by State Characteristics
  This table sort female, underrepresented minority and Asian by state characteristics. It only includes states with more than 100 Entrepreneurs and 50 VCs.
                       State Characteristics                                                                                     Entrepreneur                                                 VC
                                                                                                                                    Under                                                     Under
                 Political view: Percentage of republican                              % Republican                Female        Represented               Asian          Female           represented              Asian
   Top 5 States UT, PA, GA, TN, AZ                                                         31.60%                   6.30%           4.28%                  8.22%           7.06%              1.85%                 7.28%
Bottom 5 States MA, CT, MD, NY, CA                                                         20.00%                   9.45%           4.29%                 13.64%           8.51%              2.94%                 9.04%
         p value                                                                            0.002                  0.058*            0.977                0.087*           0.269               0.063*               0.441
                 Union: Percentage of Union Members                                       % Union
   Top 5 States NY, MI, NJ, WA, IL                                                         21.19%                   9.53%              3.57%              12.92%            9.43%              3.52%                8.32%
Bottom 5 States NC, GA, TX, VA, FL                                                          5.73%                   6.64%              4.84%              9.78%             6.79%              3.41%                6.60%
         p value                                                                            0.000                  0.029**             0.476               0.131          0.049**              0.903                0.206
                 Religion: Percentage of Christian                                      % Christian
   Top 5 States TN, TX, NC, GA, PA                                                         83.00%                   6.93%              3.90%              9.31%             7.92%              2.09%                6.77%
Bottom 5 States OR, WA, NH, CO, CA                                                         69.80%                   8.12%              2.56%              10.14%            8.57%              2.10%                9.58%
         p value                                                                            0.000                   0.376              0.096*              0.818            0.697              0.996                0.236
                 Economy: GDP per capita                                               GDP per capita
   Top 5 States CT, MA, NY, NJ, WA                                                        55913.5                   9.47%              3.89%              12.62%           10.02%              2.63%                7.98%
Bottom 5 States FL,AZ,TN, UT, MI                                                          40285.58                  6.48%              5.22%               7.42%            6.39%              2.82%                7.54%
         p value                                                                            0.001                  0.098*              0.427              0.043**         0.008***             0.850                0.791
                                                                                         Education
                 Improvement in Education                                                 Change
   Top 5 States MA, NJ, MD, CT, NH                                                         11.38%                   7.77%              3.32%              11.78%            7.85%              2.19%                7.15%
Bottom 5 States AZ, UT, TX, CA, TN                                                          6.52%                   6.13%              3.97%              10.54%            6.60%              2.24%                9.05%
         p value                                                                            0.000                   0.281              0.316               0.754            0.407              0.936                0.427
                 Maternal/family Leave Benefit                                          Benefit Score
   Top 5 States CA, OR, NJ, CT, WA                                                            87                    9.32%              3.20%              13.27%            9.67%              2.34%            10.31%
 Bottom States MD, VA,GA,NC, PA, MO, TX                                                        0                    7.30%              3.75%              10.02%            7.29%              2.43%            6.58%
         p value                                                                            0.001                  0.059*              0.395               0.375            0.164              0.845            0.089*
  Source: (1) Republican Ratio, Christian population are retrieved from Gallup 2010 Party Affiliation. (2) union data is retrieved from http://www.unionstats.com/ by Barry T. Hirsch and David A. Macpherson,
  "Union Membership and Coverage Database from the Current Population Survey: Note," Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 56, No. 2, January 2003, pp. 349-54. The union membership data used in
  this table is the average of 1990, 2000 and 2010. (3) GDP Data retrieved from Bureau of Economic Analysis. It is the average of 1997-2010, in 2009 dollars. (4) Education data is retrieved from Census Bureau,
  1970, 1980, 1990, 2000 Censuses of Population, and the 2010-2014 American Community Surveys. (5) Benefit score is retrieved from National Partnership for Women & Families (2005). Expecting Better: A
  State-by-State Analysis of Laws That Help New Parents. https://www.lidac.com/pdf/ParentalLeaveReportMay05.pdf




                                                                                                        73
                                           Table XV. Diversity and State Characteristics Univariate Regression

This table reports univariate regression coefficient of state characteristics on Female Ratio and Minority Ratio. The dependent variables (first column) are female (or
minority) ratios in venture capital and entrepreneurship. The independent variable for each univariate regression is state level republican ratio, union member ratio,
Christian ratio, log GDP per Capita, Maternity Benefit Score and College Graduation rate growth. Asterisks denote statistical significance at the 1% (***), 5% (**), or
10% (*) level.

                                                                                                                                          College
                                                                      Union                            Log GDP          Maternity         graduate
                                                   Republican        Member            Christian         per cap         benefit           growth             Obs
 Female Entrepreneur Ratio                         -0.258***         0.264***         -0.283***        0.0534***        0.000165           -0.244             28
                                                    (0.0559)         (0.0607)          (0.0803)         (0.0120)       (0.000172)          (0.535)
 Female VC Ratio                                    -0.142**         0.180***           -0.122         0.0831***       0.000235**           0.311              26
                                                    (0.0620)         (0.0590)          (0.0833)         (0.0220)       (0.000102)          (0.182)

 Under-represented Entrepreneur Ratio                0.0412           -0.0335           0.0859*        -0.00942         -8.38e-05           -0.106             28
                                                    (0.0277)          (0.0686)          (0.0432)       (0.00913)        (7.87e-05)         (0.120)
 Under-represented Minority VC Ratio                -0.0169            0.0296            0.0154         0.00424         -6.94e-05          -0.0849             26
                                                    (0.0472)          (0.0437)          (0.0476)        (0.0223)        (5.83e-05)         (0.128)

 Asian Entrepreneur Ratio                          -0.330***          0.211*              -0.247       0.0684**         0.000513            0.487              28
                                                    (0.0793)          (0.116)            (0.151)       (0.0256)        (0.000314)          (0.393)
 Asian VC Ratio                                      -0.0717          0.135*            -0.230**        0.0264         0.000424**          -0.249              26
                                                     (0.104)         (0.0715)            (0.102)       (0.0367)        (0.000185)          (0.270)




                                                                                   74
