NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

AGGREGATING THE FERTILITY TRANSITION:
INTERGENERATIONAL DYNAMICS IN QUALITY AND QUANTITY
Tom Vogl
Working Paper 23081
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23081

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2017

An earlier draft of this paper circulated as “Intergenerational Dynamics and the Fertility
Transition.” I am grateful for comments from seminar and conference participants at AEA/ASSA,
Bocconi University, CIREQ, Hebrew University, Lund University, NBER (Children, Income
Distribution and Macroeconomics), Northeastern University, Stockholm University, Princeton
University, UC Berkeley, UC Louvain, University of Namur, and University of Warwick. The
views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Tom Vogl. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Aggregating the Fertility Transition: Intergenerational Dynamics in Quality and Quantity
Tom Vogl
NBER Working Paper No. 23081
January 2017
JEL No. J1,O1,O4
ABSTRACT
Fertility change is distinct from other forms of social and economic change because it directly
alters the size and composition of the next generation. This paper studies how changes in
population composition over the fertility transition feed back into the evolution of average
fertility across generations. Theory predicts that changes in the relationship between human
capital and fertility first weaken and then strengthen fertility similarities between mothers and
daughters, a process that first promotes and then restricts aggregate fertility decline. Consistent
with these predictions, microdata from 40 developing countries over the second half of the 20th
century show that intergenerational fertility associations strengthen late in the fertility transition,
due to the alignment of the education-fertility relationship across generations. As fertility
approaches the replacement level, the strengthening of these associations reweights the
population to raise aggregate fertility rates, pushing back against aggregate fertility decline.

Tom Vogl
Department of Economics
Princeton University
123 Julis Romo Rabinowitz Building
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
tvogl@princeton.edu

1

Introduction

Research in macroeconomics has shown increasing interest in whether and how heterogeneity across
agents affects aggregate outcomes. In the study of economic development and growth, classic work
on this topic (Banerjee and Newman 1993; Galor and Zeira 1993) focuses on how capital market
imperfections interact with the distribution of wealth to affect development in the long run. More
recent work seeks to model the interplay of these forces with demographic change (Galor and Moav
2002; Hazan and Berdugo 2002; de la Croix and Doepke 2003; Moav 2005). Because the escape from
the Malthusian trap commonly coincides with the demographic transition (Galor 2011), an understanding of this economic-demographic interplay may be crucial for theories of current and historical economic growth. In this context, heterogeneity becomes especially interesting because it may
feed back into the dynamics of population composition, with implications for the pace of aggregate
change. Families with high relative fertility in one generation comprise a larger share of the next.
This paper studies how skill heterogeneity combines with decisions regarding the quality and
quantity of children to influence the path of aggregate fertility decline across generations. Fertility
decline—itself a transformation of social and economic life—plays a potentially important role in
generating economic growth (Ashraf, Weil, and Wilde 2013), and its timing and pace present an
important set of puzzles to economists and other social scientists. As its primary contribution, this
paper focuses on an under-explored demographic mechanism influencing its pace. The core insight
is that the fertility transition occurs unevenly, changing the relative fertility levels and population
shares of different skill groups. Different lineages undergo fertility transitions at different times. As
documented by Bengtsson and Dribe (2014), Clark and Cummins (2015), and Vogl (2016), the history
of differential fertility spans two regimes, Malthusian and modern. In the past, when Malthusian
population dynamics prevailed, higher-skill parents maintained higher levels of both fertility and
child investment. But around the time of the demographic transition, their fertility fell below that
of the lower-skilled, even as they continued to invest more in their children. Existing theoretical
research (Galor and Moav 2002; Galor and Michalopoulous 2012) argues that these changes in differential fertility alter the skill composition of the population in the next generation, with important
consequences for economic growth and other forms of aggregate progress.1
1 See also Clark (2007). These theories have much in common with the eugenic arguments of Francis Galton, Karl
Pearson, and Ronald Fisher (Kevles 1985).

1

Building on that literature, this paper theoretically explores implications for the path of aggregate fertility and then quantifies these implications using micro-data from 40 developing countries.
The main theoretical result is that forces commonly associated with the fertility transition
as rising living standards and rising returns to human capital investment

such

induce compositional

shifts that initially promote fertility decline and then restrain it. This result squares well with evidence from the demography literature (Bongaarts 2006, 2008) that following periods of sustained
fertility decline, many populations “stall” at fertility levels well above the replacement level. A
key determinant of these compositional shifts is the reduced-form association between a mother’s
fertility and her daughter’s fertility, which provides a useful estimand for the empirical work. The
theoretical framework predicts that within the Malthusian regime or the modern regime, this association is positive, but for the transitional generation between regimes, the association turns negative.
Higher-skill parents bear more children and invest more in their human capital, but when their
children grow up, their greater human capital decreases their own fertility.
Using 82 Demographic and Health Surveys, the paper thus estimates mother-daughter associations in fertility and their determinants in birth cohorts spanning the second half of the twentieth
century from 40 developing countries. The results indicate that women of these cohorts bear children predominantly in the modern regime, when fertility declines with skill. But while more recent
cohorts were also born in the modern regime, earlier cohorts in some countries are part of a transitional generation born in the Malthusian regime, when fertility rises with skill. Education thus
negatively predicts fertility in all cohorts, but the association of childhood family size with education flips from positive the negative. As a result, in more recent cohorts, women with more siblings
bear more children in adulthood; this relationship is significantly weaker in earlier cohorts, and
in some cases, women with more siblings bear fewer children in adulthood. This striking finding
highlights how the fertility transition reverses relative fertility levels across lineages within a single
generation. The lineages with the most children per parent become the lineages with the fewest.
The theoretical framework rationalizes these changes as stemming from either rising productivity or increases in the return to investment in human capital (equivalently, decreases in the cost of
schooling). Past research (Vogl 2016) finds that changes in differential fertility in sample countries
were more consistent with the latter mechanism, involving the net return to parental investment in
their children’s human capital. In this paper, the role of human capital receives further support from
2

analyses of the aggregate predictors of the intergenerational fertility association. Net of country and
cohort fixed effects, GDP per capita, urbanization, and child mortality do not predict the association, but rising educational attainment—in the sample generation or in their parents’ generation—is
correlated with a rising intergenerational fertility association.
Yet the paper’s core demographic insight about the aggregate consequences of changing intergenerational fertility associations is independent of the mechanism driving them. Because the
intergenerational fertility association becomes stronger, the population share of high-fertility parents rises as a population approaches low fertility, pushing back against aggregate fertility decline.
To quantify this phenomenon, the paper non-parametrically estimates the difference between the
average number of children among mothers and the average number of grandchildren per daughter among grandmothers. This gap, which I term the composition effect, captures the extent to which
heterogeneity in fertility across women who grew up in families of different size affects average
fertility.2 Estimating this effect at the cohort level, I find that the composition effect becomes significantly stronger as cohort fertility declines; well into the fertility transition, heterogeneity in fertility
across mothers in one generation raises the mean fertility of their daughters by as much as 10 percent, and by 4 percent on average. To link these cohort-level associations to the evolution of total
fertility rates (TFR), the paper also carries out a complementary analysis of period fertility, aggregating over the cross-sectional age distribution in a given year. Here again, the composition effect
on TFR becomes significantly stronger as TFR declines. In populations with TFRs less than 3, differential fertility raises TFR by as much as 6 percent, and by 4 percent on average.
These findings demonstrate the role of heterogeneity in driving aggregate fertility dynamics.
In this sense, they relate to the economics literature on how micro-level demographic phenomena
like differential fertility and assortative mating aggregate up to the population or economy (Kremer
1993; Lam 1986; Fernandez and Rogerson 2001; de la Croix and Doepke 2003). That literature focuses largely on aggregating skill or income across households, whereas this paper shifts attention
toward fertility behavior, yielding results that may help resolve the puzzle of fertility “stalls.”3 The
2 The composition effect of differential fertility bears similarities to the stable population theory concept of population
momentum (Keyfitz 1971). Population momentum stems from the gradual evolution of the population age structure
following a change in age-specific fertility rates. Analogously, one can view the composition effect as reflecting the
gradual evolution of lineages’ population shares following a change in their relative fertility rates.
3 Indeed, my data contain three of the six countries that Bongaarts (2003) singles out for having “stalls:” Dominican
Republic, Kenya, and Peru. All three exhibit recent upward swings in composition effects on cohort fertility. Composition
effects on TFR are significantly positive in Dominican Republic and Peru but not Kenya.

3

paper also expands on classic demographic research relating the average family sizes of women and
children. Preston (1976) points out that because children from larger families are over-represented in
the population, the average family size of children (i.e., sibship size) is generally larger than the average family size of women (i.e., fertility). In a hypothesis recently confirmed by Lam and Marteleto
(2014), Preston argues that this difference shifts slowly during the demographic transition, so that
average sibship size falls more slowly than average fertility. Just as in this paper, differential fertility reweights the population to slow the pace of aggregate demographic change as experienced by
the next generation. Both lines of research highlight the value of considering how the cross-section
interacts with the aggregate time series.
Additionally, the results add to a large body of research, spanning the social sciences, on intergenerational associations in a range of outcomes, behaviors, and traits. Especially relevant is the
recent economics literature that studies how intergenerational associations vary across space and
over time. Much of this literature focuses on intergenerational earnings mobility, investigating its
variation both across countries (Björklund and Jantti 1997; Solon 1999; Corak 2013) and across subnational areas within a country (Chetty et al. 2014). International comparisons are also available
for intergenerational associations in of other outcomes, including educational attainment (Hertz et
al. 2007; Chevalier, Denny, and McMahon 2009) and health (Bhalotra and Rawlings 2013). In the
field of demography, interest in the association of mothers’ and daughters’ fertility dates back over
a century, to one of the earliest applications of the correlation coefficient (Pearson et al. 1899).4 Summarizing and extending this literature, Murphy (1999, 2012) finds that the association strengthened
recently in rich countries and that it is weaker in poor than in rich countries. This paper further
extends Murphy’s analysis to shed light on changes over time within many countries, linking it to
a broader theory of aggregate demographic change.5
More broadly, the paper contributes to the economics literature on the demographic transition
and its relation to economic development (Galor 2011; de la Croix 2013). In both its theoretical
and empirical facets, this work has focused mostly on aggregate demographic and economic variables, with a small subset of the theoretical literature exploring the role of within-population hetero4 Seminal contributions include Huestis and Maxwell (1932), Duncan et al.

(1965), Ben-Porath (1975), Wise and Condie
(1975), Anderton et al. (1987), Kahn and Anderson (1992), and Axinn et al. (1994).
5 Two recent contributions to biodemography (Murphy and Wang 2003; Kolk, Cownden, and Enquist 2014) study how
intergenerational fertility associations affect the time series of aggregate fertility rates, but only in the context of highly
stylized micro-simulation models.

4

geneity. While research in development economics has given more attention to within-population
heterogeneity (Schultz 1997), its primary goal has been to understand the determinants of fertility choice in poor countries, not to shed light on how heterogeneity affects the pace of aggregate
change. By analyzing heterogeneity and its consequences for many countries over half a century,
this paper seeks to improve the empirical basis for theories that link population dynamics with
aggregate change.

2

Heterogeneity and Aggregation in a Quality-Quantity Model

To shed light on how intergenerational shifts in population composition feed back into the process
of fertility decline, this section studies a simple model in the tradition of the theoretical literature
on demography and long-run economic growth. First, it derives how associations in the fertility
behavior of parents and children aggregate up to the population level, irrespective of the specific
behavioral model underlying these associations. Next, it analyzes a model in which parents of
heterogeneous skill choose the quality and quantity of their children, using the earlier aggregation
results to explore the evolving role of heterogeneity over the fertility transition. Finally, it broadens
the discussion to consider whether the empirical implications change if factors outside the model
also contribute to parent-child fertility associations.

2.1

Statistical Preliminaries

Let nit denote the fertility of parent i from generation t, with mean µt and variance σt2 . Let ni,t+1
denote the fertility (in adulthood) of each of the parent’s children, such that if the parent has more
than one child, then the i, t + 1 subscript represents more than one member of generation t + 1.
Because the results below considers only expectations and conditional expectations, one can assume
that siblings have the same fertility without loss of generality, so this slight abuse of notation is
inconsequential. In fact, the model below exhibits no intra-family heterogeneity, but the results in
this subsection are general and do not only apply to the model. Given the notation, parent i from
generation t has nit ni,t+1 grandchildren.
The paper is interested in how the reweighting of the population due to differential fertility in
generation t affects average fertility in generation t + 1. To quantify this phenomenon:
5

Definition 1. The composition effect of differential fertility in generation t on average fertility in generation t + 1, denoted ∆t+1 , equals the average fertility of generation t + 1 minus the average number
of grandchildren per child in generation t.
Using the notation above, one can express the composition effect as:
∆t+1 = Et+1 [ni,t+1 ] − Et [ E (ni,t+1 |nit )]
h 
i
h
i
= Et nµitt E (ni,t+1 |nit ) − Et E (ni,t+1 |nit )

i
h
= Et nµitt − 1 E (ni,t+1 |nit )

(1)

where Et+1 [·] is an expectation evaluated under the distribution of ni,t+1 ; Et [·] is an expectation
evaluated under the distribution of nt ; and E (ni,t+1 |nit ) is the conditional expectation of a child’s
fertility given her parent’s fertility, also known as her childhood family size or sibship size. In
the first term of the second line, the distribution of nit is reweighted by the factor

nit
µt

to give more

weight to members of generation t + 1 from larger sibships, reflecting the changing composition
of the population from t to t + 1. This factor gives more weight to members of generation t + 1
from larger sibships. If the conditional expectation E (ni,t+1 |nit ) is an increasing function, then the
added weight given to larger families raises average fertility, so that ∆t+1 > 0. In this case, fertility
heterogeneity in generation t raises average fertility in generation t + 1.
Both the model and the empirical work use a linear projection to summarize the conditional
expectation function E (ni,t+1 |nit ).
Definition 2. The intergenerational fertility association, denoted β t+1 , is the coefficient from the linear
projection of ni,t+1 on nit .
This association has received much attention in the literature on the intergenerational transmission
of behaviors, outcomes, and traits. Here, it is particularly convenient because it can simplify the
formula for the composition effect. Because expression (3) represents the composition effect for a
conditional expectation of any form, computation may prove complicated. With a linear conditional
expectation, however, the expression reduces.
σ2

Lemma 1. If E (ni,t+1 |nit ) is linear, then ∆t+1 = β t+1 µtt .
The Theory Appendix contains all proofs. This result will prove useful for both the theory and
the empirical work. ∆t+1 increases in β t+1 and σt2 , while decreasing in µt . In other words, the
6

composition effect of differential fertility is more positive when the intergenerational association is
stronger or when the variance of childhood family size is larger relative to its mean. The role of
the variance-to-mean ratio σt2 /µt , also known as the index of dispersion, in linking the cross-section
with aggregate outcomes is not unique to the composition effect. Exactly the same ratio appears in
Preston’s (1976) formula for the difference between the average family size of children and the average family size of women. Both there and here, it implies that the aggregate implications differential
fertility are larger when fertility is more dispersed relative to its mean.
Lemma 1 also provides a helpful decomposition of the composition effect in the linear case,
which the empirical work will implement. One component measures similarity in the reproductive
behavior of parents and children, while the other measures the relative spread of the fertility distribution among parents. Because the second component is always positive, the composition effect is
negative

2.2

promoting fertility decline

only when the intergenerational association is negative.

Optimization Setup

The model setup closely follows the theoretical literature on differential fertility and economic
growth.6 Parents maximize a log-linear utility function over their own consumption cit , the number
of children nit , and human capital per child hi,t+1 :
U (cit , nit , hi,t+1 ) = α log (cit ) + (1 − α) log (nit hi,t+1 )

(2)

α ∈ (0, 1) indexes the weight the parents place on their own consumption relative to the combined
quantity and quality of children.
To produce child quality, or human capital, parents have access to a human capital production
η

function that is isoelastic with respect to total inputs xit : hi,t+1 = xit , with η ∈ (0, 1). Each children
is born with an input endowment θ > 0 (reflecting basic human capacity or free public school),
which parents can augment by purchasing additional education eit at price p. The endowed and
purchased inputs are assumed to be perfectly substitutable, so that xit = θ + eit . One can view p as
the inverse of the return to educational expenditure, so that an increase in this return is reflected in
falling p. The presence of the input endowment implies that low-skill parents will choose a corner
6 See

Galor and Moav (2002), Hazan and Berdugo (2002), de la Croix and Doepke (2003, 2005, 2008), and Moav (2005).

7

solution in which fertility rises with their human capital (de la Croix 2013; Vogl 2016), and also that
the elasticity of human capital with respect to education is positive, which allows fertility to decline
with parental human capital in the interior solution (Jones, Schoonbroodt, and Tertilt 2010). Parents
themselves are endowed with human capital hit > 0, drawn from an distribution Ft .
The aggregate production function is Yt = AHt , where A > 0 is the exogenous level of technology and Ht is the aggregate quantity of human capital in generation t, so the wage rate per unit of
human capital is A. Notably, the aggregate and human capital productions function have one input
each and are fixed over time. A fuller version of the model could incorporate spillovers, scale effects,
and additional inputs, but this theory section seeks to shed light on the compositional mechanism
and its empirical implications, not to provide a full theory of the growth process.
Each child costs τ ∈ (0, 1) units of time and κ > 0 goods, leading to the budget constraint:

cit + κnit + peit nit ≤ Ahit (1 − τnit )

(3)

Parents spend their full income Ahit on their own consumption (cit ), the quantity costs of children
(κnit and τAhit nt ), and the quality costs of children (peit nit ).

2.3

Optimization Results

The first order conditions imply that parents set education at:

eit = max 0,

1
1−η



η
( Ahit τ + κ ) − θ
p


(4)

Education starts at a corner solution of zero for low-skill parents and then rises linearly with parental
skill in the interior solution. Parents spend on education if and only if their human capital exceeds


pθ
1
e
h ≡ τA
−
κ
. This threshold also plays an important role in fertility choice:
η

nit =




 (1−α) Ahit

if hit ≤ e
h



 (1−α)(1−η ) Ahit

if hit > e
h

κ +τAhit

κ − pθ +τAhit

(5)

From inspection of equation (5), one can see that an additional assumption is necessary for unambiguous comparative statics with respect to parental skill.
8

Assumption 1. The value of the input endowment is strictly larger than the goods cost: pθ > κ.
To obtain its value, the input endowment θ is scaled by the price of education p. This assumption
guarantees that e
h > 0, so parents with very low skill choose a corner solution, and also that the
substitution effect of higher parental skill dominates its income effect in the interior solution.
Lemma 2. Fertility nit increases with parental human capital hit over the interval (o, e
h] and decreases with
hit over the interval (e
h, ∞).
Under Assumption 1, the model thus predicts a hump-shaped relationship between parental skill
and fertility. Below e
h, parents choose a corner solution for human capital expenditure, so the income effect of higher skill dominates the substitution effect, and fertility rises with skill. Above e
h,
the substitution effect dominates, so fertility declines with skill.7 In data from 20 diverse developing countries, Vogl (2016) documents exactly this hump-shaped pattern, such that the least-skilled
exhibit lower fertility in the early stages of development and higher fertility in the later stages.
The corner solution also generates an s-shaped relationship between the human capital of parents and children. Substitution of equation (4) into the human capital production function leads to
a first-order, non-linear dynamical system hi,t+1 = φ(hit ), where:

φ (hit ) ≡




θ η
n




if hit ≤ e
h
η
1− η



κ +τAhit
p

−θ

oη

(6)

if hit > e
h

Equation (6) implies several useful properties.
Lemma 3. The dynamical system φ(·) is continuous, constant over the interval (o, e
h], and increasing and
concave over the interval (e
h, ∞), with limhit →∞ φ’ (hit ) = 0.
These properties are key to identifying steady states of the dynamical system—with constant levels
of human capital (and therefore fertility) across generations—which help shed light on the model’s
implications for intergenerational associations and composition effects over the fertility transition.
In particular, φ(·) may have multiple steady states, generating heterogeneity that is sufficiently
tractable for the study of β t and ∆t .
7 If

pθ ≤ κ, the declining portion of the hump disappears, so that fertility everywhere increases with parental skill.

9

Proposition 1. The dynamical system φ(·) is characterized by at least one and at most three steady state
levels of human capital and fertility, of which at least one and at most two are stable.
The dynamical system is guaranteed to have a steady state and may have up to three, two of which
have positive human capital expenditure and one of which has none. Of these three steady states,
those with the lowest and highest levels of human capital are stable, while the intermediate one
(which exists only if one of the others also exist) is unstable. For an environment with three steady
states, Figure 1 graphs the dynamical system together with the relationship between human capital
and fertility. Steady states ss1 , ss2 , and ss3 occur when φ(·) intersects the 45-degree line. ss1 and
ss3 are stable because φ(·) crosses the 45-degree line from above, whereas ss2 is unstable because it
crosses from below. In this case, the fertility level associated with ss1 is higher than that associated
with ss3 , but other parameter values could lead to the opposite.
A more realistic version of the model could have idiosyncratic shocks to human capital, possibly
leading to a steady state distribution of lineages, which contrasts the current model’s indefinitely
expanding mass points. In the presence of multiple lineage-specific steady states, different lineages
expand at different rates, precluding a steady-state distribution but (perhaps attractively) implying
long-run evolution, as in Galor and Moav (2002) and Galor and Michalopoulos (2012). The remainder of the section focuses on the two stable steady states of an environment with three steady states.
Definition 3. A fertility regime is a distribution of fertility in which all lineages are in stable steady
states. A fertility regime is non-degenerate if fertility is heterogeneous within it.
The history of differential fertility over the course of economic development suggests two types of
fertility regimes: one in which the higher-skill steady state has higher fertility, and one in which it
has lower. I refer to the first type of regime as “Malthusian” and the second as “modern.” In Figure
1, a population distributed across ss1 and ss3 would be in a modern fertility regime.
In this model, two forces are particularly natural for generating transitions between Malthusian
and modern regimes: rising productivity and a rising return to human capital expenditure, as represented by a decrease in the price of education, p. Rising productivity pushes up the wage return
to human capital, which increases fertility in the low-skill steady state, while decreasing fertility
in the high-skill steady state. Falling p decreases the fertility of the high skilled, while leaving the
low-skill steady state unchanged.
10

Proposition 2. Consider a population initially in a non-degenerate fertility regime that experiences a onetime, permanent increase in A or decrease in p. If the population attains a new non-degenerate fertility
regime, fertility in both the transition and the new regime is weakly higher among low human capital parents
and strictly lower among high human capital parents.
Consequently, if the population starts in a Malthusian regime, either force pushes it toward a modern regime. Each mechanism has a different implication for average fertility, however. A decline
in p reduces average fertility in the population, while an increase in A has an ambiguous effect.
In aggregate data on the demographic transition, average fertility typically first rises and then falls
(Dyson and Murphy 1985), so both mechanisms are consistent with features of the historical fertility
transition. The mechanisms directly relate to theories that place rising income and human capital at
the center of the transition (Galor 2011), but they also capture theories involving new social norms
that favor child investment (Caldwell 1981).
The model has omitted child mortality, which demographic transition theory views as a key
driver of fertility change. Because child mortality occurs before substantial human capital investment, the model can capture it by dividing the quantity costs of children by the survival rate. If m
is the child mortality rate, then the quantity costs become

κ
1− m

and

τ
1− m .

In this setup, a decrease in

child mortality raises (surviving) fertility in both steady states, with ambiguous effects on fertility
differentials. The prediction that net fertility rises with survival is common in fertility models in
which a share m of children die deterministically, although Doepke (2004) finds that it also holds in
appropriately parameterized models with stochastic child mortality and sequential fertility choice.
Thus, in most macroeconomic models of the demographic transition, child mortality does not play
a major role in net fertility change.
We are now equipped to consider how the intergenerational fertility association and the composition effect evolve over the transition from a Malthusian regime to a modern regime.
Proposition 3. In any non-degenerate fertility regime and any transition between non-degenerate regimes,
β t and ∆t are strictly positive, except during a transition from a Malthusian regime to a modern regime,
during which they are weakly negative for a single generation.
Because parents’ human capital is positively associated with children’s human capital, fertility is
also positively associated in all pairs of generations except one: the generations on either side of
11

a flip in fertility differentials by skill. In fact, because human capital and fertility are constant in a
steady state, β t = 1 within a fertility regime. This implication is quantitatively unrealistic but could
be weakened by introducing stochastic shocks to human capital or income. As such, the model’s
predictions should be viewed as qualitative.
For population dynamics, the most important implication of Proposition 3 is that the composition effect is negative for a generation that experiences a reversal of differential fertility. If the
reversal is contemporaneous with the onset of aggregate fertility decline, then the negative composition effect initially speeds the decline. In subsequent generations, however, the composition effect
turns positive again, pushing back against aggregate fertility decline.

2.4

Empirical Implications

The most general empirical prediction is that when the fertility differential between high- and lowskill parents flips, the intergenerational fertility association and the composition effect turn negative
for a generation. However, the model highlights only one source of the intergenerational association, human capital persistence. Other possible sources include the genetic heritability of fecundity
and the cultural determinants of fertility preferences or behavior.8 Behavioral genetics research
finds some genetic heritability in markers of fecundity—including menstrual regularity and the
ages at menarche and menopause (van Akker et al. 1987; Treloar and Martin 1990)—which may
lead to the heritability of fertility. Meanwhile, a large literature in the social sciences highlights the
role of culture in the intergenerational transmission of traits and behaviors. Sociologists (Duncan et
al. 1965) have long emphasized this explanation for intergenerational fertility associations, positing
that growing up in a large family shapes the preference for a large family of one’s own.
To combine the model’s prediction with these alternative sources of the intergenerational fertility
association, one can express the association as:
∂E [nt+1 |nt , ht+1 ] ∂E [nt+1 |nt , ht+1 ] dE [ht+1 |nt ]
dE [nt+1 |nt ]
=
+
×
dnt
∂nt
∂ht
dnt
|
|
{z
}
{z
} |
{z
} |
{z
}

overall association

net transmission

skill-fertility

(7)

sibsize-skill

where the i subscripts are suppressed for simplicity. If the conditional expectation is linear, then
8 Intergenerational

associations in other socioeconomic outcomes, such as income or health, may also play a role.
Because these outcomes are closely linked to human capital, they are broadly related to the model.

12

βt =

dE[nt+1 |nt ]
.
dnt

Ideally, one could derive structural expressions for these partial derivatives directly

from the model, as in Becker and Tomes (1979), but the model’s non-monotonicity implies that only
reduced-form interpretations are possible.
Equation (7) expands the overall fertility association into sub-components using the chain rule.
These subcomponents include any intergenerational transmission of fertility net of the human capital mechanism,

∂E[nt+1 |nt ,ht+1 ]
;
∂nt

the relationship between skill and fertility,

lationship between childhood family size and skill,

∂E[ht+1 |nt ]
.
∂nt

∂E[nt+1 |nt ,ht+1 ]
;
∂ht

and the re-

The first sub-component captures

persistence in the determinants of fertility that are not correlated with education, perhaps genetics
or culture. The model focuses on the second and third sub-components, which change in a staggered fashion during the demographic transition. In a Malthusian regime, higher-skill parents bear
more children, so
dE[ht+1 |nt ]
dnt

∂E[nt+1 |nt ,ht+1 ]
∂nt

> 0, and women from larger sibships obtain more education, so

> 0. In a modern regime, both patterns are flipped, so

∂E[nt+1 |nt ,ht+1 ]
∂nt

< 0 and

dE[ht+1 |nt ]
dnt

< 0.

In the transition between these two regimes, a single generation experiences long and auxiliary
parameters of opposite sign:

∂E[nt+1 |nt ,ht+1 ]
∂nt

< 0 and

dE[ht+1 |nt ]
dnt

> 0. If the net intergenerational

transmission component is small or varies little over time, then the intergenerational association
dE[nt+1 |nt ]
dnt

follows the trajectory predicted by the model: large within the Malthusian and modern

regimes, small during the transition between them. However, in the presence of net intergenerational transmission,

dE[nt+1 |nt ]
dnt

may not turn negative in the transition. Figure 2 represents these

changes schematically by plotting

dE[nt+1 |nt ]
dnt

against

∂E[ht+1 |nt ]
∂nt

across the different fertility regimes.

Given Lemma 1, equation (7) has similar implications for the composition effect. The composition effect will be positive within the Malthusian and modern regimes but will shrink and possibly
turn negative during the transition. If it does turn negative during the transition, then it will initially speed the process of fertility decline, as predicted by the model. Otherwise, fertility will never
decline faster than it would in the absence of population reweighting, but in either case, the subsequent growth of the composition effect will slow the process of fertility decline.
The paper will argue that in the postwar era, developing countries moved from the transition
generation to the modern regime. The results will show that the intergenerational association and
the composition effect grew as the relationship between education and sibship size flipped from
positive to negative. Because this reversal coincided with fertility decline (Vogl 2016), one can expect
the intergenerational association and the composition effect to grow as aggregate fertility falls.
13

3

Data on the Fertility of Mothers and Daughters

To link mothers’ and daughters’ fertilities, I draw on data from the Demographic and Health Surveys, a collection of nationally-representative samples of women of childbearing age (generally
15-49). Two survey modules are key for the analysis. The fertility history module asks women to
list all of their own children ever born, while the sibling history module asks women to list all of
their siblings ever born to their mothers, both with details like birthdates and survival. Combined,
these two lists allow one to retrospectively track fertility behavior in a lineage over two generations.
Although the design of the DHS allows for comparisons across surveys and countries, questionnaires and sampling methods occasionally differ. Surveys must meet two criteria for inclusion
in the study sample. First, they must sample all women, not only ever-married women, to avoid
sample selection on an outcome closely related to fertility.9 Second, they must include information
on the survival of both offspring and siblings, to allow analysis of both ever-born and surviving
fertility. Based on these criteria, the paper uses 82 surveys in 40 African, Asian, Caribbean, Latin
American, and Pacific countries (see Appendix Table 1 for a list of countries and survey years).10
Together, these surveys provide data on sibship size and fertility for 966,498 women aged 15-49.
As its main unit of analysis, the analysis focuses on birth cohorts, estimating intergenerational
associations and composition effects among women born in the same country and the same 5-year
interval. Because this strategy generates parameter estimates for many cells per country, it allows a
rich analysis of changes in associations and composition effects within a country over time. Notably,
this approach abstracts from the model, which considers generations, or all women born to the same
group of mothers. Each cohort statistic characterizes a hypothetical generation of families whose size
is distributed according to the cross-sectional distribution of sibship size in the birth cohort.
Analyses of both the intergenerational association and the composition effect involve two steps:
first, estimating parameters for each country-cohort cell, and second, documenting patterns across
(rather than within) cells. In the first step, I use sampling weights provided by the DHS but rescale
them to maximize efficiency with multiple surveys per country. If a country-cohort cell includes
data from surveys k = 1, · · · , K, each with Nk observations, then the weights from survey k are
9 The

one exception to this rule is the 1996 Nepal DHS, which surveyed only ever-married women. Because 98 percent
of Nepalese women over 30 in that year were ever-married, I include data from that survey on women over 30.
10 Two additional surveys, the 1989 Bolivia DHS and the 1999 Nigeria DHS, meet the sample inclusion criteria but are
omitted due to irregularities in the sibling history data.

14

rescaled to sum to

Nk
.
∑k Nk

This approach weights surveys in proportion to their contribution to the

country-cohort sample. In the second step, analyses are unweighted to ensure representativeness.
For precision, I drop cells smaller than 250 women, the 5th percentile of the cell size distribution.
In an extension to the cohort analysis, I quantify implications for the total fertility rate (TFR), a
period measure of fertility that reflects the expected number of children for a woman who experiences current age-specific fertility rates throughout her lifetime. The unit of analysis is a countryyear, so each survey generates a single estimate, and no weight rescaling is necessary.
Many parts of the analysis focus on relationships between estimated parameters, which are
based on the same underlying sample. For conservative statistical inference, I bootstrap all such
analyses in a two-step procedure. The first step randomly draws primary sampling units within
each survey, while the second step randomly draws countries.11 I do not otherwise correct for estimation error in the cell-level parameter estimates; earlier work on the same dataset (Vogl 2016)
found that Fuller’s (1987) error correction procedure did not meaningfully change the results.

4

Intergenerational Fertility Associations

This section estimates intergenerational fertility associations at the country-cohort level and studies
how they evolve. For completeness, it reports results for both ever-born and surviving fertility.
Ever-born fertility is more relevant for intergenerational associations in fertility behavior, whereas
surviving fertility is more relevant for intergenerational associations in fertility outcomes. Either
measure of fertility may be relevant for the demand for children, depending on parents’ ability to
target the number of surviving offspring subject to mortality risk.12

4.1

Methods

I estimate intergenerational associations using a linear model relating a woman’s fertility outcome
at a specific age to her sibship size. For woman i from country c and 5-year birth cohort t:
a
a
a
yict
= αct
+ β act sict + uict

(8)

11 Unless otherwise noted, I compute analytical standard errors (clustered by primary sampling unit) for the cell-level
statistics themselves. Only analyses relating estimated cell-level parameters are bootstrapped.
12 From the model’s perspective (and an evolutionary perspective), only surviving fertility is relevant. Surviving fertility is also attractive because it is less subject to recall bias, or the forgetting of deceased children.

15

a
a is cumulative fertility at age a, and s
where yict
ict is sibship size. β ct is country-cohort ct’s intergen-

erational fertility association at age a, capturing all mechanisms linking a mother’s fertility with her
daughter’s. It is not a causal effect, and its sources are not necessarily limited to the mechanism
specified in the model.
The choice of a poses a methodological tradeoff. The DHS interviews most respondents midway
through their childbearing years, so the analysis must consider cumulative fertility before the end of
reproductive age. An earlier a allows for a larger sample and coverage of later birth cohorts, while
a later a covers more of the reproductive lifespan. To deal with this trade-off, I follow research
on intergenerational income mobility, where similar issues arise (Solon and Haider 2006).13 In a
recent analysis, Chetty et al. (2014) choose the age at which the intergenerational income association
becomes stable for the rest of the lifecycle. If fertility gaps are concentrated early in the reproductive
lifespan, then one can take a similar approach to analyzing intergenerational fertility associations.
Along these lines, I choose the earliest age a for which β act approximates the completed fertility
transmission coefficient. To find this age, I draw on the full fertility histories of women at least 45
years old to estimate β act at ages 20, 25, 30, 35, 40, and 45. I then regress the cohort’s age-45 association on its association at an earlier age.14 Appendix Figure 1 plots the results by age, indicating that
intergenerational associations at earlier ages are informative about the association for completed
fertility (as measured at age 45). From age 25 on, all estimated slopes are significantly different from
zero and extremely close to 1 for ever-born and surviving fertility. At age 20, however, the estimated
slope for surviving fertility is substantially (albeit insignificantly) below 1 and also not significantly
different from 0. Given these results, the analysis focuses on cumulative fertility at age 25.
Motivated by equation (7), one can decompose the intergenerational fertility association into
its driving forces: (1) the association of sibship size and fertility, conditional on human capital; (2)
the association of human capital and fertility, conditional on sibship size; and (3) the association of
sibship size and human capital. Two equations summarize these three partial derivatives. The first
expresses fertility outcomes as a function of sibship size and education:
a
a
a
a
a
yict
= Act
+ Bct
sict + Γct
eduict + Uict

(9)

13 Since age-earnings profiles are steeper for individuals with high lifetime earnings, early measurement of the child’s
income can bias estimates of the parent-child association downward. This lifecycle bias is analogous to the problem that
arises here, except that the dependent variable is a flow (income) rather than a stock (cumulative fertility).
14 A limitation of this approach is that it overlooks future changes in the age profile of fertility.

16

while the second expresses education as a function of sibship size:

eduict = ψct + ϕct sict + vict

(10)

In the language Goldberger (1991) uses to characterize omitted variables bias, equation (8) is a
“short” regression, while equations (9) and (10) are the corresponding “long” and “auxiliary” rea is the net intergenerational transmission term discussed in Section 2.4, accounting for
gressions. Bct
a is the skill-fertility association, representing differenfactors outside the theoretical framework. Γct

tial fertility in the current generation, while ϕct is the sibsize-skill association, reflecting differential
fertility in the last generation. By equation (7), the cohort coefficients are related by the identity
a + ϕ Γ a , which confirms that β a is smaller when Γ a and ϕ are of opposite sign.
β act = Bct
ct ct
ct
ct
ct

4.2

Results

The analysis of intergenerational fertility associations proceeds in six steps. To build intuition for
the full-sample results, I first present a case study of Bolivia, which has data covering birth cohorts
from the mid-1940s to the mid-1980s, a period in which the country underwent a marked reversal
of differential fertility. Next, I describe the distribution of parameter estimates in the full sample,
followed by an exploration of how they change across cohorts, how they relate to each other, and
how they relate to other demographic processes like marriage. Finally, I regress the fertility associations on economic aggregates in early life and early adulthood to understand the drivers of the
observed changes.
Bolivian Case Study

The case study of Bolivia appears in Table 1. To reduce the number of results

to report, the case study uses decadal birth cohorts instead of the 5-year cohorts of the main analysis.
For each decade of birth from 1945-54 to 1975-83 (data are unavailable for 1984), the table estimates
the four slope parameters of equations (8)-(10) using age-25 ever-born fertility. Panel A reports
estimates of the overall intergenerational fertility association, β act , which is 0 in the 1945-54 cohort
but steadily grows to a statistically significant 0.08 by the 1975-83 cohort. That is to say, among
Bolivian women born just after World War II, childhood family size has no relation to adult fertility.
But among their counterparts born three decades later, each additional sibling is associated with an
additional one-twelfth of a child by age 25.
17

Panel B reports estimates of the “long” regression, showing that net of education, the intergenerational transmission of fertility starts positive at 0.01 and then grows to roughly 0.03 in later birth
cohorts. Net of sibship size, education has an negative association with fertility across all cohorts,
although the association is most negative for the most recent cohorts. Interpreted through the theoretical framework of Section 2, fertility patterns in all cohorts are consistent with a modern regime.
However, in Panel C’s estimates of the “auxiliary” regression, the association of sibship size and education flips from positive to negative, consistent with a shift from Malthusian to modern fertility
patterns in the parents’ generation. Taken together, staggered shifts in the skill-fertility relationship
across generations account for over half of the growth in the intergenerational fertility association.

Distribution of Parameter Estimates

The full-sample analysis applies these same methods to all

5-year birth cohorts, for both ever-born and surviving fertility. Table 2 summarizes the parameter
estimates. Column (1) presents the mean and standard deviation of the parameter estimate across
cells. The remaining columns summarize the distributions of the associated t-statistics, based on
analytic standard errors clustered at the primary sampling unit level.
Two patterns immediately emerge for intergenerational associations in both ever-born and sura
viving fertility. First, the central tendencies of β act and Bct
are close to zero, and the supports of
a
their distributions contain both positive and negative values. Second, the dispersion of Bct
—from

the “long” regression, which controls for education—is smaller than that of β act from the “short”
regression. Heterogeneity in the role of education thus explains part of the observed heterogeneity
in intergenerational fertility association. To shed additional light on this heterogeneity, Appendix
a
Figure 2 plots kernel densities of the estimated β act and Bct
across country-cohort cells, revealing
a
that the distribution of Bct
has shorter right and left tails than the distribution of β act . This finding

suggests that education amplifies both positive and negative intergenerational fertility associations.
One interpretation is that intergenerational fertility associations are small everywhere, so that
the distributions observed in Figure 2 are the result of sampling variability. However, the distributions of t-statistics in Table 2 do not fit such an interpretation. At the 5 percent significance level, the
ever-born fertility association is significantly positive in 29 percent of cells and significantly negative in 2 percent; the surviving fertility association is significantly positive in 16 percent of cells and
significantly negative in 9 percent. As a result, the distribution of the surviving fertility associations
18

contains too many positive values and too many negative values to be explained by randomness.
The amplifying role of education has two potential sources: heterogeneity in the association
of education with fertility (Γct ) and heterogeneity in the association of sibship size with education
(ϕct ). Theory predicts staggered reversals in these associations. The skill-fertility association flips
first, inducing a flip in the next generation’s sibsize-skill association. For insight into which of
these sources is at play, Table 2 also reports distributions of estimates and t-statistics for Γct and
ϕct . The reversal of the skill-fertility association had already occurred before the sample cohorts
began childbearing, with 90 percent of the estimates significantly negative for ever-born fertility
and 80 percent for surviving fertility. In contrast, the distribution of the sibsize-skill association has
significant mass in both tails, suggesting that some cohorts were born when Malthusian fertility
patterns prevailed, so that children with higher skill parents had more siblings and obtained more
education. For ever-born fertility, 40 percent of ϕct estimates are significantly positive and 26 percent
negative. For surviving fertility, 56 percent are positive and 16 percent negative.

Cohort Trends in Parameter Estimates The preceding evidence suggests that most women in the
sample bore children during the modern era, but some were born during the Malthusian era. One
can shed more light on this issue by considering how the parameters change on average across
successive cohorts. To characterize these trends, I regress each estimated parameter on country fixed
effects and cohort fixed effects, plotting the cohort effects in Figure 3. I set the omitted category to
the the only cohort for which data are available for all countries, 1965-9, and then add the mean
parameter value to the cohort effects, so the figure provides information about average levels and
changes. The horizontal line reflects the 1965-9 mean; the point estimates and 95 percent confidence
intervals are for differences relative to this line.
Starting from the right-hand side of Figure 3, one can see clear evidence of the transition from
Malthusian to modern regimes. For both ever-born and surviving sibship size, the sibsize-skill association is positive on average for the 1965-9 cohort, significantly more positive for earlier cohorts,
and significantly more negative for later cohorts. Moving forward one generation, the skill-fertility
association is negative on average for the 1965-9 cohort, but similar to the sibsize-skill association,
it is significantly more positive for earlier cohorts, and significantly more negative for later cohorts.
Meanwhile, the net transmission coefficient averages near zero with little change.
19

The intergenerational association equals the net transmission coefficient plus the product of
the two skill-related associations. Since the transmission coefficient is constant while the the skillrelated associations become more negative across successive cohorts, intergenerational fertility associations should become more positive. Indeed, the left-most panels of Figure 3 indicate that intergenerational associations for both ever-born and surviving fertility have become significantly more
positive since the 1965-9 cohort. Magnitudes are not large: the intergenerational association averages 0.02-0.03 for the 1980-4 cohort, implying that a woman with 10 siblings can expect to have
1
10

more children by age 25 than a woman with no siblings. Nevertheless, the data show a clear

strengthening of the association, consistent with the theory.

Relationship Between Parameter Estimates

While Figure 3 provides evidence of average changes

across cohorts, one can glean further evidence of the link between intergenerational fertility associations and skill-fertility associations by directly relating them. Figure 4 carries out such an analysis.
On the left-hand side, the figure draws scatterplots and local linear regressions (with confidence
intervals based on bootstrapped pointwise standard errors) linking the intergenerational fertility
association to the sibsize-skill association. Both the scatterplot and non-parametric fit reveal negative relationships for both ever-born and surviving fertility, with the scatterplot also suggesting
regional variation. Latin American and Caribbean (LAC) cohorts have more negative sibsize-skill
associations and more positive intergenerational fertility associations. In the starkest cases (recent
cohorts in the Andes), a women with 10 siblings can expect to have 5 years less education and 1 more
child than a woman with no siblings. At the other end of the spectrum (older cohorts in Africa), the
woman with 10 siblings would expect to have 3 years less education and

1
3

fewer children than her

counterpart without siblings. The intercepts of the local linear regressions are significantly positive
a
at the 5 percent level, reflecting a net transmission coefficient Bct
that is on average greater than

zero. As reported in the top-right corners of the figures, ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions on
these scatterplots lead to significantly negative slopes of roughly -0.1 (p < 0.01) for both measures
of fertility. Relative to the standard deviations in Table 2, these slopes imply that variation in the
estimated sibsize-education association explains roughly one-third of the variation in the estimated
intergenerational fertility association.
Despite the apparent importance of regional variation, within-country variation produces simi20

lar results. The right-hand side of Figure 3 plots residuals after regressing the estimated parameters
on country and cohort fixed effects. A negative slope obtains again, suggesting that as the sibsizeskill association turns more negative across successive cohorts within a country, the intergenerational fertility association turns more positive. The LAC region reaches furthest into the southeast
and northwest quadrants, implying that the simultaneous drop in the sibsize-skill association and
rise in the intergenerational fertility association were strongest in that region. As reported in the
top-right corners, OLS estimates of the slopes are very similar with and without fixed effects, and
they remain significant at the 1 percent level.

Role of Marriage and Fertility Onset The fact that intergenerational fertility associations measured early in the reproductive lifecycle strongly predict associations measured late in the reproductive lifecycle suggests that marriage and the initiation of childbearing may play an important
role. To what extent do the preceding results reflect changes in the ages at marriage and first birth?
Ordinary least squares estimation of equation (8) is inappropriate for answering this question because never-married and childless women have censored outcomes. As such, I estimate Cox hazard
regressions in which the age at first marriage or first birth is the outcome, and surviving sibship size
is the independent variable.15
Figure 5 presents the results in a format analogous to Figure 4, plotting the hazard ratio against
the sibsize-skill association on the left-hand side, and plotting residuals net of country and cohort
fixed effects on the right-hand side. A hazard ratio greater (less) than 1 indicates that women from
larger sibships have higher (lower) marriage or first birth risk. For both outcomes, both with and
without country and cohort fixed effects, Figure 5 reveals clear negative slopes. When women
with more siblings obtain more education, they marry and begin having children later, as reflected
in hazard ratios that are on average significantly below 1. In contrast, when such women obtain
less education, they marry and begin having children earlier, as reflected in hazard ratios that are
on average significantly above 1. The explanation for this pattern follows the same logic as that
for Figure 4. Most women in the sample came of age in an era when more education meant later
marriage and birth. As a result, for those born in the Malthusian era, sibship size negatively predicts
marriage and childbearing risk, while for those born in the modern era, the opposite result obtains.
15 Results

for ever-born sibship size are similar, so I omit them to conserve space.

21

Aggregate Predictors of the Intergenerational Fertility Association

The theoretical framework

showed that human capital can play an important role in the evolution of the intergenerational
fertility association. One way to test this proposition is to relate the association to economic and
demographic aggregates. To this end, this section regresses the intergenerational fertility association
on log GDP per capita (from the Penn World Table), the urbanization rate (from the UN), the infant
mortality rate (from the UN), and average educational attainment among adults (from the Barro
and Lee dataset). Because the intergenerational association depends on fertility decisions in two
generations, I consider two measurements of each variable, first in the five-year period of birth and
then in the five-year period surrounding the 20th birthday.
Table 3 reports the results, with ever-born fertility in columns (1)-(4) and surviving fertility in
columns (5)-(8). The odd-numbered columns only include aggregates measured at birth; the evennumbered columns add the age-20 measures. Because the aggregate data are not available for the
full panel, the sample size shrinks to 150 country-cohort cells. All regressions include country and
cohort fixed effects, standard errors are clustered at the country level.
Columns (1) and (5) begin with all four aggregate variables measured in childhood, finding a
significant role for education but not living standards, urbanization, or infant mortality. For both
ever-born and surviving fertility, a one-year increase in average educational attainment is associated
with a strengthening of the intergenerational association by slightly more than 0.02, or two-thirds
of a standard deviation. Adding the age-20 measures in columns (2) and (6) does not change the
takeaway, with significant coefficients on the education variables but no others. The coefficient
on average education at birth shrinks somewhat, implying that some of the relationship between
average education at birth and the intergenerational fertility association is mediated by average
education in early adulthood. However, the two fertility measures yield conflicting results on which
age is more important.
Because changes in living standards, urbanization, and infant mortality appear to play no role
in the evolution of the intergenerational fertility association, it is useful to rerun the preceding regressions omitting these covariates. Columns (3)-(4) and (7)-(8) carry out this exercise, regression
the estimated association on average education in childhood and early adulthood, plus country and
cohort fixed effects. The results are similar but generally more statistically significant.16
16 In

columns (3)-(4) and (7)-(8), it is possible to expand the sample because data on GDP per capita are sparse. In the

22

5

Composition Effects on Average Fertility

What do these strengthening intergenerational associations imply for the evolution of average fertility? This section estimates the composition effect of differential fertility among cohort t’s parents
on the average fertility of cohort t. Of particular interest is how the composition effect varies with
average fertility in cohort t, which speaks to how the dynamics of population composition affect the
evolution of aggregate fertility rates.

5.1

Methods

For empirical application, the composition effect in Section 2 requires three modifications. First, the
model considered a population of one sex for analytical convenience, but the empirical measure
must account for the reality of two sexes. As such, I refine the definition the composition effect to
be the average number of children born to women minus the average number of grandchildren per
daughter born to their mothers.17 Second, Section 2 wrote the composition effect over the distribution
of fertility in the grandparent generation, but the DHS offers data on the women themselves. Thus,
the definition of the composition effect I take to the data must involve two ingredients: the average
a , and their deweighted average fertility, ỹ a , which undoes
fertility of women from cohort ct, ȳct
ct

the reweighting of the population due to differential fertility among their mothers. Let K be the
maximum number of surviving females in a woman’s sibship (including herself); ηctk be the share
a be the average
of women from country-cohort ct with k surviving females in their sibships; and ȳctk

fertility of women with k surviving females in their sibships. Then:

a = K η ȳ a
ȳct
∑k=1 ctk ctk

a = K
ỹct
∑ k =1

and



ηctk /k
∑lK=1 ηctl /l



a
ȳctk

Third, because changing fertility levels complicate comparisons of composition effects at different
stages of the fertility transition and at different ages, I divide the absolute composition effect by the
average fertility that would obtain in the absence of reweighting from differential fertility in the
previous generation. This new measure, the relative composition effect, captures how the reweighting
of the population affects average fertility in proportional terms.
expanded sample, the results for education remain similar but again become more statistically significant.
17 A more detailed definition might explicitly consider men and the role of assortative mating, but the DHS only offers
data on women’s sibship sizes, making such an extension impossible to estimate.

23

For country-cohort ct, the relative composition effect on mean fertility at age a is:
a
δct
=

a − ỹ a
ȳct
ct
a
ỹct

(11)

This expression is a simple non-linear combination of the weighted and deweighted averages. The
non-parametric estimator for the relative composition effect plugs in the empirical analogs of those
averages. Keeping with Section 4, the measure of fertility is cumulative fertility at age 25. For
conciseness, I report results only for children ever born; unreported results for surviving fertility
a reweights on the number of surviving sisters only, as
are extremely similar. Notably, however, ỹct

deceased sisters are irrelevant to the cohort’s composition in adulthood.
In the case of a linear conditional expectation function, the composition effect equals the intergenerational association times the variance-to-mean ratio of childhood family size. To clearly
link the composition effect estimates with the fertility transmission results of the previous section,
I carry out this decomposition using sibship rather than sistership size.18 For county-cohort ct, the
decomposition is:
a
δct
=



β ct
ỹct



2
σ̃ct
s̃ct


(12)

where β ct is the slope from a regression of ever-born fertility on surviving sibship size; ỹct is defined
above; and σ̃ct2 and s̃ct are the deweighted variance and mean of sibship size, respectively. The relative composition effect has two components: a relative intergenerational association and a ratio. If
the intergenerational association becomes positive during fertility decline, but the ratio stays constant, then the composition effect rises. Each of these components is separately estimable, and their
product provides a parametric estimator for the composition effect.

5.2

Results

As in Section 4.2, I begin with case study evidence from Bolivia to build intuition. I then present
estimates for all country cohort cells and track their evolution over the fertility transition.

Bolivian Case Study

The case study of Bolivia appears again in Table 4, using the same four

decadal cohorts as Table 1. Panel A presents relative composition effects across cohorts, estimated
18 Results

are extremely similar if one changes the covariate to the surviving number of female siblings, which would
more appropriately capture the dynamics of a two-sex population but would have a less obvious relation to Section 4.

24

first non-parametrically using equation (11) and then parametrically using equation (12). Panel B
then decomposes each parametric estimate into a relative fertility association and a variance-tomean ratio. Panel C reports additional descriptive statistics. Because the estimands in Panels A and
B are non-linear combinations of other parameters, standard errors are block-bootstrapped at the
primary sampling unit level.
In Panel A, both the non-parametric and parametric estimates are consistent with a population that started in transition and then settled into a modern regime. The earliest cohort exhibits a
marginally significant negative composition effect, implying that differential fertility in the previous generation decreases the cohort’s average fertility, by 2-3 percent. The non-parametric estimate
for this cohort is more negative and more statistically significant (p = 0.098) than the parametric
estimate, but both estimates display a marked upward trend across subsequent cohorts. The latest
cohort exhibits a significantly positive composition effect using either estimator, such that differential fertility in the previous generation increases this cohort’s average fertility by 6-9 percent. The
corresponding levels of fertility can be seen in the descriptive statistics at the bottom of the table.
Deweighted average fertility starts higher than actual average fertility (1.9 versus 1.8 children ever
born) but ends lower (1.5 versus 1.6 children ever born).
Panel B reveals that this increasing trend in the relative composition effect is driven by a rising
relative intergenerational association, rather than a rising variance-to-mean ratio. The association is
(insignificantly) negative for the earliest cohort but then swells to (a significant) 0.06 for the latest cohort, implying that each additional sibling is associated with a 6 percent increase in fertility relative
to the deweighted mean. Meanwhile, the variance-to-mean ratio of sibship size steadily declines
across cohorts, from 2.1 to 1.7, thus acting to limit increases in the composition effect. However, this
force lacks the strength to to entirely offset the rising relative intergenerational association. Overall,
the Bolivian data indeed suggest that composition effects turn positive as the fertility transition sets
in, pushing back against decline of average fertility.

Composition Effects over the Fertility Transition For the full sample, Figure 6 plots the composition effect and its components against deweighted average fertility, along with local linear
regression estimates. Using deweighted (rather than actual) average fertility on the x-axis eases
interpretation because actual fertility is (1 + δ) x when deweighted fertility is x.
25

On the left side of Panel A, non-parametric estimates of equation (11) show the composition
effect averaging near zero for levels of deweighted average fertility above 1.5. But below 1.5, the
composition effect rises. At the lowest observed levels of fertility, differential fertility in the previous
generation raises current mean fertility by as much as 10 percent, and by 4 percent on average—with
the regression function significantly different from zero at p = 0.06. OLS estimation on this scatterplot yields a marginally significant negative slope coefficient of -0.010 (p = 0.13).19 If one uses an
indicator for the bottom decile of deweighted average fertility instead of the continuous measure,
the coefficient on that indicator is 0.024 (p = 0.02). Composition effects are thus higher at lower
levels of cohort fertility.
On the right side of Panel A, parametric estimates based on equation (12) point to a similar but
even more pronounced rise below 1.5. At the 5 percent level, the regression function is significantly
positive at the lowest levels of deweighted average fertility and significantly negative at the highest levels. OLS estimation on this scatterplot also yields a significant negative slope (p = 0.01).
Together, then, both composition effect estimators suggest that endogenous changes in population
composition push back against aggregate fertility decline late in the fertility transition. Consistent
with the patterns in Section 4, the growth of the composition effect late in the fertility transition is
especially apparent in the LAC region.
Panel B of Figure 6 decompose equation (12) into the association and ratio components, revealing that the rise in composition effects as fertility falls can be attributed entirely to rising intergenerational associations. The relative intergenerational association decreases with the level of deweighted
fertility, whereas the variance-to-mean ratio increases with it. Both of these relationships are characterized by OLS slope coefficients that are significant at the 5 percent level. The results for the full
sample thus mimic the case study evidence from Bolivia.

6

Implications for Period Fertility Rates

Cumulative fertility at age 25 is an uncommon measure, making the cohort results difficult to interpret. This section estimates the implications for the total fertility rate (TFR), or the number of children a woman would expect to bear if she experienced current age-specific fertility rates throughout
19 With

the inclusion of country and cohort fixed effects, the coefficient on the continuous measure rises in absolute
value, to -0.019, but maintains a similar significance level, at p = 0.16.

26

her reproductive lifecycle. TFR is a period measure of fertility, summing over the cross-sectional
distribution of age-specific fertility rates, so each DHS survey provides exactly one estimate.

6.1

Methods

a as an indicator for whether woman i of age a from country
To analyze TFR, redefine the outcome yict

c and birth cohort t gave birth in the year preceding the survey. Let the τ be the survey year, so that
a is an age-specific fertility rate for age a in year τ = t + a. Similarly, the
the cohort average ȳct
a is the age-specific fertility rate that would have obtained absent the
deweighted cohort average ỹct

influence of differential fertility on population composition. The total fertility rate and deweighted
total fertility rate sum over these age-specific rates. For country c in year τ:

a
TFRcτ = 5 ∑ a ȳc,τ
−a

and

a
dTFRcτ = 5 ∑ a ỹc,τ
−a

The summations are multiplied by five because I use five-year age groups, from 15-19 to 45-49.20 The
composition effect of differential fertility on TFR is the relative difference between actual TFR and
the TFR that would obtain if women from different sibship sizes were equally represented within
their age group:
δcτ =

TFRcτ − dTFRcτ
dTFRcτ

(13)

As in the cohort analysis, this expression is a non-linear combination of weighted and deweighted
averages. The empirical analog is a non-parametric estimator for the composition effect on TFR.
For the linear case, the cohort analysis decomposed the composition effect into a relative intergenerational association and variance-mean ratio. For TFR, the decomposition becomes complicated because the numerator of the right-hand side of equation (13) sums 7 age-group-specific
absolute composition effects, each of which has a separate multiplicative decomposition. However,
one can approximate the decomposition by assuming that either the association component or the
ratio component is constant across age groups. Because the paper focuses on variation in intergenerational associations, I hold the variance-to-mean ratio at its average:
2
σc,τ
−a

δcτ =

∑ a β ac,τ − a µc,τ − a
dTFRcτ

≈

5

∑ a β ac,τ − a
dTFR



1
7

σ̃2 − a
∑ a µ̃c,τ
c,τ − a


(14)

20 Specifically, for age group a with lower bound a and upper bound a, the birth cohort τ − a would be born between
the year τ − a and the year τ − a.

27

where β ac,τ −a is the coefficient from a regression of an indicator for a birth in the year preceding the
2
survey on surviving sibship size for respondents aged a, while σ̃c,τ
− a and µ̃c,τ − a are the deweighted

variance and mean of sibship size, respectively. In the approximate decomposition of equation (14),
δcτ again has two parts: a relative association and a ratio. In the first, the total fertility association
5 ∑ a β ac,τ −a , which mimics the total fertility rate by summing over the cross-sectional distribution of
age-specific fertility associations, is divided by the deweighted TFR. In the second, the ratio of the
variance to the mean of sibship size is averaged across the seven age groups. As in Section 5, the
product of these components provides a parametric estimator for the composition effect, which in
this case is approximate in the linear case.

6.2

Results

For each of the 81 surveys in the sample (not including Nepal 1996, which lacks representative information on younger, unmarried women), Figure 7 plots the composition effect and its components
against deweighted TFR, along with local linear regression estimates. The results mirror the cohort results in the previous section. In Panel A, non-parametric estimates of the composition effect
average near zero when deweighted TFR exceeds 4, but below this threshold, they turn positive.
At the lowest observed levels of deweighted average fertility, differential fertility in the previous
generation raises average fertility by 4 percent on average (p < 0.01), and by as much as 6 percent.
OLS estimates also show a significantly negative slope, such that each additional child per woman
is associated with a 0.7-point lower composition effect. Parametric estimates based on the approximation in equation (14) display similar patterns, although as in the cohort results, they are larger in
magnitude and more statistically significant. In a notable difference from the cohort results, neither
regression function ever turns significantly negative.
Here again, the association component rather than the ratio component drives the implied evolution of the composition effect over the fertility transition. As deweighted TFR falls below 4 in
Panel B of Figure 7, the total fertility association rises dramatically as a share of deweighted TFR,
such that at the lowest observed fertility levels, each additional sibling is associated with a 5 percent increase in the number of children per woman. In contrast to the cohort results, the average
variance-to-mean ratio for sibship size does not appreciably change with the level of fertility.
Overall, then, the analysis of period fertility rates has similar conclusions to the analysis of
28

cohort fertility rates. In the later phases of the process of aggregate fertility decline, the composition
effect slows the process by raising average fertility. With non-parametric estimates of 4 percent on
average and 6-10 percent in the most pronounced cases, these results explain a small but systematic
feature of aggregate fertility dynamics.

7

Conclusion

The question of whether girls from large families tend to bear many children in adulthood has
drawn the attention of social scientists and statisticians for over a century. Nevertheless, existing
research has shed limited light on how this association evolves over the course of the fertility transition, and on what implications it has for aggregate fertility outcomes. This paper fills that gap on
two levels.
First, it first theoretically explores the evolution of the association in a quality-quantity framework drawn from the literature on demography and long-run economic growth. The theoretical
results highlight the importance of the changing relationship between human capital and fertility. Intergenerational fertility associations

and therefore also composition effects

turn positive

when fertility differentials by skill are aligned across generations, which occurs within the Malthusian or modern regimes but not during the transition between them. As a result, differential fertility
initially encourages the decline of aggregate fertility but then hinders it.
Second, the empirical analysis confirms these predictions in data on mother-daughter pairs from
40 developing countries over half a century. In these data, intergenerational associations grow during the transition to a modern fertility regime, as the link between human capital and fertility flips
from positive to negative, and the skill-fertility association becomes more negative. Due to this
change in intergenerational associations, the composition effect of differential fertility on average
fertility turns positive as the fertility transition progresses.
The paper’s approach provides a new demographic lens for understanding the pace of the global
decline of fertility, the subject of a large literature in economics (Schultz 1997; Galor 2011; de la Croix
2012). From a broader economic perspective, the results are of interest not just because they clarify
aggregate fertility dynamics but also because they demonstrate a unique way in which intergenerational associations aggregate up to population-level dynamics. In this sense, this paper is related
29

to the literature exploring how the intergenerational transmission of economic status affects the
dynamics of the income distribution (Becker and Tomes 1979; Goldberger 1989).
While the paper breaks new ground on the changing causes and consequences of fertility transmission, several questions remain open. First, although fertility differentials by female education
clearly influence intergenerational fertility associations, other sources of intergenerational persistence, such as fecundity and culture, may also play a role. A fuller model of the evolution of intergenerational transmission would also take these factors into account, although data limitations
hinder tests of such a model. Second, although the paper provides evidence that changes in differential fertility and population composition interact to increase the composition effect of differential
fertility, future research could further draw out the connections to the pace of fertility decline, and
especially to the recent “stalls” Bongaarts (2006, 2008) has identified in many populations. Finally,
the analysis here has not considered other demographic influences on the time path of aggregate
fertility, such as assortative mating, or intergenerational influences that span more than two generations (Mare 2011). Investigations into the consequences of these other mechanisms may shed
further light on the micro-level demographic phenomena influencing the pace of aggregate change.

30

References
Anderton, Douglas L., Noriko O. Tsuya, Lee L. Bean, and Geraldine P. Mineau. (1987). “Intergenerational Transmission of Relative Fertility and Life Course Patterns.” Demography 24(4): 467-480.
Axinn, William G., Marin E. Clarkberg, and Arland Thornton. (1994). “Family Influences on Family
Size Preferences.” Demography 31(1): 65-79.
Ashraf, Quamrul H., David N. Weil, and Joshua Wilde. (2013). “The Effect of Fertility Reduction on
Economic Growth.” Population and Development Review 39(1): 97-130.
Becker, Gary S., and Nigel Tomes. (1979). “An Equilibrium Theory of rhe Distribution of Income
and Intergenerational Mobility.” Journal of Political Economy 87(6): 1153-1189.
Ben-Porath, Yoram. (1975). “First-Generation Effects on Second-Generation Fertility.” Demography
12(3): 397-405.
Bengtsson, Tommy, and Martin Dribe. (2014). “The Fertility Transition at the Micro Level: Socioeconomic Status, Income and Fertility in Southern Sweden 1815-1939.” Demographic Research 30(17):
493-534.
Bhalotra, Sonia, and Samantha Rawlings. (2013). “Gradients of the Intergenerational Transmission
of Health in Developing Countries.” Review of Economics and Statistics 95(2): 660-672.
Björklund, Anders, and Markus Jäntti. (1997). “Intergenerational Income Mobility in Sweden Compared to the United States.” American Economic Review 87(5): 1009-1018.
Bongaarts, John. (2006). “The Causes of Stalling Fertility Transitions.” Studies in Family Planning
37(1): 1-16.
Bongaarts, John. (2008). “Fertility Transitions in Developing Countries: Progress Or Stagnation?”
Studies in Family Planning 39(2): 105-110.
Caldwell, John C. (1982). Theory of Fertility Decline. New York: Academic Press.
Chetty, Raj, Nathaniel Hendren, Patrick Kline, and Emmanuel Saez. (2014). “Where Is The Land
of Opportunity? The Geography of Intergenerational Mobility in the United States.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 129(4): 1553-1623.
Chevalier, Arnaud, Kevin Denny, and Dorren McMahon. (2009). “A Multi-Country Study Of Intergenerational Educational Mobility.” In Peter Dolton, Rita Asplundh and Erling Barth, eds.,
Education and Inequality Across Europe. London: Edward Elgar.
Corak, Miles. (2013). “Income Inequality, Equality of Opportunity, and Intergenerational Mobility.”
Journal of Economic Perspectives 27(3): 79-102.
Clark, Gregory. (2007). A Farewell to Alms: A Brief Economic History of the World. Princeton: Princeton
University Press.
Clark, Gregory, and Neil Cummins. (2015). “Malthus to Modernity: Wealth, Status, and Fertility in
31

England, 1500–1879.” Journal of Population Economics 28: 3-29.
De la Croix, David and Matthias Doepke. (2003). “Inequality and Growth: Why Differential Fertility
Matters.” American Economic Review 93: 1091-1113.
De la Croix, David. (2013). Fertility, Education, Growth, and Sustainability. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Doepke, Matthias. (2005). “Child Mortality and Fertility Decline: Does the Barro-Becker Model Fit
the Facts?” Journal of Population Economics 18(2): 337-366.
Duncan, Otis Dudley, Ronald Freedman, J. Michael Coble, and Doris P. Slesinger. (1965). “Marital
Fertility and Size of Family of Orientation.” Demography 2(1): 508-515.
Fernandez, Raquel, and Richard Rogerson. (2001). “Sorting and Long-Run Inequality.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 101: 1305-1341.
Fuller, Wayne A. (1987). Measurement Error Models. New York: Wiley.
Galor, Oded. (2011). Unified Growth Theory. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Galor, Oded, and Omer Moav. (2002). “Natural Selection and the Origin of Economic Growth.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 117: 1133-1192.
Galor, Oded, and Stelios Michalopoulos. (2012). “Evolution and the Growth Process: Natural Selection of Entrepreneurial Traits.” Journal of Economic Theory 147(2): 759-780.
Goldberger, Arthur S. (1989). “Economic and Mechanical Models of Intergenerational Transmission.” American Economic Review 79(3): 504-513.
Haider, Steven, & Solon, Gary. (2006). “Life-Cycle Variation in the Association between Current
and Lifetime Earnings.” American Economic Review 96(4): 1308-1320.
Hazan, Moshe, and Binyamin Berdugo. (2002). “Child Labour, Fertility, and Economic Growth.”
Economic Journal 112(482): 810-828.
Huestis, R.R., and Aline Maxwell. (1932). “Does Family Size Run in Families?” Journal of Heredity
23(2): 77-79.
Jones, Larry E., Alice Schoonbroodt, and Michèle Tertilt. (2010). “Fertility Theories: Can They
Explain the Negative Fertility-Income Relationship?” In J.B. Shoven, ed., Demography and the
Economy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 43-100.
Kahn, Joan R., and Kay E. Anderson. (1992). “Intergenerational Patterns of Teenage Fertility.”
Demography 29(1): 39-57.
Keyfitz, Nathan. (1971). “On the Momentum of Population Growth.” Demography 8: 71-80.
Kolk, Martin, Daniel Cownden, and Magnus Enquist. (2014). “Correlations in Fertility Across
Generations: Can Low Fertility Persist?” Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences
281(1779): 20132561.
32

Kremer, Michael. (1997). “How Much Does Sorting Increase Inequality?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 97: 115-139.
Lam, David. (1986). “The Dynamics of Population Growth, Differential Fertility, and Inequality.”
American Economic Review 76(5): 1103-1116.
Lam, David, and Letícia Marteleto. (2013). “Family Size of Children and Women During the Demographic Transition.” Mimeo, University of Michigan.
Mare, Robert D. (2011). “A Multigenerational View of Inequality.” Demography 48(1): 1-23.
Moav, Omer. (2005). “Cheap Children and the Persistence of Poverty” Economic Journal 115(500):
88-110.
Murphy, Michael. (1999). “Is The Relationship Between Fertility of Parents snd Children Really
Weak?” Biodemography and Social Biology 46(1-2): 122-145.
Murphy, Michael. (2012). “Intergenerational Fertility Correlations in Contemporary Developing
Counties.” American Journal of Human Biology 24(5): 696-704.
Murphy, Michael, and Duolao Wang. (2003). “The Impact of Intergenerationally-Transmitted Fertility and Nuptuality on Population Dynamics in Contemporary Populations.” In Joseph L.
Rodgers and Hans-Peter Kohler, eds., Biodemography of Human Reproduction and Fertility. Boston:
Kluwer Academic Publishers, pp. 209–228.
Pearson, Karl, Alice Lee, and Leslie Bramley-Moore. (1899). “Inheritance of Fertility in Man, and of
Fecundity in Thoroughbred Racehorses.” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London,
Series A 192(1899): 257-330.
Preston, Samuel H. (1976). “Family Sizes of Children and Family Sizes of Women.” Demography
13(1): 105-114.
Schultz, T. Paul. (1997). “Demand for Children in Low Income Countries.” In Mark Rosenzweig
and Oded Stark, eds., Handbook of Population and Family Economics. Amsterdam: Elsevier, pp.
349-430.
Solon, Gary. (1999). “Intergenerational Mobility in the Labor Market.” In Orley Ashenfelter and
David Card, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics Vol. 3. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Treloar, S.A., and N.G. Martin (1990). “Age at Menarche as a Fitness Trait: Nonadditive Genetic
Variance Detected in a Large Twin Sample.” American Journal of Human Genetics 47(1): 137-148.
Van den Akker, O.B.A., G.S. Stein, M.C. Neale, and R.M. Murray. (1987). “Genetic and Environmental Variation in Menstrual Cycle: Histories of Two British Twin Samples.” Acta Geneticae Medicae
Et Gemellologiae: Twin Research 36(4): 541-548.
Vogl, Tom. (2016). “Differential Fertility, Human Capital, and Development.” Review of Economic
Studies 83: 365-401.
Wise, Jeffrey M., and Spencer J. Condie. (1975). “Intergenerational Fertility Throughout Four Generations." Biodemography and Social Biology 22(2): 144-150.
33

Theory Appendix
Proof of Lemma 1
Let E (ni,t+1 |nit ) ≡ a + bnit . Then:
i
h
i
E (ni,t+1 |nit ) − Et E (ni,t+1 |nit )
h 
i
h
i
= Et nµitt ( a + bnit ) − Et a + bnit
h i
 
= µbt Et n2it − bEt nit
h i2
Et [n2it ]−bEt nit
= b
µt

∆t+1 = Et

h

nit
µt



σ2

= b µtt

σ2

Since β t+1 is the coefficient from the linear projection of ni,t+1 on nit , β t+1 = b. Then ∆t+1 = β t+1 µtt .
Proof of Lemma 2
Differentiation of equation (5) leads to:

∂nit
∂hit

=






(1− α )κ A
(κ +τ Ahit )2

if hit ≤ e
h

>0



 (1−α)(1−η )(κ − pθ2 ) A < 0
(κ − pθ +τ Ahit )

if hit > e
h

Proof of Lemma 3
φ (·) has domain R+ , is a constant function for hit < e
h, and is a power function for hit > e
h, implying
n

oη
η
κ +τ Ahit
−θ
continuity for all hit 6= e
h. Further, limh ↓eh
= θ η , proving continuity on R+ .
1− η
p
it

Differentiation of equation (6) leads to:

φ’ (hit ) =




0

if hit ≤ e
h

 


η τA
p

η
1− η

η 

κ +τAhit
p

−θ

 η −1

>0

if hit > e
h

h
where the second line is positive because κ +τpAhit − θ > κ +τA
−θ = θ
p
 
η 
 η −1
η
κ +τAhit
limhit →∞ φ’ (hit ) = limhit →∞ η τA
−θ
= 0.
p
1− η
p
e

34



1
η


− 1 > 0. In the limit,

Further differentiation leads to:

φ” (hit ) =




0

if hit ≤ e
h

 2 


η (η − 1) τA
p

η
1− η

η 

κ +τAhit
p

−θ

 η −2

<0

if hit > e
h

Proof of Proposition 1
To prove that at least one steady state exists, note:
• If e
h > θ η , then φ (·) must cross the 45 degree line from above at hit = θ η because φ (hit ) = θ η
for all hit ≤ e
h.
• If e
h ≤ θ η , then φ (·) must cross the 45 degree line from above at some hit > θ η because φ (·) is
continuous, φ (θ η ) > θ η , and limhit →∞ φ’ (hit ) = 0.
In each of these steady states, φ (·) crosses the 45 degree line from above, so at least one steady state
is stable. To prove that the number of steady states cannot exceed three, note:
• For hit > e
h, φ (·) is strictly increasing and strictly concave, so it can cross or be tangent to the
45 degree line at most twice, once from below with φ’ > 1 and once from above with φ’ < 1.
• For hit ≤ e
h, φ (·) is constant, so it can cross the 45 degree line from above or be tangent to it
only once.
Because φ (·) can cross the 45 degree line from above at most once for hit > e
h and at most once for
hit ≤ e
h, at most two steady states are stable.
Proof of Proposition 2
An increase in A or decrease in p reduces the corner solution threshold
threshold ĥ, so that ĥ < e
h. Then differentiation
of equation (5) leads to:



 (1−α)κhit2 > 0
if hit ≤ ĥ
∂nit
= (κ +τAhit )

∂A

 (1−α)(1−η )hit (κ −2 pθ ) < 0 if hit > e
h
(κ − pθ +τ Ahit )

and:




0

∂nit
=

∂p

 θ (1−α)(1−η ) Ah2it > 0
(κ − pθ +τ Ahit )

35

if hit ≤ ĥ
if hit > e
h

1
τA



pθ
η


− κ . Call this

Differentiation of equation (6) leads to:



0

∂φ
≡ 

∂A


and:

if hit ≤ ĥ
η
1− η

η 

κ +τAhit
p

−θ

 η −1

ητhit
p

>0

if hit > e
h




0

∂φ
≡


∂p

− η
p

if hit ≤ ĥ
η
1− η

η 

κ +τAhit
p

−θ

 η −1 

κ +τ Ahit
p



<0

if hit > e
h

First consider lineages initially in the low human capital stable steady state, hit = θ σ . Since the
population attains a new non-degenerate fertility regime, ĥ > θ η . Thus, for these lineages, φ (·) and
therefore hit do not change. In the case of higher A, these lineages choose higher nit ; in the case of
lower p, nit is unchanged.
Next consider lineages initially in the high human capital stable steady state, with hit > e
h. φ (·) rises
from higher A or lower p, so hit rises with t, and hit > e
h in every period. Holding hit constant, nit
falls from higher A and lower p. Since hit rises with t and

∂nit
∂hit

< 0 for hit > e
h, nit falls further. Thus,

for these lineages, nit is lower in the transition and the new regime.
Proof of Proposition 3
Denote the stable steady state human capital levels in generation t as h0t and h1t , with h0t < h1t , and
let n0t and n1t denote the associated fertility levels. Let h0,t+1 , h1,t+1 , n0,t+1 , and n1,t+1 be the same
outcomes for the next generation of the 0 and 1 lineages. Then the intergenerational transmission
coefficient is β t+1 =

n1,t+1 −n0,t+1
n1t −n0t .

If the child cost parameters and the human capital production

function is the same in both t and t + 1, then hi,t+1 = hit and ni,t+1 = nit for all lineages, so β t+1 = 1.
In the transition between two Malthusian regimes, n0t < n1t , n0,t+1 < n1,t+1 , n0,t+1 ≥ n0t , and
n1,t+1 < n1t , so β t+1 ∈ (0, 1). In the transition between two modern regimes, n0t > n1t , n0,t+1 >
n1,t+1 , n0,t+1 ≥ n0t , and n1,t+1 < n1t , so β > 1. During a transition between Malthusian and modern
regimes, there exists t such n0t > n1t , n0,t+1 ≤ n1,t+1 , n0,t+1 ≥ n0t , and n1,t+1 < n1t , so β t+1 ≤ 0.
Because the skill distribution has two mass points in any non-degenerate regime and any transition
between non-degenerate regimes, E (nt+1 |nt ) can be fully characterized by a linear function, and
σ2

σt2 > 0. Therefore, ∆t+1 = β t+1 µtt . Since µt > 0, sgn (∆t+1 ) = sgn ( β t+1 ).
36

nt

Figure  1:  Fertility  and  the  Dynamics  of  Human  Capital  
  
A. Optimal fertility

ss1 ss2

ss3
ht

ht+1

B. Dynamical system

ss1 ss2

ss3
ht

  
Note:  The  figures  depict  a  parameterization  of  the  model  in  which  steady  states  with  higher  
human  capital  have  lower  fertility.  A  modern  fertility  regime  would  obtain  if  all  lineages  were  
  
located  at  ss1  or  ss3.  

  

37  

Figure  2:  Intergenerational  Associations  across  Fertility  Regimes  

Modern regime

∂E [nt+1|nt,ht+1] ⁄ ∂nt {

dE [nt+1|nt] ⁄ dnt

dE [ht+1|nt] ⁄ dnt

Malthusian regime

Transition

  
Note:  The  figure  is  a  schematic  plot  of  the  overall  intergenerational  fertility  association  against  
the  sibsize-­‐‑skill  relationship.  In  the  Malthusian  regime,  the  sibsize-­‐‑skill  and  skill-­‐‑fertility  
relationships  are  both  positive,  leading  to  a  positive  intergenerational  fertility  association.  In  the  
transition,  the  sibsize-­‐‑skill  relationship  stays  positive,  but  the  skill-­‐‑fertility  relationship  turns  
negative,  leading  to  a  potentially  negative  intergenerational  fertility  association.  In  the  modern  
regime,  the  sibsize-­‐‑skill  and  skill-­‐‑fertility  relationships  are  both  negative,  leading  to  a  positive  
intergenerational  fertility  association.  The  intercept  reflects  the  net  intergenerational  
transmission  coefficient.  

  

  

38  

Figure  3:  Cohort  Effects  in  Parameter  Estimates  
A. Ever-born

1945

1965
1985
Period of birth

1945

1965
1985
Period of birth

-.1

0

.1

.2

Sibsize-skill association

-.2

-.1

0

.1

.2

Skill-fertility association

-.2

-.1

0

.1

.2

Net transmission coefficient

-.2

-.2

-.1

0

.1

.2

Overall association

1945

1965
1985
Period of birth

1945

1965
1985
Period of birth

B. Surviving

1945

1965
1985
Period of birth

1945

1965
1985
Period of birth

-.1

0

.1

.2

Sibsize-skill association

-.2

-.1

0

.1

.2

Skill-fertility association

-.2

-.1

0

.1

.2

Net transmission coefficient

-.2

-.2

-.1

0

.1

.2

Overall association

1945

1965
1985
Period of birth

1945

1965
1985
Period of birth

Note:  Sample  includes  581,143  women  from  258  country-­‐‑cohort  cells  with  at  least  250  

  

observations.  Plots  represent  cohort  effects  from  regressions  of  the  estimated  country-­‐‑cohort  
parameters  on  country  and  cohort  fixed  effects.  Capped  spikes  represent  95%  confidence  
intervals  based  on  bootstrapped  standard  errors.  Omitted  category  is  1965-­‐‑69,  the  only  cohort  
with  data  available  from  all  countries.  Horizontal  lines  are  average  parameter  values  across  
countries  for  the  1965-­‐‑69  cohort.  Fertility  associations  are  based  on  cumulative  fertility  at  age  25.    
  

  

  

39  

Figure  4:  Intergenerational  Fertility  Associations  vs.  Sibsize-­‐‑Skill  Associations	  	  

A. Ever-born
With country & cohort FE
Intergenerational fertility residual
-.08
-.04
0
.04
.08

Intergenerational fertility association
-.1 -.05
0
.05
.1
.15

No fixed effects
OLS: -.12
[.021]

-.6

-.4 -.2
0
.2
.4
Sibsize-skill association

.6

OLS: -.113
[.039]

-.4

-.2
0
.2
Sibsize-skill residual

.4

B. Surviving
With country & cohort FE
Intergenerational fertility residual
-.08
-.04
0
.04
.08

Intergenerational fertility association
-.1 -.05
0
.05
.1
.15

No fixed effects
OLS: -.092
[.019]

-.6

-.4 -.2
0
.2
.4
Sibsize-skill association

LAC

.6

OLS: -.094
[.033]

-.4

Asia

-.2
0
.2
Sibsize-skill residual

.4

Africa

  
Note:  Sample  includes  581,143  women  from  258  country-­‐‑cohort  cells  with  at  least  250  
observations.  Solid  curves  are  local  linear  regressions  with  bandwidths  of  0.1;  dashed  curves  are  
95%  confidence  intervals  based  on  bootstrapped  pointwise  standard  errors.  OLS  results  
reported  in  the  top  right  corner  of  each  panel  are  slope  coefficients  from  the  analogous  linear  
regressions,  with  bootstrapped  standard  errors  in  brackets.  Fertility  associations  are  based  on  
cumulative  fertility  at  age  25.  
  
  

  

40  

Figure  5:  Role  of  Earlier  Marriage  and  Childbearing  

A. Age at first birth
With country and cohort FE
.1

Age at 1st birth hazard ratio
.95
1
1.05 1.1 1.15

No fixed effects

OLS: -.110
[.022]

.9

-.05

Age at 1st birth residual
0
.05

OLS: -.100
[.015]

-.6

-.4 -.2
0
.2
.4
Sibsize-skill association

.6

-.4

-.2
0
.2
Sibsize-skill residual

.4

B. Age at first marriage
With country and cohort FE
Age at 1st marriage residual
0
.05
.1

Age at 1st marriage hazard ratio
.9
.95
1
1.05 1.1 1.15

No fixed effects

OLS: -.091
[.021]

-.05

OLS: -.120
[.014]

-.6

-.4 -.2
0
.2
.4
Sibsize-skill association

LAC

.6

-.4

Asia

-.2
0
.2
Sibsize-skill residual

.4

Africa

  
Note:  Sample  includes  581,143  women  from  258  country-­‐‑cohort  cells  with  at  least  250  
observations.  Solid  curves  are  local  linear  regressions  with  bandwidths  of  0.1;  dashed  curves  are  
95%  confidence  intervals  based  on  bootstrapped  pointwise  standard  errors.  OLS  results  
reported  in  the  top  right  corner  of  each  panel  are  slope  coefficients  from  the  analogous  linear  
regressions,  with  bootstrapped  standard  errors  in  brackets.  All  estimations  use  surviving  
sibship  size.    
  
  

  

41  

Figure  6:  Composition  Effects  on  Cohort  Average  Fertility  

A. Composition effects
.15

Parametric

OLS: -.0100
[.0066]

OLS: -.023
[.009]

-.1

-.1

Association * ratio
-.05
0
.05
.1

Δ25 as a share of dCEB
-.05
0
.05
.1

.15

Nonparametric

1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Deweighted avg. children ev. born, age 25 (dCEB)

1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Deweighted avg. children ev. born, age 25 (dCEB)

B. Components
Sibsize variance/sibsize mean
1
1.5
2
2.5

Ratio component

OLS: -.015
[.006]

-.05

β25 as a share of dCEB
0
.05

.1

Association component

1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Deweighted avg. children ev. born, age 25 (dCEB)

LAC

Asia

OLS: .127
[.052]

1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Deweighted avg. children ev. born, age 25 (dCEB)

Africa

Note:  Sample  includes  581,143  women  from  258  country-­‐‑cohort  cells  with  at  least  250  
observations.  Solid  curves  are  local  linear  regressions  with  bandwidths  of  0.5;  dashed  curves  are  
95%  confidence  intervals  based  on  bootstrapped  pointwise  standard  errors.  OLS  results  
reported  in  the  top  right  corner  of  each  panel  are  slope  coefficients  from  the  analogous  linear  
regressions,  with  bootstrapped  standard  errors  in  brackets.  Estimates  are  based  on  based  on  
cumulative  ever-­‐‑born  fertility  at  age  25.  
  

  

42  

Figure  7:  Composition  Effects  on  the  Total  Fertility  Rate  

A. Composition effects
.1

Parmametric
OLS: -.011
[.004]

-.05

Association * ratio
0
.05

OLS: -.0071
[.0030]

-.05

ΔTFR as a share of dTFR
0
.05

.1

Nonparametric

2
4
6
8
Deweighted total fertility rate (dTFR)

2
4
6
8
Deweighted total fertility rate (dTFR)

B. Components
Sibsize variance/sibsize mean
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8
2

Ratio component

OLS: -.0076
[.0030]

OLS: .009
[.020]

1

β25 as a share of dTFR
-.02
0
.02 .04 .06

.08

Association component

2
4
6
8
Deweighted total fertility rate (dTFR)

LAC

2
4
6
8
Deweighted total fertility rate (dTFR)

Asia

Africa

Note:  Sample  includes  81  surveys.  Solid  curves  are  local  linear  regressions  with  bandwidths  of  
1;  dashed  curves  are  95%  confidence  intervals  based  on  bootstrapped  pointwise  standard  errors.  
OLS  results  reported  in  the  top  right  corner  of  each  panel  are  slope  coefficients  from  the  
analogous  linear  regressions,  with  bootstrapped  standard  errors  in  brackets.  

  

43  

  

Table  1:  Sibship  Size,  Educational  Attainment,  and  Age-­‐‑25  Fertility  in  Bolivia  
  
1945-­‐‑54  
  
1955-­‐‑64  
  
1965-­‐‑74  
  
1975-­‐‑83  
  
Ever  
Surv.      Ever  
Surv.      Ever  
Surv.      Ever  
Surv.  
  
(1)  
(2)  
  
(3)  
(4)  
  
(5)  
(6)  
  
(7)  
(8)  
A.  Short  regression  (dependent  variable:  #  children  at  age  25)  
#  siblings  (β)   0.0001   0.005      0.009  
0.014      0.048  
0.043      0.081  
0.073  
  
[0.016]   [0.012]      [0.007]   [0.006]      [0.007]   [0.006]      [0.008]   [0.007]  
  
B.  Long  regression  (dependent  variable:  #  children  at  age  25)  
#  siblings  (B)  
0.010  
0.014      0.014  
0.026      0.035  
0.042      0.029  
0.039  
  
[0.015]   [0.015]      [0.007]   [0.074]      [0.006]   [0.002]      [0.007]   [0.008]  
Yrs.  of  ed.  (Γ)   -­‐‑0.064   -­‐‑0.030      -­‐‑0.082   -­‐‑0.053      -­‐‑0.115   -­‐‑0.090      -­‐‑0.130   -­‐‑0.110  
  
[0.007]   [0.006]      [0.003]   [0.003]      [0.003]   [0.003]      [0.003]   [0.003]  
  
C.  Auxilliary  regression  (dependent  variable:  yrs.  of  ed.)  
#  siblings  (φ)  
0.148  
0.322      0.062  
0.205      -­‐‑0.112   -­‐‑0.010      -­‐‑0.399   -­‐‑0.373  
  
[0.048]   [0.059]      [0.024]   [0.029]      [0.022]   [0.027]      [0.029]   [0.034]  
  
D.  Means  and  standard  deviations  
#  children  
1.8  (1.6)   1.4  (1.3)      1.9  (1.6)   1.6  (1.3)      1.8  (1.5)   1.6  (1.3)      1.6  (1.4)   1.4  (1.2)  
#  siblings  
4.6  (2.9)   3.5  (2.4)      5.4  (3.0)   4.2  (2.4)      5.4  (2.9)   4.4  (2.4)      5.3  (2.8)   4.5  (2.4)  
Yrs.  of  ed.  
4.7  (5.4)  
  
6.1  (5.3)  
  
7.5  (5.1)  
  
9.0  (5.1)  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
#  obs.  
1,808  
  
7,758  
  
10,090  
  
6,834  
Note:  Brackets  contain  standard  errors  clustered  at  the  level  of  the  primary  sampling  unit;  
parentheses  contain  standard  deviations.  Data  source:  1994,  2003,  and  2008  Bolivia  
Demographic  and  Health  Surveys.  
  

  

  

44  

Table  2:  Summary  of  Age-­‐‑25  Parameter  Estimates  
  
  
  
Distribution  of  t-­‐‑statistics  
Mean  (S.D.)     
t  ≤  -­‐‑1.96  
   -­‐‑1.96  <  t  <  1.96     
t  ≥  1.96  
  
(1)  
  
(2)  
  
(3)  
  
(4)  
  
  
  
A.  Ever-­‐‑born
  
  
  
  
  
β  (overall  association)  
.017  (.030)     
2%  
  
70%  
  
29%  
.014  (.020)     
B  (net  transmission)  
2%  
  
70%  
  
29%  
Γ  (skill-­‐‑fertility)  
-­‐‑.098  (.048)     
90%  
  
29%  
  
<  1%  
.005  (.149)     
φ  (sibsize-­‐‑skill)  
26%  
  
35%  
  
40%  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
B.  Surviving  
  
  
  
  
  
β  (overall  association)  
.005  (.030)     
9%  
  
75%  
  
16%  
.007  (.021)     
B  (net  transmission)  
6%  
  
77%  
  
17%  
Γ  (skill-­‐‑fertility)  
-­‐‑.070  (.050)     
80%  
  
17%  
  
3%  
.082  (.165)     
φ  (sibsize-­‐‑skill)  
16%  
  
29%  
  
55%  
Note:  Sample  includes  581,143  women  from  258  country-­‐‑cohort  cells  with  at  least  250  
observations.  S.D.  =  standard  deviation  of  the  parameter.  Fertility  associations  are  based  on  
cumulative  fertility  at  age  25.  t-­‐‑statistics  are  based  on  standard  errors  clustered  at  the  primary  
sampling  unit  level.  
  
  

  

45  

Table  3:  Aggregate  Predictors  of  Intergenerational  Fertility  Associations  
  
Ever-­‐‑born  
  
Surviving  
  
(1)  
(2)  
(3)  
(4)  
  
(5)  
(6)  
(7)  
(8)  
Log  annual  GDP  per  capita  (PPP),  Penn  World  Table  
  
  
  
    At  birth  
0.008  
0.01  
  
  
   0.003  
0.005  
  
  
  
[0.012]   [0.016]  
  
  
   [0.012]   [0.014]  
  
  
    At  age  20  
  
-­‐‑0.007  
  
  
  
  
0.001  
  
  
  
  
[0.016]  
  
  
  
  
[0.018]  
  
  
Urbanization  rate  (0-­‐‑1),  UN  
  
  
  
  
  
    At  birth  
0.081  
0.044  
  
  
   -­‐‑0.008  
-­‐‑0.064  
  
  
  
[0.101]   [0.096]  
  
  
   [0.113]   [0.106]  
  
  
    At  age  20  
  
-­‐‑0.009  
  
  
  
  
-­‐‑0.011  
  
  
  
  
[0.089]  
  
  
  
  
[0.088]  
  
  
Infant  mortality  rate  (0-­‐‑1),  UN  
  
  
  
  
  
    At  birth  
0.015  
0.012  
  
  
   -­‐‑0.0003   -­‐‑0.001  
  
  
  
[0.015]   [0.013]  
  
  
   [0.011]   [0.011]  
  
  
    At  age  20  
  
0.003  
  
  
  
  
-­‐‑0.004  
  
  
  
  
[0.013]  
  
  
  
  
[0.010]  
  
  
Average  adult  years  of  education  (25+)  Barro-­‐‑Lee  
  
  
  
    At  birth  
0.024  
0.018  
0.027  
0.020      0.021  
0.011  
0.022  
0.011  
  
[0.010]   [0.009]   [0.009]   [0.008]     
[0.011]   [0.009]   [0.009]   [0.008]  
    At  age  20  
  
0.009  
  
0.010     
  
0.017  
  
0.016  
  
  
[0.007]  
  
[0.007]     
  
[0.008]  
  
[0.007]  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
#  cells  
150  
150  
150  
150  
  
150  
150  
150  
150  
#  countries  
31  
31  
31  
31  
  
31  
31  
31  
31  
Notes:  All  regressions  include  country  and  cohort  fixed  effects.  Brackets  contain  standard  errors  
clustered  at  the  country  level.  Outcomes  are  intergenerational  fertility  associations  based  on  
cumulative  fertility  at  age  25.  Urbanization  and  infant  mortality  rates  are  scaled  between  0  and  1  
to  reduce  the  number  of  decimal  places  in  the  coefficients.  
  
  

  

46  

Table  4:  Composition  Effects  on  Age-­‐‑25  Fertility  in  Bolivia  
  
1945-­‐‑54      1955-­‐‑64      1965-­‐‑74      1975-­‐‑83  
  
(1)  
  
(2)  
  
(3)  
  
(4)  
A.  Relative  Composition  Effects  
Nonparametric  
-­‐‑0.032  
  
-­‐‑0.009  
  
0.007  
  
0.058  
  
[0.020]  
  
[0.008]  
  
[0.009]  
  
[0.011]  
Parametric  
-­‐‑0.018  
  
0.0009  
  
0.038  
  
0.093  
  
[0.023]  
  
[0.008]  
  
[0.009]  
  
[0.012]  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
B.  Components  
Relative  intergenerational  association  
-­‐‑0.009  
  
0.0005  
  
0.022  
  
0.056  
  
[0.011]  
  
[0.005]  
  
[0.005]  
  
[0.007]  
Variance/mean  of  sibsize  
2.05  
  
1.88  
  
1.76  
  
1.66  
  
[0.07]  
  
[0.05]  
  
[0.03]  
  
[0.05]  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
C.  Means  and  standard  deviations  
Children  ever  born  at  age  25  
1.8  (1.6)      1.9  (1.6)      1.8  (1.5)      1.6  (1.4)  
Deweighted  children  ever  born  at  age  25   1.9  (1.7)      1.9  (1.6)      1.8  (1.5)      1.5  (1.3)  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Number  of  observations  
1,808  
  
7,758  
  
10,090  
  
6,834  
Note:  Brackets  contain  standard  errors  block  bootstrapped  at  the  primary  sampling  unit  level;  
parentheses  contain  standard  deviations.  Data  source:  1994,  2003,  and  2008  Bolivia  
Demographic  and  Health  Surveys.  
  

  

  

47  

Appendix  Table  1:  Demographic  and  Health  Surveys  Included  in  the  Sample  
Benin:  1996,  2006  
Bolivia:  1994,  2003,  2008  
Burkina  Faso:  1999  
Burundi:  2010  
Cambodia:  2000,  2005,  2010  
Cameroon:  1998,  2004  
Central  African  Republic:  1995  
Chad:  1996,  2004  
Congo,  Democratic  Republic:  2007  
Congo,  Republic:  2005  
Cote  d'ʹIvore:  1994  
Dominican  Republic:  2002,  2007  
Ethiopia:  2000,  2005,  2010  
Gabon:  2000  
Guinea:  2000,  2005  
Haiti:  2000,  2005  
Indonesia:  2012  
Kenya:  2003,  2008  
Lesotho:  2004,  2009  
Madagascar:  1992,  1997,  2004,  2008  
  
  

  

Malawi:  1992,  2000,  2004,  2010  
Mali:  1995,  2001,  2006  
Morocco:  1992,  2003  
Mozambique:  1997,  2003  
Namibia:  1992,  2000  
Nepal:  1996,  2006  
Nigeria:  2008  
Peru:  1992,  1996,  2000,  2004  
Philippines:  1993,  1998  
Rwanda:  2000,  2005,  2010  
São  Tomé  &  Príncipe:  2008  
Senegal:  1992,  2005  
Sierra  Leone:  2008  
South  Africa:  1998  
Sudan:  2010  
Swaziland:  2007  
Tanzania:  1996,  2004,  2010  
Togo:  1998  
Zambia:  1996,  2001,  2007  
Zimbabwe:  1994,  1999  

48  

Coef. from reg. of age-45 assoc. on age-a assoc.
-.5
0
.5
1
1.5
2

Appendix  Figure  1:  Choosing  the  Age  at  Fertility  Measurement  

20

25

30
Age a
Ever-born

35

40

Surviving

  
Note:  Sample  includes  75,062  women  from  95  country-­‐‑cohort  cells  with  at  least  250  women  over  
age  45.  Each  coefficient  and  95%  confidence  interval  comes  from  a  separate  regression  of  the  
fertility  association  at  age  45  on  the  fertility  association  at  an  earlier  age.  Capped  spikes  
represent  95%  confidence  intervals  based  on  bootstrapped  standard  errors.  
  
  

  

  

49  

Appendix  Figure  2:  Kernel  Densities  of  Intergenerational  Fertility  Associations  

15
Density
10
5
0

0

5

Density
10

15

20

Surviving

20

Ever-born

-.1

-.05

0

.05

.1

.15

-.1

Overall intergenerational fertility association

-.05

0

.05

.1

.15

Net intergenerational transmission coefficient

  
Note:    Kernel  density  estimates  with  a  bandwidth  of  0.01.  Sample  includes  581,143  women  from  
258  country-­‐‑cohort  cells.  The  intergenerational  fertility  association  is  from  a  univariate  
regression,  while  the  net  intergenerational  transmission  coefficient  is  from  a  regression  that  
controls  for  education.  Fertility  associations  are  based  on  cumulative  fertility  at  age  25.  
  

  

50  

