                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      HOW DO QUASI-RANDOM OPTION GRANTS AFFECT CEO RISK-TAKING?

                                          Kelly Shue
                                       Richard Townsend

                                      Working Paper 23091
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23091


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2017


Kelly Shue is with the University of Chicago, Booth School of Business and NBER; Richard
Townsend is with the Univserity of Califonia San Diego, Rady School of Management. We are
grateful to Michael Roberts (the editor), the associate editor, two anonymous referees, Marianne
Bertrand, Ing-Haw Cheng, Ken French, Ed Glaeser, Todd Gormley, Ben Iverson (discussant),
Steve Kaplan, Jonathan Lewellen, Katharina Lewellen, Borja Larrain (discussant), David Matsa
(discussant), David Metzger (discussant), Toby Moskowitz, Enrichetta Ravina (discussant),
Canice Prendergast, Amit Seru, and Wei Wang (discussant) for helpful suggestions. We thank
seminar participants at the AFA, BYU, CICF Conference, Depaul, Duke, Gerzensee ESSFM,
Harvard, HKUST Finance Symposium, McGill Todai Conference, Finance UC Chile, Helsinki,
IDC Herzliya Finance Conference, NBER Corporate Finance and Personnel Meetings, SEC,
Simon Fraser University, Stanford, Stockholm School of Economics, University of Amsterdam,
UC Berkeley, UCLA, and Wharton for helpful comments. We thank David Yermack for his
generosity in sharing data. We thank Matt Turner at Pearl Meyer, Don Delves at the Delves
Group, and Stephen O’Byrne at Shareholder Value Advisors for helping us understand the
intricacies of executive stock option plans. Menaka Hampole provided excellent research
assistance. We acknowledge financial support from the Initiative on Global Markets. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Kelly Shue and Richard Townsend. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
How do Quasi-Random Option Grants Affect CEO Risk-Taking?
Kelly Shue and Richard Townsend
NBER Working Paper No. 23091
January 2017
JEL No. G3,J3,M12,M52

                                          ABSTRACT

We examine how an increase in stock option grants affects CEO risk-taking. The overall net
effect of option grants is theoretically ambiguous for risk-averse CEOs. To overcome the
endogeneity of option grants, we exploit institutional features of multi-year compensation plans,
which generate two distinct types of variation in the timing of when large increases in new at-the-
money options are granted. We find that, given average grant levels during our sample period, a
10 percent increase in new options granted leads to a 2.8–4.2 percent increase in equity volatility.
This increase in risk is driven largely by increased leverage.


Kelly Shue
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
kelly.shue@chicagobooth.edu

Richard Townsend
University of California, San Diego
Rady School of Management
9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093
rrtownsend@ucsd.edu
   Performance-sensitive pay for executives has surged over the last 30 years. Much of this surge

has been in the form of stock options, which became the largest component of executive compensa-

tion in the 1990s, accounting for approximately 50% of the total compensation of S&P 500 CEOs

by the end of the decade. Following changes in the accounting treatment of options in 2005, the

use of options declined. Still, options remain one of the major components of CEO pay, accounting

for over 20% of total pay (Murphy, 2013). Moreover, Bettis et al. (2012) find that many firms

substituted from option grants toward performance-vesting stock grants, which have option-like

payoﬀs. Similar to an option, a performance vesting share provides zero payoﬀ below some per-

formance threshold and increasing payoﬀs above the threshold. As of 2008 nearly 40% of equity

awards had performance vesting rather than simple time vesting. Given the prevalence of options

and option-like compensation, it is important to understand if and how these forms of pay aﬀect

CEO decision-making. In particular, there is a long-standing and important question dating back

to Jensen and Meckling (1976) of whether options influence CEO risk-taking behavior.

   The idea that stock options create incentives for risk-taking is rooted in the convexity of their

payoﬀs: if the underlying stock price rises above the strike price, the option holder earns the

diﬀerence, but if the stock price drops below the strike price, the option holder does not lose the

diﬀerence. However, in addition to this “convexity eﬀect,” Ross (2004) shows that there is also a

countervailing “magnification eﬀect” associated with options. The magnification eﬀect is driven by

the fact that options increase the sensitivity of an executive’s wealth to the underlying stock price,

which may lead a risk-averse executive to want to decrease risk. In practice, it is also possible that

options have no eﬀect on risk-taking if executives are suﬃciently well monitored or if they are able

to hedge their option holdings (Garvey and Milbourn, 2003). Thus, the overall eﬀect of option

compensation on risk-taking is ultimately an empirical question.1

   Estimating the eﬀect of options on risk-taking is diﬃcult due to endogeneity issues. The main

challenge is that a third omitted factor could aﬀect both options and risk-taking. For example,

if value-maximizing firms believe that options increase risk-taking, they may increase option pay

exactly when the benefits to risk-taking are greater (i.e., when there are more risky positive NPV



                                                  2
projects). In this case, risk-taking may increase due to option pay or because the CEO is responding

to the firm’s need for more risk-taking. While much of the previous research on options and risk-

taking has been correlational in nature, two recent studies by Chava and Purnanandam (2010)

and Hayes et al. (2012) attempt to address these endogeneity issues by examining how executive

risk-taking changed when option use declined following the change in the accounting treatment of

options in 2005. However, firms that decreased option compensation after the reform also tended to

increase stock compensation at the same time. As a result, this experiment is not ideal for isolating

the total net eﬀect of options—for risk-averse managers, stock compensation aﬀects risk-taking

incentives as well. Further, Bettis et al. (2012) point out that the confounding eﬀect of the increase

in stock compensation is exacerbated by the fact that much of the stock compensation was in the

form of performance-vesting shares, which have option-like convex payoﬀs. Finally, the regulatory

change aﬀected all firms simultaneously, meaning there is no control group available to estimate the

counterfactual change in risk-taking that would have occurred over the same time period absent the

reform.2

   To identify a causal eﬀect of options on risk-taking, the ideal test would utilize exogenous vari-

ation in option pay that is staggered across firms over time. In this paper, we exploit a natural

experiment that delivers such variation. Our identification strategy builds on Hall’s (1999) observa-

tion that firms often award options according to multi-year plans. Two types of plans are commonly

used: fixed-number and fixed-value.3 On a fixed-number plan, an executive receives the same num-

ber of options each year within a cycle. On a fixed-value plan, an executive receives the same value

of options each year within a cycle. Cycles are generally short, lasting about two years, after which

a new cycle typically begins.

   Multi-year plans give us two distinct sources of variation in the timing of option pay increases.

Our first instrumental variables strategy uses only CEOs on fixed-value plans. For these executives,

option compensation tends to follow an increasing step function. During a fixed-value cycle, the

value of options granted is held constant. At the beginning of a new cycle, there is a discrete

increase in the value of option grants, on average. The timing of when these steps occur is staggered



                                                  3
across firms. These staggered steps motivate our first instrument: an indicator variable for whether

each CEO-year is predicted to be the first year of a new fixed-value cycle. We use predicted cycle

first years instead of actual cycle first years as our instrument because the timing of when new

cycles actually begin may be endogenously renegotiated between the manager and the board. For

example, a manager may negotiate to prematurely start a new cycle for some unobserved reason

that also directly relates to the firm’s risk. Instead, we use a predicted first year indicator, which

corresponds to when new cycles would likely have started if renegotiation had not taken place. Our

predictions exploit the fact that firms tend to use repeated cycles of equal length. We use the length

of a manager’s previous cycle to predict when the next cycle will begin. Thus, predictions are based

only on past information. For example, if a manager had cycles starting in 1990 and 1992, we would

predict that a new cycle would start in 1994. Assuming that firms do not set the length of the

current cycle in anticipation of risk-taking conditions at the start of future cycles, the predicted

first year instrument should purge the estimation of bias from renegotiation.

   Our second instrumental variables strategy does not use the timing of cycle first years. Rather, it

uses variation in the value of options granted within fixed-number and fixed-value cycles. We exploit

the fact that the Black–Scholes value of an at-the-money option increases proportionally with its

strike price. As noted by Hall (1999), this means that CEOs on fixed-number plans receive new

grants with higher value when their firm’s stock price increases. In contrast, CEOs on fixed-value

plans receive new grants with the same value (and a lower number of options) when their firm’s stock

price increases. Thus, the value of new options granted is fundamentally more sensitive to stock

price movements for CEOs on fixed-number plans than for CEOs on fixed-value plans. Of course,

movements in each firm’s stock price are partially driven by industry shocks. These shocks are

beyond an executive’s control and are also diﬃcult to predict, even by sophisticated agents. Thus,

our second instrument for the change in the value of options granted is the interaction between plan

type and aggregate returns.

   Our conversations with leading compensation consultants suggest that multi-year plans are used

to minimize contracting costs, as option compensation only has to be set once every few years. Hall



                                                  4
(1999) argues that firms sort into the two types of plans somewhat arbitrarily, saying, “Boards seem

to substitute one plan for another without much analysis or understanding of their diﬀerences.”

Consistent with this, Shue and Townsend (2017) find suggestive evidence that boards granted fixed-

number options due to contracting frictions and lack of sophistication regarding option valuation,

rather than because such plans implemented an optimal contract. Nonetheless, we do not assume

here that firms choose randomly between plans. We also do not assume that the average level of

options paid during a multi-year plan cycle is exogenous. Among firms using multi-year plans, it

remains true that those with high option compensation may be those where risk was going to be high

(or low) in any case, for reasons unrelated to option compensation. Moreover, even if some boards

choose multi-year plans in an unsophisticated way, this does not imply that all panel variation in

option compensation is exogenous to risk-taking. Instead, what we argue is that multi-year plans

generate random variation in the timing of when large compensation increases occur.

   For our first instrument, we use fixed-value firms, for which option grants can increase only

at regularly pre-scheduled intervals (when new cycles start). For example, consider a fixed-value

firm on regular three-year cycles. Other time-varying factors may drive trends in risk for this firm.

However, these trends are unlikely to coincide exactly with the timing of when new cycles are

scheduled to start. If we observe that the risk of this firm increases significantly more at the start

of a new cycle than in other years, we attribute these increases in risk to the coinciding increases

in option compensation.4

   For our second instrument, we focus on fixed-number firms. The value of options granted

in any particular year varies with aggregate returns within a fixed-number cycle. This means

that the timing of increases in option pay within a cycle will be random in the sense that the

increases are partly driven by industry shocks that are beyond the control of the firm and are

largely unpredictable. To account for the possibility that aggregate returns can directly aﬀect risk,

we use fixed-value firms as a control group because their option compensation must remain fixed

despite changes in aggregate returns. Thus, our identifying assumption is that fixed-number and

fixed-value firms do not diﬀer in their response to aggregate returns for reasons other than the



                                                  5
diﬀerential sensitivity of their option compensation. Fixed-number firms may systematically diﬀer

from fixed-value firms, but we assume they do not diﬀer in how their non-compensation-related

risk-taking moves with aggregate returns. We perform a number of tests in the paper that support

this assumption.

   Our two instrumental variables strategies yield similar results across a range of firm outcomes.

Given that the two strategies rely on completely diﬀerent identifying assumptions, they help cross-

validate one another. Overall, we find a significant positive eﬀect of option compensation on risk-

taking, as measured by realized equity volatility. Given average grant levels during our sample

period, a 10 percent increase in new options granted leads to a 2.8–4.2 percent increase in volatility.

We find that the increase in risk is driven largely by increases in leverage, which mechanically

increases the volatility of equity. In addition, we find that option pay has a modest and generally

insignificant eﬀect on investment. In supplementary tests, we also find that the eﬀect of new option

grants on volatility is greater in subsamples where the value of new option grants is high relative

to the total value of the unexercised options held by the CEO. Finally, we find suggestive evidence

that the eﬀect of options on risk-taking is greater for firms in the financial and high-tech sectors,

where executives may have greater ability to aﬀect risk beyond changing leverage.

   Our paper contributes to the option compensation literature by addressing the endogeneity of

option grants through a natural experiment that oﬀers exogenous variation in option pay that is

staggered across firms over time. Relative to the existing literature, we also focus on a somewhat

diﬀerent research question. The bulk of the literature has focused on estimating the association

between the “vega” of a CEO’s personal portfolio and subsequent risk-taking behavior, where vega

is defined as the sensitivity of the value of the CEO’s option holdings to changes in the firm’s equity

volatility. Most of these studies also control for the “delta” of a CEO’s personal portfolio, where

delta is defined as the sensitivity of the value of the CEO’s stock and option holdings to changes

in the firm’s stock price. Cohen et al. (2000), Coles et al. (2006), Chava and Purnanandam (2010),

Liu and Mauer (2011), Armstrong and Vashishtha (2012), and Hayes et al. (2012) all examine

the association between vega and risk-taking, mostly finding a positive relation. However, the



                                                  6
eﬀect of vega on risk-taking is theoretically unambiguous, as vega is a measure of convexity. Using

Ross’s terminology, increases in vega should increase the convexity eﬀect, leading to weakly more

risk-taking, all else equal. Thus, the existing empirical literature has focused on quantifying the

magnitude of the convexity eﬀect.

   Our paper focuses instead on estimating the theoretically ambiguous overall net eﬀect of option

compensation, which includes the combination of the convexity eﬀect (operating through vega) and

the magnification eﬀect (operating through delta). Almost all firms in our sample grant options

that are at-the-money. When “more” at-the-money options are granted, the Black–Scholes value,

delta, and vega of option compensation all increase simultaneously. We investigate how such a

simultaneous increase in these three dimensions of option compensation aﬀects risk-taking. Knowing

the total net eﬀect of increases in at-the-money option grants on risk-taking is important, as most

compensation committees and policymakers do not contemplate awarding option compensation in

such a way that only delta or vega is changed in isolation. Rather, the relevant decision is typically

whether to grant an executive more or less at-the-money options.5

   The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section I discusses the data and construction of key

variables. Section II discusses our two instrumental variables strategies in more detail. Section III

presents our results. Section IV concludes.



                                              I.   Data

A. Sources

We use data from Execucomp from 1992 to 2010, which covers executive compensation for the CEO

and other top executives in S&P 1500 firms. We limit attention only to CEOs in our analysis.

For option compensation, we use individual grant-level data, which allows us to better identify

CEOs on fixed-number and fixed-value plans in cases where a CEO receives multiple grants in a

fiscal year. We also require data on the date of each option grant to measure aggregate returns

between consecutive grants and equity volatility following a grant. Exact grant date information

is available after 2006. Prior to 2006, firms were only required to report the expiration date of an

                                                   7
option grant. In those years, we follow the literature (e.g., Aboody and Kasznik, 2000) and infer

the grant date from the expiration date under the assumption that expiration dates occur on grant

date anniversaries.

     In 2006, firms were required to begin reporting the grant date value of their option compensation,

which we use in our analysis. For years prior to 2006, we use Execucomp’s computed Black–Scholes

value. In 2006, firms were also required to begin reporting detailed information on the portfolio of

unexercised options held by executives at the end of each fiscal year. We use this information to

compute the value, delta, and vega of unexercised options held by each executive. Prior to 2006,

we follow the procedure of Core and Guay (2002) to estimate these values.

     Accounting data come from Compustat. Following standard practice, financial firms (6000-6999)

and regulated utilities (4800-4999) are excluded from the sample when accounting-based outcomes

are used. However, these firms are included in the sample when non-accounting-based outcomes

such as volatility are used. Industry and firm return data come from the Center for Research in

Security Prices (CRSP) and the Fama–French Data Library.


B.    Detecting Cycles

Firms are not required to disclose intended schedules for multi-year compensation cycles, and there-

fore, few report them. Following Hall (1999), we instead back out these cycles using the data.

Ideally, we would use the firm’s planned cycle structure in our IV analysis. Inferring the cycle

structure from realized option grants necessarily introduces measurement error. In particular, we

infer planned cycles with error if the firm did not intend to adopt a multi-year plan but awarded

the same number or value of options across consecutive years for potentially endogenous reasons.

We will also infer planned cycles with error if the firm departs from a pre-planned schedule for

potentially endogenous reasons. As will be discussed in later sections, our methodology is robust to

both of these types of errors. In our IV framework, measurement error will reduce the precision of

our estimates but not lead to bias.




                                                   8
                                        B.1.    Fixed-Number


We infer an executive to be on a fixed-number cycle in two consecutive years if the executive receives

the exact same number of options in both years, adjusting for stock splits. When executives receive

multiple grants per year we only compare the largest grant. This is done because an executive may

receive one grant as part of a long-term incentive plan that is common among all executives in the

firm as well as another grant that is part of a fixed-number plan. To ensure that the fixed-number

grants are significant relative to other option grants, we require that the number of options in the

fixed-number grants constitute more than 50 percent of the total number of options granted over

the years of the cycle. Our results are not sensitive to these assumptions. In most cases, executives

receive a single option grant and limiting our analysis to this subsample yields qualitatively similar

results.


                                         B.2.   Fixed-Value


We consider an executive to be on a fixed-value cycle in two consecutive years if the value of the

options the executive receives is within three percent of the previous year. Value is computed

as either Black–Scholes value or “face value” (i.e., the number of options granted multiplied by

the grant-date price of the underlying stock). While face value has little theoretical relation to

the value of an option grant, it is common for fixed-value firms to target face value during our

sample period.6 Naturally, we require that a fixed-value cycle be defined using the same valuation

method (Black–Scholes value or face value) in all years. We allow for a three percent tolerance

because firms often grant options in round lots, and so value is not exactly fixed, even by their

own internal valuation methodology. In addition, the Black–Scholes value we use may be computed

using somewhat diﬀerent assumptions, regarding volatility and other parameters, than those used

by the firm. Again, if multiple grants are awarded per year, then the largest grants are compared

and can form the basis of a fixed-value cycle as long as they are significant relative to other options

granted, using the same criteria as before.




                                                  9
C. Measuring Risk

As is standard in the literature, our primary measure of risk-taking is realized equity volatility

(e.g., Guay, 1999; Cohen et al., 2000; Armstrong and Vashishtha, 2012; Hayes et al., 2012; Gorm-

ley et al., 2013). Equity volatility is the most natural measure of risk, as it is ultimately what

executives would be incentivized to change to aﬀect the value of their options. We also examine

other outcomes that may drive changes in volatility, such as leverage and investment. Standard

capital structure theory implies that leverage unambiguously increases equity volatility. Riskier

investment can also contribute to volatility, although it is not obvious whether accounting measures

of investment increase or decrease risk—a concern we discuss in later sections. In unreported tests,

we also estimate the eﬀect of options on implied volatility. We find that implied volatility is highly

correlated with realized volatility. However, since the OptionMetrics data do not start until 1996

and do not cover many of the firms in our sample, we lose significant power in tests using this

dependent variable, as our sample size drops by roughly 80 percent. Another possibility would be

to use cash flow volatility. However, as will be discussed shortly, our methodology is constrained

to look at year-to-year changes in risk-taking, and within a year, there are insuﬃcient cash flow

observations to make this possible.


D.    Summary Statistics

Panel A of Table I shows the distribution of cycle length by plan type. The modal cycle length is two

years for both fixed-number and fixed-value plans.7 Conversations with compensation consultants

indicate that two-year cycles are indeed common.

     Next, we explore the extent to which firms that use fixed-number, fixed-value, or neither plan

diﬀer in their observable characteristics. Because there are likely to be time trends in these variables

and the relative prevalence of the two types of plans has changed over time, we examine three cross-

sections of the data rather than pool all years together. Table I presents the year 2000, while

1995 and 2005 are presented in the Internet Appendix. Panel B of Table I shows the industry

distribution for firm-years, categorized by the CEO’s plan type. We find that multi-year cycles



                                                  10
are distributed across many industries and that the industry distribution is approximately similar

across plan types, with fixed-number cycles being more prevalent in the business equipment and

health industries. Panel C of Table I compares other firm and CEO characteristics across plan

types. In general, fixed-number and fixed-value firms appear similar in terms of market-to-book,

volatility, investment, leverage, and profitability. In terms of assets and sales, fixed-value firms tend

to be larger than fixed-number firms, which are in turn larger than firms using neither type of plan.

Overall, we find that firms do not diﬀer sharply across the three categories, consistent with Hall’s

claim that firms sort approximately randomly into these plans. Nevertheless, as will be discussed

in Section II, our analysis will never assume that firms choose randomly between fixed-number and

fixed-value plans.

   Over our sample period, we find that multi-year plans are quite prevalent. Specifically, 18

percent of CEO-years with option compensation are associated with a fixed-number plan and 11.5

percent are associated with a fixed-value plan. Moreover, these numbers are likely low because we

are fairly conservative in how we define these plans. For example, rather than holding the raw value

of option grants fixed within a fixed-value cycle, firms often hold value fixed as a proportion of

salary or salary plus bonus. If we included these types of cycles, we would find a greater prevalence

of multi-year plans.8



                                  II.    Empirical Strategy

We introduce two instruments that provide exogenous variation in the timing of when large increases

in the amount of new at-the-money options are granted. We begin by noting that the Black–Scholes

value, delta (the change in the Black–Scholes value of a grant associated with a one percent change

in the underlying), and vega (the change in the Black–Scholes value of a grant associated with a

0.01 unit change in the volatility of the underlying) of new at-the-money option grants are all highly

correlated and aﬀected by our instruments. An exogenous increase in new option grants implies that

all three values increase together. We do not attempt to identify the eﬀect of each of these on risk-

taking, holding the others constant. Instead, we measure the overall eﬀect of an increase in option


                                                   11
pay, when delta and vega increase simultaneously. As discussed by Ross (2004), this overall eﬀect

is theoretically ambiguous, as it includes the countervailing convexity and magnification eﬀects of

options. Moreover, the overall eﬀect of options is important because most compensation committees

and policymakers do not contemplate awarding option compensation in such a way that only delta or

vega is changed in isolation. Rather, the relevant decision is typically whether to grant an executive

more or less at-the-money options.

   Therefore, we instrument for Black–Scholes value in our two-stage least squares estimates be-

cause this is a simple summary measure of the magnitude of a grant. However, instrumenting for

delta or vega yields similar results. To emphasize this point, we also present reduced-form estimates

of our outcomes regressed directly on our excluded instruments and controls, with the understand-

ing that the coeﬃcient on the excluded instrument represents a general eﬀect of higher option value

and associated higher delta and vega.9


A. Instrumental Variables Strategy 1

Our first instrumental variables strategy uses only observations corresponding to fixed-value plans.

Thus, it is not subject to the concern that fixed-value firms may be diﬀerent from fixed-number

firms due to the fact that plans are endogenously chosen. Instead, we use the staggered timing of

predicted increases in option grants within the fixed-value sample to estimate the eﬀect of options

on risk-taking. Thus, we are able to estimate a causal eﬀect within the fixed-value sample.

   To help fix ideas, Figure 1 illustrates three real examples of fixed-value cycles taken from the data.

From these examples, two patterns emerge that are true more generally. First, option compensation

tends to follow an increasing step function for executives on fixed-value plans. This is because

compensation tends to drift upward over time, yet executives on fixed-value plans cannot experience

an upward drift within a cycle. As a result, they experience a discrete increase, on average, in the

year following the completion of a cycle. Second, executives tend to have repeated cycles of equal

length that are staggered across executives. For example, the executive in Panel A completes

cycles in 2006, 2008, and 2010, while the executive in Panel B completes cycles in 2007, 2009, and



                                                  12
2011. While these two stylized facts do not hold in all cases—as can also be seen in Figure 1—our

identification strategy only requires that they hold true on average.

   Panel A of Table II confirms that the increasing step function pattern holds true on average. We

regress the change in log option compensation on an indicator variable equal to one in the first year

following the end of a fixed-value cycle. The first year indicator is equal to one for any first year

following a completed cycle, even if that observation does not represent the start of a new cycle.

This is because option pay tends to jump substantially after being fixed for two or more years, even

if the firm chooses to discontinue fixed-value plans in the future. Accordingly, the sample is limited

to years that are part of fixed-value cycles as well as years that immediately follow a completed

fixed-value cycle.

   Because the first year indicator is staggered across firms and CEOs, we can control for year

fixed eﬀects in these and all future regressions. We also control for time-varying firm characteristics

measured in the year prior to the current option grant: CEO tenure, log of cash compensation (salary

+ bonus), log sales, log assets, sales growth, market-to-book, tangibility ratio, and a dummy variable

for whether the firm has rated debt. To account for changes in the incentives from previously granted

equity compensation, we control for the change in the log delta and vega of the CEO’s previously

granted (unexercised) option and stock holdings.

   We find that the first year indicator corresponds to a 15 percent larger increase in the

Black–Scholes value of new option grants than in other years. Consistent with the fact that the

Black–Scholes value, delta, and vega of new at-the-money options move together, we find that the

first year indicator is also associated with a 16–18 percent larger increase in the delta and vega of

new option compensation.

   However, we do not use the simple first year indicator as our instrument because of the possibility

that the timing of cycle termination may be renegotiated mid-way through a cycle. For example, in

good times, executives may seek to prematurely begin new fixed-value cycles and receive a raise. In

this case, actual first years may coincide with periods in which risk-taking is expected to increase

or decrease for reasons unrelated to the incentives provided by option compensation. This, in turn,



                                                  13
would lead to a violation of the exclusion restriction required of a valid instrument.

   To address concerns about renegotiation, we use an indicator for whether a year is predicted to

be the first year of a new fixed-value cycle as our first instrument. Predicted first years correspond

to when new cycles would likely have started if renegotiation had not taken place. To make these

predictions, we use the fact that executives tend to have repeated cycles of equal length. Conditional

on being on a fixed-value cycle, the length of the cycle is equal to that of the previous cycle in 90

percent of cases. Thus, we can use the length of an executive’s previous cycle to predict the length

of the executive’s next cycle. For example, if an executive had cycles starting in 1990 and 1992, we

would predict that a new cycle would start in 1994. Importantly, the predictions are made without

using any contemporaneous or future information.

   We use the following simple prediction algorithm. To determine whether an observation for

CEO i in year t + 1 is predicted to be the first year of a new fixed-value cycle, we only use data for

the CEO from years t and earlier. Let k be the length of the executive’s last completed fixed-value

cycle. If there was no previous cycle, let k = 2 because this is the modal cycle length in the data

as shown in Table I. At the start of year t, let nt be the number of consecutive years, inclusive,

in which the executive received the same value of options (within the aforementioned tolerance of

three percent). We predict that year t + 1 will be a first year if nt   k. Finally, we also exclude the

first year of each executive’s tenure from the analysis because those years are likely to be special in

other ways besides being the first year of a new cycle (Pan, Wang, and Weisbach, 2013).

   To illustrate how this works in practice, the dotted vertical lines in Figure 1 indicate years that

we predict to be cycle first years. Panels A and B both show three cycles of length 2. In these

cases, we correctly predict all of the cycle first years (e.g., for Panel A, these occur in 2006, 2008,

and 2010). The example in Panel C shows a cycle of length 2 followed by two cycles of length 3. In

this case, we correctly predict a cycle first year in 2000, incorrectly predict a first year in 2002 due

to the change in cycle length, and then correctly predict a first year in 2003 and 2006. Incorrect

predictions reduce the power of the first stage of our IV estimation, but do not bias our results. In

fact, they purge the instrument of potential bias arising from endogenous renegotiation.



                                                  14
   As can be seen from the examples above, we only use past information to predict current cycle

status. This is designed to purge the estimates of potential bias that would arise if actual cycle

status is correlated with current conditions. Consistent with this, we find that one-year lagged

returns are not correlated with our predicted cycle first year instrument. More generally, as long

as managers and boards do not set the length of the current cycle in anticipation of risk-taking

conditions at the start of future cycles, then the predicted first year indicator should correspond

to exogenously timed increases in option pay. Also, our second IV strategy will not require this

assumption. This is the sense in which the two identification strategies help to cross-validate one

another.

   Using the predicted first year variable, we then estimate the eﬀect of changes in option com-

pensation in an instrumental variables framework. Specifically, we estimate first- and second-stage

equations of the form:


                                             P redictedF irstY ear
                      4Oijt =     0   +   1 Iijt                      +   t   + controls + ✏ijt       (1st stage)

                       4Yijt =   0    +     d +
                                          1 4Oijt      t   + controls + µijt ,                       (2nd stage)


where i indexes CEOs, j indexes firms, and t indexes years. The variable Iijt
                                                                          P redictedF irstY ear is the


indicator for predicted first year.

   The variable 4Oijt is a measure of the change in value of the option grant, and 4Yijt are the

outcome variables measured as annual changes for stock variables and levels for flow variables. We

measure options and firm outcomes in terms of annual changes because our instrument delivers

exogenously timed increases in option grants. As such, we do not necessarily expect risk-taking

to be higher in the first year of a fixed-value cycle than in subsequent years, but we do expect a

larger change in risk-taking in the first year of a new cycle than in continuation years. Because we

estimate our regressions in terms of annual changes, we do not include firm fixed eﬀects. However,

we do control for year fixed eﬀects, represented by             t,   and allow standard errors to be clustered by

firm.

   The main coeﬃcient of interest,         1,   represents the eﬀect of an increase in options on outcomes


                                                           15
4Yijt .10 Importantly, in the second stage, we do not regress firm outcomes on the actual change in

option compensation that a CEO experienced at the start of a new cycle, as the size of that change

may be related to unobservables that aﬀect risk-taking. Instead, we use the fact that the indicator

for predicted first year corresponds to increases in option pay on average and is staggered across

firms. Our analysis essentially compares average changes in risk-taking in years when the indicator

is equal to one to years in which the indicator is equal to zero.

     One might be concerned that predicted first years provide exogenously timed but potentially

anticipated increases in option compensation. However, this is not an issue for our empirical strategy.

To see this, first suppose that a manager could change risk instantaneously. He would have no

incentive to increase risk prior to an anticipated increase in the value of his option compensation

next period. The anticipated option grant would not provide any extra incentive to increase risk

today. However, if a manager could only adjust risk slowly, he might wish to begin doing so prior to

receiving the increase in options. Yet, if anything, this would bias us against finding larger increases

in risk during predicted first years than in other years.11


B.    Instrumental Variables Strategy 2

Our second instrumental variables strategy uses only observations corresponding to fixed-value and

fixed-number plans. Specifically, we exploit diﬀerences in the way that option compensation moves

within a cycle for executives on these two types of plans. The value of new option grants remains

approximately fixed within a cycle for executives on fixed-value plans. In contrast, the value, delta,

and vega of new option grants within a fixed-number cycle changes with the price of the underlying

stock. This is because the Black–Scholes value of each share of an at-the-money option increases in

proportion to the strike price. Thus, if a firm using a fixed-number plan experiences an increase in

its stock price, the total value of new options awarded to its executives increases as well.

     It may not initially seem intuitive that the value of an at-the-money option increases in pro-

portion with its strike price. However, this follows directly from the Black–Scholes formula. In

particular, for an at-the-money option with a strike price X that is equal to the stock price S, the



                                                  16
Black–Scholes formula reduces to:


                                        dT               rT
                               S ⇤ [e        N (Z)   e        N (Z   T (1/2) )],


   where Z = [T (r    d + 2 )]/ T (1/2) . From the formula, it is clear that doubling S will double the

value of the option. To gain further intuition, consider what occurs in a reverse stock split, where

two shares become one share and the stock price doubles. In this case, two options also become

one. Thus, two at-the-money options on the old stock must be worth the same as one at-the-money

option on the new stock. In other words, when the stock price doubles in the reverse split, the

value of an at-the-money option must double as well. While we presented this intuition in terms of

Black–Scholes value, this value is intrinsically linked to the delta and vega of at-the-money options.

An increase in the underlying stock price will also entail an increase in the grant date delta and

vega for at-the-money options under fixed-number plans.

   This is illustrated via an example in Table III, adapted from Hall (1999). The example shows

how option compensation would evolve for an executive at the same firm if he were on a fixed-value

or fixed-number plan. The executive is paid 28,128 options valued at $1 million under both plans

in Year 1. The firm’s stock price then increases by 20 percent in each of the next two years. Under

a fixed-value plan, the firm grants the executive fewer options each year to keep the value of those

options constant at $1 million. Under a fixed-number plan, the firm continues to grant the executive

28,128 options each year, and as a result, the value of those options increases by 20 percent each year

along with the stock price. This illustrates how the value of new grants is more sensitive to stock

price movements for executives on fixed-number plans than for executives on fixed-value plans.

   Of course, movements in each firm’s stock price are partially driven by industry shocks. These

shocks are beyond a CEO’s control and are also diﬃcult to predict, even by sophisticated agents.12

Thus, our second instrument for changes in option compensation is the interaction between plan

type and industry returns.

   Specifically, for executives on fixed-number or fixed-value cycles, we estimate first- and second-




                                                     17
stage equations of the form:


                                    FN                        FN
             4Oijt =     0   +   1 Iijt   +   2 Rkt   +    3 Iijt Rkt   +     t   + controls + ✏ijt        (1st stage)

              4Yijt =   0    +      FN
                                 1 Iijt   +   2 Rkt   +     d +
                                                          3 4Oijt       t    + controls + µijt ,          (2nd stage)


where Iijt
       F N is an indicator equal to one if the executive is on a fixed-number plan, and R
                                                                                          kt is the

Fama–French (49) industry return over the 12 months prior to the grant date. The interaction term,
 F N R , is the excluded instrument. The coeﬃcient,
Iijt  kt                                                                3,   is the eﬀect of an increase in new option

grants on our outcome of interest, 4Yijt , measured again as annual changes for stock variables and

levels for flow variables.

   Note that Iijt
              F N and R are not excluded instruments, as they appear in the second-stage regres-
                       kt

sion as well. Thus, our identification strategy allows for the possibility that plan type or aggregate

returns directly relate to risk-taking. It may well be, for example, that fixed-number firms tend to

take on more risk or that firms in general increase risk when industry returns are high. We do not

need to assume away these types of relations.

   The exclusion restriction instead requires that the interaction term, Iijt
                                                                          F N R , only relates to risk-
                                                                               kt

taking, 4Yijt , through its eﬀect on compensation. In other words, we assume that fixed-value and

fixed-number executives do not have diﬀerent non-compensation induced responses to changes in

aggregate returns. We examine whether there is support for this assumption in the data through a

number of additional tests, which are presented in Section III.B. In addition, our first instrumental

variables strategy does not require this assumption.

   Finally, the sample is restricted to CEOs on fixed-number or fixed-value cycles, as we wish

our identification to be based on the comparison of executives whose compensation is mechanically

sensitive to industry returns with those whose compensation is mechanically insensitive to industry

returns. We also exclude observations corresponding to the first years of cycles because our first

stage outcome is the annual change in option compensation. In the first year of a new cycle,

the change in option compensation relative to the previous year is not necessarily more sensitive

to returns for fixed-number executives—in the first year, fixed-number (value) executives do not


                                                             18
receive the same number (value) of options as in the previous year, while in later years they do.

Another consequence of restricting our second IV sample to cycle continuation years (excluding the

first year) is that we are identifying oﬀ of variation induced by industry returns within cycles, so

this second methodology is robust to the potential concern that the predicted start of cycles may

be correlated with other unobserved cycles of activity within the firm.



                                          III.    Results

A. Instrumental Variables Strategy 1

We begin by using the predicted first year indicator as an instrument for changes in option grants.

We use predicted first years rather than actual first years to purge the estimation of bias from

endogenous renegotiation. In unreported results, we find that the predicted first year indicator

indeed strongly predicts true fixed-value first years in the data, with a t-statistic exceeding 100.

   Panel B of Table II shows that the predicted first year indicator is strongly correlated with

changes in the Black–Scholes value, delta, and vega of new options granted. Predicted first years

corresponds to an approximate 15 percent increase in the Black–Scholes value, delta, and vega of

new at-the-money options granted.

   The results remain very similar in the even-numbered columns in which we add control variables

for time-varying CEO and firm characteristics measured in the year prior to the grant: CEO tenure,

log of cash compensation (salary + bonus), log sales, log assets, sales growth, market-to-book,

tangibility ratio, and a dummy variable for whether the firm has rated debt. To account for changes

in the incentives tied to the CEO’s previous equity-related grants, we also control for the change

in the log delta and vega of previously granted (unexercised) option and stock holdings. This same

set of control variables is included in all future tables. All estimates are highly significant, with F-

statistics greatly exceeding 10, the rule of thumb threshold for concerns relating to weak instruments

(Staiger and Stock, 1997).

   In Table IV, we use our first instrument to explore the eﬀect of an increase in option pay on the

annual change in equity volatility, our primary measure of risk-taking. We measure volatility in two

                                                  19
ways: the volatility of daily returns in the 12 months following the grant date and the volatility of

daily returns in the first 120 trading days following the grant date. The latter measure is designed

to be less sensitive to potential manipulation of volatility immediately prior to a fixed-value option

grant. Both measures are annualized.

    The top panel presents the IV estimates from regressing the change in volatility on the change in

the log Black–Scholes value of new option grants, as instrumented by the predicted first year indica-

tor. The bottom panel presents the reduced-form estimates from regressing the change in volatility

directly on the instrument and other controls. With and without additional control variables, we

find that an increase in options leads to an increase in equity volatility. The results in Column 4

imply that a 10 percent increase in new options corresponds to approximately a 0.011 unit increase

in equity volatility relative to the median of 0.29 for our sample period, or a 3.8 percent increase in

volatility.

    It is further reassuring that our main coeﬃcient of interest remains very similar in magnitude

once we control for time-varying CEO and firm characteristics in the even-numbered columns (con-

trol variables are included in both the first and second stages of all IV specifications). If our

instruments are valid, they should be orthogonal to time-varying firm and CEO characteristics,

leading to similar main coeﬃcients after the inclusion of additional control variables.

    Next, we explore possible channels that may drive this change in equity volatility. One prime

candidate is leverage. Basic capital structure theory implies that, holding the assets and real activity

of the firm constant, an increase in leverage will mechanically lead to an increase in equity volatility.

Columns 1–3 of Table V show that an increase in option compensation does indeed lead to significant

increases in leverage. Specifically, Column 1 implies that a 10 percent increase in the value of new

options granted corresponds to a 0.010 unit increase in the market leverage ratio (total debt scaled

by total market value of assets). One issue with using market leverage ratios, however, is that these

ratios may reflect changes in the market price of equity rather than active debt management. To

address this possibility, we use the simple change in log total book leverage in Column 2 and an

indicator for positive net debt issuance in Column 3. The results imply that a 10 percent increase



                                                   20
in the value of new options granted corresponds to a 1.3 percent increase in book leverage and a

3.5 percent greater probability of positive net issuance. Thus, the increase in leverage appears to

be due to active debt management.

   We can also estimate the proportion of the increase in equity volatility that can be explained

by the increase in leverage. In unreported results, we find that a 10 percent increase in the value of

new options is associated with a statistically significant 1.75 percent decline in the equity to assets

ratio, which in turn implies approximately a 1.75 percent increase in equity volatility.13 Thus, the

increase in leverage accounts for nearly half (1.75/3.8 = 46%) of the increase in volatility.

   Next, we explore the eﬀect of options on investment. These tests should be viewed as ex-

ploratory because it is not clear how an increase in investment aﬀects firm risk. While it may

seem intuitive that investment increases risk, some argue that certain forms of investment, such as

capital expenditures, decrease risk (Coles et al., 2006). Therefore, we examine the eﬀect of option

compensation on investment, leaving open the question of whether this contributes to the increase

in volatility. In Columns 4–5 of Table 4, we find that greater option compensation corresponds to

lower capital expenditures but higher total investment (defined as the sum of capital expenditures,

R&D, acquisitions, and advertising expenses), although neither estimate is significantly diﬀerent

from zero. In unreported tests, we also explore how options aﬀect R&D, diversifying acquisitions,

and non-diversifying acquisitions separately and find positive, albeit noisily estimated, eﬀects.

   We also perform further tests to ensure the validity of our first instrument. A potential concern

with this instrument is that predicted first years may tend to coincide with other cycles within

firms. For example, firms may set multi-year plans to expire right before the introduction of new

products. Alternatively, they may time major performance reviews to occur in the last year of a

multi-year plan, leading to decreased risk of CEO turnover during predicted first years. In such

cases, increases in risk may coincide with predicted first years for reasons other than the increases

in option compensation that tend to occur during these years.

   In order to examine whether the increases in risk are tied to the increases in option compensation,

we decompose our instrument into two distinct variables: predicted first years where option pay



                                                  21
increases and predicted first years where option pay (weakly) decreases. This test exploits the fact

that option grants can both increase or decrease at the start of new fixed-value cycles (although

they increase on average). If our results are driven by non-compensation cycles that coincide with

fixed-value cycles, we should see increases in risk during both types of predicted first years. On

the other hand, if our results are driven by option compensation, we should only see increases in

risk during predicted first years in which option pay actually increases. The results are reported in

Panel A of Table VI. As can be seen, predicted first years in which option compensation increases

are associated with significant increases in risk-taking. In contrast, predicted first years in which

option compensation decreases have no significant changes in risk-taking.

   In addition, we examine directly whether fixed-value cycles appear to be correlated with other

firm cycles that might relate to risk. To examine product cycles, we merge our data with the

CapitalIQ key developments database, which provides structured summaries of material news and

events that may aﬀect the market value of a firm’s securities. Among other things, CapitalIQ

tracks announcements related to a firm’s products. This allows us to explore whether predicted first

years tend to be ones in which major product announcements occur. The results are reported in

the first column of Panel B in Table VI. We find no significant change in the number of product

announcements that occur during predicted first years. In unreported results, we also find no change

in the probability of any product announcement. Similarly, in Column 2, we find no significant

change in the number (or probability) of business expansion events. Thus, it does not seem that

fixed-value cycles are correlated with product or expansion cycles. We also look at whether predicted

first years tend to coincide with debt maturity cycles. Were this the case, it might explain our finding

that leverage increases more during predicted first years than in other years. However, in Column 3,

we find no significant change in the percent of debt that is maturing in predicted first years relative

to other years for fixed-value firms.14 Finally, in Column 4 we also examine whether predicted

first years tend to be years with lower CEO turnover. One might expect this to be the case if

major performance reviews tend to occur in the last year of a cycle. However, we again find no

significant diﬀerence. This last finding is also consistent with our conversations with compensation



                                                  22
consultants suggesting that performance reviews are typically performed annually instead of at cycle

termination.15


B.    Instrumental Variables Strategy 2

We turn now to our second source of variation, which exploits the fact that the value of options

granted within fixed-number cycles is more sensitive to market movements than the value of options

granted within fixed-value cycles. Following the methodology described in Section II.B, the excluded

instrument is the interaction between the fixed-number indicator and industry returns. In Table

VII, we show that the instrument significantly predicts changes in the Black–Scholes value, delta,

and vega of new option grants. For a one standard deviation change in the industry return, CEOs on

fixed-number plans receive an additional 14 percent increase in the value of option grants relative

to CEOs on fixed-value plans. Again, we instrument for changes in Black–Scholes value in the

remainder of our analysis. Thus, our estimates represent the overall net eﬀect of higher option

pay, which includes the convexity eﬀect (which operates through vega) and the magnification eﬀect

(which operates through delta).

     As with our first instrument, we begin by exploring the eﬀect of an increase in option pay

on changes in volatility. We again find that an increase in the value of new option grants leads

to an increase in equity volatility. The results in Columns 2 and 4, which include the full set

of control variables, imply that a 10 percent increase in the value of new options granted leads

to a 0.0086–0.0144 increase in equity volatility, or a 2.79–4.24 percent increase relative to median

volatility in the sample.

     We again find that a major mechanism driving the change in volatility is an increase in firm

leverage. Columns 1–3 of Table IX show that a 10 percent increase in the value of new options

granted leads to a .0072 unit increase in the market leverage ratio, a 1.3 percent increase in total in

book leverage, and a 3.1 percent increase in the probability of positive net issuance. We estimate

that 45 percent of the increase in equity volatility is due to increased leverage. Thus, the results once

again suggest that leverage is actively increased in response to increases in option compensation. In



                                                   23
Columns 4 and 5, we also explore the eﬀect of changes in option compensation on investment. We

find that an increase in options leads to greater capital expenditures and total investment. However,

as with our first instrument, the coeﬃcients are noisily estimated and insignificant.

   Our second instrumental variables strategy requires the assumption that fixed-number and fixed-

value CEOs do not have diﬀerential non-compensation-related responses to industry returns. If this

assumption holds, then the diﬀerential sensitivity of firm outcomes to industry returns for fixed-

number firms must be due to the diﬀerential sensitivity of their option compensation. Note that our

first IV strategy already oﬀers a validity check, showing that our results are not dependent on this

assumption. The first instrument only uses data for fixed-value CEOs and does not require assump-

tions about how CEOs would react to industry returns in the absence of diﬀerences in compensation.

Using the first instrument, we estimate similar results across a range of firm outcomes.

   To further ensure that the results we find using our second instrument are not driven by dif-

ferential sensitivity of fixed-number and fixed-value firms to industry returns, we perform several

tests. As noted in section II.B, Iijt
                                  F N (the fixed-number indicator) and R (industry returns) are not
                                                                        kt

excluded instruments, as they appear in the second-stage regression as well. Thus, our identification

strategy allows for the possibility that plan-type or aggregate returns directly relate to risk-taking.

However, we would also like to account for the possibility that the eﬀect of industry returns on

changes in volatility may be non-linear. If this is the case, controlling for Rkt linearly will not

be suﬃcient to break the correlation between our instrument and the error term. To address this

possibility, we include not only Rkt as a control variable but a 5-degree polynomial of Rkt . In this

case, our excluded instruments become the interaction between this 5 degree polynomial and Iijt
                                                                                            FN.


The non-excluded instruments include the direct eﬀects of Iijt
                                                           F N and the 5-degree polynomial of R .
                                                                                               kt

The results with and without other controls are reported in Columns 1–2 and 4–5 of Table X. As

can be seen, our estimates change very little with the inclusion of non-linear controls.

   Finally, we allow all of our firm and CEO control variables to interact with the 5-degree polyno-

mial of Rkt as well. To the extent that fixed-number and fixed-value firms diﬀer in observable ways

that lead to diﬀerential sensitivity of their risk to industry returns, controlling for the interaction



                                                  24
between these observable characteristics and industry returns should lead our estimated eﬀect to

become insignificant. For example, if smaller firms are more likely to be on fixed-number plans than

on fixed-value plans and smaller firms have stronger risk responses to industry returns for other

reasons, controlling for the interaction between firm size and industry returns should account for

this. However, we find little change in our estimated eﬀect when we control for interactions between

a large set of firm and CEO characteristics and the industry return polynomial in Columns 3 and

6. Of course, we cannot control for unobservable firm diﬀerences. Nevertheless, the stability of our

coeﬃcients after the inclusion of many additional observable control variables suggests that unob-

servable selection is also likely to be low (Oster, 2013). Overall, these results provide evidence that

our baseline findings are not driven by non-linearity or observable diﬀerences between fixed-number

and fixed-value firms.

   It remains possible that there are unobservable diﬀerences between fixed-number and fixed-value

firms that drive our baseline findings. To help rule out this possibility, we perform a placebo test that

compares the responses of fixed-number and fixed-value firms to industry returns during years in

which their CEO is not on a fixed-number or fixed-value plan. Among other things, this test exploits

the fact that multi-year plans grew in popularity in the early 1990s and declined in popularity in

the mid 2000s, possibly due to the introduction of peer benchmarking requirements that required

firms to justify their level of executive pay annually. We estimate the following regression:


                                      F N P lacebo                      F N P lacebo
                  Yijt =   0   +   1 Iijt            +   2 Rkt   +   3 Iijt          Rkt   +   t   + ✏ijt ,


restricting the sample to CEOs who are not currently on a cycle but were on a fixed-number or

fixed-value cycle in some other year. The variable Iijt
                                                    F N P lacebo is an indicator for whether the CEO


was on a fixed-number cycle in some other year. A                    3   close to zero would provide evidence that

fixed-number and fixed-value CEOs respond similarly to market movements absent compensation

eﬀects. Panel A of Table XI shows that, across all the previously examined outcomes, fixed-number

and fixed-value CEOs react similarly to changes in industry returns in years in which the CEO is

not awarded options according to either type of multi-year plan. It is further reassuring that the


                                                           25
point estimates are close to zero with small standard errors, suggesting that       3   is a well-estimated

zero eﬀect.

   One may still be concerned that firms discontinue the use of fixed-number plans exactly when

they anticipate or desire a decline in the responsiveness of their firm’s risk to industry returns.

To address this final possibility, we exploit the implementation of FAS123r in 2005, which led

many firms to discontinue their use of options altogether. Prior to FAS123r, at-the-money option

compensation did not have to be recognized as an expense on a firm’s income statement. Such

options thus represented a way to compensate employees without aﬀecting current reported earnings.

After FAS123r went into eﬀect, firms had to begin expensing the grant date value of at-the-money

options using Black–Scholes (or a related model). We identify firms that discontinued the use of

options entirely, for all top executives, in the year that FAS123r went into eﬀect (or the year before

or after) to be option “discontinuers.” 16 For these firms, it is even less likely that they stopped using

multi-year plans due to anticipated changes in the responsiveness of their firm’s risk to industry

returns. Rather, these firms likely stopped using multi-year plans—and options altogether—due to

accounting considerations. Accordingly, in Panel B of Table XI, we repeat our placebo analysis,

limiting the sample to these option discontinuers in the post-FAS123r period. Now the sample

consists of CEOs that were on either a fixed-number or fixed-value plan prior to the discontinuation

of options, and the variable Iijt
                              F N P lacebo is an indicator for whether the CEO was on a fixed-number


plan. Again, the interaction between Iijt
                                      F N P lacebo and industry returns is insignificant. Thus, fixed-


number and fixed-value CEOs who stopped receiving options due to FAS123r subsequently respond

similarly to changes in industry returns. Again, these results suggest that fixed-number and fixed-

value firms are not inherently diﬀerent in their response to industry returns.


C. Heterogeneity

Thus far, we have reported the average eﬀect of changes in the value of new option grants on

executive risk-taking. In this section, we explore whether this eﬀect varies with the total amount of

options held by the executive as well as by the firm’s industry.



                                                   26
   We hypothesize based on Ross (2004) that the marginal eﬀect of new option grants on risk-taking

may be weaker if the executive already holds a sizable portfolio of unexercised options that were

granted in the past. In Panel A of Table XII, we re-estimate our baseline reduced form specifications

from Column 4 of Tables IV and VIII, Panel B. Specifically, the change in volatility is regressed on

Pred First Year in Columns 1–2 and on FN ⇥ Ind Return in Columns 3–4.17 For each observation,

we calculate the ratio of the value of new options to all unexercised options at the grant date. Using

this ratio, we divide the sample into terciles. For both instruments, we find that the eﬀect of new

options on risk-taking is 3–5 times greater when new options are a higher fraction of all options

held. The p-values in the bottom row show that the diﬀerences between the first and third terciles

are also statistically significant.

   In Panel B, we instead split the sample based on whether the firm belongs to the financial

or high-tech sectors. Executives in these sectors may have relatively greater ability to aﬀect risk

beyond merely changing leverage. For example, many allege that the recent rise of complicated

derivative products combined with deregulation allowed executives in the financial sector to be

particularly sensitive to risk-taking incentives. Similarly, the high-tech sector is characterized by

high rates of innovation and high information asymmetry, which may allow executives to increase

risk by pursuing riskier product development. We test these theories by comparing the eﬀect of

options on risk-taking within the finance and high-tech sectors with the eﬀect in other industries.

Using both instruments, we find that the eﬀect of options on risk-taking is approximately twice as

large in the finance and high-tech sectors than in other sectors. The large diﬀerences in magnitudes

support the hypothesis that executives in the finance and high-tech sectors respond more strongly

to changes in options. However, we caution that these results are only suggestive. After splitting

the sample, we lack statistical power to establish significant diﬀerences between finance/high-tech

executives and other executives (p-values for the test of diﬀerences between coeﬃcients are in the

range of 0.3).




                                                 27
D.    Discussion and Robustness

Our analysis shows that, all else equal, an increase in option compensation leads to an increase in

firm volatility that is driven in part by increases in leverage. However, aggregate equity volatility

and leverage among large public firms remained approximately stable over our sample period. In

light of these aggregate trends, our results suggest that other factors are needed to explain broad

changes in volatility and leverage. For example, it is possible that other factors pushed executives

to reduce risk, but the rise in options dampened their response.

     We also note that, so far, we have explored the overall net eﬀect of an increase in options on

executive behavior. Options can aﬀect behavior through various channels. One such channel, which

we have not focused on much, is the wealth eﬀect. An increase in options, like an increase in cash

compensation, increases a CEO’s wealth, which in turn could lead to an increase in risk tolerance

(Becker, 2006). Columns 1 and 2 of Panel A of Table XIII present suggestive evidence that the

wealth channel does not drive our results. In particular, we control for the change in log total

compensation (the sum of the grant date values of salary, bonus, restricted stock, options, and

other compensation) and continue to find a strong eﬀect of options on risk-taking behavior. Of

course, current total compensation may only be a small fraction of a manager’s wealth. However,

all of our regressions are in terms of changes, and a manager’s total compensation is a reasonable

proxy for the change in his wealth relative to the previous year. Overall, the results suggest that the

composition of pay matters. Risk-taking increases when options as a fraction of total pay increase.

     Next, we explore the possibility that other types of compensation, such as salary, bonus, and

restricted stock, move with our shocks to option grants. In Columns 3 and 4 of Panel A of Table

XIII, we find similar results for the eﬀect of options on risk-taking after controlling separately for

changes in all other components of compensation: salary, bonus, restricted stock, and any other

compensation. In unreported tests, we also find that salary and bonus do not increase with our

instruments. Likewise, we find that our instruments do not predict changes in restricted stock.

Moreover, when we limit the sample to years in which no restricted stock is awarded in Columns 5

and 6, we find similar results.


                                                  28
   Panel B of Table XIII presents additional robustness checks. Columns 1 and 2 show that our

results cannot be explained by the potentially endogenous choice of cycle length. In particular, our

first set of IV results using the predicted first year instrument are instead driven by the staggering

of when first years occur among CEOs on cycles of equal length. We re-estimate our two IV

specifications after restricting the sample to CEOs on two-year cycles and find similar results.

Next, we show that our results are insensitive to assumptions regarding the treatment of CEOs

who receive more than one option grant per year. As noted previously, an executive may receive

one grant as part of a firm-wide long-term incentive plan as well as another grant that is part of a

fixed-value or number plan. Columns 3 and 4 show that limiting our analysis to the subsample of

CEO-years with a single grant yields similar results.

   Finally, we show that our results are unlikely to be driven by endogeneity in the exact choice of

date for each option grant. Previous evidence on backdating by Lie (2005) has shown that CEOs

may have strategically chosen grant dates ex-post to maximize the value of their option grants.

However, for backdating to explain our results, not only would firms have to backdate strategically

in a way that coincides with increases in volatility, they would have to engage in more backdating

when our instruments predict increases in option compensation. For our first instrument, this

would mean that backdating would have to coincide with predicted first years and thus occur on

a somewhat regular schedule. For our second instrument, this would mean that backdating would

have to be more sensitive to industry returns for fixed-number firms than for fixed-value firms.

   In Columns 5 and 6, we provide direct empirical evidence that our results are robust to backdat-

ing concerns. We substitute grant dates in the data for the current option grant with grant dates

based on the previous year’s grant. For example, if an executive had reported grants on March 1,

2007 and May 5, 2008, then we would use March 1, 2008 as the grant date for the latter grant.

This approximates when the 2008 options would have been granted, absent strategic backdating.

We form realized volatility measures based on these alternative grant dates and find similar results

with both instruments. Thus, our results are very unlikely to be driven by endogenous choice of

grant dates.



                                                 29
   Another potential concern is that after FAS123r becomes eﬀective, we may not be able to control

fully for changes in a CEO’s incentives from non-option compensation. As mentioned earlier, after

FAS123r, many firms began using performance-vesting shares. These types of shares typically have

convex payoﬀs as well, but Execucomp does provide suﬃcient data to compute their vegas (Bettis

et al., 2012). To make sure that our results are not somehow driven by performance-vesting shares,

in Internet Appendix Table IAII, we re-estimate our baseline specifications, limiting the sample to

the pre-FAS123r period (i.e., fiscal years starting prior to June 15, 2005). This leads to similar

results.

   In general, option compensation also vests over time. Like the prior literature, we ignore the

issue of why firms attach time-vesting schedules to at-the-money options, which is beyond the scope

of this study. Nonetheless, one may wonder why managers would increase volatility in the year

following a shock to option grants since the options may not fully vest for several years. However,

42 percent of a typical option grant does vest within a one-year window (Cadman et al., 2012). In

addition, after an option is granted, increasing volatility over any time interval prior to exercise will

increase its value by leading to more extreme prices in expectation.18

   Finally, given that many firms do not use fixed-number or fixed-value plans, one may wonder

about the extent to which our results generalize to firms outside of our samples. That is, even if

we are estimating a true causal eﬀect for firms using multi-year plans, it may be the case that the

causal eﬀect for other firms would diﬀer. We have no ex-ante reason to believe that the eﬀect for

other firms would be diﬀerent, but it is also diﬃcult to rule out this possibility entirely. In order

to provide suggestive evidence on the generalizability of our results, we match each observation in

the no-plan sample with its nearest neighbor in the main estimation samples using propensity score

matching. We match on the firm-level controls from our baseline specification, along with industry

and year. We then re-estimate our baseline IV specification, this time weighting observations by the

number of no-plan observations that matched to them. This weighting scheme makes our estimation

sample similar to the no-plan sample based on observable characteristics. For example, observations

with characteristics that are out of line with those in the no-plan sample will receive zero weight in



                                                   30
the new IV estimates. The results are presented in Internet Appendix Table IAIII. Panel A shows

that the weighting scheme makes the our first IV sample comparable to the no-plan sample. Panel

B shows the IV results with the weighting scheme. We see that the weighted results are similar to

our baseline results, and if anything the magnitudes are slightly larger with the weights. Panels C

and D repeat the same exercise using the second instrument. Again, the magnitudes are similar

to before but slightly larger. Therefore, this analysis suggests no reason to believe that our results

would not generalize beyond the multi-year plan samples.



                                        IV.     Conclusion

In this paper, we explore the overall eﬀect of increases in CEO option pay on risk-taking using two

sources of variation induced by the institutional features of multi-year compensation plans. First,

the value of new option grants increases sharply in years that are predicted to be the start of a new

fixed-value cycle. Second, fixed-number executives receive option grants that are more sensitive to

market movements than fixed-value executives. These two types of variation help to cross-validate

one another: our two IV methodologies yield similar results across a range of firm outcomes.

   We find that, on average, executives lie in a region of their utility function in which increases

in option pay—in the range of 10–15% generally observed in our data—lead to increases in firm

equity volatility. A significant portion of the increase in volatility is driven by increases in leverage.

Returning to the theory, we know that the eﬀect of options on risk-taking may be non-monotonic.

Very large option grants that are awarded to risk-averse and undiversified executives may lead to

reduced risk-taking. Nevertheless, our estimates should be informative for boards and policymakers

who are interested in the eﬀects of moderate changes to existing convex compensation packages.




                                                   31
                                        REFERENCES


Aboody, David, and Ron Kasznik, 2000, CEO stock option awards and the timing of corporate
 voluntary disclosures, Journal of Accounting and Economics, 29, 73–100.

Armstrong, Christopher S., and Rahul Vashishtha, 2012, Executive stock options, diﬀerential risk-
  taking incentives, and firm value, Journal of Financial Economics, 104, 70–88.

Becker, Bo, 2006, Wealth and executive compensation, The Journal of Finance, 61, 379–397.

Bettis, J. Carr, John Bizjak, Jeﬀrey Coles, and Swaminathan Kalpathy, 2012, Performance-vesting
  provisions in executive compensation, Working Paper .

Bettis, J. Carr, John M. Bizjak, and Michael L. Lemmon, 2005, Exercise behavior, valuation, and
  the incentive eﬀects of employee stock options, Journal of Financial Economics, 76, 445–470.

Cadman, Brian D., Tjomme O. Rusticus, and Jayanthi Sunder, 2012, Stock option grant vesting
  terms: Economic and financial reporting determinants, Review of Accounting Studies, 1–32.

Carpenter, Jennifer N., 2000, Does option compensation increase managerial risk appetite?, Journal
  of Finance, 55, 2311–2331.

Chava, Sudheer, and Amiyatosh Purnanandam, 2010, CEOs versus CFOs: Incentives and corporate
  policies, Journal of Financial Economics, 97, 263–278.

Cohen, Randolph B., Brian J. Hall, and Luis M. Viceira, 2000, Do executive stock options encourage
  risk-taking?, Working Paper .

Coles, Jeﬀrey L., Naveen D. Daniel, and Lalitha Naveen, 2006, Managerial incentives and risk-
  taking, Journal of Financial Economics, 79, 431–468.

Core, John, and Wayne Guay, 2002, Estimating the value of employee stock option portfolios and
  their sensitivities to price and volatility, Journal of Accounting Research, 40, 613–630.

Garvey, Gerald, and Todd Milbourn, 2003, Incentive compensation when executives can hedge the
 market: Evidence of relative performance evaluation in the cross section, Journal of Finance, 58,
 1557–1581.

Gormley, Todd A., David A. Matsa, and Todd T. Milbourn, 2013, CEO compensation and cor-
 porate risk-taking: Evidence from a natural experiment, Journal of Accounting and Economics,
 Forthcoming.

Guay, Wayne R., 1999, The sensitivity of CEO wealth to equity risk: An analysis of the magnitude
 and determinants, Journal of Financial Economics, 53, 43–71.

Hall, Brian J., 1999, The design of multi-year stock option plans, Journal of Applied Corporate
  Finance, 12, 97–106.

Hall, Brian J., and Kevin J. Murphy, 2002a, Stock options for undiversified executives, Journal of
  Accounting and Economics, 33, 3–42.

Hayes, Rachel M., Michael Lemmon, and Mingming Qiu, 2012, Stock options and managerial incen-
  tives for risk taking: Evidence from FAS 123R, Journal of Financial Economics, 105, 174–190.

                                               32
Jensen, Michael C., and William H. Meckling, 1976, Theory of the firm: Managerial behavior,
  agency costs and ownership structure, Journal of Financial Economics, 3, 305–360.

Kelly, Bryan, and Seth Pruitt, 2013, Market expectations in the cross-section of present values,
  Journal of Finance, 68, 1721–1756.

Lambert, Richard A., David F. Larcker, and Robert E. Verrecchia, 1991, Portfolio considerations
  in valuing executive compensation, Journal of Accounting Research, 29, 129–149.

Lewellen, Katharina, 2006, Financing decisions when managers are risk averse, Journal of Financial
  Economics, 82, 551–589.

Lie, Erik, 2005, On the timing of CEO stock option awards, Management Science, 51, 802–812.

Liu, Yixin, and David C. Mauer, 2011, Corporate cash holdings and CEO compensation incentives,
  Journal of Financial Economics, 102, 183–198.

Murphy, Kevin J., 2013, Executive compensation: Where we are, and how we got there, in George M.
 Constantinides, Milton Harris, and René M. Stulz, eds., Handbook of the Economics of Finance,
 volume 2A, 211–282 (Elsevier Science, North Holland, Amsterdam).

Oster, Emily, 2013, Unobservable selection and coeﬃcient stability: Theory and validation, Working
  Paper .

Pan, Yihui, Tracy Yue Wang, and Michael S. Weisbach, 2013, Learning about CEO ability and
  stock return volatility, Working Paper .

Ross, Stephen A., 2004, Compensation, incentives, and the duality of risk aversion and riskiness,
  Journal of Finance, 59, 207–225.

Shue, Kelly, and Richard R. Townsend, 2017, Growth through rigidity: An explanation for the rise
  in CEO pay, Journal of Financial Economics, 123, 1–21.

Staiger, Douglas, and James H. Stock, 1997, Instrumental variables regression with weak instru-
  ments, Econometrica, 65, 557–586.

Wooldridge, Jeﬀrey M., 2002, Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data (MIT Press:
 Cambridge and London).




                                               33
                                                                                    Panel A: Nucor




                                               350  300
                               Grant Value (Thousands)
                              200         250  150


                                                                  2004     2005          2006      2007     2008          2009     2010
                                                                                                   Year


                                                                                Panel B: US Bancorp
                                               5,000      4,000
                                   Grant Value (Thousands)
                              1,000    2,000   0 3,000




                                                                  2005     2006          2007      2008     2009          2010     2011
                                                                                                   Year


                                                                           Panel C: Thomas & Betts
                                               600
                              Grant Value (Thousands)
                                200            0400




                                                                  1998   1999     2000     2001    2002   2003     2004     2005   2006
                                                                                                   Year


Figure 1. Real Examples of Fixed-Value Cycles and Predictions. This figure represents
three examples of fixed-value cycles taken from the data. Years that we predict to be cycle first years are
indicated by dotted vertical lines.




                                                                                                  34
                                               Table I
                                           Summary Statistics
Panel A of this table shows the distribution of cycle length, with observations at the CEO-year level. Panel
B shows the industry distribution, broken down by the CEO’s plan type. Industries are categorized using
the Fama–French 12-industry classification scheme. Panel C compares other firm and CEO characteristics
across cycle types, showing the 25th, 50th, and 75th percentiles of the distributions. Because there are time
trends in the prevalence of fixed-number and fixed-value cycles, we do not pool all years. Panels B and C
show only summary statistics from fiscal year 2000. Fiscal years 1995 and 2005 are shown in the Appendix.

                                         Panel A: Length of Cycles
                                  Fixed Number                                       Fixed Value
                         Freq                    Percent                    Freq                   Percent
     2                   2755                     61.14                     2666                      89.55
     3                   1034                     22.95                     279                        9.37
     4                    387                      8.59                      18                       0.60
     5                    330                      7.32                      14                       0.47
 Total                   4506                     100.00                    2977                    100.00

                                       Panel B: Industry Distribution
 Year: 2000                         Fixed Number                  Fixed Value                 Other
                                 Freq         Percent       Freq         Percent       Freq        Percent
 Consumer Non-Durables            17            6.30          8            5.56          74            6.35
 Consumer Durables                 9            3.33          7            4.86          29            2.49
 Manufacturing                    36           13.33         29           20.14         116            9.96
 Energy                           10            3.70          6            4.17          52            4.46
 Chemicals                        10            3.70          5            3.47          31            2.66
 Business Equipment               45           16.67         15           10.42         265           22.75
 Telecommunications                8            2.96          3            2.08          36            3.09
 Utilities                        15            5.56         10            6.94          56            4.81
 Shops                            28           10.37         21           14.58         146           12.53
 Health                           25            9.26          7            4.86          85            7.30
 Finance                          33           12.22         21           14.58         148           12.70
 Other                            34           12.59         12            8.33         127           10.90
 Total                            270         100.00         144         100.00        1165         100.00




                                                       35
                                                                    Table I
                                                                  (Continued)

                                                          Panel C: Other Characteristics
     Year: 2000                                 Fixed Number                         Fixed Value                        Other
                                       p25          p50          p75         p25           p50       p75       p25      p50        p75
     Firm-Level:
     Assets (Millions)                563.47      1545.80       6393.29     750.29    2051.62      6300.42    444.27   1383.17   5036.34
     Sales (Millions)                 476.09      1202.65       3211.77     640.98    1495.26      3994.24    372.11   1095.55   3708.53
     Market to Book                    1.09         1.42          2.35       1.09       1.37         2.38      1.12      1.54      2.53
     Volatility (12 Months)            0.35         0.46          0.71       0.31       0.44         0.58      0.37      0.51      0.76
     Volatility (120 Trading Days)     0.38         0.50          0.72       0.39       0.49         0.59      0.43      0.55      0.79
     CAPX / PPE                        0.14         0.23          0.42       0.13       0.23         0.38      0.15      0.26      0.51
     Acquisitions (Millions)           0.00         1.01         48.53       0.00       0.00        39.97      0.00      0.66     38.30
     Market Leverage                   0.06         0.22          0.44       0.06       0.21         0.43      0.03      0.17      0.39
     Book Leverage                     0.19         0.41          0.57       0.19       0.42         0.57      0.10      0.37      0.55
     Total Dividends (Millions)        0.00         3.05         37.73       0.00      11.45        62.06      0.00      0.00     30.41




36
     Return on Assets                  0.10         0.15          0.22       0.10       0.15         0.23      0.08      0.15      0.24
     Cash Flow / Assets                0.07         0.10          0.17       0.08       0.10         0.16      0.06      0.11      0.18

     CEO-Level:
     Salary (Thousands)               395.00      567.12        834.00     400.00      627.60       833.65    321.16    500.00    754.65
     Bonus (Thousands)                184.00       440.00       940.83      182.91     416.25       835.04     79.47    315.00    800.00
     Number New Options                50.00       105.00       225.00      50.00      117.17       250.00     80.00    180.00    438.75
     Number Prev Options              228.29       475.00      1022.50     207.56      433.43       975.96    128.75    375.00    855.00
     Value New Options (Thousands)    572.43      1278.20      3536.43     652.58     1187.33      3036.36    802.31   2417.57   6631.91
     Value Prev Options (Thousands)   1870.69     5624.94      17512.38    1763.59    4556.15      13947.44   788.34   4129.09   13884.27
     Delta New Options                 7.91        18.16        52.67        8.82      17.66         45.51    10.91     31.04      83.41
     Delta Prev Options                30.02       84.67        242.06      32.72      73.15        211.23    12.29     61.22     192.95
     Vega New Options                   5.86        13.80        38.56       7.39       14.14        38.60     6.87     19.97      51.48
     Vega Prev Options                 17.54        43.61       125.54      23.52       43.15       122.39      6.17     24.82     74.79
     Value Prev Options + Stock       2150.92     6519.80      20821.43    2185.94    5197.37      14455.02   949.50   4752.08   14484.78
     Delta Prev Options + Stock        31.66        89.07       258.88      34.33      75.80        228.73    14.59     67.40     197.01
     Observations                      270                                   144                              1165
                                                       Table II
                                                   IV1: First Stage
Panel A of this table shows how option compensation changes in fixed-value cycle first years. Panel B shows
how option compensation changes in fixed-value cycle predicted first years. Observations are at the CEO-year
level. The sample is limited to CEOs who are currently on fixed-value cycles or were in the previous year.
First Year is an indicator variable equal to one in the year following the final year of a cycle. Predicted
First Year is an indicator variable equal to one if the year is predicted to be a cycle first year based on the
length of the previous cycle (see Section 3.1 for a detailed discussion of our prediction methodology). The
variable B-S Value equals the Black–Scholes value of new option compensation, Delta equals the change in
the Black–Scholes value of new option compensation associated with a one percent change in the price of the
underlying, and Vega equals the change in the Black–Scholes value of new option compensation associated
with a 0.01 change in the annualized volatility of the underlying. Control variables include CEO tenure, log
of cash compensation (salary + bonus), log sales, log assets, sales growth, market to book, tangibility ratio,
and a dummy variable for whether the firm has rated debt. These control variables are measured in the year
prior to the year of the current option grant. In addition, controls for the change in the log delta and vega
of previously granted (unexercised) option and stock holdings are included. That is, we calculate the log
of total outstanding delta and vega as of the current grant date (excluding the current grant) and subtract
from this the log of total outstanding delta and vega following the previous year’s grant. Standard errors
are clustered by firm. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                            Panel A: Real First Years
                               Log B-S Value                        Log Delta                          Log Vega
                         (1)                (2)              (3)               (4)            (5)                 (6)
 First Year           0.149⇤⇤⇤            0.152⇤⇤⇤         0.165⇤⇤⇤         0.176⇤⇤⇤        0.157⇤⇤⇤        0.171⇤⇤⇤
                      (0.0193)            (0.0192)         (0.0265)         (0.0256)        (0.0312)        (0.0302)
 Controls                No                 Yes               No              Yes              No             Yes
 Year FE                Yes                 Yes               Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes
 R2                     0.084              0.097            0.032             0.088          0.105            0.153
 Observations           3,692              3,692            3,692             3,692          3,692            3,692

                                          Panel B: Predicted First Years
                                    Log B-S Value                        Log Delta                     Log Vega
                                 (1)               (2)             (3)           (4)           (5)                (6)
 Predicted First Year          0.141⇤⇤⇤
                                               0.144 ⇤⇤⇤
                                                                0.152 ⇤⇤⇤
                                                                               0.165  ⇤⇤⇤
                                                                                             0.146  ⇤⇤⇤
                                                                                                            0.161⇤⇤⇤
                               (0.0185)        (0.0185)         (0.0255)       (0.0244)      (0.0296)       (0.0286)
 Controls                         No             Yes               No            Yes            No            Yes
 Year FE                          Yes            Yes               Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes
 R2                             0.082             0.095          0.031          0.087         0.104           0.152
 Observations                   3,692             3,692          3,692          3,692         3,692           3,692




                                                           37
                                       Table III
       Sensitivity of New Grants to Stock Price: Fixed Value vs. Fixed Number
This is a simple example adapted from Hall (1999) to illustrate how the Black-Scholes value of new at-the-
money option grants and the number of options granted varies with stock price fluctuations for executives
on fixed-number and fixed-value plans. For illustrative purposes, we assume the annual standard deviation
is 32 percent, the risk-free rate is 6 percent, the dividend rate is 3 percent, and the maturity is 10 years.

                                                             Stock price
                                                             Year 1 Grant                Year 2 Grant                Year 3 Grant
        Plan                                                 100                         120                         144

        Fixed Value  Value of Options                           $1,000,000                  $1,000,000                   $1,000,000
                     Number of Options                              28,128                      23,440                       18,752
        Fixed Number Value of Options                           $1,000,000                  $1,200,000                   $1,440,000
                     Number of Options                              28,128                      28,128                       28,128
        Note: The annual standard devation is assumed to be 32 percent, the risk-free rate is 6 percent, the dividend rate is 3 percent
        and the maturity is 10 years




                                                                        38
                                                 Table IV
                                              IV1: Volatility
Panel A of this table shows IV estimation results, where the variable Log B-S Value is instrumented using
the Predicted First Year indicator, as defined in Table II. Observations are at the CEO-year level. The
sample is limited to CEOs who are currently on fixed-value cycles or were in the previous year. We measure
volatility in two ways: 1) the annualized volatility of daily returns in the first 12 months following the grant
date, and 2) the annualized volatility of daily returns in the first 120 trading days following the grant date.
Panel B shows the results of the reduced form estimation in which these outcomes are regressed directly
on the Predicted First Year instrument. Control variables are those listed in Table II. Standard errors are
clustered by firm. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                            Panel A: IV Estimation
                                          12 Month Volatility                           120 TD Volatility
                                   (1)                      (2)                   (3)                   (4)
    Log B-S Value                0.115⇤⇤⇤               0.110⇤⇤⇤               0.108⇤⇤⇤              0.0978⇤⇤⇤
                                 (0.0390)               (0.0380)               (0.0378)              (0.0368)
 Controls                           No                    Yes                     No                    Yes
 Year FE                           Yes                     Yes                    Yes                   Yes
 F-Stat (1st Stage)               58.29                    60.76                58.29                  60.76
 Observations                     3,692                    3,692                3,692                  3,692

                                   Panel B: Reduced Form Estimation
                                        12 Month Volatility                             120 TD Volatility
                                 (1)                     (2)                    (3)                     (4)
 Predicted First              0.0163⇤⇤⇤               0.0158⇤⇤⇤              0.0152⇤⇤⇤               0.0141⇤⇤⇤
                              (0.00515)               (0.00518)              (0.00500)               (0.00504)
 Controls                        No                      Yes                    No                      Yes
 Year FE                         Yes                     Yes                    Yes                     Yes
 R2                             0.300                   0.302                  0.279                   0.284
 Observations                   3,692                   3,692                  3,692                   3,692




                                                      39
                                                                           Table V
                                                                     IV1: Other Outcomes
     Panel A shows IV estimation results, where the variable Log B-S Value is instrumented using the Predicted First Year indicator, as defined in Table
     II. Observations are at the CEO-year level. The sample is limited to CEOs who are currently on fixed-value cycles or were in the previous year.
     Financial firms (SIC 6000-6999) and regulated utilities (SIC 4800-4999) are excluded. The variable Lev Ratio represents market leverage, which is
     defined as total debt divided by the market value of assets. The variable Log Debt represents the log of total debt. The variable Debt " is an indicator
     equal to one if net debt issuance is positive, i.e., if total debt increased relative to the previous year. The variable Capx represents capital expenditures,
     and Tot Inv represents total investment, i.e., the sum of capital expenditures, R&D, acquisitions, and advertising expenses. Panel B shows the results
     of the reduced form estimation in which these outcomes are regressed directly on the Predicted First Year instrument. Control variables are those
     listed in Table II. Standard errors are clustered by firm. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                                                      Panel A: IV Estimation
                                                                     Leverage                                                           Investment
                                              (1)                         (2)                       (3)                      (4)                         (5)
                                            Lev Ratio                    Log Debt                  Debt "                 Log Capx                   Log Tot Inv
         Log B-S Value                     0.0964⇤⇤                      0.129⇤⇤                   0.350⇤⇤                   -0.131                     0.121
                                           (0.0484)                     (0.0643)                   (0.161)                  (0.184)                    (0.215)




40
      Controls                                Yes                          Yes                       Yes                      Yes                        Yes
      Year FE                                 Yes                          Yes                       Yes                      Yes                        Yes
      F-Stat (1st Stage)                     40.22                        40.22                     40.22                    40.22                      40.22
      Observations                           2,815                        2,815                     2,815                    2,815                      2,815

                                                               Panel B: Reduced Form Estimation
                                                                   Leverage                                                             Investment
                                           (1)                          (2)                        (3)                       (4)                         (5)
                                         Lev Ratio                     Log Debt                   Debt "                  Log Capx                   Log Tot Inv
      Predicted First                    0.0123⇤⇤                     0.0165⇤⇤                   0.0447⇤⇤                   -0.0167                    0.0155
                                        (0.00572)                    (0.00798)                   (0.0195)                  (0.0235)                   (0.0278)
      Controls                              Yes                          Yes                        Yes                       Yes                       Yes
      Year FE                               Yes                          Yes                        Yes                       Yes                        Yes
      R2                                  0.11                          0.13                       0.09                      0.82                        0.78
      Observations                        2,815                        2,815                      2,815                     2,815                       2,815
                                                 Table VI
                                            IV1: Validity Tests
Panel A reproduces the reduced form specification from Panel B of Table IV, decomposing the predicted
first year indicator into two variables. Predicted First ( BS Val > 0) is equal to one if the observation
corresponds to a predicted first year in which the value of the CEOs option pay has increased. Predicted
First ( BS Val  0) is equal to one if the observation corresponds to a predicted first year in which the value
of the CEO’s option pay has weakly decreased. Panel B again reproduces the reduced form specification
from Panel B of Table IV, with diﬀerent dependent variables. The variable Product represents the number of
major product announcements the firm made during the year according to the CapitalIQ key developments
database. The variable Expansion represents the number of business expansion announcements the firm
made during the year. We consider CapitalIQ’s coverage of a particular firm to begin with the firm’s first
recorded announcement of any type. The variable % Debt Maturing represents the percent of the firm’s
debt that was maturing in the year. We compute the percent of debt maturing in a year using the ratio of
current liabilities to current liabilities plus long-term debt, as of the previous fiscal year end. Financial firms
(SIC 6000-6999) and regulated utilities (SIC 4800-4999) are excluded when this dependent variable is used.
The variable CEO turnover is an indicator equal to one if it is the last year the CEO is at the firm (except
if it was also the last year the firm was in the data). Control variables are those listed in Table II. Standard
errors are clustered by firm. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                     Panel A: Reduced Form Estimation with Partitioned Intrument
                                                  12 Month Volatility                          120 TD Volatility
                                                (1)                (2)                   (3)                 (4)
 Predicted First (    BS Val > 0)           0.0198⇤⇤⇤           0.0193⇤⇤⇤             0.0204⇤⇤⇤           0.0211⇤⇤⇤
                                            (0.00662)           (0.00672)             (0.00641)           (0.00640)
 Predicted First (    BS Val  0)            0.00992             0.00864               0.00713             0.00278
                                            (0.00782)           (0.00791)             (0.00781)           (0.00792)
 Controls                                      No                  Yes                   No                  Yes
 Year FE                                       Yes                 Yes                   Yes                 Yes
 R2                                           0.305               0.311                0.282                0.294
 Observations                                 3,692               3,692                3,692                3,692

                                         Panel B: Other Firm Cycles
                             (1)                  (2)                     (3)                            (4)
                            Product             Expansion             % Debt Maturing                CEO Turnover
 Predicted First           -0.00944              -0.159                   0.000670                      0.00578
                            (0.125)             (0.158)                   (0.00514)                    (0.00874)
 Controls                     Yes                 Yes                        Yes                          Yes
 Year FE                      Yes                 Yes                        Yes                          Yes
 R2                         0.025                0.022                      0.031                        0.028
 Observations               3,478                3,478                      2,795                        2,950




                                                         41
                                               Table VII
                                            IV2: First Stage
This table shows the diﬀerential sensitivity of the option compensation of fixed-number and fixed-value CEOs
to industry returns. Observations are at the CEO-year level. The sample is limited to CEOs who are on either
fixed-number or fixed-value plans (excluding the first years of cycles). The variable FN is an indicator equal
to one if the CEO is on a fixed-number plan. Industry returns are defined as the Fama–French (49) industry
return of the CEO’s firm in the 12 months preceding the option grant associated with the cycle. Other
variables are defined as in Table II. The main eﬀects of interaction terms are included in all specifications
but not shown. Control variables are those listed in Table II. Standard errors are clustered by firm. *, **,
and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                               Log B-S Value                      Log Delta                    Log Vega
                            (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)           (5)           (6)
 FN ⇥ Ind Return          0.559⇤⇤⇤
                                        0.548 ⇤⇤⇤
                                                       0.630 ⇤⇤⇤
                                                                        0.599 ⇤⇤⇤
                                                                                     0.546⇤⇤⇤
                                                                                                    0.510⇤⇤⇤
                          (0.0473)      (0.0474)       (0.0878)         (0.0892)     (0.114)        (0.108)
 Controls                    No           Yes             No              Yes           No            Yes
 Year FE                    Yes            Yes            Yes              Yes          Yes            Yes
 R2                        0.182          0.261           0.082          0.281        0.153          0.286
 Observations              3,535          3,535           3,535          3,535        3,535          3,535




                                                     42
                                                   Table VIII
                                                 IV2: Volatility
Panel A shows IV estimation results, where Log B-S Value is instrumented using FN ⇥ Ind Return, as
defined in Table VII. Observations are at the CEO-year level. The sample is limited to CEOs who are
on either fixed-number or fixed-value plans (excluding the first years of cycles). All other variables are as
defined in Table IV. Panel B shows the results of the reduced form estimation in which these outcomes are
regressed directly on the FN ⇥ Ind Return instrument. The main eﬀects of interaction terms are included in
all specifications but not shown. Standard errors are clustered by firm. *, **, and *** indicate significance
at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                              Panel A: IV Estimation
                                          12 Month Volatility                          120 TD Volatility
                                   (1)                       (2)               (3)                    (4)
    Log B-S Value               0.0832⇤⇤                 0.0864⇤⇤            0.138⇤⇤⇤               0.144⇤⇤⇤
                                (0.0424)                 (0.0432)            (0.0457)               (0.0466)
 Controls                          No                       Yes                 No                    Yes
 Year FE                           Yes                      Yes                 Yes                    Yes
 F-Stat (1st Stage)              140.04                     133.82            140.04                 133.82
 Observations                     3,535                      3,535             3,535                  3,535

                                  Panel B: Reduced Form Estimation
                                          12 Month Volatility                         120 TD Volatility
                                  (1)                       (2)                (3)                    (4)
 FN ⇥ Ind Return               0.0465    ⇤⇤
                                                        0.0474    ⇤⇤
                                                                            0.0773   ⇤⇤⇤
                                                                                                   0.0788⇤⇤⇤
                               (0.0200)                 (0.0201)            (0.0251)                (0.0251)
 Controls                         No                       Yes                 No                     Yes
 Year FE                          Yes                      Yes                 Yes                     Yes
 R2                              0.260                   0.263                0.257                  0.261
 Observations                    3,535                   3,535                3,535                  3,535




                                                       43
                                                                         Table IX
                                                                   IV2: Other Outcomes
     Panel A shows IV estimation results, where Log B-S Value is instrumented using FN ⇥ Ind Return, as defined in Table VII. Observations are at
     the CEO-year level. The sample is limited to CEOs who are on either fixed-number or fixed-value plans (excluding the first years of cycles). Financial
     firms (SIC 6000-6999) and regulated utilities (SIC 4800-4999) are excluded. All other variables are as defined in Table V. Panel B shows the results
     of the reduced form estimation in which these outcomes are regressed directly on the FN ⇥ Ind Return instrument. The main eﬀects of interaction
     terms are included in all specifications but not shown. Control variables are those listed in Table II. Standard errors are clustered by firm. *, **, and
     *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                                                    Panel A: IV Estimation
                                                                   Leverage                                                         Investment
                                             (1)                        (2)                      (3)                      (4)                        (5)
                                           Lev Ratio                   Log Debt                 Debt "                 Log Capx                  Log Tot Inv
         Log B-S Value                    0.0717⇤⇤                     0.129⇤⇤                  0.310⇤⇤                  0.307                      0.196
                                          (0.0315)                    (0.0626)                  (0.135)                 (0.191)                    (0.235)
      Controls                               Yes                         Yes                      Yes                     Yes                        Yes




44
      Year FE                                Yes                         Yes                      Yes                     Yes                        Yes
      F-Stat (1st Stage)                   122.83                      122.83                   122.83                  122.83                     122.83
      Observations                          2,930                       2,930                    2,930                   2,930                      2,930

                                                             Panel B: Reduced Form Estimation
                                                                   Leverage                                                         Investment
                                            (1)                        (2)                       (3)                      (4)                        (5)
                                          Lev Ratio                   Log Debt                  Debt "                 Log Capx                  Log Tot Inv
      FN ⇥ Ind Return                    0.0427⇤⇤                    0.0718⇤⇤                   0.173⇤⇤                  0.171                      0.109
                                         (0.0179)                    (0.0342)                  (0.0741)                 (0.106)                    (0.132)
      Controls                              Yes                         Yes                       Yes                     Yes                        Yes
      Year FE                               Yes                         Yes                       Yes                     Yes                        Yes
      R2                                    0.20                        0.13                      0.08                    0.84                       0.75
      Observations                         2,930                       2,930                     2,930                   2,930                      2,930
                                            Table X
                             Interacted Controls and Non-Linearity
This table re-estimates Table VIII with additional controls. First, rather than controlling linearly for the
main eﬀect of industry returns, we include a 5-degree polynomial of industry returns. Second, in Columns
(3) and (6) we allow that 5-degree polynomial to interact with all of the control variables listed in Table II
in order to control for the fact that firms with diﬀerent observable characteristics might respond diﬀerently
(and non-linearly) to industry returns. Across all specifications with a 5-degree polynomial of industry
returns, the excluded instrument is the interaction between the 5-degree polynomial of industry returns and
the fixed-number plan indicator variable. Standard errors are clustered by firm. *, **, and *** indicate
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                              12 Month Volatility                    120 TD Volatility
                                       (1)           (2)         (3)         (4)           (5)         (6)
    Log B-S Value                   0.0866⇤⇤      0.0882⇤⇤    0.107⇤⇤⇤    0.127⇤⇤⇤      0.128⇤⇤⇤    0.0917⇤⇤
                                    (0.0415)      (0.0425)    (0.0414)    (0.0427)      (0.0439)    (0.0447)
 Controls                              No            Yes        Yes          No           Yes          Yes
 Poly. Ind. Returns                    Yes           Yes        Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes
 Controls ⇥ Poly. Ind. Returns         No            No         Yes          No            No          Yes
 Year FE                               Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes
 F-Stat (1st Stage)                   41.58        37.77       37.60        41.58        37.77       37.60
 Observations                         3,535        3,535       3,535        3,535        3,535       3,535




                                                      45
                                                                            Table XI
                                                                        IV2: Placebo Test
     Panel A of this table shows reduced form regression results where the outcomes in Table IX are regressed directly on the FN Placebo ⇥ Ind. Return
     placebo instrument. The placebo sample is restricted to CEOs receiving option pay who are not currently on a cycle, but were on a fixed-number
     or fixed-value cycle in some other year (in the past or future). FN Placebo is an indicator variable equal to one if the CEO was on a fixed-number
     cycle in some other year. The main eﬀects of the interaction terms are included in all specifications but not shown. In panel Panel B of this table,
     the placebo sample is instead limited to firms that discontinued granting options altogether (for all top executives) in the fiscal year before, the fiscal
     year of, or the fiscal year after FAS123r went into eﬀect for the firm (FAS123r applied to the first fiscal year starting after June 15, 2005). The sample
     only includes the post-FAS123r period. In this case, FN Placebo is an indicator variable equal to one if the CEO was on a fixed-number cycle prior to
     the firm ceasing the use of option pay and zero if the CEO was on a fixed-value cycle. Control variables are those listed in Table II. Standard errors
     are clustered by firm. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.


                                                                        Panel A: Placebo Test
                                                      Volatility                                  Leverage                                   Investment
                                            (1)                       (2)            (3)               (4)            (5)            (6)               (7)
                                         12 Month Vol              120 TD Vol      Lev Ratio          Log Debt       Debt "       Log Capx         Log Tot Inv
      FN Placebo ⇥ Ind Return             -0.000489                 -0.0164        -0.00615           0.0118          0.0198        -0.0493           0.0284




46
                                           (0.0175)                (0.0164)        (0.0149)          (0.0240)        (0.0499)      (0.0708)          (0.0913)
      Controls                               Yes                      Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes            Yes              Yes
      Year FE                                Yes                      Yes             Yes               Yes             Yes           Yes               Yes
      R2                                    0.29                     0.29             0.12              0.13           0.08           0.85             0.75
      Observations                          6,098                   6,098            5,647             5,647          5,647          5,647            5,647

                                   Panel B: Placebo Test with firms that discontinued options sourrounding FAS123r
                                                      Volatility                                  Leverage                                   Investment
                                            (1)                       (2)             (3)              (4)             (5)           (6)               (7)
                                         12 Month Vol              120 TD Vol       Lev Ratio         Log Debt        Debt "      Log Capx         Log Tot Inv
      FN Placebo ⇥ Ind Return               -0.0271                 -0.0192          0.0196            -0.0652         -0.167      -0.0464            -0.210
                                           (0.0493)                (0.0461)         (0.0389)          (0.0560)        (0.175)      (0.237)           (0.209)
      Controls                                Yes                     Yes             Yes                Yes            Yes          Yes               Yes
      Year FE                                 Yes                     Yes              Yes               Yes            Yes          Yes               Yes
      R2                                     0.55                    0.67             0.18              0.15           0.14          0.82              0.74
      Observations                           657                     657              551               551            551           551               551
                                                                        Table XII
                                                                       Heterogeneity
     This table re-estimates the baseline reduced form specifications from Column 3 of Panel B of Tables IV and VIII. The change in 120 trading day
     volatility is regressed on Pred First Year in the left-most columns and on FN ⇥ Ind Return in the right-most columns. In Panel A, the sample is split
     into terciles based upon the ratio of the value of new options to all unexercised options as of the grant date of the new options. The High columns are
     the top tercile sample, and the Low columns are the bottom tercile sample. The P-value row represents the P-value of the test that the coeﬃcients in
     the High and Low column are equal. In Panel B, the sample is split based upon whether the company is in the finance (SIC 6000-6999) or high-tech
     sectors (“high-tech” in Fama–French 5-Industry Classification). Control variables are those listed in Table II. Standard errors are clustered by firm.
     *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                                               Panel A: Percent New Options
      DEP VAR:     120 TD VOL                          Instrument = Pred First Year                                  Instrument = FN ⇥ Ind Return
                                                 (1)                            (2)                           (3)                             (4)
                                                 Low                           High                           Low                            High
      Instrument                                0.0124⇤                      0.0313⇤⇤⇤                       0.0291                        0.156⇤⇤⇤
                                               (0.00738)                     (0.00906)                      (0.0456)                       (0.0402)
      Controls                                    Yes                           Yes                           Yes                            Yes




47
      Year FE                                     Yes                           Yes                            Yes                            Yes
      P-value                                    0.044                         0.044                         0.004                          0.004
      R2                                         0.359                         0.321                         0.313                           0.283
      Observations                               1,230                         1,229                         1,178                           1,177

                                                              Panel B: Finance and High Tech
      DEP VAR:     120 TD VOL                          Instrument = Pred First Year                                  Instrument = FN ⇥ Ind Return
                                                   (1)                            (2)                           (3)                             (4)
                                               No Fin/Tech                     Fin/Tech                     No Fin/Tech                      Fin/Tech
      Instrument                                 0.0108⇤                        0.0201⇤⇤                      0.0536⇤                         0.0955⇤⇤
                                                (0.00617)                      (0.00869)                      (0.0319)                        (0.0413)
      Controls                                     Yes                             Yes                          Yes                              Yes
      Year FE                                      Yes                             Yes                           Yes                             Yes
      P-value                                     0.336                           0.336                        0.272                            0.272
      R2                                          0.269                          0.338                          0.254                          0.299
      Observations                                2,524                          1,168                          2,364                          1,171
                                                  Table XIII
                                                  Robustness
This table re-estimates the baseline IV specifications from Column 3 of Panel A of Tables IV and VIII . In
both panels,     Log B-S Value is instrumented using the Predicted First Year indicator in odd-numbered
columns and FN ⇥ Ind Return in even-numbered columns. In the first two columns of Panel A, controls for
the annual change in log total compensation (the sum of the grant date values of salary, bonus, restricted
stock grants, option grants, and all other compensation) are added to the baseline IV specifications. In
Columns 3 and 4, separate controls for the annual changes in the grant date values of the logarithms of
salary, bonus, restricted stock grants, and all other compensation are added to the baseline IV specifications.
In Columns 5 and 6, the sample is restricted to CEO-years in which no restricted stock is granted. In the
first two columns of Panel B, the sample is restricted to two-year cycles. In Columns 3 and 4, the sample is
restricted to the set of CEO-years in which only one option grant is awarded. In Columns 5 and 6, rather
than computing volatility following the reported grant date, we compute volatility following a predicted
grant date (using the same month and day of the previous year’s reported grant date). The main eﬀects of
interaction terms are included in all specifications but not shown. Control variables are those listed in Table
II. Standard errors are clustered by firm. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels,
respectively.

                                        Panel A: Other Compensation
 DEP VAR:     120 TD VOL       Total Comp Control            Component Controls        No Restricted Stock
                                 (1)           (2)              (3)           (4)        (5)           (6)
    Log B-S Value             0.171⇤⇤⇤       0.189⇤⇤⇤        0.0937⇤⇤⇤    0.143⇤⇤⇤    0.0715⇤⇤      0.149⇤⇤⇤
                              (0.0618)       (0.0587)         (0.0354)    (0.0463)    (0.0348)      (0.0513)
 Controls                       Yes            Yes              Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes
 Year FE                        Yes            Yes               Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes
 Instrument                     IV1            IV2              IV1         IV2         IV1           IV2
 F-Stat (1st Stage)             33.35         98.00            65.08       135.98       49.03        103.85
 Observations                   3,692         3,535            3,692        3,535       2,212         2,425


                                          Panel B: Additional Tests
 DEP VAR:     120 TD VOL            2-Yr Cycles                  1 Grant/Yr          Predicted Grant Date
                                 (1)            (2)            (3)         (4)         (5)            (6)
    Log B-S Value             0.0991⇤⇤⇤      0.150⇤⇤⇤        0.115⇤⇤⇤     0.110⇤⇤     0.104⇤⇤      0.165⇤⇤⇤
                              (0.0356)       (0.0552)        (0.0404)    (0.0488)    (0.0461)      (0.0549)
 Controls                        Yes           Yes             Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes
 Year FE                         Yes            Yes             Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes
 Instrument                      IV1           IV2             IV1          IV2         IV1          IV2
 F-Stat (1st Stage)             58.61         69.69           52.70      126.27       52.51         156.75
 Observations                   3,326         2,147           3,271       3,008       3,468          3,228




                                                        48
                                              END NOTES



1 The   magnification eﬀect has also been noted by Lambert et al. (1991), Carpenter (2000), Hall and

 Murphy (2002a), and Lewellen (2006), among others. Options may also have other ambiguous

 implications for risk. For example, options increase in value with firm performance, and managers

 may increase or decrease firm risk in the pursuit of stronger firm performance. In addition, option

 compensation increases wealth, which may alter risk tolerance.

    2 Using   a diﬀerent strategy, Gormley et al. (2013) examine responses to an exogenous increase

 in firm litigation risk. The exogenous nature of the shock helps rule out reverse causality and

 allows the authors to explore an important related question: how does a change in risk aﬀect option

 compensation? However, to identify a causal eﬀect of options on risk-taking, the ideal test would

 utilize exogenous variation in option pay rather than in the risk environment.

    3 Hall   (1999) describes multi-year grant cycles in detail, but does not use them as an instrument

 to explore the eﬀect of options on managerial behavior.

    4 Note   that we do not regress firm outcomes on the actual change in option compensation that

 a CEO experienced at the start of a new cycle, as the size of that change may be related to

 unobservables that aﬀect risk-taking. Instead, we use the fact that the indicator for predicted first

 year corresponds to increases in option pay on average and is staggered across firms. Our analysis

 essentially compares average changes in risk-taking in years when the indicator is equal to one to

 years in which the indicator is equal to zero.

    5 There   is indirect evidence from several papers that the overall net eﬀect of options on risk-

 taking may in fact be negative. For example, Lewellen (2006) calibrates a model of the volatility

 cost of debt for managers, assuming they are risk averse and have power utility functions. She

 finds that for a range of empirically relevant parameters, higher option ownership tends to increase,

 not decrease, the volatility cost of debt. In a similar vein, Bettis et al. (2005) find that executives

 exercise their options earlier when volatility increases, which in a model calibration suggests that


                                                    49
subjective option values may actually decrease with volatility.

   6 See   “Raising the Stakes: A Look at Current Stock Option Granting Practices,” 1998, Towers

Perrin CompScan Report. In addition, note that holding “face value” constant is equivalent to hold-

ing “potential realizable value” constant, where “potential realizable value” is the value of the option

at expiration, assuming a constant rate of appreciation of the underlying stock, e.g., five percent.

Prior to 2006, firms were required to report either Black–Scholes value or potential realizable value

in their proxy statements.

   7 Our    finding that two-year cycles are relatively more common among fixed-value plans than

among fixed-number plans may partly be due to relatively more measurement error in the process

of detecting fixed-value grants. In our IV framework, errors in detection should reduce the precision

of our estimates but should not bias our results.

   8 See   “Raising the Stakes: A Look at Current Stock Option Granting Practices,” 1998, Towers

Perrin CompScan Report. Our IV strategy is still applicable for fixed salary proportion cycles

because executives still tend to receive small increases in option pay within cycles and larger jumps

in option pay at the start of a new cycle, so option grants still tend to follow an upward step

function. We find similar results if we include these grants in our fixed-value sample.

   9 Our    instruments are valid (and satisfy the exclusion restriction) despite the fact that they

aﬀect Black–Scholes value, delta, and vega simultaneously. The reason is that all the variables

aﬀected by our instruments are intrinsically related in the sense that they are all calculated from

formulas involving the same underlying parameters. If any one of the Black–Scholes value, delta,

or vega of an at-the-money option grant is known (along with the stock price, risk-free rate, and

dividend yield), the other two can be calculated from it. The exclusion restriction does not require

that the instrument not aﬀect linear/non-linear transformations of the endogenous variable being

instrumented.

  10 Note   that we do not need to further adjust our standard errors to account for the fact that our



                                                    50
instrument is a “predicted” variable. In contrast to generated regressors in OLS, generated instru-

ments in IV do not require standard errors to be adjusted (Wooldridge, 2002). Also, our predicted

first year instrument is not what would typically be considered a generated instrument/regressor.

It does not come out of a pre-first-stage regression model estimated with error. In other words, we

are not estimating a 3-Stage Least Squares (3SLS) specification in which the predicted first year

dummy is used to instrument for the true first year dummy, which is then used to instrument for

changes in option compensation. Instead, we use a standard 2SLS IV specification. The true first

year dummy does not factor directly into this 2SLS IV estimation. Instead, the first stage directly

instruments for the change in option compensation using the predicted first year dummy. That is,

our instrument literally is whether an observation is a predicted first year.

  11 One    might also be concerned that if the market anticipates an increase in risk during the next

period, equity volatility may increase this period. However, it is straightforward to show that, under

standard assumptions, unlike prices, volatility is not forward looking.

  12 A   large body of work in the field of asset pricing shows that returns are very diﬃcult to forecast.

More specific to our empirical strategy, which uses one-year industry-level returns, Kelly and Pruitt

(2013) show that a rich forecasting model can predict at most five percent of the variation in yearly

industry returns.

  13 This   approximation is made by observing that




                                          ✓   ◆      ✓ ◆
                                            E          D
                              rA =     rE       + rD
                                            A          A
                                           ✓ ◆2        ✓ ◆2              ✓       ◆✓       ◆
                               2         2  E        2  D                    E        D
                          )    A   =     E       + D        +2      DE
                                            A           A                    A        A
                                           ✓ ◆2
                               2         2  E
                          )    A   =     E
                                            A
                                                   E
                      ) ln(   E)   =   ln( A ) ln( ),
                                                   A




                                                    51
where the third line follows from the second, assuming that debt is approximately risk-free (   2
                                                                                                D   = 0)

and uncorrelated with equity       DE   = 0. Thus, a X% decline in    E
                                                                      A   leads to an approximately X%

increase in    E.



  14 We    compute the percent of debt maturing in a year using the ratio of current liabilities to

current liabilities plus long term debt, as of the previous fiscal year end. Results are similar if we

instead use the ratio of long term debt due in one year to total long term debt.

  15 In   Internet Appendix Table IAIV, we also perform a placebo test where we repeat our analysis

using stock compensation, limiting the sample to observations without option compensation. We

find no change in volatility associated with predicted first years of stock fixed-value cycles. However,

our sample in this case is quite small. Therefore, we may lack power to estimate an eﬀect, even if

one were present.

  16 FAS123r    applied to a firm’s first fiscal year starting after June 15, 2005

  17 Instead   of showing the IV specifications, Table XII shows the reduced form in which the outcome

is regressed directly on the instrument and controls. This is done so that we can more easily report

p-values, which test whether coeﬃcients are diﬀerent across columns. We arrive at these p-values

by, for example, estimating Columns 1–2 in Panel A within a single OLS regression, where standard

errors are clustered by firm.

  18 Also   note that our main outcome of interest is the change in volatility relative to the level in

the previous year. In other words, we do not necessarily expect that the level of volatility will be

higher in the first year after a shock to option grants than in subsequent years. However, we should

see a larger change in volatility (relative to observed volatility in the previous year) when there is

a large shock to new options granted.




                                                    52
