                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 HEALTHCARE SPENDING AND UTILIZATION IN PUBLIC AND PRIVATE MEDICARE

                                            Vilsa Curto
                                           Liran Einav
                                         Amy Finkelstein
                                        Jonathan D. Levin
                                         Jay Bhattacharya

                                       Working Paper 23090
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w23090


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2017




We are grateful to Andelyn Russell, Daniel Salmon, and Martina Uccioli for excellent research
assistance, and to numerous seminar participants for helpful comments. We gratefully
acknowledge support from the NSF (SES-1527942, Bhattacharya, Einav, and Levin), the NIA
(R01 AG032449, Einav and Finkelstein; R37 AG036791, Bhattacharya), and the Sloan
Foundation (Bhattacharya, Einav, Finkelstein, and Levin). The authors acknowledge the
assistance of the Health Care Cost Institute (HCCI) and its data contributors, Aetna, Humana, and
UnitedHealthcare, in providing the claims data analyzed in this study. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w23090.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Vilsa Curto, Liran Einav, Amy Finkelstein, Jonathan D. Levin, and Jay Bhattacharya.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Healthcare Spending and Utilization in Public and Private Medicare
Vilsa Curto, Liran Einav, Amy Finkelstein, Jonathan D. Levin, and Jay Bhattacharya
NBER Working Paper No. 23090
January 2017
JEL No. H11,H42,H51,I11,I13

                                         ABSTRACT

We compare healthcare spending in public and private Medicare using newly available claims
data from Medicare Advantage (MA) insurers. MA insurer revenues are 30 percent higher than
their healthcare spending. Healthcare spending is 25 percent lower for MA enrollees than for
enrollees in traditional Medicare (TM) in the same county with the same risk score. Spending
differences between MA and TM are similar across sub-populations of enrollees and sub-
categories of care, with similar reductions for "high value" and "low value" care. Spending
differences primarily reflect differences in healthcare utilization; spending per encounter and
hospital payments per admission are very similar in MA and TM. Geographic variation in MA
spending is about 20 percent higher than in TM, but geographic variation in hospital prices is
about 20 percent lower. We present evidence consistent with MA plans encouraging substitution
to less expensive care, such as primary rather than specialist care, and outpatient rather than
inpatient surgery, and with employing various types of utilization management. Some of the
overall spending differences between MA and TM may be driven by selection on unobservables,
and we report a range of estimates of this selection effect using mortality outcomes to proxy for
selection.

Vilsa Curto                                          Jonathan D. Levin
Stanford University                                  Stanford University
Department of Economics                              Department of Economics
579 Serra Mall                                       Stanford, CA 94305-6072
Stanford, CA 94305                                   and NBER
vcurto@stanford.edu                                  jdlevin@stanford.edu

Liran Einav                                          Jay Bhattacharya
Stanford University                                  117 Encina Commons
Department of Economics                              CHP/PCOR
579 Serra Mall                                       Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6072                              Stanford, CA 94305-6019
and NBER                                             and NBER
leinav@stanford.edu                                  jay@stanford.edu

Amy Finkelstein
Department of Economics, E52-442
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
afink@mit.edu
1    Introduction
A long-standing question in economics concerns the appropriate roles of the public sector and private
sector in providing services that society has decided are essential. This question comes up in many
contexts, including education, utilities, transportation, and pensions. It is especially relevant in
healthcare, where the United States is unusual among developed countries in its distinctive mix of
public and private health insurance. Comparisons of public and private health insurance systems
are di¢ cult, however, since they typically do not operate at a similar scale for the same population,
in the same markets, or with the same healthcare providers.
    The U.S. Medicare program in recent years has been an exception because of the “side by
side” operation of public and private insurance programs. While traditional Medicare (TM) o¤ers
publicly administered insurance, a signi…cant fraction of the over-65 Medicare population has opted
out of TM in the last decade and enrolled in private insurance plans through Medicare Advantage
(MA). In MA, private insurers receive capitated payments from the government for providing
Medicare bene…ciaries with health insurance that roughly mimics commercial health insurance for
the under-65 population. Today almost a third of Medicare bene…ciaries are enrolled in MA.
    Empirical comparisons of MA and TM have been hampered by asymmetric data availability:
administrative claim-level data from TM is widely available to researchers, but detailed claim-level
data from MA insurers has been more elusive. In this paper, we take advantage of newly available
claims data from Medicare Advantage plans in 2010 provided by the Health Care Cost Institute
(HCCI). The data consist of claims paid by three Medicare Advantage insurers (Aetna, Humana,
and UnitedHealthcare) that cover almost 40 percent of MA enrollees. The key advantage of these
data is that they contain claim-level data in MA – i.e. healthcare utilization and payments to
providers –that is analogous to the existing and commonly used claims data for TM.
    A simple tabulation of the MA and TM claims points to a large di¤erence in public and private
healthcare spending levels. We calculate that MA spending per enrollee-month totaled $642, of
which $590 was paid by MA insurers and the rest by enrollees out-of-pocket. In contrast, average
spending per enrollee-month in TM was $911, of which $771 was paid directly by the Medicare
program to providers. Capitated payments to the MA plans roughly track the latter number. The
MA plans in the HCCI data received on average $767 per enrollee-month, or $177 (30 percent)
more than MA insurer payments for healthcare.
    A more appropriate comparison of MA and TM spending adjusts for di¤erences in their enrollee
populations. Our baseline analysis compares MA and TM enrollees in the same county and with
the same risk score. Medicare risk scores are based on a predictive model of healthcare spending
that accounts for demographics and detailed information on prior health conditions. The county
and risk score adjustment capture the spirit in which Medicare sets reimbursement rates for MA
insurers; these are the two dimensions used in tailoring capitation rates.
    Holding county and risk score …xed, we …nd that healthcare spending for MA enrollees is 25
percent lower than for TM enrollees. The di¤erence is similar when we focus on sub-populations
of enrollees de…ned by age, by gender, or by residence in urban versus rural counties. The propor-


                                                  1
tional di¤erence in spending is also similar across quantiles of the spending distribution. Spending
di¤erences between MA and TM are similar for inpatient and outpatient care.
    We decompose the overall spending di¤erence into di¤erences in healthcare utilization and dif-
ferences in payment rates. Lower spending in MA primarily re‡ects lower utilization of services.
Lower utilization appears across the board. MA enrollees have fewer inpatient admissions, fewer
outpatient o¢ ce visits, fewer skilled nursing facility visits, fewer physician visits, and fewer emer-
gency department visits. MA enrollees have lower utilization for services where there are concerns
about over-use, such as diagnostic testing and imaging, and for services where there are concerns
about under-use, such as preventive care.
    In contrast, we …nd little di¤erence in the average prices paid for services in MA and TM.
Hospital payments per admission and per day are within one percent for MA and TM. To account
for potential di¤erences in the types of hospital admissions and the hospitals used by MA and TM
enrollees, we compare payments made to the same hospital for the same diagnosis code (DRG).
Again, we do not …nd quantitatively meaningful pricing di¤erences: on average, MA payments are
1.1 percent higher than TM payments. As we discuss below, this …nding di¤ers sharply from recent
evidence on hospital payments in the under-65 market, where insurers frequently pay well above
Medicare rates.
    Geographic variation in TM spending has received a great deal of attention. It is often in-
terpreted as a sign of regional di¤erences in the e¢ ciency of healthcare delivery within TM (e.g.
Gawande 2009; Skinner 2011). We …nd that geographic variation in healthcare spending is around
20 percent higher in MA, whereas the geographic variation in hospital prices is about 20 percent
lower.
    We …nd suggestive evidence for some potential mechanisms by which MA insurers may reduce
utilization relative to TM. The fact that spending per encounter is slightly higher in MA than
TM is consistent with utilization constraints in MA, so that the marginal patient admitted for
care is in worse health. We also …nd evidence of restrictions on the most expensive types of care,
possibly including substitution to less expensive alternatives. MA patients are much less likely to
be discharged from the hospital to post-acute care and much more likely to be discharged home
than TM patients. Visits to specialists are much lower (22 percent) in MA than TM, while visits
to primary care are only slightly lower (4 percent). Similarly, the probability of inpatient surgery
is 7 percent lower in MA than TM while the probability of outpatient surgery is 26 percent higher.
    The evidence on potential mechanisms helps alleviate – but does not remove – concerns that
di¤erences in average spending between MA and TM re‡ect di¤erences in expected healthcare
spending for individuals who select into MA, rather than a “treatment e¤ect” of MA per se. Our
baseline results compare spending in MA to spending in TM for individuals in the same county and
with the same risk score. To the extent that county and risk score are the only variables that could
be used in any capitation formula, this spending di¤erence is a useful summary, which may provide
a guide for, say, Medicare reimbursement rates. Yet, these di¤erences in spending may partly (or
entirely) re‡ect selection e¤ects whereby MA attracts individuals with lower predicted spending,
conditional on risk score and county.

                                                  2
    In the …nal section of the paper, we therefore explore how estimates of mean spending di¤erences
between MA and TM are a¤ected by more detailed controls for observable di¤erences between
TM and MA enrollees, as well as by attempts to adjust for unobserved di¤erences between the
two populations using data on mortality di¤erences to proxy for di¤erences in expected spending.
Adjusting for county and risk score reduces the 30 percent raw spending di¤erence between MA and
TM to 25 percent. Finer controls for observables have little additional impact. Our attempts to use
mortality di¤erences to proxy for unobservable di¤erences in expected TM spending between MA
and TM enrollees yield a range of results; in our most aggressive adjustment, we …nd that spending
di¤erences between MA and TM enrollees shrink to 8 percent. While none of our approaches is
perfect, we view the totality of the evidence as suggesting that MA reduces healthcare spending
relative to what it would be in TM by 10 to 25 percent.
    Our …ndings relate to several literatures. The most directly related are prior comparisons of
healthcare spending in MA and TM, where as noted earlier, our key advance is access to detailed
claims data for a large share of the MA market. Absent such data, prior studies have used a variety
of approaches to infer healthcare utilization and spending di¤erences between MA and TM. These
include comparing MA plans’(mandatory) self reports of enrollee utilization to utilization measures
in TM claims data (Landon et al. 2012), analyzing bene…ciaries’ self reports of care received in
TM and in MA (Ayanian et al. 2013), analyzing hospital discharge data from New York counties
experiencing MA exit (Duggan et al. 2015), and inferring cost di¤erences from estimates of demand
for MA and a supply-side model of the market (Curto et al. 2014). These papers have tended to
…nd lower healthcare utilization in MA –with estimates ranging from 10 percent to 60 percent.
    Our …nding of similar pricing in MA and TM contrasts with the conventional wisdom that MA
prices will be higher than TM prices due to the greater bargaining power enjoyed by the larger
public sector (e.g. Philipson et al. 2010). It also di¤ers from prior …ndings that TM prices are
substantially lower than prices in the private, under-65 market both on the inpatient side (Cooper
et al. 2015) and the outpatient side (Clemens and Gottlieb, forthcoming). This di¤erence may be
the consequence of regulation requiring hospitals to accept TM rates if they are not in the MA
plan’s network (Berenson et al. 2015).
    Our …ndings of similar geographic variation in spending and pricing in MA and TM also contrast
with recent …ndings that geographic variation in spending in commercial (i.e. under-65) insurance
is similar to TM, but stems from much larger pricing variation and lower quantity variation in
commercial insurance relative to TM (Philipson et al. 2010; Institute of Medicine 2013; Cooper et
al. 2015). This contrast between TM and commercial insurance has been interpreted as re‡ecting
the lower powered incentives in the public sector relative to the private sector in constraining
utilization, and monopsony power in the public sector to constrain prices relative to what the
private sector can achieve (Philipson et al. 2010). Of course, there are other reasons why patterns
of healthcare provision for those under 65 may di¤er from the patterns for the over 65. We consider
this same set of facts in the context of Medicare Advantage, which arguably provides a cleaner
comparison group to TM for understanding variation under private and public regimes since MA
and TM are provided to the same broad population.

                                                 3
    Our …nding that Medicare Advantage appears to reduce “high value” and “low value” care in
similar measure contributes to what we believe is an emerging, cautionary tale on the bluntness
of available instruments in the healthcare sector. Our evidence here speaks to the blunt nature of
supply-side restrictions on care. Likewise, on the demand side, recent evidence suggests that high
deductible plans reduce “high value” and “low value” care in equal measure (Brot-Goldberg et al.
2015), and that even targeted increases in the price of some types of care can depress care use
across the board, including free preventive care services (Cabral and Cullen 2011).
    Most broadly, our work is part of the large literature on the relative consequences of public and
private ownership. This literature has spanned a range of disparate industries, including education,
pensions, electricity, and transportation. In the speci…c context of healthcare, recent empirical
work has emphasized that the private sector may be more e¢ cient than the public sector at setting
reimbursement prices for providers (Clemens et al. 2015) and at setting cost-sharing to combat
moral hazard (Einav et al. 2016).
    The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides some institutional background on
our setting. Section 3 describes our data and baseline sample. Section 4 presents summary statistics
on healthcare spending in MA and introduces our baseline measurement approach for comparing
spending in MA to spending for a “comparable”set of TM enrollees. Section 5 compares healthcare
spending in MA and TM, overall and for various categories of people and spending. Section 6
examines di¤erences between MA and TM enrollees in healthcare utilization and in healthcare
prices, and examines some potential mechanisms for utilization reductions. Section 7 explores
alternative approaches to controlling for selection into MA. The last section concludes.


2    Setting and background
The Medicare Advantage (MA) program allows Medicare bene…ciaries to opt out of traditional fee-
for-service Medicare coverage and enroll in private insurance plans. The program was established
in the early 1980s with two goals: to expand the choices available to bene…ciaries and to capture
cost savings from managed care. In return for covering enrolled bene…ciaries’healthcare expenses,
private MA plans receive a risk-adjusted, capitated monthly payment from the Centers for Medicare
and Medicaid Services (CMS), which is the federal agency that manages the Medicare program.
    There has historically been a tension between the two goals of expanding access to MA and
limiting costs (McGuire, Newhouse, and Sinaiko 2011). Insurers have tended to participate more
in periods with higher payments, and to o¤er more plans in areas with higher payments. MA
plans also enroll relatively healthier bene…ciaries, complicating the problem of setting appropriate
capitation rates. Reforms over the last decade have aimed to address these problems by introducing
a risk scoring system to adjust plan payments based on enrollee health, and a competitive bidding
system that replaced the …xed reimbursement rates used earlier. These changes, combined with an
increase in capitation rates set by CMS, have coincided with the expansion of plan o¤erings and
enrollment seen in Figure 1. Enrollment in MA tends to be especially high in urban areas; in 2010,


                                                 4
MA penetration was 33% in urban counties and 18% in rural counties.
    To participate in MA, insurers must contract with a set of healthcare providers and o¤er at least
the same insurance bene…ts as standard Medicare, which covers inpatient (“Part A”) and outpatient
(“Part B”) healthcare services. MA plans typically provide additional bene…ts as well, in the form
of more generous cost sharing or supplemental coverage of dental, vision, or drug bene…ts. Medicare
bene…ciaries observe the MA plan o¤erings in their county of residence and can choose to enroll in
any of the available MA plans during an annual “open enrollment”period every fall. The trade-o¤
they face in choosing between MA and TM is that MA plans typically restrict access to healthcare
providers, but provide additional bene…ts as described above. In our data (before applying the
sample restrictions described below), 73 percent of MA enrollees were in HMO or PPO plans with
limited provider networks.
    Every year, plans enter into a bidding process, which dictates the bene…ts and premium associ-
ated with each plan that is o¤ered to bene…ciaries The precise rules of the way plan bids translate
to plan premiums and bene…ts are somewhat complicated. Curto et al. (2014) provide a detailed
description; we brie‡y summarize the key features here. Each plan submits a bid b, which should
be interpreted as the monthly compensation required by the plan to provide “standard” monthly
coverage in the local area in which the plan is o¤ered to an “average” Medicare bene…ciary. By
“standard”coverage we refer to the standard Part A and Part B …nancial coverage o¤ered by TM;
MA plans typically o¤er more comprehensive coverage, but they obtain a separate compensation
from CMS for it on top of their bid b; this is known as the “rebate.” As will be clearer later, by
“average” bene…ciary we refer to a bene…ciary with an average health risk.
    This bid b is then assessed against its local benchmark B, which is set administratively by CMS.
In principle the benchmark B is supposed to approximate the counterfactual cost to CMS to cover an
“average” bene…ciary in that county through TM. In practice, the variation in benchmarks across
locations departs somewhat from this principle, presumably re‡ecting various political economy
considerations; on average in our observation period (2010), benchmark rates are higher than
corresponding TM costs, and more so in some areas than in others.1 Overall in our data (again,
before applying the sample restrictions described below), the average benchmark across counties
(weighted by the number of Medicare bene…ciaries) is $836 per enrollee-month, compared to an
average TM cost of $798, and this di¤erence is lower in urban counties (benchmark of $866 and
average TM costs of $842) than in rural counties ($770 vs. $716). However, in our observation
period, the vast majority of plan bids are lower than the corresponding benchmarks, making MA
plans …nancially more generous than traditional Medicare, where enrollees can face large out-of-
pocket costs.2
    Capitation payment to insurers for enrolling a given enrollee in a given MA plan depends
   1
       Indeed, the 2010 A¤ordable Care Act reduces the level of these MA benchmark rates in subsequent years.
   2
       If b > B the di¤erence is charged as a premium to the consumer. If b < B; which is almost always the case
empirically, 75 percent of the di¤erence is given to the consumer through the rebate, and 25 percent is retained by
CMS.



                                                          5
not only on the plan’s bid b but also on the enrollee’s risk score ri , which is proportional to her
predicted healthcare costs in TM over the next year. Adjusting reimbursement for risk score is a
key component of CMS’s attempt to limit selection into MA by adjusting plan compensation for
predictable heterogeneity in healthcare cost across bene…ciaries. CMS assigns a risk score to each
Medicare bene…ciary based on demographic information and detailed claim-based information on
chronic health conditions measured over the previous 12 months. The average bene…ciary’s risk
score is normalized to 1, so that plans obtains compensation of ri b for covering bene…ciary i. For
purposes of setting MA plan payments, CMS de‡ates estimated risk scores for MA enrollees (by
3.41 percent in 2010, which is our sample year) to re‡ect CMS’estimate of the “upcoding” of risk
scores for MA bene…ciaries (CMS 2010; Geruso and Layton 2015).
    Thus, broadly speaking, plan compensation is designed to reimburse an MA insurer for the
costs an enrollee would incur – based on her county and risk score – had she remained in TM.
This motivates our baseline approach (described below) of comparing utilization and healthcare
spending in MA and TM, which is focused on comparing enrollees who are in the same county with
the same risk score.


3     Data and sample construction

3.1   Data sources
This paper uses data from two main sources: the Health Care Cost Institute (HCCI) and the Center
for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). All the data pertain to spending and enrollment in
2010. Appendix A provides more details on the data and sample de…nition; Appendix B provides
more details on the de…nition and construction of the speci…c healthcare spending and utilization
variables we analyze.
    The HCCI data are the key, novel data in this paper. HCCI is provided with claim-level data
from three large MA insurers – UnitedHealthcare, Humana, and Aetna. HCCI pools these data
(masking the individual insurers) and makes these data available for research. In 2010, these three
insurers (hereafter referred to as the “HCCI insurers”) covered almost 40 percent of MA enrollees:
UnitedHealthcare was the largest (national market share of 18%), Humana was second (15%), and
Aetna …fth (4%) (Kaiser Family Foundation, 2010). The claim-level data re‡ect claims that these
three insurers paid out to healthcare providers. The HCCI data also contain monthly enrollment
indicators and some limited enrollee demographics (age bins, gender, and zip code).
    The CMS data serve multiple roles. One role is to provide parallel claim-level data for Medicare
bene…ciaries enrolled in Traditional Medicare (TM). Because TM o¤ers fee-for service coverage, we
essentially observe every healthcare claim made by TM enrollees during 2010. The TM claims data
allow us to form a “benchmark” comparison of healthcare spending and utilization against which
we can compare the measures obtained from HCCI.
    The CMS data have a second, equally important role: providing enrollment, demographic,
health and mortality data for all enrollees (TM and MA). For the universe of Medicare enrollees we

                                                 6
can observe monthly enrollment information in TM (Parts A and/or B) or MA, risk score, demo-
graphics (zip code, age, and gender), dual eligibility status (in Medicaid and Medicare), detailed
health conditions from the prior year, and mortality. The detailed CMS data on MA enrollees
allow us to validate the completeness of our baseline sample in HCCI, and to adjust our compari-
son to TM spending for the di¤erential demographics, health conditions, and mortality among MA
enrollees compared to TM enrollees.
    Finally, the CMS data contain detailed information on payments to MA insurers by CMS. This
allows us to construct payments to MA plans per enrollee-month, as well as payment components.


3.2   Baseline sample
The HCCI data include most, but not all, MA enrollees in the three HCCI insurers. Based on the
qualitative information that HCCI obtained from the three participating insurers, it appears that
inclusion in the HCCI data was made on a plan-by-plan basis, with “highly capitated plans” left
out. That is, insurance plans that pay providers on a capitated basis are omitted from the HCCI
data. The HCCI data also indicate that they excludes special needs plans (SNPs), which are MA
plans for individuals with speci…c diseases (such as end-stage liver disease, chronic heart failure, or
HIV-AIDS) or certain characteristics (such as residence in a nursing home).
    Ideally, we would have plan identi…ers in the HCCI data, which would allow us to match this
information to the plan identi…ers in the CMS data, and thus know which MA plans are excluded.
This would allow us to adjust for the demographics and health conditions of MA enrollees speci…cally
enrolled in HCCI plans. However, with the exception of SNPs that are not in the HCCI data and
can be identi…ed in the CMS enrollment data, plan and insurer identi…ers are omitted from the
HCCI data. Instead, we rely on the fact that the MA market is localized and the use of provider
capitation is most common in particular regions such as California, and construct our baseline
sample by focusing on states where the HCCI data coverage appears to be approximately complete.
    We judge the completeness of the HCCI data by comparing enrollment statistics for the HCCI
insurers in the HCCI and CMS data. In the CMS data, we know for each MA enrollee whether he
or she was enrolled in an MA plan o¤ered by one of the HCCI insurers. This allows us to generate
a pseudo HCCI enrollment data set in the CMS data, which covers all enrollees who “should”have
been in the HCCI data if no plans were omitted. We then compare enrollee-month counts in this
pseudo HCCI enrollment data and cross validate the actual HCCI data against it. Speci…cally, we
compare enrollee-month counts at the state level across the two data sets, restricting the analysis
to individuals who are 65 and over; we do not require individuals to be enrolled for a full year.
    We de…ne our baseline sample to be the set of 36 states where we have a close to complete
sample of HCCI insurers’enrollees, which we de…ne to mean that the count of enrollee-months in
HCCI in the state is within 10 percent of the count for the HCCI insurers in the pseudo HCCI
enrollment data. In practice, in these 36 complete data states, total HCCI enrollment is within one
percent of total enrollment in the pseudo HCCI enrollment data, leaving us reasonably sanguine
that we have captured the entire set of MA enrollees for these three insurers. Appendix Table A1


                                                  7
provides more details on state-by-state enrollee-month counts in the HCCI insurers as measured in
the HCCI and CMS data.
    The 36 states in our baseline sample represent about 60 percent of enrollees for the HCCI
insurers. As shown in Appendix Figure A1, the excluded states are disproportionately concentrated
in the Western United States. Appendix Table A1 shows the MA share of total Medicare enrollees
and the HCCI insurer share of MA enrollees by state, including both the 36 complete data states
and the 15 omitted states.
    Table 1 shows how our baseline sample is constructed, and Panel A presents basic demographic
statistics from both the CMS and HCCI data. Throughout the paper, risk scores for TM enrollees
are unadjusted, while risk scores for MA enrollees are adjusted to re‡ect the 3.41% de‡ation CMS
applies in determining MA payments, as described above and in CMS (2010, page 19).
    Columns (1) through (3) present CMS data across all plans and states, while columns (4)
through (6) present CMS data for our baseline sample, which is comprised of the 36 states above
and omits enrollees in SNPs. In each case, we present statistics for all TM enrollees, for all MA
enrollees, and then for enrollees in the three HCCI insurers. Columns (7) and (8) present statistics
for the HCCI data, for the entire sample in column (7) and for our baseline sample in column (8).
    We use Table 1 to make several observations. First, comparing columns (1)-(3) to columns
(4)-(6), the 36 states that constitute the baseline sample do not seem to be very di¤erent from the
overall sample, making us feel reasonably comfortable that the …ndings we report throughout the
paper are likely to be relevant for states not covered by our baseline sample. Second, comparing
column (2) to (3) or column (5) to (6), it appears that the three HCCI insurers attract enrollees
that seem reasonably similar to the overall MA enrollees, suggesting that our subsequent …ndings
may apply to the broader MA population. Third, as has been documented elsewhere, MA enrollees
are slightly younger and signi…cantly healthier than TM enrollees: their risk scores (which are
proportional to their predicted healthcare spending) are about 5-10 percent lower, and their annual
mortality rates are almost a third lower. This suggests that a straight comparison of TM and
MA healthcare spending would be misleading, motivating the various corrections for selection we
describe in the next section.
    Finally, it is reassuring that, for our baseline sample, the enrollment counts and demographics
(that we can measure in both data sets) are remarkably similar when measured in the pseudo HCCI
enrollment data set we construct in the CMS data (column (6)) and the actual HCCI data (column
(8)). This is what we would expect given our construction of a baseline sample for which the HCCI
data should include all relevant MA enrollees.3
  3
      We have about 1 percent more enrollees in our HCCI sample (column (8)) than the pseudo-HCCI sample in the
CMS data (column (6)). This is to be expected, given that plan assignment is missing for about 1 percent of MA
enrollees in the CMS data.




                                                       8
4        Summary statistics and measurement approach

4.1        Spending and payments in MA
Table 1 Panel B reports average total healthcare spending and CMS payments in TM and MA.
Throughout, we de…ne healthcare spending as the sum of insurer spending and any out-of-pocket
spending by the bene…ciary. Insurer spending is based on observed payment amounts – that is,
transacted prices, not list prices. Out-of-pocket spending is the amount owed by the enrollee (due
to deductibles and co-insurance).4
     Our measure of total spending is a near-exhaustive measure of all healthcare claims. Speci…cally
it covers several categories of spending: (a) inpatient spending, which is associated with providers
identi…ed as hospitals and physicians billing for treatment provided in an inpatient hospital setting;
(b) outpatient spending, which also includes home health care and durable medical equipment (e.g.
wheelchair rentals); and (c) skilled nursing facility (SNF) spending.5 Average MA healthcare
spending per enrollee-month is $642 in our baseline sample (column (8)). Of this, $590 is paid by
the insurer, and $52 is owed by the enrollee.
     Table 1 Panel C reports mean payments to MA insurers. Payments to MA insurers for “organic”
MA services (i.e. for services that would be covered by TM) are $767 per enrollee-month in our
baseline sample (column (6)).6 The comparison of insurer MA revenue of $767 per enrollee-month
to the insurer payments to healthcare providers of $590 suggests that net revenues for MA insurers
are $177 per enrollee-month, or about 30 percent above MA insurer healthcare spending. If this
applied to the entire MA population in 2010 (including those outside our sample) it would imply $21
billion in annual (2010) revenue for MA insurers in excess of their spending on healthcare claims.
Of course, MA insurers incur additional costs, such as administrative and advertising expenses,
which we do not observe in our data.
    4
        TM enrollees can purchase supplemental private insurance (“Medigap” or employer sponsored) to cover some or
all of their out-of-pocket expenses. About half do so. If they do, the suplemental insurer is the primary payer of the
“out-of-pocket” amount owed by the bene…ciary.
    5
        One (small) category of spending that is not in our measure of total spending is hospice care. This is because
hospice care is billed directly to CMS even for MA enrollees, so it is observed in CMS data, for both TM and MA and
doesn’t fully conform to the empirical exercise. In practice, we show below that the exclusion of hospice spending
does not substantively a¤ect the comparison of total spending.
    6
        We de…ne payments to MA insurers to be the sum of CMS spending on MA ($778) and additional consumer
premiums for MA ($6) minus the portion of the consumer rebate that is passed on to consumers for additional
services, not covered by Medicare Part A and Part B services ($17). As discussed in Section 2, MA insurers typically
o¤er more comprehensive coverage than TM, but they obtain a separate compensation from CMS for it, on top of
their bid.     On average in our baseline sample, the consumer rebate is $51 per enrollee-month, and $34 of it is for
more generous coverage of the healthcare services that would be covered by TM and that we study in the paper,
while the remaining $17 of the rebate is for additional consumer bene…ts that are not captured by the analogous TM
spending (such as premium discounts, or dental and vision coverage).



                                                            9
4.2       Spending in MA and TM: raw comparisons
Table 1 Panel B reveals dramatic di¤erences in total healthcare spending between the TM and MA
populations. In our baseline sample, the average TM enrollee spends $911 per month (column (4)),
while the average MA enrollee spends 30% less, $642 (column (8)).
    Figure 2 shows raw spending in MA and TM separately for each of the 36 states in our baseline
sample. Spending is lower in MA in all states, but the di¤erences range from about 3 percent lower
MA spending in Alaska to over 45 percent lower MA spending in Florida and Vermont.
    Geographic variation in spending within TM has attracted a great deal of attention. The
“Dartmouth Atlas”…ndings of large di¤erences across areas in TM spending and utilization without
corresponding di¤erences in mortality is widely viewed as indicative of the ine¢ ciencies of the
public Medicare system (Fisher et al. 2003a, 2003b; Skinner 2011; Institute of Medicine 2013). Our
analysis suggests that, if anything, geographic variation in raw spending is higher in MA than TM.
The coe¢ cient of variation across states (weighting each state by its total Medicare enrollment) is
0.136 in MA, about 20 percent higher than the 0.114 coe¢ cient of variation we estimate in TM.7 In
Appendix Figure A2 we show that MA also exhibits the positive correlation across states between
spending and mortality that has been widely documented in TM.


4.3       Measurement
Lower baseline spending in MA relative to TM may partly or entirely re‡ect di¤erences in the
bene…ciaries who enroll in TM and MA. We have already seen in Table 1 that MA enrollees tend to
be healthier than TM enrollees. This motivates our baseline empirical strategy in which we reweight
the TM population to match the MA population in terms of county and risk score. The risk score
is a summary statistic based on an extremely rich set of demographic and health measures. These
health measures re‡ect both patient health and propensity to receive healthcare –since diagnoses
are only recorded if care is received (Song et al. 2010; Finkelstein et al. 2016) –both of which may
di¤er between TM and MA enrollees.
    Speci…cally, consider a Medicare enrollee in county zi with (continuous) risk score ri , and an
outcome yiT M in TM. We map ri to a discrete risk score bin ri0 , so that all Medicare bene…ciaries
are partitioned into a set of discrete groups, de…ned by their county and risk score bin gi = (zi ; ri0 ).
Using the sample of bene…ciaries in the CMS data who are enrolled with the HCCI insurers (Table
1, column (6)), we assign each group g a weight wg = Ng =N , where Ng is the number of enrollees
   7
       Our analysis is at the state level rather than the Hospital Referral Region (HRR) level that is more typical in
this literature. This is because many HRRs cross state boundaries and our baseline sample is limited to a subset of
states.




                                                           10
                                        P
that belong to group g and N =             g   Ng .8 Each unweighted TM outcome

                                                            1      X
                                        y Tunweighted
                                            M
                                                      =                         yiT M                           (1)
                                                          NT M          i2T M

is then replaced with a reweighted TM outcome
                                                            1           X
                                   y TreM weighted = P                              wgi yi ;                    (2)
                                                          i2T M   wgi       i2T M


which we compare to the corresponding MA outcome
                                                      1      X
                                           yM A =                       yM A:                                   (3)
                                                    NM A           i2M A i

    In addition to the transparency and simplicity of this re-weighting approach, it has the added
attraction that it captures the spirit by which MA insurers are being paid by CMS. As described
in Section 2, CMS payments to MA insurers are based on a county-speci…c benchmark, and multi-
plied by the enrollee’s risk score ri . Our baseline approach, which reweights on precisely these two
dimensions – county and risk score – can therefore be viewed as correcting for selection concerns
associated with the two dimensions on which CMS varies its payments. As mentioned above, fol-
lowing CMS’s payment policy for MA insurers during our 2010 study year, we use risk scores for
MA enrollees that are de‡ated by 3.41%.
    Naturally, there may still be selection into MA on characteristics which, conditional on risk score
and county, are correlated with expected healthcare spending. In Section 7 we return to this issue,
and report several alternative strategies for adjusting for selection into MA using both a richer set
of observables (implemented via propensity-score matching) and an attempt to account for selection
on unobservables using observed mortality di¤erences between MA and TM enrollees. As we show
there, while various approaches to selection move some of the numbers around, the qualitative and
the ballpark quantitative conclusions do not change dramatically in most speci…cations relative to
our baseline approach. This makes us comfortable “riding”this relatively simple baseline approach
for much of the paper.
    Table 2 shows how the TM spending benchmark is a¤ected by di¤erent ways of reweighting
the TM enrollees to “look like” the MA enrollees in terms of county composition and risk score.
Column (1) reproduces the raw, unweighted numbers already shown in column (4) of Table 1.
Column (2) of Table 2 reweights the TM data to match the distribution of MA enrollees across
counties. Average TM spending per enrollee-month increases from $911 to $942, re‡ecting the fact
that MA enrollees are disproportionately in more expensive counties; this is primarily driven by
the well-documented higher MA penetration in urban areas, in which healthcare delivery tends to
   8
       A slight complication of this procedure arises when an MA enrollee belongs to a group for which there are no
TM enrollees, which may happen in small counties and high (i.e. less common) risk scores. This applies to only
0.07 percent of enrollee-months. In such a case, we amend this procedure with an extra step, where we re-classify to
such “empty” TM groups the TM enrollee in the same county whose risk score is the closest to the corresponding
unmatched MA enrollee.


                                                            11
be more expensive. Columns (3) and (4) add risk scores to the reweighting of the TM population,
so that it matches, county by county, the risk score distribution of MA enrollees. In column (3)
we match on risk score bins that are quite coarse, of width 0.5; 58% of MA enrollees are in the
three largest bins (0.5-1, 1-1.5, and 1.5-2). In column (4) we use more granular risk score bins (of
width 0.1). It is evident from column (3) (and not surprising given Table 1) that reweighting on
risk scores is important, reducing the average monthly spending by 9% relative to reweighting on
county only in column (2). However, it is quite remarkable that the much more granular matching
on the risk score distribution makes little di¤erence, with columns (3) and (4) showing essentially
identical results.
    Going forward, we will use the re-weighting strategy in column (4) –using county and risk bins
of width 0.1 – as our baseline when reporting mean spending or quantity di¤erences between MA
and TM. We will show both unweighted and reweighted statistics throughout the paper, but will
concentrate our discussion on the reweighted statistics, unless we explicitly note otherwise.


5    Di¤erences in spending in MA and TM
    Overall di¤erences Table 2 shows average spending di¤erences across all our baseline sam-
ple enrollees in MA (column (5)) and comparison samples in TM. The unweighted data indicate
that healthcare spending in MA is $269 (30%) lower per enrollee-month than in TM. Using our
baseline re-weighting strategy (column (4)), we estimate that healthcare spending by MA enrollees
is $213 (25%) lower per enrollee-month than a comparable (on county and risk score) sample of
TM enrollees.
    Stated di¤erently, in the spirit of CMS’capitation payment formula, if total healthcare spending
of MA enrollees under TM were the same as for TM enrollees with the same risk scores in the same
counties, they would cost $855 per enrollee-month, while in MA their total healthcare spending
is only $642. Applying this estimate to the entire MA population in 2010 (column (2) of Table
1, which includes those outside of our baseline sample), this translates to $101.5 billion in annual
(2010) healthcare spending in TM relative to $76.3 billion in healthcare spending in MA, a di¤erence
of $25.2 billion in annual healthcare spending.

    Di¤erences by consumer type Panel A of Table 3 reports the spending di¤erences for
di¤erent types of enrollees. Each row represents a di¤erent subsample of enrollees. Across the
board, overall spending in MA is always signi…cantly lower than the (re-weighted) TM analog;
the average di¤erence reported in Table 2 is not driven by any speci…c sub-population. Yet, we
see some heterogeneous e¤ects across types of enrollees. The di¤erence is higher in both absolute
and relative terms for elderly bene…ciaries; the youngest Medicare bene…ciaries (aged 65-74) are
associated with lower MA spending of $120 per month (18%) while the most senior (85 years old
and over) are associated with a di¤erence of $378 (30%) per month. Looking at bene…ciary location,
the spending di¤erence is much greater for urban counties, which is where the vast majority (77%)



                                                12
of MA bene…ciaries enroll. In urban counties, MA spending is 27% lower than TM spending, while
in rural counties it is only 16% lower. Put di¤erently, average spending per month in MA is almost
the same for rural and urban counties, but TM spending is much higher in urban counties, thus
generating the di¤erential di¤erence. This sharp di¤erence between urban and rural counties is also
re‡ected in the MA revenues (i.e. in plan payments for “organic” MA services from Table 1 Panel
C), which we estimate to be $205 higher than claims cost in urban counties and only $83 higher in
rural ones.
    Panel A also reveals an interesting aspect of the role that the reweighting adjustment plays.
A comparison of columns (2) and (3) reveals that reweighting does not reduce the monthly TM
spending estimates uniformly across di¤erent sub-populations. Using bene…ciary age to illustrate,
we note that the re-weighting adjustment makes almost no di¤erence for the most senior (85 and
older) – essentially suggesting that there is little systematic selection on county and risk scores
for this subgroup (or that if there is, it cancels out) – but makes a larger di¤erence for younger
bene…ciaries.
    Panel B of Table 3 compares di¤erent quantiles of the MA and TM spending distributions.
This allows us to assess whether the spending di¤erence is driven, for example, by the highest
spenders. Again, we see the overall lower MA spending across all parts of the distribution. We
see a larger percentage di¤erence at the lowest end, a fairly stable (and sizeable, of about 30%)
di¤erence throughout much of the distribution, and then a somewhat lower percentage di¤erence
at the very top one or two percentiles.
    Figure 3 shows that states with higher TM spending have greater MA “savings” as measured
by the percentage di¤erence between MA spending and adjusted (i.e. re-weighted on risk score and
county) TM spending. This is consistent with the “conventional wisdom”that higher spending TM
areas are less e¢ cient or productive (e.g. Skinner 2011).

    Di¤erences by spending type Table 4 looks at spending di¤erences across di¤erent cate-
gories of care. It shows total spending broken down into three mutually exclusive and exhaustive
categories: inpatient, outpatient, and SNF. MA spending is lower in all three categories. It is 19%
lower for inpatient and 25% lower for outpatient. There is a much larger di¤erence in SNF spending,
where MA spending is almost 50% lower than in TM. However, SNF spending accounts for only a
small share (11%) of overall spending, so this large percentage di¤erence does not contribute much
to the overall di¤erence in spending.9 We return to the SNF results when we discuss potential
   9
       The Institute of Medicine (2013) recently called attention to the fact that variation in post-acute spending is a
major driver of geographic variation in TM spending. This appears to be true in MA as well, where the geographic
variation in SNF spending is even larger (relative to other types of spending) than in TM. For example, compared to
the coe¢ cient of variation across states of 0.11 in overall (unadjusted) TM spending and 0.14 in overall MA spending
(see Figure 2), we estimate a coe¢ cient of variation in SNF (unadjusted ) TM spending of 0.19, and 0.33 in SNF MA
spending. By contrast, relative geographic variation in inpatient and outpatient spending in TM and MA is similar
to the overall comparison (not shown).



                                                            13
mechanisms for reducing healthcare use in Section 6.4 below.
    The bottom row of Table 4 reports hospice spending in MA and TM. As noted earlier, hospice
is covered by TM for both MA and TM enrollees. It is therefore not in our HCCI data on MA
spending and we do not include it in our baseline “total spending”measure. It is however captured
– for both MA and TM enrollees –in the CMS data. We therefore use the CMS data to measure
hospice spending for both TM enrollees and enrollees in the three HCCI insurers. Because MA
insurers do not bear the cost of hospice expenditures, they might have an incentive to steer patients
to hospice, so that some of the lower MA spending in inpatient, outpatient, and SNF could be o¤set
by higher spending in hospice. The bottom row of Table 4 suggests, however, that this is not the
case. Hospice spending is too low to have any potential signi…cant o¤set e¤ect; moreover, it is also
lower (rather than higher) for MA enrollees than for TM enrollees.


6     Di¤erences in utilization, not in prices
We examine whether the substantial (25%) di¤erence in overall healthcare spending per enrollee-
month between MA and TM is driven by lower healthcare utilization in MA or by the ability of
MA insurers (at least the large ones, from which we have data) to negotiate lower prices, or both.
One challenge throughout this section is to conceptually separate prices from quantity or quality
of care, and this challenge dictates some of the exercises we report. To preview our results, we …nd
that quantity di¤erences appear responsible for the entire di¤erence; various measures of “prices”
are all quite similar in MA and TM.


6.1   Di¤erences in the propensity of healthcare encounters
Table 5 compares components of healthcare utilization. We examine inpatient days and admissions,
days in skilled nursing facilities (SNFs), visits to the emergency department (ED), and physician
visits. Across all categories, utilization in MA is substantially lower.
    Inpatient days are 21 percent lower, and SNF days are 56 percent lower. These di¤erences in
days are quite similar to the di¤erences in inpatient spending (of 19 percent) and SNF spending
(of 48 percent) shown earlier in Table 4. Conditional on an inpatient admission, length of stay is
also slightly (6%) lower in MA.
    ED visits are 16 percent lower in MA. This re‡ects lower utilization both for outpatient ED
visits (ED visits that do not result in an inpatient admission) and inpatient ED visits (which do
result in an inpatient admission).
    Physician visits in an outpatient setting are similarly – 17 percent – lower. This di¤erence
is approximately equally driven by the extensive and intensive margin: a 10% lower rate of MA
enrollees who see a physician at least once during the month and an 8% lower average number of
physician visits by MA enrollees who visit the physician at least once.




                                                 14
Over-used and under-used care In Table 6 we explore di¤erences in potential low-value and
high-value care. Panel A examines utilization of diagnostic testing and imaging services, where
excessive use may be a concern (e.g. Brot-Goldberg et al. 2015; U.S. Government Accountability
O¢ ce 2008). Panel B examines utilization of various measures of preventive care, an area where
under-use may be a concern (Brot-Goldberg et al. 2015).10
    We see lower utilization in MA for both low-value and high-value care. Diagnostic tests and
imaging procedures are, respectively, 24% and 19% lower in MA, which is similar to, and not
higher than, the percentage di¤erence in total spending. Preventive care also exhibits no obvious
pattern relative to overall care; rates of most preventive care are lower in MA, although there is
variation across the measures. Flu shot rates for MA bene…ciaries are much lower (by 38%). Most
other preventive tests are also lower in MA but the di¤erences are smaller. Interestingly, the one
area where screening tests are done more frequently in MA than in TM is screening tests that are
female-speci…c (mammograms and pap smears), for which the rates are a little higher in MA.
    In Panel C we use a widely-used algorithm developed by Billings et al. (2000) to classify
ED visits by their “appropriateness.” The algorithm uses primary diagnosis codes for the visit to
distinguish between visits that represent an emergency (i.e. require care within 12 hours) and non-
emergency visits (e.g. a toothache). Within emergency visits, it further distinguishes between those
that require treatment in the ED (as opposed to being treatable in a primary care setting, such as
a lumbar sprain). Finally, within emergency visits that require ED care, it distinguishes between
those that were and were not preventable by timely ambulatory care. Appendix B provides more
detail on the algorithm and its validation.
    The results indicate similar proportional reductions in each type of ED visit, irrespective of
its “appropriateness.” Emergency visits are 16% lower, while non-emergency visits are 15% lower.
Within emergency visits, those that require ED care are 17% lower while those that were primary
care treatable are 16% lower.
    Overall these results suggests that Medicare Advantage is a relatively blunt instrument for
reducing health care utilization, with “high value”and “low value”care showing similar proportional
di¤erences to TM. Interestingly, the bluntness of supply-side instruments such as managed care is
mirrored on the demand side, where recent work suggests that high deductible health insurance
plans are similarly non-discriminatory in discouraging both high-value and low-value care utilization
(Brot-Goldberg et al. 2015) and Medicaid coverage for the previously-insured encourages increases
in ED visits of all types, including (and perhaps particularly) non-emergency visits (Taubman et
al. 2014).
  10
       We show rates of preventive care by enrollee-month to be consistent with the analysis in the rest of the paper.
Naturally, recommended care is not at a monthly level but typically at an annual (or bi-annual) level. The analysis
looks similar if instead we examine these measures on an annual basis (not shown).




                                                           15
6.2       Similar spending per encounter
Table 7 shows spending per encounter in MA and TM. Given the close similarity between the
percentage di¤erence in utilization measures in Table 5 and the percentage di¤erence in the cor-
responding spending measure in Table 4, it is not surprising that spending per encounter is quite
similar between MA and TM. Inpatient spending per admission, inpatient spending per day and
SNF spending per SNF day are essentially the same in MA and TM. Interestingly, spending per
outpatient ED visit is 9 percent higher in MA; this may re‡ect utilization management for MA
patients that discourages relatively less severe cases from coming to the ED or from being admitted
from the ED to the hospital. We also note that the reweighting approach makes little di¤erence
for inpatient spending; the spending per encounter statistics are quite similar already in the raw
comparison of means.
    In the last two rows of Table 7, we brie‡y consider a speci…c case study: spending per inpatient
admission for AMIs (acute myocardial infarction, or heart attack). Focusing on spending per
admission for a particular diagnosis allows us to get closer to a pure price comparison. The choice
of AMI is motivated by the attention it has previously received in the literature; this in part stems
from the general sense that di¤erential selection into the hospital may be less of a concern for this
type of acute, emergency event than for other, more discretionary admissions. Indeed, Cutler et
al. (2000) famously compared treatment for heart attack patients in private managed care (HMO
plans) and private FFS plans in Massachusetts under the assumption that while patients may select
plans based on their expected incidence of disease, conditional on the event occurring there should
be minimal di¤erences across plans in the severity of the disease.
    We …nd that spending per AMI admission or AMI day is quite similar in MA and TM. Speci…-
cally, we estimate that spending per AMI admission is about 1 percent higher in MA, and spending
per day is about 3 percent lower.11 Our …nding of similar spending per AMI admission in private
managed care and public FFS care stands in marked contrast to Cutler et al. (2000)’s …nding that
spending per AMI episode was about 30 to 40 percent lower in private managed care (HMO plans)
than in private FFS plans in Massachusetts.


6.3       (Lack of) Mean price di¤erences for hospital admissions for speci…c diag-
          noses
Table 7 shows similar spending per encounter for MA and TM enrollees, suggesting that prices may
be similar in MA and TM. However, spending per encounter can also be a¤ected by di¤erences in
providers seen or in reason for the visit; one motivation for our AMI “case study” is to try to look
within a single reason for admission.
  11
       This analysis of spending per admission for a given condition is similar in spirit to Baker et al.’s (2016) analysis
of spending per admission for a common basket of DRGs and geographic areas. They also use HCCI data (from 2009
and 2012) and, focusing on large DRGs and large metropolitan areas, conclude that MA spending per admission is
8 percent lower than TM spending for the same “basket” of DRGs and areas.



                                                             16
    To hone in on di¤erences in “prices” – or unit payment rates – we compare payments in MA
and TM for admission to the same hospital with the same DRG.12 Under TM, hospitals are paid
by CMS based on a pre-set formula that is a product of a hospital-speci…c rate and a DRG-speci…c
rate; it is our understanding (although no contractual data is available to verify it) that these
hospitals are predominantly paid by MA insurers in a similar way. In TM, and presumably in MA
as well, some accommodation for exceptions is allowed, resulting in payments that may deviate
from the DRG-hospital formula rates.
    We compute a parallel set of prices in MA and TM. For both, our starting unit of analysis is
an admission in MA, which is characterized by a hospital and a DRG. The MA price is simply the
observed (transacted) payments for the admission in the MA claims data. Construction of the TM
price proceeds in two steps. First, for each MA admission, we calculate the formula price in TM,
applying the PPS reimbursement formula which, as noted, is a function of the hospital and the
DRG. Second, we adjust our TM formula prices to re‡ect average di¤erences between TM formula
and TM actual (transacted) prices since we are comparing to actual (transacted) prices in MA.13
Appendix C provides more detail.
    Figure 4 shows our estimate of the average price in TM and MA overall, and for the top 20
DRGs (by their share of MA admissions); Appendix Table A2 provides the underlying numbers. In
reporting DRG-speci…c average prices, we weight the admissions in each DRG by the state’s share
of MA admissions in all DRGs, so that any di¤erences in average prices across DRGs within MA
(or within TM) re‡ect price di¤erences for a common “state basket,”and are not contaminated by
di¤erences in the geographic distribution of admissions by DRG across states. The national average
price is computed by weighting each DRG by its (national) share of MA admissions.
    Inpatient prices are extremely similar in MA and TM. The national average admission price
is $9,945 in TM and $10,054 in MA. The price for an average MA admission is only 1.1 percent
higher in MA relative to TM. The largest di¤erence among the top 20 DRGs is for chest pain (DRG
#313), for which the average MA price is about 6% lower than in TM. For 10 of the top 20 DRGs,
the average price in MA is within 2 percent of that in TM.
    The close similarity of inpatient admission prices between MA and TM is interesting given that
  12
       For this pricing analysis, we focus on the approximately 4,000 hospitals in our baseline sample that are paid
(by TM) under Medicare’s prospective payment system (PPS). These represent about 95 percent of all inpatient
admissions in MA and cover essentially all standard (non-specialty) hospitals.
  13
       In principle, we could follow the exact same approach as for MA prices, and estimate transacted TM prices
directly in the CMS data, where we observe TM payments for each admission, along with its hospital and DRG. In
practice, however, we are constrained from doing this for two reasons: hospital identi…ers are encrypted in the MA
data, and our DUAs prohibit our exporting data below a minimum cell size. Fortunately, the TM hospital-speci…c
base payment rates (which determine the TM formula payments) are available in our MA data; we are extremely
grateful to Zack Cooper for providing us with this mapping. We construct actual and formula TM prices in the CMS
data and use these to construct adjustment factors to re‡ect average di¤erences between TM formula and actual
prices by DRG or by state.



                                                          17
it is frequently conjectured that because the public sector has greater bargaining power, public fee-
for-service may achieve lower prices than private insurance (e.g. Philipson et al. 2010). Consistent
with this conjecture, prior empirical work has shown that for the same service, TM tends to
reimburse at substantially lower prices than commercial (under 65) private insurance both in the
outpatient setting (Clemens and Gottlieb, forthcoming) and the inpatient setting (Cooper et al.
2015). In contrast, we do not …nd that TM prices are substantially lower than MA prices.14
One potential explanation for this discrepancy is that Medicare Advantage plans may have more
bargaining power with hospitals than commercial plans since hospitals must accept fee-for-service
Medicare rates when they are not included in the MA plan’s network (Berenson et al. 2015).

Geographic variation in hospital prices We also compare geographic variation in inpatient
prices for MA and TM. We construct average state prices in MA and TM following a parallel
process to what we did for measuring DRG prices; now, we weight the admissions in each state
using the DRG’s national share of MA admissions, so that comparisons of state-level average prices
within MA (or within TM) are not contaminated by di¤erences in the mix of DRGs across states.
    Figure 5 shows the results; Appendix Table A3 shows the underlying numbers. Pricing variation
across states (weighted by Medicare enrollment) is about 20 percent lower in MA than in TM.
Speci…cally, the coe¢ cient of variation across states is 0.067 in MA, compared to 0.082 in TM.
By contrast, recent work has shown evidence of substantially higher geographic pricing variation
in commercial (less than 65) private plans compared to TM (Philipson et al. 2010, Institute of
Medicine 2013, Cooper et al. 2015).15


6.4       Potential channels for saving
Our results thus far strongly point to di¤erences in utilization metrics, rather than payment rates,
that are driving the overall di¤erences in spending between TM and MA. Potential mechanisms
by which MA plans may reduce care utilization include: limited provider networks through which
bene…ciaries receive care, coordination of care programs to more e¢ ciently deliver appropriate
services and avoid excessive utilization, and …nancial incentives to physicians to in‡uence the quality
  14
       Of course, our MA sample is limited to three large insurers, and their bargaining power may not be representative
of smaller MA insurers; on the other hand, Cooper et al. (2015)’s analysis of commercial pricing was also limited to
the same three large insurers, and there average inpatient prices were almost twice as high as in TM.
  15
       Like us, this analysis focuses on pricing variation in hospitals. The recent Cooper et al. (2015) comparison of
pricing variation in TM compared to commerical (i.e. private, under 65) plans also uses data from HCCI, speci…cally
2007-2011 data for commercial insurance. We con…rmed that we replicate their …nding of substantially greater
variation in pricing in commercial insurance relative to TM when, as with our main analysis here, we use data only
from 2010 and from the subset of 36 states in our baseline analysis. Speci…cally, using the MA share of admissions in
each DRG to construct average prices for each state, and estimating the coe¢ cient of variation across states weighting
each state by the Medicare enrollment in that state (as in Figure 5), we estimate that pricing variation is over 50
percent larger in commercial insurance (coe¢ cient of variation = 0.14) than in TM (coe¢ cient of variation = 0.08).


                                                            18
and quantity of services delivered (e.g. Landon et al. 2012). By contrast, in TM there are virtually
no restrictions on physician clinical decisions or patient choices of care.
    We have already seen evidence of one “signature”of MA mechanisms to reduce care utilization:
all these mechanisms should constrain patient entry into care, particularly expensive care, so that
the average person using that care in MA is in worse health, and is higher cost than the average
person using that care in TM. In other words, MA enrollees should have fewer encounters, but have
greater spending (or utilization) per encounter. Consistent with this, we found that spending per
inpatient day and spending per outpatient ED visit were in fact slightly higher in MA than in TM
(see Table 7).
    In Table 8 we provide additional evidence consistent with restrictions on utilization. In Panel A
we explore di¤erences between TM and MA in the distribution of discharge destinations of hospi-
talized patients. Destinations are roughly ordered in how expensive they are (from cheaper to more
expensive). The number of enrollee-months sent to di¤erent destinations is uniformly lower in MA,
re‡ecting the lower total number of inpatient admissions in MA (see Table 5). However, inpatients
covered by MA are disproportionately discharged to less expensive destinations. Discharges of MA
enrollees directly to home are only 10% lower than in TM, discharges to a home health organization
are 23% lower, and discharges to SNF are 38% lower; together, these three destinations make up
about 85 percent of discharges in either TM or MA. Discharges to other post acute institutions
(such as long-term care hospitals, cancer centers, or psychiatric hospitals) are less common, but
signi…cantly more expensive; they are 71% lower in MA than in TM.
    In addition to limiting use of care, MA may also constrain the type of service, encouraging
use of less expensive substitutes. Panel B points to some patterns that are suggestive of such
channels. First, we analyze the frequency of surgeries. We …nd the surgery rate to be in fact
higher, not lower, in MA by a fair amount (18%). However, inpatient surgeries are lower (by
7%) and outpatient surgeries are much higher (by 26%), which is suggestive of MA insurers using
outpatient surgeries to substitute away from inpatient surgeries and perhaps (given the fact that
overall number of surgeries is higher) from other types of expensive, non-surgical admissions as well.
Second, we examine two types of physician visits: primary care and specialist visits. We already saw
in Table 5 that MA enrollees are associated with 17% fewer physician visits. While, consequently,
both types of physician visits are lower in MA, the percentage di¤erence in the number of specialist
visits is much greater. Primary care visits are only 4% lower, while visits to specialists are 22%
lower.


7    Alternative approaches to correct for selection
The results thus far suggest that spending in MA is 25% lower than in TM, even after adjusting for
county and a detailed measure of predicted health spending (risk score). To the extent that county
and risk scores are the only variables that could be used in any capitation formula, this di¤erence
is a useful summary, which may provide a guide for, say, CMS reimbursement rates.


                                                 19
    Nonetheless, we would like to know the extent to which this lower spending re‡ects a treatment
e¤ect of MA as opposed to selection into MA by individuals who – conditional on risk score and
county – have lower predicted spending due to unmeasured di¤erences in health or preferences
for healthcare. The relative importance of selection or treatment is particularly important in the
context of assessing the cost implications of any expansion of the MA program to cover those
currently enrolled in TM.
    We take several steps in this section to try to make progress on this question. We begin by
showing that our baseline comparison of mean MA and TM spending is not sensitive to alterna-
tive, richer ways of controlling for observables. We then consider the possibility of selection on
unobservables by using di¤erential mortality rates (conditional on observables) in MA and TM to
proxy for unobservable spending di¤erences. This approach yields varying results, with the most
aggressive adjustment suggesting that MA spending is only 8 percent lower than what it would be
under TM.
    The rest of this section discusses the implementation and results in detail. We emphasize at the
outset that we consider these alternative approaches useful but clearly not a panacea for concerns
about selection. Our earlier evidence pointing to potential channels by which MA may reduce
spending – such as via substitution from inpatient to outpatient surgery or from specialist care
to primary care – complements our empirical exercise here in suggesting the existence of an MA
treatment e¤ect. One would need a more subtle selection story, which moves beyond selection into
MA on predicted spending, to explain these patterns. The same is true for many of our other
results, such as the comparison of geographic variation. Overall, we view the results as pointing to
a large “treatment e¤ect” of MA on spending, in the range of 10 to 25 percent.


7.1   (Standard) framework
A standard potential outcome framework is useful to organize our exercise. Let Wi = 1 if bene…ciary
i is enrolled in a plan o¤ered by one of the three HCCI insurers in MA, and Wi = 0 if i is in TM.
Let yiT M be the individual outcome of interest (e.g. healthcare spending per month, which is the
focus of this section) if she were in TM, and yiM A be the individual outcome of interest if she were
in MA. We observe yi = yiT M when Wi = 0, and we observe yi = yiM A when Wi = 1. The individual
treatment e¤ect is yi = yiM A yiT M .
     We observe (e.g. in Table 1 Panel B)

                        D = E yiM A jWi = 1      E yiT M jWi = 0 = T + S;                        (4)

where T is the average treatment e¤ect for the MA population

                                   T = E yiM A      yiT M jWi = 1                                (5)

and S represents the selection e¤ect, given by

                             S    E yiT M jWi = 1     E yiT M jWi = 0 :                          (6)

                                                 20
A key advantage – in the context of our data – of the above representation of the selection e¤ect
is that it is only a function of yiT M ; this is attractive because the set of observables is signi…cantly
richer and more granular in the CMS data than in the HCCI data, and the above representation
allows us to analyze the selection e¤ect using CMS data alone, holding the average outcome of
interest …xed in the HCCI data.


7.2       Correcting for selection on observables
Our baseline re-weighting approach (see equation (2)) can be viewed within this framework as
assuming that, conditional on county and risk score, Wi is as good as random assignment. The risk
score itself is generated from an underlying much richer set of observables, including very detailed
health measures as well as age, gender, and dual eligibility in Medicaid. These observables are used
with a particular functional form to produce the risk score. A more ‡exible approach therefore
would be to condition on the individual components of the risk score.
    If we want to condition on a richer set of observables, it gets more di¢ cult to apply our baseline
re-weighting strategy as the data become sparse and it becomes common to observe MA bene…ciaries
with a vector of characteristics for which there is no match in the TM sample. We therefore instead
follow a standard approach of constructing propensity scores for enrollment in MA as a function
of a rich set of observables, and then apply the reweighting strategy to the propensity score rather
than to the entire vector of observables.
    Speci…cally, given a vector of observables xi we estimate a logit model of Wi on xi . That is, we
                                     exp(x0 )
assume that pi = Pr(Wi = 1) = 1+exp(xi 0 ) and estimate by maximum likelihood. We estimate
                                            i
the logit model separately for each county, to allow the relationship between enrollment in MA and
observables to di¤er across counties. We then use our estimate of to generate the propensity score
for individual i, denoted by pbi . Appendix Figure A3 shows the distribution of propensity scores
under MA and TM for our baseline xi ’s (county and risk score).
    We then apply the same reweighting procedure used earlier, in two ways. First, we simply
reweight the TM sample to match the propensity score distribution of the MA sample by binning
the propensity score to bins of size 0.01. Second, because we think that location heterogeneity
may be particularly important for healthcare spending, we also reweight on county and propensity
score, so that reweighting groups are de…ned as a combination of county and a 0.01 bin of propensity
score. Table 9 reports the results from both procedures, in columns (3) and (4), respectively, but
it turns out that the additional conditioning on county in the reweighting procedure makes little
di¤erence, presumably because all our speci…cations already include county-speci…c estimates in
the construction of the propensity score.
    Rows 1 and 2 of Table 9 report the TM average spending when we apply no weights (row 1) and
when we reweight on risk score (row 2), as in the baseline speci…cation, regenerating the results
from Table 2.16 Rows 3 through 6 report speci…cations based on the propensity score reweighting.
  16
       To be parallel with the subsequent propensity score analysis, column (4) of row 2 shows our baseline estimate
that re-weights on county and risk score bin, while column (3) shows the impact of re-weighting only on risk score


                                                          21
Row 3 shows that (not surprisingly) using county and risk score as in our baseline approach, but
through a propensity score, has essentially no e¤ect on the results. Rows 4 through 6 then use
the individual components of the risk score separately as observables xi in the propensity score;
speci…cally we now include increasingly ‡exible controls for age, gender, dual eligibility, and 70
hierarchical condition categories (HCC) indicator variables. These alternative speci…cations have
very little e¤ect on the results; indeed, more ‡exible controls result in slightly higher estimated TM
spending and thus greater MA-TM spending di¤erences.


7.3    Using mortality to correct for selection on unobservables
We try to address selection on unobservables that are correlated with healthcare spending by
leveraging the fact that, fortunately, we can observe mortality outcomes for individuals in both TM
and MA. As we saw in Table 1, mortality is lower for MA enrollees than for TM enrollees; it is also
lower conditional on county and risk score (not shown).
    We therefore use mortality di¤erences across enrollees in MA and TM to try to proxy for unob-
servable di¤erences in expected healthcare spending. We make the strong assumption that mortality
outcomes are una¤ected by enrollment in MA. Under this assumption, we can use mortality as an
additional observable and control for it.
    This use of mortality to proxy for unobservables is of course not perfect; but we think it provides
a reasonably aggressive bounding approach to the likely role of unobservables. The results using
mortality will under-estimate the impact of MA on reducing healthcare spending relative to TM if
in fact some of the mortality di¤erences between MA and TM re‡ect a bene…cial treatment e¤ect of
MA on mortality, or if, conditional on mortality, counterfactual TM spending would be higher for
individuals who select into MA than for those who do not. Likewise, it will over-estimate the impact
of MA on reducing healthcare spending if MA increases mortality or if, conditional on mortality,
counterfactual TM spending would be lower for individuals who select into MA than for those who
do not. It is not obvious what the sign of any bias would be.
    We pursue two approaches: a statistical correction in the spirit of our approach to adjusting for
observables, and an “economic” selection model.

Statistical correction We use di¤erences in mortality rates to create an MA-speci…c mapping
and a TM-speci…c mapping from risk scores to a health index, captured by mortality. This ap-
proach therefore captures di¤erences in expected spending, conditional on risk score, arising from
unobservable health di¤erences captured by mortality. Such di¤erences in expected spending could
re‡ect selection on unobserved health, as well as upcoding (manipulation of patient diagnoses and
hence risk scores) in MA beyond what CMS assumes (Geruso and Layton 2015).
   Speci…cally, we calculate a predicted mortality rate by risk score bin, separately for MA and TM
enrollees. We can then reweight on predicted mortality (row 7 of Table 9) or on a propensity score
that uses predicted mortality as the observable (row 8 of Table 9); here we once again estimate the

bin.


                                                  22
propensity score county by county. These speci…cations, which e¤ectively match MA enrollees to
TM enrollees with the same mortality rate (and therefore lower risk scores of the MA enrollees)
lead to the largest estimate of selection. According to these estimates, total spending in MA is only
8-10 percent lower than in TM.17

Parametric Selection Model We also consider a more parametric selection model as an alter-
native way to adjust for observables and unobservables. It yields a less aggressive correction for
unobservables than the statistical correction shown in the last two rows of Table 9.
    In this alternative approach, we continue to assume that mortality is not a¤ected by enrollment
in MA. We also assume that there is only one dimension of unobservable heterogeneity –which we
can think of as health status – which a¤ects both costs (under TM) and mortality. Under these
assumptions, we can essentially use mortality rate as a “control function” for unobservables.
    Speci…cally, we assume the data generating process arise from two equations. The …rst is a
selection equation
                                      Wi = 1fu (xi ; ri ; i ) 0g;                               (7)
where xi is a vector of observables associated with bene…ciary i, ri is her risk score, and                                  i   is
unobserved. The second equation is the potential outcome equation

                                     E(ln cTi M jxi ; ri ; i ) = x0i   x   +   r (ri   +   i ):                              (8)

We depart from the analysis thus far and consider the outcome to be log costs rather than dollars
since it seems more natural to model factors (either observable or unobservable) as a¤ecting cost
proportionally.
    Under these assumptions, the selection term (see equation (6)) is given by

 S       E ln cTi M jWi = 1       E ln cTi M jWi = 0 =           r (E( i jxi ; ri ; Wi     = 1)     E( i jxi ; ri ; Wi = 0)); (9)

and the selection term is not zero when i and i are correlated.
   Suppose now that mortality realization is drawn from a logistic distribution, so that
                                                           exp (x0i x + r (ri + i ))
                                 E[mi jxi ; ri ; i ] =                                 ;
                                                         1 + exp (x0i x + r (ri + i ))
where mi = 1 if the bene…ciary (in either TM or MA) dies during the year (2010) and mi = 0
otherwise. We can now de…ne the log-odds ratio
                                                    E[mi jxi ; ri ; i ]
                         e i (xi ; ri ; i ) = ln
                         m                                               = x0i     x   +    r   (ri +   i) :                (10)
                                                   1 E[mi jxi ; ri ; i ]
  17
       By way of comparison, Geruso and Layton (2015) estimate that MA risk scores are 6 to 16 percent higher than
they would be for the same enrollee under TM, or 3 to 13 percent higher after accounting for CMS’ “upcoding”
adjustment to MA risk scores (that we have already applied). Taking their upper bound, such 13% additional
“upcoding” alone would suggest that comparable TM spending would be $744 per enrollee-month (13% lower than
our baseline estimate of $855), which would imply that MA costs ($642) are 14 percent lower than in TM. Put
di¤erently, the upper bound of their upcoding estimate could account for most of the selection on unboservables we
estimate here.


                                                              23
Equation (10) is estimable for the entire population, using the CMS data set, as we see mortality
there for both the TM and MA populations. We can thus obtain unbiased estimates for x and
  r and back out E( i jxi ; ri ; Wi ). Equipped with this information, we can return to equation (8)
and correct for the selection. That is, we can now regress yi0 (xi ; ri ) = E(yiT M jxi ; ri ) on xi and on
ri + E( i jxi ; ri ; Wi = 0) and (given our assumptions) obtain unbiased estimates for x and r .
We then have all the pieces to plug into the selection term, equation (9), and obtain the extent of
selection on unobservables.
    This approach yields that 16% of the residual di¤erence in total spending between MA and
(reweighted) TM is attributable to selection on unobservables. That is, we use equation (4), sub-
stituting ln cTi M for yiT M (using the reweighted cost) to compute the total di¤erence in log cost and
obtain 0.497. We then follow the above procedure to estimate S (see equation (9)), and we obtain
0.0786, which is 16% of the overall di¤erence.


8    Conclusion
We have compared healthcare spending and utilization in public and private Medicare. This setting
provides a rare opportunity for a “side by side” comparison of public and private health insurance
systems operating on a similar scale, for the same population, in the same markets, and with the
same providers. Novel data from the Health Care Cost Institute on the healthcare claims of MA
enrollees allow us a rare look inside the “black box” of healthcare utilization and spending in MA.
    We …nd that MA insurer revenues are 30 percent higher than their healthcare spending. Health-
care spending for enrollees in MA is 25% lower than for enrollees in TM in the same county and
risk score. We explore a variety of ways to quantify how much of this overall di¤erence may be
driven by residual selection; in our most aggressive adjustment, we …nd that the spending di¤erence
between MA and TM shrinks to 8%.
    The lower spending by MA enrollees is entirely due to lower healthcare utilization. Prices appear
similar in MA and TM. Where we can most directly measure this – the price of an admission for
a given DRG at a given hospital –we estimate that average prices in MA are 1.1% higher than in
TM. Reductions in utilization appear similar both for types of care where there is concern about
“over use” (e.g. imaging and diagnostic tests) and where there is concern about “under use” (e.g.
preventive care).
    We provide suggestive evidence for some of the potential channels by which MA may reduce
healthcare utilization for enrollees. We …nd that utilization is lower in MA but that, conditional on
an encounter, spending per encounter is similar or slightly higher in MA. This suggests that MA
manages to restrict utilization on the margin to sicker individuals. Relatedly, individuals discharged
from the hospital are much more likely to be sent home – and less likely to be sent to post-acute
care facility – if they are enrolled in MA rather than in TM. We also …nd evidence consistent
with substitution to less expensive types of care in MA: di¤erences in specialist visits are much
larger than di¤erences in primary care visits, and while inpatient surgery rates are lower in MA,


                                                    24
outpatient surgery rates are higher.
    Finally, in light of the widespread interest in geographic variation in healthcare spending in TM,
and recent work on geographic variation in commercial (under 65) private insurance, we explore
similar comparisons in MA. Although geographic variation in spending in TM is often viewed as a
re‡ection of the ine¢ ciencies in a public health insurance system, we …nd similar –in fact slightly
larger – geographic variation in spending in MA compared to TM. And while recent work has
emphasized the much greater geographic pricing variation in private commercial insurance than in
TM, we …nd similar –in fact slightly smaller –geographic variation in pricing in MA compared to
TM.
    One natural question these …ndings raise is their implications for MA insurers and consumers.
For insurers, our estimates from MA data indicate that their revenue exceeds their healthcare
expenditures by $177 (about 30%) per enrollee-month. An important area for further work is
to examine how this may be dissipated through other costs, such as the administrative costs of
providing the insurance and the marketing costs of attracting enrollees. A related and important
question is whether and how competitive pressures a¤ect the MA market.
    Implications for consumers are more elusive, since the elements of their objective function are
not as straightforward to de…ne or measure. A simple revealed preference argument would suggest
that consumers who choose MA are better o¤ in it. Other inferences are harder to make. Quality of
the healthcare experience is di¢ cult to assess; our measures of preventive care point to reductions
there that are similar in magnitude to those for other forms of care. We calculated that the mean
actuarial bene…t to consumers (i.e. rebate to consumers as measured in the bid data) was $51 per
enrollee-month, but, of course, the rebate may be valued di¤erently from its actuarial value, and
MA plans have other attributes that will a¤ect consumer surplus, such as limited networks. The
implications of privately provided Medicare for both consumers and producers is an important area
for further work.


References
Ayanian J.Z., Landon BE, Zaslovsky AM, Saunders R, Pawlson L.G., Newhouse JP. 2013. “Quality
of Ambulatory Care in Medicare Advantage HMOs and Traditional Medicare.” Health A¤ airs 32
(7): 1228-1235.
    Baker, Laurence C., M. Kate Bundorf, Aileen M. Devlin and Daniel P. Kessler. 2016. “Medicare
Advantage Plans Pay Hospitals Less than Traditional Medicare Pays.”Health A¤ airs 35 (8): 1444-
1451.
    Brot-Goldberg, Zarek, Amitabh Chandra, Benjamin Handel and Jonathan Kolstad. 2015.
“What Does a Deductible Do? The Impact of Cost-Sharing on Health Care Prices, Quantities,
and Spending Dynamics.” NBER Working Paper 21632.
    Berenson, Robert A., Jonathan H Sunshine, David Helms and Emily Lawton. 2015. “Why
Medicare Advantage Plans Pay Hospitals Traditional Medicare Prices.”Health A¤ airs 34 (8): 1289-


                                                 25
1295.
    Billings, John., Nina Parikh and Tod. Mijanovich, Emergency Room Use: The New York Story.
(Commonwealth Fund, 2000). Available here: http://www.commonwealthfund.org/publications/issue-
briefs/2000/nov/emergency-room-use–the-new-york-story
    Cabral, Marika and Mark Cullen. 2011. “The E¤ect of Insurance Coverage on Preventive
Care.” http://www.marikacabral.com/Cabral_CullenPreventiveCare.pdf
    Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. 2010. “Announcement of Calendar Year (CY)
2010 Medicare Advantage Capitation Rates and Medicare Advantage and Part D Payment Policies.”
https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Health-Plans/MedicareAdvtgSpecRateStats/downloads/announcement2010.pdf
    Clemens, Je¤rey and Joshua Gottlieb. Forthcoming. “In the Shadow of a Giant: Medicare’s
In‡uence on Private Physician Payments.” Journal of Political Economy.
    Clemens, Je¤rey, Joshua Gottlieb and Timea Molnar. 2015. “The Anatomy of Physician
Payments: Contracting Subject to Complexity.” NBER Working Paper 21642.
    Cooper, Zack, Stuart Craig, Martin Gaynor, and John Van Reenen. 2015. “The Price Ain’t
Right? Hospital Prices and Health Spending on the Privately Insured.” NBER Working Paper
21815.
    Cutler, David, Mark McClellan, and Joseph P. Newhouse. 2000. “How does managed care do
it?” RAND Journal of Economics 31(3): 526-548.
    Curto, Vilsa, Liran Einav, Jonathan Levin and Jay Bhattacharya. 2014. “Can Health Insurance
Competition Work? Evidence from Medicare Advantage.” NBER Working Paper 20818.
    Duggan, Mark, Jonathan Gruber, and Boris Vabson. 2015. “The E¢ ciency Consequences
of Health Care Privatization: Evidence from Medicare Advantage Exits.” NBER Working Paper
21650.
    Einav, Liran, Amy Finkelstein and Maria Polyakova. 2016. “Private Provision of Social Insur-
ance: Drug-speci…c Price Elasticities and Cost Sharing in Medicare Part D.”NBER Working Paper
22277.
    Finkelstein Amy, Matthew Gentzkow and Heidi Williams. 2016. “Sources of Geographic Vari-
ation in Health Care: Evidence from Patient Migration.” Quarterly Journal of Economics.
    Fisher, Elliott S., David E. Wennberg, Therese A. Stukel, Daniel J. Gottlieb, F. L. Lucas, and
Etoile L. Pinder. 2003a. “The Implications of Regional Variations in Medicare Spending: the
Content, Quality, and Accessibility of Care. Part 1.”Annals of Internal Medicine, 138(4): 273–287.
    Fisher, Elliott S., David Wennberg, Theresa Stukel, Daniel Gottlieb, F.L. Lucas, and Etoile
L.Pinder. 2003b. “The Implications of Regional Variations in Medicare Spending. Part 2: Health
Outcomes and Satisfaction with Care” Annals of Internal Medicine 138(4): February 18, 2003.
288-299
    Gawande, Atul. 2009. “The Cost Conundrem: What a Texas Town Can Teach Us about Health
Care.” The New Yorker, June 1.
    Geruso, Michael and Timothy Layton. 2015. “Upcoding: Evidence from Medicare on Squishy
Risk Adjustment.” NBER Working Paper 21222.



                                          26
    Institute of Medicine, 2013. “Variation in health care spending: Target decision making, not
geography.” Washington DC: The National Academies Press.
    Kaiser Family Foundation, 2010. https://kaiserfamilyfoundation.…les.wordpress.com/2013/01/8080.pdf
    Landon, Bruce, Alan Zaslavsky, Robert Saunders, L. Gregory Pawlson, Joseph Newhouse and
John Ayanian. 2012. “Analysis of Medicare Advantage HMOs Compared with Traditional Medicare
Shows Lower Use of Many Services During 2003-2009.” Health A¤ airs No. 12: 2609-2617.
    McGuire, Thomas, Joseph P. Newhouse, and Anna D. Sinaiko. 2011. “An Economic History of
Medicare Part C.” The Milbank Quarterly 89(2): 289-332.
    Philipson, Tomas, Dana Goldman, Seth Seabury, Darius Lakdawalla and Lee Lockwood. 2010.
“Geographic Variation in Health Care: The Role of Private Markets.” Brookings Papers on Eco-
nomic Activity, Spring, pages 325-355.
    Skinner, Jonathan. 2011. “Causes and Consequences of Regional Variations in Health Care.”
In Handbook of Health Economics. Vol. 2, eds. Mark V. Pauly, Thomas G. McGuire and Pedro
P.Barros, 45–93. Elsevier.
    Song, Yunjie, Jonathan Skinner, Julie Bynam, Jason Sutherland, and Elliott Fisher. 2010.
“Regional Variations in Diagnostic Practices.” New England Journal of Medicine, 363(1): 45–53.
    Newhouse, Joseph and Thomas McGuire. 2014. “How Successful in Medicare Advantage?”The
Milbank Quarterly 92(2): 351-394.
    Taubman, Sarah, Heidi Allen, Bill Wright, Katherine Baicker and Amy Finkelstein. 2014.
“Medicaid Increases Emergency-Department Use: Evidence from Oregon’s Health Insurance Ex-
periment.” Science 343(6168): 263-268.
    U.S. Government Accountability O¢ ce, 2008. Medicare Part B Imaging Services: Rapid Spend-
ing Growth and Shift to Physician O¢ ces Indicate Need for CMS to Consider Additional Manage-
ment Practices. URL http://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-08-452 (accessed 2.23.15)




                                              27
Figure 1: MA penetration over time




Figure shows the share of Medicare bene…ciaries enrolled in Medicare Advantage plans, year by year. The data source
is CMS’s Medicare Managed Care Contract Plans Monthly Summary Reports. All data are from December of the
year indicated.




                                                        28
Figure 2: State-by-State Comparison of TM and MA Spending




Figure plots MA spending per enrollee-month against TM spending per enrollee-month for each of the 36 states in
our baseline sample. Coe¢ cients of variation across states in spending are computed using total Medicare enrollees
in the state as weight. The size of each bubble is proportional to the number of total Medicare enrollees in the state.




                                                          29
Figure 3: TM-MA Spending Di¤erences across States




Figure plots the (percentage) di¤erence between average MA spending and (re-weighted) TM spending per enrollee-
month against average TM spending for each of the 36 states in our baseline sample. The size of each bubble is
proportional to the number of total Medicare enrollees in the state. The y-axis compares MA spending to TM
spending that is re-weighted to match the MA population on county and risk score, using our preferred weighting
(see Table 2, column (4)). The x-axis reports average (unadjusted) TM spending in the state (see Table 2, column
(1)).




                                                      30
Figure 4: TM-MA price di¤erences for inpatient admissions, across DRGs




Figure plots the (percentage) di¤erence between average MA prices and TM prices for a hospital admission, overall
and for the 20 most common DRGs in MA. Average MA or TM prices for a given DRG are computed using a
common (MA) basket of state admission shares for that DRG. The national average price in MA or TM is computed
by weighting each DRG (including the less common ones not shown here) by its (national) share of MA admissions.
The size of each bubble (except for the overall “Average” bubble) is proportional to the number of MA admissions
with that DRG.




                                                       31
Figure 5: TM-MA price di¤erences for inpatient admissions, across states




Figure plots the (percentage) di¤erence between average MA prices and TM prices for a hospital admission for each
state in our baseline sample (except Alaska which is omitted because it has too few inpatient admissions for us to
report). Averages are computed for each state using a common (MA) “basket” of DRG admission shares. The size
of each bubble is proportional to the number of MA admissions in that state. Coe¢ cients of variation across states
in prices are computed using total Medicare enrollees in the state as weight.




                                                         32
Table 1: Baseline sample

  Data source / sample                                                 All CMSa                          Baseline CMSb               All HCCIa   Baseline HCCIb
                                                                        MA (all    MA (HCCI                 MA (all      MA (HCCI    MA (HCCI      MA (HCCI
                                                               TM                                TM
                                                                       insurers)   insurers)               insurers)     insurers)   insurers)     insurers)
                                                               (1)        (2)           (3)      (4)          (5)           (6)         (7)           (8)


  Panel A: Enrollee-level summaryc
  No. of enrollees (000s)                                    26,420     10,475      3,911      15,641       5,291         2,270       2,941          2,290
  Female                                                      0.575     0.574       0.574       0.576       0.567         0.568       0.569          0.571
  Age                                                         75.4       74.6           74.5    75.4         74.3          74.1         --             --
  Coarse age:d
   65-74                                                      0.520     0.555       0.560       0.516       0.568         0.581       0.592          0.590
   75-84                                                      0.330     0.328       0.325       0.333       0.323         0.315       0.306          0.308
   85+                                                        0.150     0.117       0.115       0.151       0.109         0.104       0.102          0.102
  Dual eligible                                               0.143     0.123       0.111       0.129       0.072         0.073         --             --
  SNP enrollees                                                --       0.081       0.065        --         0.000         0.000         0.0           0.0
  Risk score                                                  1.089     1.031       1.032       1.085       0.986         0.994         --             --
  Died in 2010                                                0.050     0.039       0.039       0.052       0.036         0.036         --             --

  Panel B: Spending per enrollee-monthe
  No. of enrollee-months (000s)                              304,908   118,737      44,371     180,608      60,273        25,867      32,506        25,394
  Total Spending ($/month)                                    938         --             --     911           --            --         639            642
  Insurer Spending ($/month)                                  798         --             --     771           --            --         586            590
  OOP Spending ($/month)f                                     140         --             --     140           --            --          53            52

  Panel C: Payments to insurers per enrollee-monthe
                                g
  Overall CMS expenditure ($)                                  --        820            819      --          767           778          --             --
                                                         h
  Actuarial value of incremental consumer benefits ($)         --         63            53       --           56            51          --             --
  Plan payments for organic MA services ($) i                  --        800            806      --          751           767          --             --




Table presents summary statistics for various sample de…nitions. Columns (6) and (8), highlighted in gray, are
comparable and are used to validate our sample construction.
a Sample include all Medicare enrollees who are 65 or older by the end of 2010.

b Baseline sample excludes SNP enrollees, and enrollees in the 15 states in which the number of enrollee-months in

HCCI is not within 10% of that in CMS.
c At the enrollee-level, we de…ne an individual as enrolled in TM if she is never enrolled in MA during the sample

year and is enrolled in TM for at least one month of the sample year; we de…ne her as enrolled in MA if she is enrolled
in MA in any month of the year, and we assign her to an HCCI insurer if she is covered by one of them in her …rst
month in MA. Age, dual eligibility and SNP enrollment is likewise de…ned based on the …rst month in which an
enrollee is observed during the sample year.
d In HCCI we only have information about age in three bins: 65-74, 75-84, and 85+.

e We count an enrollee-month in TM if she is enrolled in TM that month and never enrolled in MA during the sample

year; any enrollee-months in MA (or in HCCI insurers) are counted as such.
f Out of pocket (OOP) spending denotes amount owed by enrollee. For TM enrollees, OOP Spending may be

partially covered by supplemental (Medigap or employer-sponsored) coverage.
g This includes all payments made from CMS to the MA plans, including risk-adjusted payments and rebates.

h This is also known as the “rebate.”

i The variable “Plan payments for organic MA services ($)”is equal to “Overall CMS expenditure ($)”plus additional

premiums paid by the bene…ciaries minus the non-cost-sharing component of the rebate.




                                                                                   33
Table 2: Baseline reweighting


  Source                                                           CMS                                    HCCI
  Sample                                     TM            TM              TM           TM                MA
                                                                         County &     County &
  Reweight by                               None         County                                          None
                                                                      Risk bin 0.5   Risk bin 0.1
                                             (1)           (2)             (3)           (4)               (5)

  No. of enrollee-months (000s)           180,608        180,608         180,608      180,608            25,394
  Total Spending ($/month)                  911            942             857           855              642
  Insurer Spending ($/month)                771            799             725           723              590
  OOP Spending ($/month)a                   140            143             132           131               52



Results based on baseline sample (see Table 1, columns 8 and 4). All statistics are at the enrollee-month level.
a Out of pocket (OOP) spending denotes amount owed by enrollee. For TM enrollees, OOP Spending may be partially

covered by supplemental (Medigap or employer-sponsored) coverage.




                                                         34
Table 3: Spending di¤erences for di¤erent groups of enrollees



                                   % MA enrollees         TM, unweighted    TM, weighteda    MA              Difference
                                                                                                     (4)-(3)       ((4)-(3)) / (3)
                                         (1)                   (2)               (3)         (4)      (5)                 (6)

No. of enrollee-months (000s)          25,394                180,608          180,608       25,394
Total Spending                          100%                   911              855          642     -212             -24.9%

Panel A. Spending ($/month) by enrollee characteristics
Male                                   42.9%                   916              857          673     -184             -21.4%
Female                                 57.1%                   907              853          619     -234             -27.4%

65-74                                  56.3%                   723              661          540     -120             -18.2%
75-84                                  32.6%                  1,022             967          731     -236             -24.4%
85+                                    11.1%                  1,264            1,276         898     -378             -29.6%
           b
Urban                                  76.8%                   942              887          645     -243             -27.3%
       b
Rural                                  23.2%                   851              752          634     -118             -15.7%

Panel B. Realized distribution of spending ($/month)
Proportion w/ no spending                                      0.37             0.38         0.46     0.08            19.6%

Median spending                                                93                84          38       -46             -54.3%
75th pctile                                                    332              317          222      -95             -30.0%
90th pctile                                                   1,314            1,233         849     -384             -31.1%
95th pctile                                                   3,433            3,124        2,161    -964             -30.8%
97.5th pctile                                                 8,349            7,571        5,690    -1,880           -24.8%
99th pctile                                                   18,510           17,332       13,614   -3,718           -21.5%




Results based on baseline sample (See Table 1, columns 8 and 4). All statistics are at the enrollee-month level. All
spending numbers are in $/month.
a Weighting based on our preferred weighting, as in column (4) in Table 2.

b Rural/urban assignment is based on whether the enrollee zip code is in an MSA.




                                                                       35
Table 4: Spending di¤erences for di¤erent components of spending



                                   TM, unweighted      TM, weighteda            MA                         Difference
                                                                                                   (3)-(2)       ((3)-(2)) / (2)
                                         (1)                  (2)               (3)                  (4)                (5)

No. of enrollee-months (000s)         180,608             180,608             25,394
               b
Total spending                          911                   855               642                 -212            -24.9%

Inpatient                               364                   333               269                 -64             -19.2%
Outpatient                              452                   435               328                 -107            -24.6%
Skilled Nursing Facilty (SNF)            95                   86                45                  -42             -48.2%

Hospicec                                 31                   32                24                   -8             -24.9%



Results based on baseline sample (See Table 1, columns 8 and 4). All statistics are at the enrollee-month level. All
spending numbers are in $/month.
a Weighting based on our preferred weighting, as in column (4) in Table 2.

b Total spending is the sum of inpatient, outpatient, and skilled nursing facility (SNF) spending. It doesn’t include

hospice.
c Hospice expenditures for MA enrollees are billed directly to CMS, so for MA enrollees they are in fact observed in

the CMS data and not in the HCCI data.




                                                         36
Table 5: Di¤erences in healthcare utilization



                                       TM, unweighted     TM, weighteda           MA                        Difference
                                                                                                   (3)-(2)        ((3)-(2)) / (2)
                                             (1)                (2)               (3)                (4)                 (5)

Total spending ($/month)                     911               855               642                -212             -24.9%

Inpatient days                              0.200             0.181              0.144             -0.037            -20.6%
 Any inpatient admission                    0.027             0.025              0.021             -0.004            -16.0%
 Days cond'l on any                         7.371             7.352              6.95              -0.402             -5.5%

Skilled Nursing Facility (SNF) days         0.336             0.296              0.131             -0.166            -55.9%
 Days cond'l on any                        47.275             46.654             20.6               -26.0            -55.8%

Emergency Department (ED) Visits            0.049             0.045              0.038             -0.007            -15.8%
 Outpatient ED visits                       0.031             0.028              0.024             -0.004            -14.8%
 Inpatient ED visits                        0.018             0.017              0.014             -0.003            -17.5%

Physician visits                             1.22              1.21              1.01              -0.204            -16.8%
 Any physician visits                       0.545             0.540              0.486             -0.054            -10.0%
 Number of visits cond'l on any              2.24              2.25              2.08              -0.169             -7.5%




Results based on baseline sample (See Table 1, columns 8 and 4). All statistics are at the enrollee-month level, but
all days associated with a given encounter are attributed to the original admission date, even if it extends beyond
the month.
a Weighting based on our preferred weighting, as in column (4) in Table 2.




                                                        37
Table 6: Utilization di¤erences across di¤erent types of care



                                                        TM, unweighted   TM, weighteda    MA                    Difference
                                                                                                        (3)-(2)          ((3)-(2)) / (2)
                                                             (1)              (2)         (3)                      (4)

A. Testing and imaging
      Diagnostic tests                                       2.12            2.05        1.55           -0.50               -24.4%
      Any diagnostic test                                    0.35            0.34        0.293          -0.049              -14.3%
      Cond'l on any                                          5.97            6.00        5.29           -0.71               -11.9%

      Imaging procedures                                     0.66            0.64        0.52           -0.12               -18.9%
      Any imaging test                                       0.18            0.17        0.154          -0.018              -10.5%
      Cond'l on any                                          3.75            3.71        3.37           -0.35                -9.3%

B. Preventative care (rates per relevant population)b
      Flu shot                                              0.051           0.050        0.032          -0.018              -38.0%
      Cardiovascular screen                                 0.090           0.093        0.077          -0.016              -16.9%
      Colorectal cancer screen                              0.009           0.010        0.008          -0.001              -14.9%
      Mammogram                                             0.045           0.046        0.047          0.001                3.3%
      Pap smear                                             0.011           0.012        0.013          0.001                7.9%
      Prostate cancer screen                                0.023           0.023        0.018          -0.005              -22.4%
      Hemoglobin A1c test                                   0.064           0.062        0.055          -0.007              -14.1%
      Blood lipids test                                     0.103           0.106        0.091          -0.016              -15.9%
      Eye exam                                              0.067           0.067        0.054          -0.014              -21.1%

C. Appropriateness of ED Visits
      Nonemergent                                           0.006           0.005        0.005          -0.001              -14.7%
      Emergent
        ED care not needed (primary care treatable)         0.012           0.011        0.009          -0.002              -15.8%
        ED care needed, preventable                         0.004           0.004        0.003          -0.001              -18.4%
        ED care needed, not preventable                     0.012           0.011        0.009          -0.002              -16.6%
      Unclassified                                          0.013           0.012        0.010          -0.002              -19.9%




Results based on baseline sample (See Table 1, columns 8 and 4). All statistics are at the enrollee-month level.
a Weighting based on our preferred weighting, as in column (4) in Table 2.

b Rates are per the relevant population, which is: everyone for ‡u shot, cardiovascular screen, and colorectal cancer

screen; women for pap smear; women aged 65-74 for mammogram; men for prostate cancer screen; and enrollees aged
65-74 with a diabetes diagnosis for hemoglobin test, blood lipids test, and eye exam.




                                                                    38
Table 7: Di¤erences in spending per episode of care



                                   TM, unweighted    TM, weighteda            MA                      Difference
                                                                                               (3)-(2)      ((3)-(2)) / (2)
                                        (1)               (2)                 (3)               (4)                (5)

Total spending ($/month)                911               855                 642              -212            -24.9%

Spending per SNF day                    381               379                 378                -1             -0.2%
Spending per outpatient ED visit        782               768                 837                69                9.0%
         b
Inpatient :
  Spending per admission               10,134            10,151              10,093             -58             -0.6%
  Spending per day                     1,901             1,903               1,908               6                 0.3%
  Spending per AMI admission           14,512            14,558              14,761             203                1.4%
  Spending per AMI day                 2,730             2,739               2,663              -77             -2.8%



Results based on baseline sample (See Table 1, columns 8 and 4). All statistics are at the enrollee-month level, but
all expenditures or days associated with a given encounter are attributed to the original admission date, even if it
extends beyond the month.
a Weighting based on our preferred weighting, as in column (4) in Table 2.

b Inpatient spending here includes only payments to the hospital, it does not include associated physician payments

as in prior tables.




                                                        39
Table 8: Potential channels for cost saving



                                                                      a
                                       TM, unweighted     TM, weighted           MA                        Difference
                                                                                                    (3)-(2)      ((3)-(2)) / (2)
                                             (1)               (2)                (3)                (4)                (5)

A. Hospital discharge destinations:
    Home                                   0.0136            0.0122             0.0109             -0.0013          -10.4%
    Home health service org.               0.0053            0.0049             0.0038             -0.0011          -23.3%
    SNF                                    0.0067            0.0061             0.0038             -0.0023          -37.6%
    Other post-acute care                  0.0014            0.0013             0.0004             -0.0009          -70.5%
    Other (incl. hospice, death)           0.0027            0.0024             0.0018             -0.0007          -27.3%

B. Surgeries and specialists:
    Total surgeries                        0.037              0.033             0.039               0.006           18.1%
    Outpatient surgeries                   0.029              0.026             0.032               0.007           25.5%
    Inpatient surgeries                    0.008              0.007             0.007               -0.001           -7.2%

    Primary care visits                    0.379              0.370             0.355               -0.014           -3.8%
    Specialist visits                      0.840              0.844             0.655               -0.190          -22.4%



Results based on baseline sample (See Table 1, columns 8 and 4). All statistics are at the enrollee-month level. All
spending numbers are in $/month. Panel A reports (unconditional) hospital discharge destinations.
a Weighting based on our preferred weighting, as in column (4) in Table 2.




                                                        40
Table 9: Alternative ways to correct for selection into MA



                                                                                             TM Mean Total Spending
                                                                                                 (Reweighted)
       Reweight on                               Covariates
                                                                                           Reweight        Reweight county-
                                                                                           nationally         by-county
             (1)                                      (2)                                     (3)                  (4)

1. None                                                                                       911                  911
              a
2. Risk score                 --                                                              844                  855

3. Prop. Scoree               county*risk score                                               853                  854
                  e                                                      b
4. Prop. Score                county*(age FE, female, HCC FE)                                 883                  884
                  e                                                           c
5. Prop. Score                county*(age FE, female, HCC FE, dual)                           864                  866
                  e                                                           d
6. Prop. Score                county*dual*(age FE, female, HCC FE)                            864                  861

7. Predicted mortalityf                                                                       698                  706
                                                                 e
8. Prop. score                county*predicted mortality                                      712                  709



Results based on baseline sample (See Table 1, column 4).            Rows 2 and 7 use our baseline re-weighting approach
(see equation (2)) with the re-weighting based on risk score bin (row 2) or predicted mortality bin (row 7). The
“propensity score” approach in rows 3-6 and row 8 is based on a logistic regression (estimated separately, county by
county) for being in MA, using the covariates listed in Column (2).
a Risk scores are mapped to 0.1 bins, and are included using indicator variables for each bin.

b The independent variables are dummies for age, gender, and the 70 hierarchical condition categories (HCCs) that

appear in the MA risk adjustment model.
c The independent variables are dummies for age, gender, the 70 hierarchical condition categories (HCCs) that appear

in the MA risk adjustment model, and dual eligibility for Medicare and Medicaid.
d The independent variables are dummies for age, gender, and the 70 hierarchical condition categories (HCCs) that

appear in the MA risk adjustment model. Each of these dummies is interacted with a dummy for dual eligibility for
Medicare and Medicaid.
e Resultant propensity score is mapped to bins of 0.01, and included as indicator variables for each bin.

f “Predicted mortality” is generated based on a regression of a annual mortality indicator on indicators for risk bins

of 0.1. The regression is run separately for MA enrollees and for TM enrollees. The resultant mortality prediction is
mapped to bins of 0.001, and included as indicator variables for each bin.




                                                            41
Appendix A: Construction of the baseline sample

A.1 Raw data …les
HCCI Files We have data from HCCI on a convenience sample of 2010 Medicare Advantage
(MA) enrollees in three insurers: Aetna, Humana, and UnitedHealthcare (hereafter, “HCCI insur-
ers”). The data were provided to HCCI by the private insurers and exclude enrollees in highly
capitated plans, Special Needs Plans, plans with various data issues, and other limitations.18
    The HCCI data contain four main …les. There is an enrollment …le, which we use to de…ne the
sample and obtain basic demographic information. The unit of observation is an enrollee-month.
The enrollment …le contains monthly indicators for enrollment, age (in bins of 10 years), gender,
the enrollee’s state of residence, and the enrollee zip code (masked for zip codes with a 2010 census
population of less than 1,350).19 We observe “exit”within the year from the HCCI data but do not
directly measure mortality. The data also contain an indicator as to whether the plan covering the
enrollee is HMO, PPO, or other, but do not contain information as to the identity of the insurer
or other coverage details. In addition, there are three claims …les – inpatient, outpatient, and
physician – which we use to measure medical spending. In these …les the unit of observation is a
claim, payable by one of the HCCI insurers to a medical provider.

CMS Files We have data from CMS on the universe of individuals enrolled in Medicare at any
point in 2010. This includes both those enrolled in Traditional Medicare (TM) and those enrolled in
MA. For all enrollees –both those in TM and those in MA –we have four main …les: the enrollment
data base (EDB), the common Medicare enrollment …le (CME), the Health Plan Management
System (HPMS), and the Risk Adjustment Processing System (RAPS). The two enrollment …les
allow us to observe for every enrollee: exact date of birth, date of death (if applicable), gender,
and zip code. They also include monthly data on whether the individual is enrolled in TM Part A,
enrolled in TM Part B, enrolled in MA, whether they are dually covered by Medicare and Medicaid,
and whether the individual died; note that dual coverage and mortality are observed in the CMS
…les for both MA and TM enrollees.
    For enrollee-months in MA we also observe a plan identi…er. Using the HPMS plan-level data
on the parent organization, we are able to identify which plans are provided by the HCCI insurers,
and also whether the plan is a Special Needs Plan (SNP), specialized Medicare Advantage plans
for particular types of individuals (e.g. those in long term care institutions). We assign an MA
enrollee an MA plan based on the …rst plan in which she is enrolled in the year.
    The RAPS …le has a risk score and indicators for each health indicator (HCC) that goes into the
calculation of the risk score, for every enrollee. These HCCs are then integrated using a predictive
  18
       The description of the exclusion critiera come from HCCI, except for the exclusion of SNPs which we determined
by looking at the type of plan codes that apopear in the HCCI enrollment …le.
  19
       When we analyze counties separately by urban/rural status, we assume the pseudo counties are rural, since 2010
census data indicate that 80 percent of them are in fact rural.



                                                          42
formula that combines them together to form a risk score, which is a predictor of the enrollee’s
healthcare spending in the subsequent year. We observe these indicator for MA enrollees since MA
plans must submit HCCs to CMS to determine their CMS payments. The RAPS …le also contains
indicators for the enrollees’type –community (90%), new (9%), or long-term institutional (1%) –
and three risk scores (one for each type), and we assign each enrollee her type-speci…c risk score.
    For TM enrollees only, the CMS data allows us to measure healthcare utilization and spending
through 6 claims …les: inpatient, outpatient, SNF, home health, durable medical equipment, and
physician. A seventh claims …le – the hospice claims …le – contains utilization and spending for
both TM and MA enrollees (since hospice is reimbursed by CMS for MA enrollees as well as TM
enrollees); the hospice …le is the only CMS …le where we can observe utilization and spending for
MA enrollees.
    Finally, for MA enrollees we use the Monthly Membership Detail Report and the HPMS to
construct information on revenues to MA insurers. Speci…cally, for each individual enrolled in an
MA plan, we observe the payment from CMS to the insurer. The payment from CMS to the insurer
consists of a part that is retained by the insurer and the rebate which is passed on by the insurer
to the enrollee. We observe, for each plan, this rebate amount, as well as the Part C premium that
is paid by the enrollee to the insurer. We de…ne MA revenue for a given enrollee-month as the
payments from CMS to the insurer minus the rebate to consumers, plus the Part C premiums.


A.2 Sample de…nition
We use the HCCI data to analyze spending and healthcare utilization for individuals covered by
the HCCI insurers. We use the CMS data for two primary purposes: to construct comparison
spending and healthcare utilization estimates for “comparable” TM enrollees, and to create an
independent measure of enrollment in the HCCI insurers’plans that we use to examine and validate
the completeness of the HCCI enrollment data. Both of these exercises require that we de…ne a
TM and an MA enrollee in the CMS data.
    Throughout this paper, in the CMS data we de…ne an enrollee as enrolled in MA if she is
enrolled in MA for at least one month during 2010; we de…ne someone as enrolled in TM if she
is not enrolled in MA during any month in 2010, and is enrolled in TM Part A and TM Part B
in at least one month during 2010. We count the enrollee-months in MA as the total number of
months in MA during the year. Within MA, we can further identify the subset of MA enrollees
who are in the three HCCI insurers. We restrict our analysis to enrollee-months who are 65 and
over, who reside in one of the 50 states or the District of Columbia; we do not require individuals
to be enrolled for a full year.
    We can measure the completeness of the HCCI data in terms of enrollment by the HCCI insurers
by comparing enrollee-month counts in the HCCI data to enrollee-month counts for these HCCI
insurers in the CMS data, which in principle records the universe of enrollees in those same plans.
Appendix Table A1 shows enrollee-month counts for the three HCCI insurers according to the HCCI
data and the CMS data, overall, and separately by state. To analyze how "complete" the HCCI


                                                43
data are, we compare counts of enrollee-month by state in the HCCI data (column 3) to analogous
counts of enrollee-months in the HCCI insurers by state in the CMS data (column 5); we exclude
from the CMS comparison enrollment counts in the HCCI insurers any enrollees in SNP plans since,
as discussed, these are also excluded from the HCCI data. The HCCI data contain about 78 percent
of total MA enrollees for the HCCI insurers; “missing” enrollees disproportionately concentrated
in the Western US.
    We restrict our analysis to the 36 “complete data” states, which we de…ne as states where the
count of enrollee-months in HCCI is within 10 percent of the corresponding count in CMS data.
The 10 percent cuto¤ is arbitrary, but 30 of the 36 states are within 5 percent, and these 30 states
would account for more than 70% of the enrollees in the baseline sample, so the results are unlikely
to change much with more conservative sample de…nitions. Overall, a comparison of column 8 and
column 6 of Table 1 shows that our baseline sample in HCCI has 1 percent more enrollees than the
pseudo HCCI enrollment data set we create for the same baseline sample in CMS; this is in line
with what we would expect, given that plan enrollment data is missing in CMS for 1 percent of
MA enrollees.
    Columns (1) and (2) of Appendix Table A1 show, by state, the MA share of Medicare enrollment
and the HCCI insurer share of MA. Overall, the 36 states that we analyze comprise 61 percent of
enrollment in HCCI insurers nation-wide. As can be seen in Appendix Figure A1, the states that
are omitted from our baseline analysis are disproportionately in the Western US.


Appendix B: Construction of speci…c variables
We analyze MA medical spending and utilization in the HCCI data. We benchmark it against
TM spending and utilization in the CMS data, for observably similar enrollees. We therefore
construct parallel medical spending and healthcare utilization variables in the HCCI and CMS
data. Unless explicitly noted, all MA medical spending and healthcare utilization measures are
derived from HCCI data, and all TM spending measures are derived from CMS data. All measures
are constructed at the enrollee-month level unless explicitly noted.
    Total spending is de…ned as the sum of insurer spending plus out-of-pocket spending. Insurer
spending is de…ned based on the actual amount paid by the plan (either MA or TM) to the
provider. In other words, it is the transacted (as opposed to list) price. Out-of-pocket spending
is the amount owed by the enrollee (i.e. the sum of any coinsurance, copay, and deductible). For
individuals enrolled in TM, some of this “out of pocket”spending may be covered by supplemental
private insurance (Medigap), which they may purchase separately.
    Medical spending is divided across claims …les based on who is billed, which does not map
perfectly to our concept of “place of care.” In particular, institutional billing goes to the rele-
vant institutional …le (e.g., inpatient or outpatient) while individual provider billing (regardless
of whether it is inpatient or outpatient) goes to the physician (aka carrier) …le. The structure of
claims …les is slightly di¤erent across the two data sources. We use three HCCI claims …les: Inpa-


                                                44
tient, outpatient and physician. We use seven CMS claims …les: inpatient, outpatient, physician,
SNF, home health, durable medical equipment, and hospice. In HCCI, the SNF spending is in the
inpatient …le; we identify SNF claims in the HCCI inpatient …le based on their Place of Service
(POS) codes (POS code of 31-33 determines a SNF). In HCCI, home health and durable medical
equipment are in the outpatient and physician …les. Hospice is reimbursed by TM for both TM
and MA enrollees; there is therefore no hospice spending in the HCCI data, but we can observe
hospice spending in the CMS data for both TM and MA enrollees. Finally, we note that in HCCI
the inpatient …le includes all admissions in 2010, while in CMS the inpatient and SNF …les include
discharges in 2010; we therefore supplement the 2010 SNF and inpatient discharge …les in CMS
with the 2011 SNF and inpatient discharge …les, and in both …les limit the analysis to admissions
that occur in 2010; in this way we reconstruct a 2010 admission …le that is parallel to the HCCI
admission …le.
    Below we describe he construction of speci…c variables.

Total spending and components All of these measures are constructed at the enrollee-month
level unless explicitly noted otherwise. Note that for inpatient and SNF spending, we associate
the spending with the month in which the admission occurred even when the stay extends into
subsequent months.

     Total spending: the sum of inpatient, outpatient, and SNF spending.

     Inpatient spending: in the CMS data it covers all spending on the inpatient …le plus
     spending on the physician …le associated with an inpatient hospital (POS code of 21). In the
     HCCI data it covers all spending on the inpatient …le minus SNF spending (as mentioned,
     POS codes of 31-33) plus spending on the physician …le associated with an inpatient hospital
     (POS code of 21).

     Outpatient spending: in CMS data it is the sum of all spending on the outpatient …le, the
     home health …le, and the durable medical equipment …le, plus all spending on the physician
     …le for which POS is not 21. In HCCI data is it the sum of all spending on the outpatient …le
     (which, recall, includes home health and durable medical equipment), plus spending on the
     physician …le for which POS is not 21.

     SNF spending: in CMS data it is the sum of all spending on the SNF …le, while in HCCI
     …le it is the sum of all spending on the inpatient …le with POS codes 31-33.

     Hospice spending: hospice care is reimbursed by TM for both TM and MA enrollees. There
     is therefore no hospice spending in the HCCI data, but we can observe hospice spending in
     the CMS data for both TM and MA enrollees. We use the hospice …le in the CMS data to
     measure hospice spending in TM and in MA.




                                               45
Healthcare utilization In addition to measuring spending, we also measure healthcare utiliza-
tion. We de…ne a number of standard measures of healthcare use for each enrollee-month. We
measure inpatient utilization using the inpatient …les. In the HCCI data we only count observa-
tions that are inpatient hospital admissions (i.e. we exclude SNF admissions based on POS codes
of 31-33). We measure SNF utilization using the SNF …le in the CMS data and the inpatient …le
in the HCCI data, only counting admissions with POS codes of 31-33.

         Inpatient days: the sum of the days associated with each inpatient admission that month;
         as with our inpatient spending measure, this will include all the days for each admission in a
         given month, even if those days extend beyond that month. We measure the days of a given
         admission as the di¤erence between discharge date and admission date, plus 1.

         SNF days: is de…ned analogously to inpatient days. In the CMS …le, discharge date is
         missing for about 18 percent of the observations, which appears to re‡ect discharges that
         extend beyond the 100-day coverage period for SNF in TM. Since we are interested in TM-
         covered utilization, we impute 100 days for such discharges.

         Inpatient admissions: any inpatient admission that month.20

         Physician visits: is measured based on claims in the physician …le (excluding claims with
         POS code of 21, which indicates that they occur in an inpatient setting). We de…ne physician
         visits as the sum of primary care visits and specialty care visits. We allow a maximum of
         one primary care visit per patient-day, and one specialist visit per patient day. Following the
         approach in Finkelstein et al. (2016), our de…nition of primary care physicians and specialists
         follows the Dartmouth Atlas.21 Speci…cally, we crosswalk the primary care and specialist
         de…nitions in the Dartmouth Atlas to the list of HCFA specialty codes in the CMS data. The
         HCCI data has a separate set of provider category codes which we crosswalk to the HCFA
         specialty codes.

         ED visits: we identify ED visits based on their revenue center codes. ResDAC identi…es
         revenue center codes 0400-0459 and 0981 as indicating ER serivces.22 We de…ne ED visits as
         the sum of outpatient ED visits and inpatient ED visits. We allow a maximum of one
         outpatient ED visit per patient-day and a maximum of one inpatient ED visit per patient
         - admission date. We identify an outpatient ED visit by an outpatient claim line with the
         relevant revenue code and identify an inpatient ED visit by a (non-SNF) inpatient claim line
         with the relevant revenue code.
  20
       We do not de…ne an analagous “SNF admission” measure because the HCCI data are not conduicive to de…ning
distinct admissions; we observe many consecutive short stays in SNFs for patients, and it is unclear whether these
are distinct admissions.
  21
       See http://www.dartmouthatlas.org/downloads/methods/research_methods.pdf, page 6
  22
       Source: https://www.resdac.org/resconnect/articles/144.




                                                         46
         Diagnostic Tests and Imaging Procedures. Our de…nition of diagnostic tests and imag-
         ing procedures follows Song et al. (2010), and is based on BETOS codes: codes beginning
         with T are diagnostic tests, and codes beginning with I are imaging procedures. We examine
         all claims …les for possible diagnostic tests and imaging procedures.

         Surgery. We de…ne surgeries as the sum of inpatient surgeries and outpatient surgeries.
         We de…ne an inpatient surgery using the inpatient claims …le (excluding, in the case of the
         HCCI data, POS codes of 31-33 since these indicate SNF). We classify an inpatient admission
         as having an inpatient surgery if it is associated with a “surgical DRG”.23 We count each
         unique inpatient admission with a surgical DRG as one inpatient surgery. We de…ne an
         outpatient surgery based on the HCPCS codes in the outpatient …le explicitly identi…ed
         as corresponding to “outpatient surgery”; we exclude any claims classi…ed as “emergency
         room” claims from this de…nition. We restrict to a maximum of one outpatient surgery per
         patient-date.

Spending per encounter To measure spending per SNF day we use the above de…nitions of
SNF spending and SNF days. To measure spending per inpatient admission or inpatient day, we
use the above de…nition of inpatient admissions and inpatient days above; we measure inpatient
spending however only counting spending on the inpatient …le (i.e. not including physician spending
with POS code of 21 as we do when breaking down spending by category). To measure spending
per outpatient ED visit; we count all spending on the same date as the outpatient ED visit date
that is on the outpatient …le or is on the physician …le with a POS code of 23 (“Emergency room”).
For all of these measures, we take the average across enrollee months of the ratio of spending to
utilization for that enrollee-month..

Preventive care We analyze the set of preventive care measures in Finkelstein et al. (2016)
that we can reasonably replicate in our data. These in turn are drawn from procedures measured
in the Dartmouth Atlas and the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid (CMS). These measures are
typically de…ned as rates of any care receipt during an observation period (an enrollee-month in
the baseline analysis) for a denominator of “relevant” patients. In some cases, we have to modify
the denominator due to limitations of the HCCI data (e.g. coarse age bins or the inability to do a
two-year “look back” period). We highlight these modi…cations below, which we do in parallel for
both MA and TM measures so that they are internally comparable:

         Mammogram is de…ned following the Dartmouth Atlas (see http://www.dartmouthatlas.org/data/
         table.aspx?ind=169). We de…ne the denominator as women ages 65-74; due to the coarse-
  23
       The     primary      source      was      https://www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-Data-and-Systems/Statistics-
Trends-and-Reports/MedicareFeeforSvcPartsAB/downloads/DRGDesc10.pdf.                           Information   on     6     DRGs
(14,     16,   17,   570,   571,     572),    which   is   not    present   in   the   above    source,   was     added   from
https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Coding/ICD10/Downloads/ICD-10-MS-DRG-v32-De…nitions-Manual-Text.zip.
Information on DRG 15 was added after manual search on-line.


                                                                 47
      ness of the age variable in HCCI, this is a broader “risk set” than the Dartmouth Atlas
      denominator of women ages 67-69.

      Diabetes screen (“HbA1c test”), cholesterol test (“blood lipids test”), and retinal
      eye exam (“retinal or dilated eye exam”) are de…ned following the Dartmouth Atlas (see
      http://www.dartmouthatlas.org/data/map.aspx?ind=160). For all of them the denominator
      (risk set) is de…ned as all enrollees aged 65-74 with a diagnosis of diabetes. Due to the coarse-
      ness of the age variable in HCCI, this is a slightly di¤erent “risk set” than the Dartmouth
      Atlas denominator of enrollees aged 65-75 with a diagnosis of diabetes. The de…nition of “a
      diagnosis of diabetes”also di¤ers because we have only one year of data while the Dartmouth
      Atlas de…nes a diabetes diagnosis based on encounters with speci…c codes identifying diabetes
      during the year or prior year; we are able to replicate their coding exactly, but because we
      can only look during our one observation year, our de…nition is more stringent than theirs.

      Seasonal in‡uenza vaccine, cardiovascular screening blood test, colorectal cancer
      screening, pap smears, pelvic examinations, and prostate cancer screening are de-
      …ned following CMS’preventive care de…nitions (see https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Prevention/
      PrevntionGenInfo/ Downloads/MPS_QuickReferenceChart_1.pdf; downloaded on 08/11/2016);
      for a list of relevant ICD-9 codes see https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Prevention/ Prevntion-
      GenInfo/ Downloads/MPS-QuickReferenceChart-1TextOnlywithICD9.pdf (downloaded on 08/11/2016).
      For in‡uenza, cardiovascular screening, and colorectal cancer, the denominator is everyone.
      For pap smears and pelvic exams, the denominator is all women, and for prostrate cancer the
      denominator is all men.

Appropriateness of ED visit: Billings et al. Algorithm We also classify visits using an
algorithm developed by Billings et al. (2000) that is based on the primary ICD-9 diagnosis code
for the visit. To construct this algorithm, a panel of emergency department and primary care
physicians was given access to a sample of 6,000 full emergency department records. These full
records contained detailed information about the patient including age, gender, vital signs, medical
history, presenting symptoms and also information about the resources used on the patient in the
emergency department, the diagnoses made and procedures performed. Based on this much more
extensive information than available in typical discharge or claims data like ours, each physician
classi…ed each record into one of four categories. For each primary diagnosis, the algorithm assigns
probabilities to each category of visit, based on averaging all the physicians’codings across all visits
with that diagnosis. This reliance on probabilities derived from ex post diagnoses rather than ex
ante symptoms is one of the major limitations of this measure, as has been noted elsewhere (e.g.,
Raven et al. 2013).
    Several subsequent studies have validated the algorithm (e.g. Ballard et al., 2010, Gandi and
Sabik 2014). Although originally created with ED discharge data, it has been applied to classify
ER visits from TM claims data (Joynt et al., 2013), and we follow that approach here. Like Joynt
et al. (2013), we exclude from our analysis the few (in our case, less than 4 percent in either TM

                                                  48
or MA data) ED visits with multiple primary diagnoses.
    The algorithm classi…es ED visits into 4 mutually exclusive categories. The …st distinction is be-
tween non-emergent and emergent cases. A non-emergent case is one where care is not required
within 12 hours (for example, a toothache). Among emergent cases, a distinction is then made
between emergent, ED care needed and emergent, ED care not needed ("primary care
treatable"); the latter refers to cases where care is needed within 12 hours but can be provided
in a primary care setting (e.g. a lumbar sprain). Finally, among emergent cases where ED care is
needed, the algorithm makes a …nal distinction between those that are “emergent, but primary
care preventable” and those that are “emergent but not primary care preventable.” This
…nal classi…cation distinguishes between emergencies that require ED care but could have been
prevented with appropriate ambulatory care (e.g. a heart attack) and those that could not.
    Finally, diagnoses are marked as "unclassi…ed" if the algorithm does not assign a probability
weight to it. Presumably these represent diagnoses that are too infrequent to have been included
in the dataset of visits coded by the panel of physicians who created the algorithm. In our setting,
we …nd that about a quarter of ED visits are unclassi…ed by the algorithm; this is comparable to
what has been found in other settings (e.g. Taubman et al. 2014).


Appendix C: Analysis of inpatient prices
Our objective is to compare the price of an admission at a given hospital for a given diagnosis (DRG)
in MA to what this price would have been if (counterfactually) that admission had occurred under
TM. For this analysis, we make two departures from our baseline. First, in measuring inpatient
spending, we now only consider spending on the inpatient …le, and not spending on the physician
…le associated with the inpatient admission (as we did previously in analyzing inpatient spending in
e.g. Table 4). Second, we limit our analysis to the approximately 4,000 hospitals in our baseline MA
sample that, for purposes of TM reimbursement, would have been covered by Medicare’s Prospec-
tive Payment System (PPS). PPS covers virtually all standard (non-specialty) hospitals; limiting
ourselves to MA admissions in these hospitals excludes about 5 percent of inpatient admissions,
and about 7 percent of payments to inpatient hospitals. For these standard hospitals, pricing in
TM (and to the best of our understanding in MA), is based primarily on the hospital at which the
admission occurs and the DRG for which the patient was admitted.
    We conduct two analyses, an analysis of average price di¤erences by state, and an analysis
of average price di¤erences by DRG (for common DRGs). They are conceptually the same, just
created at di¤erent units of aggregation.

   State-level prices. To arrive at a state-level average price (in either MA or TM), we calculate
the average price in the state for each MA admissions in a given DRG, and then take a weighted
average of prices for each DRG in the state. We use as weights the DRG’s (national) share of
admissions in MA;24 di¤erences in average prices within MA (or within TM) across states therefore
 24
      For a few small states, there are a number of common (national) DRGs which, in that state, have no admissions.


                                                         49
re‡ect price di¤erences for a common “DRG basket.”
    Measuring the MA price for each MA admission is straightforward: we simply calculate total
payments to hospitals for that admission, as measured in the inpatient …le.
    Measuring the (counterfactual) TM price for each MA admission proceeds in two steps. First,
we calculate the TM formula price for each MA admission as a function of the hospital and DRG
for that admission.25 We compute the average, TM formula price for each DRG in the state, and
then construct the state average TM formula price by taking a weighted average of prices across
DRGs, using each DRG’s (national) share of admissions (in MA) in that DRG as weights.
    Second, we adjust these state average TM formula prices for observed di¤erences between the
state-level transacted price and formula price in TM. The actual, transacted TM price will not
always correspond exactly to the formula TM price. For example, in certain costly cases, hospitals
receive additional “outlier payments”covering 80 percent of costs beyond a threshold. In addition,
if the individual is transferred to another hospital, the actual reimbursement will be below the
reimbursement formula. Since in MA we observe transacted prices, we want to compare to an
estimate of TM transacted prices. We therefore adjust the TM formula price to account for the
average di¤erence between TM actual and TM formula price. We calculate this adjustment factor
using CMS data in which we can observe actual TM prices (i.e. payments, as we do in MA data)
and can also construct TM formula prices. We calculate a state-speci…c adjustment factor that
is the ratio of actual TM prices to formula TM prices in that state.26 We multiply the state’s
average TM formula price by this state-speci…c adjustment factor to arrive at our estimate of the
state-speci…c average TM price. Appendix Table A3 shows the state-speci…c average MA and TM
prices.

To address this, we impute the national average price for that DRG in that missing state-DRG pair, corrected by a
state-speci…c correction factor. The state-speci…c correction factor is given by the ratio of the state price and average
national price for the DRGs we do observe in that state.
  25
       As noted, under TM, these admissions would be reimbursed by Medicare’s PPS; the PPS reimbursement for-
mula is the product of a hospital-speci…c “base payment” rate times a diagnosis-speci…c (DRG) weight; both
are publicly available from CMS.The DRG weights can be found here: https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Medicare-
Fee-for-Service-Payment/AcuteInpatientPPS/Acute-Inpatient-Files-for-Download-Items/CMS1247873.html (see …le
FY_2010_FR_Table_5).           The hospital base payment rates can be found in the Medicare Impact File
(available here: https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Medicare-Fee-for-Service-Payment/AcuteInpatientPPS/Historical-
Impact-Files-for-FY-1994-through-Present.html). The base payment rates for the hospital include hospital-speci…c
adjustments for wage index reclassi…cations, indirect medical education payments, and disproportionate share pay-
ments. The HCCI data has encrypted hospital identi…ers that can not be directly mapped to the publicly available
data on hospital base payment rates. We are extremely grateful to Zack Cooper for providing us with a …le containing
these base payment rates linked to the encrypted hospital identi…ers.
  26
       Once again, for both actual and formula TM prices, we compute the average of admission prices by state-DRG,
and then a weighted average by state, in which the weight associated to each DRG is the national share of MA
admissions with that DRG.



                                                           50
    DRG-level prices. The DRG-level analysis proceeds in a similar manner except that we now
compute the average price for each DRG by taking a weighted-average of prices for each state in
the DRG, using as weights the state’s share of admissions (across all DRGs) in MA; the di¤erences
in average prices across DRGs within MA (or within TM) therefore re‡ects price di¤erences for a
common “state basket,” which mimics the geographic distribution of MA admission across states.
    The measurement of the average TM price for each DRG proceeds in the same two steps. First,
we calculate each DRG’s average TM formula price using the same TM formula prices for each
admission that we used in the state-level analysis, but now average these across states for each
DRG, using the state’s share of admission (in MA) as weights. Second, we adjust the average TM
formula price in the DRG by a DRG-speci…c adjustment factor re‡ecting the DRG-speci…c ratio
of actual TM prices to formula TM prices.27 Appendix Table A2 shows the DRG-speci…c average
MA and TM prices for the 20 most common DRGs.


Appendix References
Ballard, Dustin, Mary Price, Vicki Fung, Richard Brand, Mary Reed, Bruce Fireman, Joseph P.
Newhouse, Joseph Selby, and John Hsu. 2010. “Validation of an Algorithm for Categorizing the
Severity of Hospital Emergency Room Visits.” Medical Care 48(1).
    Gandhi, Sabrina and Linsday Sabik. 2014. “Emergency Department Visit Classi…cation Using
the NYU Algorithm.” The American Journal of Managed Care 20(4): 315-320.
    Joynt, Karen, Atul Gawande, E. John Oray and Ashish Jha. 2013. “Contribution of Pre-
ventable Acute Care Spending to Total Spending for High-Cost Medicare Patients.”Journal of the
American Medical Association 309(24): 2572-2578.
    Raven, M.C., R.A. Lowe, J. Maselli, and R.Y. Hsia. 2013. “Comparison of presenting complaint
vs discharge diagnosis for identifying ‘nonemergency’emergency department visits.”Journal of the
American Medical Association 309, 1145-1153.
  27
       For both actual and formula TM prices, we compute the average admission prices for each state-DRG, and then
a weighted average by DRG, in which the weight associated with each state is the state’s share of MA admissions.




                                                         51
Appendix Figure A1: States included in the baseline sample




Figure shows MA share of Medicare enrollment by state; states that are white are omitted from baseline sample.
Appendix A and Appendix Table A1 provide more detail.




                                                     52
Appendix Figure A2: Mortality-Spending Relationship in TM and MA




Figure shows relationship between annual mortality rate and spending for each state, separately for TM (top panel)
and MA (bottom panel). In the top panel, the size of each bubble is proportional to the number of TM enrollees in
the state. In the bottom panel, the size of each bubble is proportional to the number of MA enrollees in the state.




                                                        53
Appendix Figure A3: Propensity score distributions




Figure shows the distribution of propensity scores in the baseline sample for the TM (black) and MA (gray) popu-
lations. The …gure uses row 3 of Table 9, where propensity scores are generated from a logit regression of an MA
indicator on dummy variables for each risk score bin (of 0.1), which is estimated county by county.




                                                        54
Appendix Table A1: Construction of baseline sample

                                                                             Counts of Enrollee-Months in HCCI Insurers
                                                HCCI insurers
                                MA Share (%)                                                      cleaned          % Difference:
                                               share of MA (%)    All HCCI           All CMS
                                                                                                    CMS            ((3) - (5))/(5)
                                    (1)              (2)            (3)                 (4)          (5)                   (6)

                        All         28.0            37.4         32,505,844         44,371,265 41,684,486                 -22.0

                        AL          22.4            28.2          421,380            449,306      383,695                  9.8
                        AK          0.8             58.6           2,602              2,680        2,631                  -1.1
                        AZ          39.2            53.9          648,500           1,807,922    1,628,786                -60.2
                        AR          14.5            43.3          272,328            285,038      284,887                 -4.4
                        CA          42.9            22.6          642,277           4,169,255    4,071,737                -84.2
                        CO          39.2            47.9          354,798           1,076,124    1,013,937                -65.0
                        CT          21.5            20.9          210,161            236,303      194,975                  7.8
                        DE          3.8             72.0          39,199              37,995       35,596                 10.1
                        DC          13.6            12.4           6,317              10,271       5,019                  25.9
                        FL          32.8            56.6         5,097,850          6,019,462    5,458,355                -6.6
                        GA          24.4            69.1         1,739,812          1,821,869    1,729,667                 0.6
                        HI          49.1            23.1          151,329            220,785      153,906                 -1.7
                        ID          33.0            37.9          244,680            266,744      259,697                 -5.8
                        IL          11.1            59.7         1,094,149          1,119,609    1,091,129                 0.3
                        IN          18.2            47.4          784,123            795,364      778,536                  0.7
                        IA         14.7             61.5          444,714            455,813      454,166                 -2.1
                        KS         12.3             61.1          300,774            306,948      302,071                 -0.4
                        KY         18.2             60.9          685,965            696,447      696,236                 -1.5
                        LA         28.0             57.2          932,542            953,417      935,861                 -0.4
                        ME         15.6             25.0          87,411              90,216       90,087                 -3.0
                        MD          9.3             27.9          180,940            183,320      154,445                 17.2
                       MA          25.4             8.2           140,131            194,537      103,079                 35.9
                       MI          18.5             16.2          446,674            453,679      444,670                  0.5
                       MN          49.8             9.2           321,824            340,132      340,008                 -5.3
                       MS          10.0             49.2          197,121            205,978      205,846                 -4.2
                       MO          24.6             46.7          999,750           1,037,740     999,320                  0.0
                       MT          19.9             54.6          166,173            173,636      173,559                 -4.3
                       NE          13.0             68.1          230,020            237,516      235,717                 -2.4
                       NV          36.0             87.9          337,836           1,021,319    1,020,570                -66.9
                       NH           8.5             35.1          56,321              57,540       57,242                 -1.6
                       NJ          14.4             60.1          706,632           1,060,082    1,028,209                -31.3
                       NM          30.0             20.6          142,307            169,552      148,360                 -4.1
                       NY          35.9             14.6          539,254           1,405,315    1,270,208                -57.5
                       NC          19.5             53.5         1,324,226          1,401,748    1,138,093                16.4
                       ND           9.0             59.9          54,576             57,067        57,052                 -4.3
                       OH          39.4             57.0         3,856,644          3,957,898    3,855,415                 0.0
                       OK          16.8             46.9          183,566            428,148      416,256                 -55.9
                       OR          47.8             15.1          205,505            416,014      401,139                 -48.8
                       PA          43.1             18.4         1,539,253          1,676,370    1,583,624                -2.8
                       RI          44.2             44.4          302,571            308,224      283,232                  6.8
                       SC          16.5             36.3          396,921            409,194      408,879                 -2.9
                       SD           9.0             69.2          78,564             82,584       82,534                  -4.8
                       TN          26.9             48.0         1,086,782          1,192,598    1,073,406                1.2
                       TX          21.6             52.6         1,478,223          3,092,452    2,753,984                -46.3
                       UT          38.8             51.4          480,772            517,799      500,744                 -4.0
                       VT           5.1             56.9          29,216             29,260       29,244                  -0.1




All data except from column (3) are from CMS. Columns (1) and (2) show the MA share of total Medicare enrollment
and the HCCI insurers’share of MA enrollment, respectively. Columns (3) through (5) show counts of enrollee-months
in the HCCI insurers in di¤erent data sets. Columns (3) and (4) are based on the full sample of data (see columns
(7) and (3) of Table 1, respectively). Column (5) excludes enrollees in SNP plans. States that are in bold are those
that are included in our baseline sample (using our criteria of being within 10%), and correspond to columns (8) and
(6) of Table 1, respectively.



                                                                     55
Appendix Table A2: MA-TM prices di¤erences for most common DRGs


DRG Code                                 DRG Description                        MA Admissions   MA price   TM price   (MA-TM)/TM
   (1)                                          (2)                                  (3)          (4)        (5)          (6)

   All DRGs (weighted by MA admission shares)                                      488,008      10,054      9,945        1.1%

   470     Major Joint Replacement Or Reattachment Of Lower Extremity W/O Mcc      23,879       12,387     12,005        3.2%
   392     Esophagitis, Gastroent & Misc Digest Disorders W/O Mcc                  10,897        4,203      4,328        -2.9%
   871     Septicemia Or Severe Sepsis W/O Mv 96+ Hours W Mcc                      10,035       11,490     11,540        -0.4%
   291     Heart Failure & Shock W Mcc                                              9,595        8,917      9,009        -1.0%
   292     Heart Failure & Shock W Cc                                               9,113        5,939      6,075        -2.2%
   312     Syncope & Collapse                                                       8,032        4,255      4,476        -4.9%
   690     Kidney & Urinary Tract Infections W/O Mcc                                8,024        4,544      4,729        -3.9%
   194     Simple Pneumonia & Pleurisy W Cc                                         7,488        6,017      6,049        -0.5%
   310     Cardiac Arrhythmia & Conduction Disorders W/O Cc/Mcc                     7,185        3,513      3,495        0.5%
   247     Perc Cardiovasc Proc W Drug-Eluting Stent W/O Mcc                        6,710       11,865     11,510        3.1%
   313     Chest Pain                                                               6,682        3,182      3,381        -5.9%
   190     Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease W Mcc                              6,599        7,021      7,238        -3.0%
   378     G.I. Hemorrhage W Cc                                                     6,396        6,010      6,098        -1.4%
   287     Circulatory Disorders Except Ami, W Card Cath W/O Mcc                    6,291        6,351      6,387        -0.6%
   641     Nutritional & Misc Metabolic Disorders W/O Mcc                           6,129        4,155      4,255        -2.3%
   193     Simple Pneumonia & Pleurisy W Mcc                                        5,682        8,670      8,717        -0.5%
   192     Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease W/O Cc/Mcc                         5,508        4,300      4,355        -1.3%
   191     Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease W Cc                              5,424         5,724      5,835        -1.9%
   683     Renal Failure W Cc                                                      5,395         6,197      6,391        -3.0%
   65      Intracranial Hemorrhage Or Cerebral Infarction W Cc                     5,176         6,967      7,051        -1.2%




Table reports average prices for a hospital admission in TM and MA for the top 20 DRGs, and overall across all
DRGs (not limited to the top 20). Averages are computed for each DRG using a common (MA) “basket” of state
admission shares. Sample is a subset of our baseline sample; it is limited to all MA inpatient admissions to hospitals
that are paid (by CMS) under prospective payment system (PPS).




                                                                      56
Appendix Table A3: MA-TM price di¤erences, by state


                     State   MA Admissions        MA price        TM price     (MA-TM)/TM
                      (1)         (2)                (3)            (4)             (5)

                       AL        9,411              8,984          8,862           1.4%
                      AR         4,733              9,461          9,056           4.5%
                       CT        2,894             11,495          12,778         -10.0%
                       FL       104,424            10,291          9,851           4.5%
                      GA         27,876            10,300          9,944           3.6%
                       HI        1,351             13,275          13,350          -0.6%
                       IA        5,925              9,656          9,693           -0.4%
                       ID        2,189             10,297          9,700           6.2%
                       IL        19,359            10,183          10,356          -1.7%
                       IN        11,953             9,703          9,522           1.9%
                       KS        5,261              9,428          9,533           -1.1%
                       KY        13,794             9,684          9,733           -0.5%
                       LA        20,905             9,948          9,841           1.1%
                      ME          996              10,341          10,869          -4.9%
                      MI         8,674             10,097          10,948          -7.8%
                      MN         5,264             10,911          10,969          -0.5%
                      MO         17,550             9,657          9,594           0.7%
                      MS         4,033              9,728          9,446           3.0%
                      MT         2,133              9,777          9,512           2.8%
                      ND          719               9,532          9,230           3.3%
                      NE         3,998             10,215          10,319         -1.0%
                      NH          591              11,229          11,010          2.0%
                      NM         1,748             10,949          11,198         -2.2%
                      OH         89,716             9,574          9,916          -3.5%
                      PA         35,344            11,130          10,401          7.0%
                       RI        5,149             11,575          12,144         -4.7%
                      SC         6,800             10,003          10,376         -3.6%
                      SD         1,073             10,831          10,802          0.3%
                      TN         24,161             9,756          8,959           8.9%
                      UT         6,112              9,638          9,363           2.9%
                      VA         14,409             9,773          9,908          -1.4%
                      VT          146              11,936          13,690         -12.8%
                      WI         19,099            10,334          10,521         -1.8%
                      WV         9,834              9,238          9,647          -4.2%
                      WY          350              12,930          13,034         -0.8%




Table reports average prices for a hospital admission in TM and MA for each state in our baseline sample (except
Alaska which is omitted because it had too few inpatient admissions for us to report). Averages are computed for
each state using a common (MA) “basket” of DRG admission shares. Sample is a subset of our baseline sample; it
is limited to all MA inpatient admissions to hospitals that are paid (by CMS) under prospective payment system
(PPS).




                                                      57
