                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        A MODEL OF SECULAR STAGNATION:
                      THEORY AND QUANTITATIVE EVALUATION

                                      Gauti B. Eggertsson
                                       Neil R. Mehrotra
                                       Jacob A. Robbins

                                      Working Paper 23093
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23093


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2017




This paper replaces an earlier version of a paper released in 2014 under the title “A Model of
Secular Stagnation.” We thank the Institute for New Economic Thinking for financial support.
We also thank Olivier Blanchard, John Cochrane, Michael Dotsey, Emmanuel Farhi, Jesus
Fernandez-Villaverde, Pablo Guerron-Quintana, Benjamin Keen, Pat Kehoe, John Leahy, Emi
Nakamura, Paolo Pesenti, and Lawrence Summers for helpful discussions and conference and
seminar participants at the Bank of Canada, Bank of England, Bank for International Settlements,
Bank of Japan, Bank of Finland, Boston University, Brown, Central Bank of Austria, Cornell,
Chicago Booth, Georgetown, European Central Bank, Rutgers, the Federal Reserve Banks of
Boston, Dallas, Minneapolis, and New York, Harvard, LSE, LUISS Guido Carli, NBER Summer
Institute MEFM and EFG meetings, Northwestern, Princeton, Royal Economic Society meetings,
and UTDT for comments. We would also like to thank Alex Mechanick for excellent research
assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Gauti B. Eggertsson, Neil R. Mehrotra, and Jacob A. Robbins. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
A Model of Secular Stagnation: Theory and Quantitative Evaluation
Gauti B. Eggertsson, Neil R. Mehrotra, and Jacob A. Robbins
NBER Working Paper No. 23093
January 2017, Revised February 2017
JEL No. E31,E32,E5,E52,E58,E6,E62

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper formalizes and quantifies the secular stagnation hypothesis, defined as a persistently
low or negative natural rate of interest leading to a chronically binding zero lower bound (ZLB).
Output-inflation dynamics and policy prescriptions are fundamentally different from those in the
standard New Keynesian framework. Using a 56-period quantitative life cycle model, a standard
calibration to US data delivers a natural rate ranging from –1:5% to –2%, implying an elevated
risk of ZLB episodes for the foreseeable future. We decompose the contribution of demographic
and technological factors to the decline in interest rates since 1970 and quantify changes required
to restore higher rates.

Gauti B. Eggertsson                              Jacob A. Robbins
Department of Economics                          Department of Economics
Brown University                                 Brown University
64 Waterman Street                               64 Waterman Street
Providence, RI 02912                             Providence, RI 02906
and NBER                                         Jacob_Robbins@brown.edu
gauti_eggertsson@brown.edu

Neil R. Mehrotra
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
90 Hennepin Avenue
Minneapolis, MN 55401
neil_mehrotra@brown.edu




A online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w23093
                                                                                                                                  Figure 1: Short and long term interest rates

                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      


 "                                                                                                                                                                                                                  "


                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
 
           "#


                              #



                                                            #
                                                                       #!
                                                                                 #"
                                                                                          ##
                                                                                                     


                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                   


                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                 #


                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                         #




                                                                                                                                                                                               
                     #



                                                   #




                                                                                                               



                                                                                                                                              



                                                                                                                                                                           



                                                                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               "#


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #"
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ##
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
1              Introduction

The zero lower bound (ZLB) on the short-term nominal interest rate became a binding constraint
in the United States in 2008 in the midst of the ﬁnancial crisis. Accordingly, low interest rates
are often tied to that event, and it may seem natural to presume that as the crisis of 2008 moves
into the rear view mirror so too will the low interest rate environment. This perspective seems
vindicated by the recent interest rate increases by the Federal Reserve in the fourth quarter of
2016. However, as shown in Figure 1, the low interest rate in 2008 was not just an anomaly that
arose solely because of the ﬁnancial crisis. Instead, it is the culmination of a 25-year trend across
major industrial economies. In Japan, rates have been zero since the mid-1990s and remain there
today. Furthermore, while recent increases in the Federal Funds rate may give rise to optimism
in the US, rates remain at zero in Europe with no end in sight. The fact that rates remain so low
should raise concern that the ZLB will remain a signiﬁcant constraint on US monetary policy in
the future should economic conditions deteriorate.
           This paper contemplates the possibility that the fall in interest rates observed over the past 25
years in the industrialized world represents a permanent change — a ”new normal.” We propose
a model that allows for ZLB episodes of arbitrary duration due to a persistent fall in interest
rates (as observed in Figure 1) driven by slow-moving secular forces that are unlikely to reverse
themselves. We also perform a quantitative assessment to ascertain the plausibility of a decline in
the natural (full employment) interest rate to negative values using a quantitative life cycle model
calibrated to current US data.
           This paper should be read as a formalization of the secular stagnation hypothesis, originally
proposed by Hansen (1939), who, a decade into the Great Depression with interest rates still at


                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1
zero, argued that the US economy faced a permanent shortfall in aggregate demand. This idea was
recently resurrected by Lawrence Summers, who argued that one should think of secular stagna-
tion as the hypothesis that the natural rate of interest (the equilibrium real interest rate consistent
with output at potential) is permanently negative (see Summers (2013) and Summers (2014)). We
formalize this idea by constructing a series of analytic and quantitative overlapping generation
models (OLG) of varying degrees of complexity in which the steady-state, full-employment real
interest rate is permanently negative. This leads under certain conditions to a chronically bind-
ing ZLB, subpar growth, and inﬂation below target; we deﬁne these characteristics as a secular
stagnation.
    The policy implications of our framework differ in important ways from the standard ZLB
literature. Perhaps most importantly, a policy of simply waiting for a ZLB episode to end is not
a good strategy in a secular stagnation; there is no deus ex machina for recovery as presumed in
the existing literature (see Krugman (1998) and Eggertsson and Woodford (2003), where the ex-
ogenous shocks that give rise to the ZLB must ultimately revert). The absence of an automatic
recovery has fundamental implications for monetary policy. Unlike in Eggertsson and Woodford
(2003), forward guidance loses most of its power, for two reasons. First, agents do not necessar-
ily anticipate a future date at which the ZLB is not binding. Second, aggregate demand (or the
intertemporal IS equation) is not as ”forward looking” — sensitive to expectations about future
income — in our setting relative to the standard model. Raising the inﬂation target may be an
option to accommodate a negative natural rate of interest. This policy, however, suffers from two
major drawbacks. First, an increase in the inﬂation target must be sufﬁciently large. For example,
if the natural rate of interest is −4%, the inﬂation target must be 4% or higher. Small changes in
the inﬂation target have no effect, capturing Krugman’s observation of the ”law of the excluded
middle” or ”timidity trap” when trying explain why the Japanese economy might not respond
to a higher inﬂation target announced by the Bank of Japan unless it was sufﬁciently aggressive
(see Krugman (2014)). Second, even with a high enough increase in the inﬂation target, the sec-
ular stagnation equilibrium is not eliminated. Hence, an increase in the inﬂation target allows
for a better outcome, but it does not guarantee it because it cannot exclude a secular stagnation
equilibrium.1
    Fiscal policy is more effective in addressing the problems raised by secular stagnation, and an
aggressive enough ﬁscal expansion does not suffer from multiplicity of steady states — it elimi-
nates the secular stagnation steady state altogether. However, the effects of ﬁscal policy are more
subtle than in the standard New Keynesian treatment of the ZLB. Increases in government spend-
ing can carry zero or negative multipliers in our model, depending on the distribution of taxes
across generations. The key for successful ﬁscal policy is that it must reduce the oversupply of
    1
        In fact, theory provides no obvious way to determine whether the high or low steady state will be chosen because
they both pass standard equilibrium selection tests, such as local determinacy.

                                                            2
savings and raise the natural rate of interest. Fiscal policy that instead increases desired sav-
ings by, for example, reducing future disposable income through tax increases, can exacerbate a
secular stagnation. In the standard NK model, government spending multipliers are above one
irrespective of the ﬁnancing mechanism and may be unboundedly large for reasons related to the
forward-looking intertemporal IS curve. These mechanisms are considerably attenuated in our
framework.
    In addition to allowing for the possibility of arbitrarily long periods of negative interest rates,
our model accounts for and can quantify a host of new forces that affect the natural rate of interest.
These forces come naturally into play in our analysis since we abandon the representative agent
framework of the standard NK model. Essentially any force that alters the relative supply of
savings and investment can have an effect on the interest rate. We show how a slowdown in
population growth or an increase in life expectancy puts downward pressure on the natural rate.
Rising income inequality or a fall in the relative price of investment goods may also reduce the
natural rate. A slowdown in productivity growth can also play an important role.2
    Many existing narratives of the Great Recession in the US have emphasized the effect of debt
deleveraging caused by the housing crisis on restraining aggregate demand and causing the ZLB
to bind (see, for example, Mian and Suﬁ (2014), Eggertsson and Krugman (2012), Guerrieri and
Lorenzoni (2011), and Mehrotra (2017)). For this reason, we incorporate ﬁnancial frictions in our
baseline model. In earlier models, even a permanent shock that tightens credit to ﬁnancially con-
strained households results in only a temporary ZLB episode. Once the deleveraging cycle runs
its course, the natural rate of interest rises, aggregate demand rises, and the ZLB episode ends. In
stark contrast, in our model a deleveraging cycle need not culminate in a rise in the natural rate,
and there is no guarantee of a recovery once deleveraging ends. Indeed, our model predicts that,
as the deleveraging cycle runs its course, interest rates continue to fall as the young borrowers
who transition to saving in middle age have greater disposable income. Incorporating ﬁnancial
frictions in our model also gives some structure to the idea that secular stagnation conditions may
have existed prior to 2008 but were masked by the tech bubble in the late 1990s and the subsequent
housing bubble in the early 2000s as suggested by Summers (2014).
    While the ﬁrst main contribution of this paper is an analytic framework that lays out the the-
oretical ingredients needed to characterize secular stagnation, the second main contribution is
building a medium-scale life cycle model to explore whether persistently negative natural interest
rates are quantitatively realistic. We build a 56-period OLG model with capital and calibrate it
to match the US economy in 2015, assuming that the output gap at that time is either (i) zero, or
(ii) corresponds to the deviation of output from its pre-2008 trend — two natural (and extreme)
benchmarks. In our calibrated model, this gives us a range for the natural rate of interest from
    2
        It should be noted that the elasticity of the interest rate to changes in productivity growth differs in an OLG setting
relative to the standard representative agent model.

                                                                3
−1.47% to −2.20%.
    Our quantitative model is able to generate a permanently negative natural rate of interest us-
ing parameters that are standard in the macro literature and match key moments from the US
data. The main drivers of negative natural interest rates are an aging population, low fertility,
and sluggish productivity growth. While this trend may reverse itself, if current projections for
fertility and productivity hold, our analysis suggests that the natural rate of interest will be low
or negative for the foreseeable future.3 Though productivity growth has experienced unexpected
periods of acceleration and deceleration since the 1970s, the demographic factors accounting for a
low natural rate of interest are unlikely to abate.
    We use our model to understand the decline in interest rates seen in the data. We take our 2015
calibration and revert observable demographic and productivity factors to their 1970s value. Over
this period, our model generates a 4.02% decrease in the real interest rate from 1970 to 2015, which
matches the actual decrease of 4.09% experienced in the real Federal Funds rate over that period.
The reductions in fertility, mortality, and the rate of productivity growth play the largest role; each
alone can account for a fall in the real interest rate of −1.84%, −1.92%, and −1.90%, respectively.
The main factor that has tended to counterbalance these forces is an increase in government debt,
which accounts for a 2.11% increase in the real interest rate. Changes in the labor share, the relative
price of investment goods, and variation in consumer debt capacity play a quantitatively smaller
role (the ﬁrst two decrease rates by −0.50% and −0.44%, while the last raises rates by 0.13%).
    We also evaluate quantitatively the assumptions under which one should expect real interest
rates to revert to a more normal level of 1% — the assumption maintained by current Federal
Reserve projections. At a 1% steady-state real interest rate, the ZLB is much less likely to pose a
problem for business cycle stabilization (see, for example, Williams (2016)). A key determinant
of whether interest rates are likely to increase is whether the rate of productivity growth, which
has slowed markedly since the 1970s, returns to its long-run rate of 2% per year. This experiment
makes clear that the lively debate between Robert Gordon and others about the likely evolution of
productivity is crucial in determining whether secular stagnation will remain a problem. Gordon
(2012) takes a very pessimistic view of the evolution of future productivity, while Brynjolfsson and
McAfee (2014), for example, take a more optimistic view. Our simulations suggest that the stakes
are high in that debate for the future conduct of monetary policy, as it may determine the extent
to which the ZLB remains an issue for macroeconomic stabilization.
    Our paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we relate the paper to the existing literature. In
Section 3, we present our baseline model, starting with a simple endowment economy to explore

    3
        Of course, a negative natural rate of interest in steady state does not exclude the possibility that we may see a
short-term rise in the nominal interest rate due to temporary business cycle factors. Instead, it suggests that there are
plausible conditions under which one should expect recurrent and chronic ZLB episodes going forward that can be of
arbitrary duration.

                                                             4
interest rate determination in an OLG model with no nominal frictions. Section 4 adds price level
determination. Sections 5 and 6 incorporate nominal rigidities and show how negative real inter-
est rates can create a demand recession. Section 7 evaluates monetary and ﬁscal policy responses
in a secular stagnation. Section 8 presents a 56-generation life cycle model with capital accumu-
lation and borrowing constraints to allow for a quantitative evaluation of the secular stagnation
hypothesis.


2       Related Literature

It may seem somewhat surprising that the idea of secular stagnation has not already been studied
in detail in the relatively large literature on the liquidity trap. This literature already invites the
possibility that the zero bound on the nominal interest rate is binding for some period of time
due to a drop in the natural rate of interest. The reason for this omission, we suspect, is that
secular stagnation does not emerge naturally from the current vintage of models in use in the
literature. This, however — and perhaps unfortunately — has less to do with economic reality
than with the limitations of these models. Most analyses of the current crisis take place within
representative agent models (see, e.g., Krugman (1998), Eggertsson and Woodford (2003), Chris-
tiano, Eichenbaum and Rebelo (2011), and Werning (2012) for a few well-known examples) where
the long-run real interest rate is directly determined by the inverse of the discount factor of the
representative agent. Zero lower bound episodes are caused by temporary shocks to the discount
factor triggering temporary reductions in the real interest rate that eventually must revert back to
a positive long-run level.4 The second generation of these models, as in Eggertsson and Krugman
(2012), that more explicitly incorporate ﬁnancial frictions and deleveraging cannot generate per-
manently negative rates either, since the steady-state real interest rate is tied to the discount rate
of the representative saver.
    Our model differs fundamentally from this earlier generation of models. As has been under-
stood since Samuelson (1958), with an OLG structure the discount factor of a representative saver
is no longer the sole determinant of the natural rate of interest, and a negative natural rate that
lasts for an arbitrarily long time is now a possibility.5 Our contribution is to introduce the zero
lower bound in a framework where the natural rate of interest is inﬂuenced by a broader set of
factors than in the typical inﬁnite-horizon model. As we argue, these differences are nontrivial
for thinking about monetary and ﬁscal policy at the zero lower bound. Furthermore, an OLG

    4
        A permanent shock to the household’s discount factor is not possible since the maximization problem of the
representative household is no longer well deﬁned. One possible alternative in the representative agent framework is
a rise in uncertainty large enough to make the risk-free rate negative, as in Abel et al. (1989).
     5
       For a more recent reference that provides a good overview of the results in the literature, see Blanchard and Weil
(2001).

                                                           5
structure allows for a richer set of factors to inﬂuence the real interest rate, which is essential for
understanding the sources and potential persistence of the decline in the natural rate.
    A recent literature has emphasized that existing New Keynesian models of the zero lower
bound tend to generate inﬂation and output dynamics at odds with recent ZLB episodes; NK
models predict a sharp collapse in output and deﬂationary spirals for particularly long-lasting
ZLB episodes (see, e.g., Cochrane (2016)). By contrast, our model does not suffer from these coun-
terfactual dynamics. In a secular stagnation steady state, inﬂation is persistently below target and
output falls below trend, which matches the observed dynamics of output, inﬂation, and interest
rates in the US, Eurozone, and Japan. Similarly, our model also does not suffer from the ”forward
guidance puzzle” — the idea that interest rate changes very far in the future have implausibly
large effects on output and inﬂation today, as discussed in Del Negro, Giannoni and Patterson
(2012). The intertemporal IS equation in our model is not as forward looking, exhibiting endoge-
nous discounting as in McKay, Nakamura and Steinsson (2016) due to life cycle considerations as
opposed to occasionally binding borrowing constraints in their model.
    A literature related to our work that explores the deﬂation steady state in a standard NK model
is found in Benhabib, Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2001), Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2017), and Be-
nigno and Fornaro (2015). A key difference to this strand of the literature is that, in these papers,
the ZLB is binding due to self-fulﬁlling expectations rather than the fundamental factors we con-
sider here. Moreover, the ZLB steady state in these models is locally indeterminate. In contrast, the
secular stagnation equilibrium in our model satisﬁes normal determinacy conditions. This allows
us to consider well-deﬁned comparative statics, and our steady state is immune from criticism
as in Christiano, Eichenbaum and Johannsen (2016), who argue that indeterminate ZLB episodes
driven by self-fulﬁlling expectations can be ruled out on the grounds that they are not ”learnable”
and hence it is unclear how expectations can coordinate on this steady state (see Gibbs (2017)).
    Other closely related work includes Kocherlakota (2013), who also considers a permanent liq-
uidity trap. The focus in that paper is on falling land prices as a trigger for the crisis, while our
focus is on the forces usually associated with secular stagnation: population dynamics, income
inequality, a decline in the relative price of investment goods, and a debt deleveraging shock.6
Likewise, Caballero and Farhi (2014) characterize a long-lasting ZLB episode resulting from a
scarcity of safe assets. This work is more closely focused on explaining falling rates during the
Great Recession as opposed to long-term interest rate trends, the focus of the secular stagnation
hypothesis. It is worth stressing, however, that the safety trap mechanism is not inconsistent with

    6
        In the context of the Japanese crisis, Krugman (1998) suggested that population dynamics might be driving some
of the decline in the natural rate of interest, although he did not explore this possibility explicitly. Carvalho and Ferrero
(2014) quantify this force in a medium-scale DSGE model in the Japanese context and argue that demographic pres-
sures were a signiﬁcant contributor. Another recent contribution in the same vein but focusing on US age dynamics is
Gagnon, Johannsen and Lopez-Salido (2016).

                                                             6
the forces we emphasize as driving secular stagnation. Indeed, building on an earlier version of
this paper, Caballero and Farhi (2014) explicitly incorporate the supply side of our model and
show that many of the same policy conclusions apply. In separate work, the simple model in this
paper is extended to an open economy setting (Eggertsson et al. (2016)), where the open economy
dimensions of secular stagnation are analyzed. Open economy factors are particularly relevant
when thinking about the global savings glut identiﬁed in Bernanke (2005) as a source of low in-
terest rates in the early 1990s, as well as in understanding policy spillovers from current account
imbalances and monetary/ﬁscal policy interactions across countries in a global secular stagnation
(see also Coeurdacier, Guibaud and Jin (2015) for the role of demographics and low interest rates
in a global context).


3   Endowment Economy

We start by considering a simple overlapping-generations economy to analyze the determination
of interest rates in an OLG setting. Households live for three periods. They are born in period 1
(young), enter middle age in period 2 (middle age), and retire in period 3 (old). Consider the case
in which no aggregate saving is feasible (that is, there is no physical capital) but that generations
can borrow and lend to one another. Moreover, imagine that only the middle-aged and old gener-
ations receive any income in the form of an endowment: Ytm and Yto . In this case, the young will
borrow from the middle-aged households, which, in turn, will save for retirement. The old will
not save, but will fully consume their remaining income and assets. We assume, however, that
there is a limit on the amount of debt the young can borrow. Generally, we would like to think of
this as reﬂecting some sort of incentive constraint, but for the purposes of this paper it will simply
take the form of an exogenous time-varying constant Dt (as in the ”debtors” in Eggertsson and
Krugman (2012)).
    More concretely, consider the representative household of a cohort born at time t. This house-
hold has the following utility function:
                                                             m            o 
                         y
                            max         Et log (Cty ) + β log Ct+1 + β 2 log Ct+2  ,
                        Ct,   m ,C o
                            ,Ct+1 t+2


where Cty is the consumption of the household when young, Ct+1
                                                           m its consumption when middle

           o
aged, and Ct+2 its consumption while old. We assume that borrowing and lending take place via
one-period riskless bonds denoted Bti , where i = y, m, o at an interest rate rt . Given this structure,




                                                       7
we can write the budget constraints facing households born at time t in each period as

                                               Cty = Bty                                                                 (1)
                                              m
                                             Ct+1 = Yt+1
                                                      m
                                                         − (1 + rt ) Bty + Bt+1
                                                                            m
                                                                                                                         (2)
                                              o
                                             Ct+2 = Yt+2
                                                      o
                                                         − (1 + rt+1 ) Bt+1
                                                                        m
                                                                                                                         (3)
                                       (1 + rt )Bti ≤ Dt ,                                                               (4)

where equation (1) corresponds to the budget constraint for the young where consumption is ﬁ-
nanced by borrowing. Equation (2) gives the budget constraint of the middle-aged household that
receives the endowment Ytm , repays what was borrowed, and saves Bt+1
                                                                  m for retirement. Finally,

equation (3) corresponds to the budget constraint when the household is old, consuming savings
and interest and any endowment received in the last period.7
    The inequality (4) corresponds to the exogenous borrowing limit (as in Eggertsson and Krug-
man (2012)). We assume that the collateral constraint is tight enough so that it binds for the
young:8
                                                                   Dt
                                                  Cty = Bty =           ,                                                (5)
                                                                 1 + rt
where the amount of debt that the young can borrow depends on their ability to repay in the
middle period and, therefore, includes interest payments. As a result, a drop in the real interest
rate increases borrowing by the young.
    The old at any time t are hand to mouth and will consume their income:

                                             Cto = Yto − (1 + rt−1 ) Bt−1
                                                                      m
                                                                          .                                              (6)

The middle aged, however, are at an interior solution and their consumption-saving choices satisfy
a standard Euler equation given by
                                                    1       1 + rt
                                                       = βEt o .                                                         (7)
                                                   Ctm      Ct+1

We assume that the size of each generation is given by Nt . Let us deﬁne the growth rate of the new
cohort by 1 + gt =          Nt
                           Nt−1 .   Equilibrium in the bond market requires that borrowing of the young
equals the savings of the middle aged so that Nt Bty = −Nt−1 Btm or

                                                  (1 + gt )Bty = −Btm .                                                  (8)


    7
        The addition of a warm-glow bequest motive would not affect our qualitative results because the steady-state
real interest may remain negative. Thwaites (2015) shows that bequests do not materially impact determination of real
interest rates in an OLG setting. However, in the full life cycle model, we include an explicit bequest motive.
    8                                                                Ytm +Yt+1
                                                                            o
                                                                               /(1+rt )
        For the constraint to be binding, it must be the case that       1+β(1+β)
                                                                                          > Dt−1 . We check in our numerical
experiments that the relevant condition is satisﬁed.

                                                             8
                                                          Figure 2: Equilibrium in the asset market

                                            
                                                                                                
                                                                                               
                                            


                                            
                      
                                                                                
                                                              

                                            
                                                                          
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                       
                                             


                                            


                                            
                                                                                          

                                                                                  


An equilibrium is now deﬁned as a set of stochastic processes {Cty , Ct,o , Ctm , rt , Bty , Btm } that solve
(1) , (2) , (5) , (6) , (7), and (8) given an exogenous process for {Dt , gt }.
    To analyze equilibrium determination, let us focus on equilibrium in the market for savings
and loans given by equation (8) using the notation Lst and Ldt ; the left-hand side of (8) denotes the
demand for loans, Ldt , and the right-hand side its supply, Lst . Hence the demand for loans (using
(5)) can be written as

                                                                                1 + gt
                                                                        Ldt =          Dt ,                                       (9)
                                                                                1 + rt
while an expression for loan supply, assuming perfect foresight, can be derived by combining the
household budget constraints and the middle-generation Euler equation:

                                                                  β                    1 Yt+1o
                                                         Lst =       (Ytm − Dt−1 ) −              .                              (10)
                                                                 1+β                 1 + β 1 + rt
The real interest rate, depicted in Figure 2, is then determined by the intersection of the loan
demand, Ldt , and loan supply, Lst :

                                                                   1 + β (1 + gt ) Dt   1   o
                                                                                          Yt+1
                                                        1 + rt =                      +        .                                 (11)
                                                                     β Ytm − Dt−1 β Ytm − Dt−1

In contrast to the standard representative agent model, the real interest rate will now, in general,
depend on a host of factors in addition to the discount factor: the income proﬁle over the life cycle,
the debt limit, and population growth all inﬂuence the real interest rate.


                                                                                 9
3.1        Productivity, Population Growth, and Inequality

In our OLG setting, any factor that affects the relative supply or demand for loans changes the
interest rate. Unlike in the standard representative agent model used in business cycle analysis,
these forces can have permanent effects on the interest rate, and we should expect these dynamics
to play out over an extended period. Importantly, there is nothing that prevents the real interest
rate in expression (2) from being either positive or negative. Below, we offer a few examples of
the forces that may affect the equilibrium interest rate; this list is far from exhaustive, and in the
quantitative section we take a ﬁrmer stand on which of these forces best account for declining US
interest rates.
      Let us ﬁrst consider a potential fall in total factor productivity growth, which has been com-
monly associated with discussions of secular stagnation (this hypothesis is most forcefully artic-
ulated by Gordon (2015)). For this exercise, we assume that the income of the middle aged and
the old is proportional to the aggregate endowment Yt , which in turn is proportional to produc-
tivity such that Yt = At Ỹ . Moreover, as the debt limit reﬂects the extent to which the middle-aged
agents can replay their debt, we assume that it grows with the middle-aged income so that the
debt limit relevant to the young at time t is given by Dt = At+1 D̃. The loan demand and supply
can then be written in terms of renormalized variables, as shown.                  9

      Consider now the effect of a slowdown in productivity. First, lower productivity growth shifts
out the supply of savings since lower expected future income induces the middle-aged generation
to increase retirement savings. Second, the expectation of lower future productivity tightens the
borrowing constraint of the young, leading to a backward shift in the demand for loans. The new
equilibrium is shown in point C in Figure 2, which now depicts the renormalized variables. It
should be noted that, unlike in the representative agent model, it is not required for productivity
growth to be negative in order for the real interest rate to become negative.10 Instead, interest rates
depend on how income is distributed over the life cycle, as well as on the interaction between
productivity growth and the income distribution.
      The mechanism by which a reduction in population growth lowers the interest rate is straight-

      9
          The demand and supply for loans can now be written as
                                              1 + gt At
                                       L̃dt =             D̃                                                           (12)
                                              1 + rt At−1
                                                β  m            1     Ỹ o At+1
                                       L̃st =         Ỹ − D̃ −                   ,                                    (13)
                                              1+β               1 + β 1 + r t At
where tilde denotes that the original variable has been divided by productivity.
  10
     In the representative household model (without population growth) the real interest rate is given by
                                                                   At+1
                                                   1 + rt = β −1        ,
                                                                    At
so productivity would need to decline at a rate greater than the inverse of the discount factor for the interest rate to be
negative. While productivity growth is low in many advanced countries, it is not negative.

                                                            10
forward and can be seen directly by inspecting the expression for loan demand. As the number
of young decreases relative to the middle aged (a decline in gt ), loan demand falls, shifting back
the Ldt curve and lowering the real interest rate to point B in Figure 2. In the quantitative model,
we will also consider changes in mortality risk, which have a relatively intuitive effect on the real
interest rate. As mortality risk decreases, individuals save more for retirement, increasing the
supply of savings and lowering the interest rate.
      Our model can also be used to consider the impact of an increase in inequality on interest rates.
Generically, the effect of an increase in inequality is ambiguous. There are plausible conditions,
however, under which higher inequality will in fact reduce the natural rate of interest. We provide
one such example in Appendix B, in which a fraction of the middle-aged population are credit
constrained. In this case, shifting income from the low-skilled, credit-constrained households to
the high-skilled middle-aged households reduces the real interest rate. In general, the condition
needed for inequality to reduce rates is that those with higher incomes at a given age save more
than those with lower incomes.11
      A fourth force often associated with secular stagnation is a persistent fall in the relative price of
investment goods. As investment goods become cheaper, less savings is needed to ﬁnance a given
level of investment in the capital stock, thereby reducing overall demand. Since our example does
not include capital, we will defer this discussion to Section 8.


3.2      Deleveraging

One of the main narratives about the source of the 2008 crisis is that it was triggered by a debt
deleveraging shock (see, e.g., Mian and Suﬁ (2014)). Households took on excessive levels of mort-
gage debt in the mid-2000s, and the 2008 crisis corresponded to an abrupt correction whereby
households were forced to pay down high levels of debt — often referred to as a ”Minsky mo-
ment.” Eggertsson and Krugman (2012) (hereafter EK) model this as permanent tightening in the
household collateral constraint Dt . A key prediction of EK and related models is that once agents
in the economy pay down their debt to the new sustainable level the debt deleveraging ends and
interest rates return to their precrisis level. However, in our framework, this prediction is over-
turned, and the end of a debt deleveraging cycle does not lead to a normalization of interest rates.
      Point B in Figure 2 shows the equilibrium level of the real interest rate on impact after a
deleveraging shock. As we can see, the shock leads directly to a reduction in the demand for loans

   11
        Most realistic models of bequests, for example, argue that the preference for leaving a bequest increases with
income, implying an increase in bequests is associated with higher inequality. See Dynan, Skinner and Zeldes (2004) for
a discussion of other mechanisms, such as the persistence of skill types across generations. We have also experimented
with a production structure where skill-biased technological change (as in Krusell et al. (2000)) increases inequality and
found plausible conditions under which skill-biased technical change puts downward pressure on the real interest rate.
We leave a fuller analysis of this subject for future research.

                                                             11
since the demand curve shifts inward. The supply of loanable funds is unchanged since the debt
repayment of the middle-aged generation depends on the lagged value of collateral constraint,
Dt−1 .
    On impact, the young are now spending less at a given interest rate, while the middle aged and
old are spending the same. Since the endowment must be fully consumed in our economy, this
fall in spending by the young then needs to be made up by inducing some agents to spend more.
This adjustment takes place via a reduction in the real interest rate that induces more spending.12
So far, the mechanism described in our model is exactly the same as in EK. A deleveraging shock
triggers a drop in spending by borrowers at the existing rate of interest. The real interest rate then
falls to keep the aggregate level of spending the same.
    In EK, the economy reaches a new steady state in the next period, in which, once again, the
real interest rate is determined by the discount factor of the representative savers in the economy.
In that setting, the loan supply curve shifts back so that the real interest rate is exactly the same as
before (as seen in point D). Loan supply shifts back in EK because borrower deleveraging reduces
interest income accruing to savers, which implies that their supply of savings falls in equilibrium.
In contrast, in our model there is no representative saver; instead, households are both borrowers
and savers at different stages in their lives. The fall in the borrowing of young households in pe-
riod t then implies that in the next period — when that agent becomes a saver — each household
has more resources to save since disposable income is higher. At time t + 1, the supply of savings
Lst shifts outward as shown in Figure 2. In sharp contrast to EK, where the economy settles back
into the old steady state after a one-period transition, the economy in our model reaches a new
steady state with a permanently lower real rate of interest. The new interest rate may be negative,
depending on the size of the shock. This process can serve as a powerful and persistent propa-
gation mechanism for the original deleveraging shock. More generally, even if the drop in Dt is
not permanent, the natural rate of interest will inherit the dynamics of the drop in Dt , which may
be of arbitrary duration. One interesting implication of these dynamics is that policies that are
implemented in the midst of a deleveraging crisis, such as macroprudential policies, run the risk
of permanently depressing the natural rate of interest.



   12
        The drop in the real interest rate stimulates spending via two channels. First, as equation (11) shows, a fall in the
real interest rate makes consumption today more attractive to the middle aged, thus increasing their spending. Observe
that the Lst curve is upward sloping in the real interest rate; in general, the slope of the savings curve depends upon the
elasticity of intertemporal substitution. If preferences exhibit very weak substitution effects and if the endowment is
received only by the middle-aged generation, it is possible to have a downward sloping Lst curve. However, our view is
that the empirically relevant case is when savings are increasing in the interest rate. Second, for the credit-constrained
young generation, a reduction in the real interest rate relaxes their borrowing constraint. A lower interest rate allows
them to take on more debt, Bty , for any given value of Dt . Since borrowing is limited by their ability to repay in the
next period, changes in the interest rate that affect the size of the total repayment affect borrowing today.

                                                              12
4        Price Level Determination

We now introduce perfectly ﬂexible nominal prices. We will show that this introduces a kink in
the model: If the steady-state equilibrium interest rate is negative, then there is no equilibrium
consistent with inﬂation below a certain level. For example, if the real interest rate is −3%, then
inﬂation must be greater than 3% in a steady state that respects the zero lower bound on nominal
interest rates. This will have fundamental implications when we introduce realistic nominal fric-
tions; the unwillingness or inability of the central bank to accommodate a high enough inﬂation
rate will result in a demand shortfall and output contraction.
     As is standard in the literature, we introduce a nominal price level by assuming that one-period
nominal debt denominated in money is traded and that the government controls the nominal rate
of return on this asset.13 The saver in our economy (the middle-generation household) now has
access to risk-free nominal debt that is indexed in dollars, in addition to one-period risk-free real
debt.14 This assumption gives rise to a consumption Euler equation, which is the nominal analog
of the Euler equation (7):
                                               1        1            Pt
                                                  = βEt o (1 + it )      ,                                                   (14)
                                              Ctm      Ct+1         Pt+1

where it is the nominal rate and Pt is the price level. We impose a non-negativity constraint on
nominal rates. Implicitly, we assume that the existence of money precludes the possibility of a
negative nominal rate. At all times,

                                                             it ≥ 0.                                                         (15)

Equations (7) and (14) imply (assuming perfect foresight) the standard Fisher relation
                                                                          Pt
                                                  1 + rt = (1 + it )          ,                                              (16)
                                                                         Pt+1
where again the equilibrium real interest rate rt is determined by equation (11). The Fisher equa-
tion simply states that the real interest rate should be equal to the nominal rate deﬂated by the
growth rate of the price level (inﬂation).15
    13
         There are various approaches to microfounding a demand for money by using money in the utility function or
cash-in-advance constraints. For completeness, we explicitly add money in the utility function to our model in Ap-
pendix F.
   14
      For simplicity, we assume that this asset trades in zero net supply, so that, in equilibrium, the budget constraints
already considered are unchanged. However, we relax this assumption once we incorporate ﬁscal policy. Strictly
speaking, what is needed, once money is explicitly incorporated as in Appendix F with explicit ﬁscal policy rules, is
that net government nominal debt (inclusive of money) be in zero supply. As we show, our conclusions are unchanged
when one considers a strictly positive level of government debt.
  15
     Again, we can deﬁne an equilibrium as a collection of stochastic processes {Cty , Ct,o , Ctm , rt , it , Bty , Btm , Pt } that
solve (1), (2), (5), (6), (7), and (8) and now also (14) and (15) given an exogenous process for {Dt , gt } and a speciﬁcation
for monetary policy like an interest rate rule.

                                                               13
    From (15) and (16), it follows that if the real rate of interest is permanently negative, then there
is no equilibrium consistent with a stable price level. To see this, assume such an equilibrium and
that Pt+1 = Pt = P ∗ . Then the Fisher equation implies that it = rt < 0, violating the zero bound.
Hence, a constant price level — price stability — cannot be sustained when rt is negative.16
                                                                                          Pt+1
    Let us denote the growth rate of the price level (inﬂation) by Πt =                    Pt    = Π̄. The zero bound
and the Fisher equation then imply that, for an equilibrium with constant inﬂation to satisfy the
ZLB, there is a bound on the inﬂation rate given by Π(1 + r) = 1 + i ≥ 1 or
                                                               1
                                                       Π̄ ≥       ,                                                  (17)
                                                              1+r
which implies that steady-state inﬂation is bounded from below by the real interest rate due to the
zero bound. We term this the natural lower bound on inﬂation.
    At a positive real interest rate, the natural bound is of little relevance. If, as is common in
the literature using representative agent models, the real interest rate in steady state is equal to
the inverse of the discount factor, then the natural bound says that Π ≥ β. Under a standard
calibration, this implies a bound on the steady-state inﬂation rate of about −2% to −4%. This is, of
course, well below the inﬂation target of most central banks, making this bound of little empirical
relevance.
    With permanently negative real rates, however, this bound takes on a greater practical signiﬁ-
cance. If the real interest rate is negative, it implies that, under ﬂexible prices, steady-state inﬂation
must be positive. Suppose, for example, that the natural rate of interest is −4% in Europe; this im-
plies the natural lower bound on inﬂation is 4%. But what happens if the European Central Bank
(ECB) refuses to allow inﬂation to rise above 2%? With ﬂexible prices, this possibility cannot be
contemplated in the model; it does not admit an equilibrium. If the real interest rate is negative,
the inﬂation rate has to be positive. The ECB must target inﬂation above 4% in the example above.
    This is an unappealing result. A key question we want to ask our model is, what happens
if the natural rate of interest is negative and the central bank does not provide enough inﬂation,
causing the zero lower bound to become binding? So far, our model is not able to answer this
question because there is simply no equilibrium under this scenario. A straightforward solution,
and one that ﬁts the data, is to employ nominal rigidities in the price system. Once we introduce
nominal frictions, then the central bank can indeed set inﬂation below the natural lower bound
on inﬂation. In this case, however, the refusal of the central bank to allow inﬂation to rise to or
overshoot its target results in an output gap and the nominal interest rate stuck permanently at
zero.
   16
        For this result, it is important that we rule out bubbles and that ﬁscal policy keeps the real value of government
liabilities constant. With passive ﬁscal policy and positive government liabilities, the price level could fall sharply on
impact to increase the real value of debt and raise the natural rate of interest back to zero. After impact, the nominal
rate will be at zero and the central bank will keep prices stable. This possibility will become more transparent once
ﬁscal policy is explicitly introduced. We thank Jaume Ventura for pointing this out.

                                                              14
5          Aggregate Supply

In this section, we incorporate nominal rigidities into our baseline model. The presence of nominal
rigidities carries important implications for adjustment when the natural rate falls negative. We
show that if the natural rate of interest is negative and the central bank does not set a sufﬁciently
high inﬂation target, an employment and output gap emerges.
       While it is common for models to feature short-term pricing rigidities, our model will incorpo-
rate a form of long-run rigidity. Since our modeling choice is uncommon, some initial discussion
is warranted before we proceed to our exact speciﬁcation. There is a broad consensus among
economists that, with permanently high levels of inﬂation, expectations about future inﬂation will
ultimately adjust so there is no long-run trade-off between inﬂation and unemployment. This em-
pirical prediction was indeed largely borne out during the 1970s in the United States. Our model
will incorporate this neutrality of high inﬂation in the form of a long-run vertical aggregate supply
curve when inﬂation is sufﬁciently high (see the top half of the aggregate supply curve in Figure
3).
       In contrast, a similar consensus has not emerged for long-run neutrality in a low inﬂation/deﬂation
environment. Tobin (1972) argued that, during the Great Depression, ﬁrms were reluctant to cut
nominal wages despite high unemployment. Tobin argued that this behavior suggests a perma-
nent, long-run trade-off between inﬂation and unemployment at low levels of inﬂation. Others
have built on and formalized Tobin’s analysis in the form of an upward sloping long-run Phillips
curve (see, for example, Akerlof, Dickens and Perry (1996), Kim and Ruge-Murcia (2009), Fagan
and Messina (2009), Benigno and Ricci (2011), Coibion, Gorodnichenko and Wieland (2012), and
Daly and Hobijn (2014)). We incorporate this notion of aggregate supply in our model, leading to
an upward sloping Phillips curve (see the bottom half of the aggregate supply curve in Figure 3).
       Alternative microfoundations for introducing nominal rigidities will provide similar qualita-
tive results as long as the models feature a long-run trade-off between inﬂation and output.17 Here,
we opt for capturing this trade-off by introducing downward nominal wage rigidity; this speci-
ﬁcation has the virtue of capturing the neutrality of inﬂation when it is high, yet simultaneously
giving rise to meaningful trade-offs at low inﬂation rates.
       A large body of evidence documents the presence of downwardly nominally rigid wages, even
in the face of high unemployment. This notion dates back as far as Malthus, who noted that ”it
very rarely happens that the nominal price of labour universally falls” (Malthus (1798)). Bew-
ley (1999) interviewed ﬁrm executives directly and explicitly documented their reluctance to cut
nominal wages. More recently, substantial nominal wage rigidity has been studied in US admin-
istrative data by Fallick, Lettau and Wascher (2011), in worker surveys by Barattieri, Basu and

      17
           In Appendix E, we provide perhaps the most standard way of specifying rigidities: the New Keynesian Calvo
model.

                                                           15
Gottschalk (2014), and in cross-country data by Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2016). Our speciﬁcation
is closely related to the supply side of Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2016), and our calibrated level
of wage rigidity in our quantitative analysis (see Section 8) matches closely their estimates for the
degree of wage rigidity.18
    We simplify our exposition by assuming that only the middle-aged generation receives income,
now as payment for labor supplied instead of as an exogenous endowment.The budget constraint
for young agents is again given by equations (1) and (4), but now we replace the budget constraint
of the middle-aged generation (2) and old generation (3) with the following:
                                           Wt+1        Zt+1
                                  m
                                 Ct+1 =         Lt+1 +      − (1 + rt )Bty + Bt+1
                                                                              m
                                                                                                                    (18)
                                           Pt+1        Pt+1
                                  o
                                 Ct+2 = −(1 + rt+1 )Bt+1
                                                     m
                                                         ,                                                          (19)

where Wt+1 is the nominal wage rate, Pt+1 the aggregate price level, Lt+1 the labor supply of
the middle-aged generation, and Zt+1 the proﬁts of the ﬁrms. For simplicity, we assume that
the middle-aged generation will supply a constant level of labor L̄ inelastically. Note that if the
ﬁrms do not hire all available labor supplied, then labor demand Lt may be lower than labor
supply L̄ due to rationing. Under these assumptions, each of the generations’ consumption-saving
decisions remains the same as before.19
    On the ﬁrm side, we assume that ﬁrms are perfectly competitive and take prices as given. They
hire labor to maximize period-by-period proﬁts. Their problem is given by

                                                   Zt = max Pt Yt − Wt Lt                                           (20)
                                                           Lt

                                            s.t.    Yt = Lαt .                                                      (21)

The ﬁrms’ labor demand condition is then given by
                                                     Wt
                                                        = αLα−1
                                                            t   .                                                   (22)
                                                     Pt
So far we have described a perfectly frictionless production side, and, if this were the end, our
model would be analogous to what we have already considered in the endowment economy.
Output would be given by Yt = Lαt = L̄α and the labor demand condition (22) would ﬁx the real
wage.
    Now, consider a world in which households will never accept working for wages that fall
below their wage in the previous period, so nominal wages at time t cannot be lower than what
   18
        Relative to their speciﬁcation, ours allows us to vary the degree to which wages are downwardly rigid or ﬂexible
and to show that increasing ﬂexibility does not lead to stabilization, illustrating the basic failure of the price mecha-
nism in restoring full employment in a secular stagnation. Also see Shimer (2012) and Kocherlakota (2013) for further
discussion of how wage rigidities can explain labor dynamics during the Great Recession.
   19
      The rationing approach followed here and in Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2016) is essentially of the same form as in
the general disequilibrium model of Barro and Grossman (1971); for a review of this literature, see Bénassy (1993).

                                                            16
they were at time t−1. Or, slightly more generally, imagine that the household would never accept
lower wages than a wage norm given by W̃t = γWt−1 + (1 − γ)Wtf lex where

                                                  Wtf lex = Pt αL̄α−1 .                                              (23)

    If γ = 1, the wage norm is simply last period’s nominal wages and wages are perfectly down-
wardly rigid; if γ = 0, we obtain the ﬂex-price nominal wage. Formally, wages in our economy
are given by
                                             
                        Wt = max W̃t , Wtf lex where W̃t = γWt−1 + (1 − γ)Wtf lex .                                  (24)

Nominal wages in our economy can never fall below the wage norm W̃t . If labor market clearing
requires nominal wages lower than the previous nominal wage rate, then the labor market will
not clear, and labor is rationed.20
    To close the model, we specify a monetary policy rule. We posit that the central bank sets the
nominal rate according to a standard Taylor rule:
                                           
                                                                             φπ
                                                                  ∗    Πt
                                       1 + it = max 1, (1 + i )                    ,                                 (25)
                                                                       Π∗

where φπ > 1; Π∗ and i∗ are parameters of the policy rule that we hold constant. This rule states
that the central bank attempts to keep inﬂation at the inﬂation target Π∗ and the nominal rate at i∗
so long as the nominal rate implied by the rule is not constrained by the zero bound.21
    It should be noted that the results we present in this paper do not depend on the particulars
of the Taylor rule. We are interested in exploring what happens in an inﬂation-targeting regime
when the natural rate of interest is negative and the central bank’s inﬂation target is low enough
that it cannot be reached even at a zero nominal rate. A simpler way of thinking about the policy
regime we have in mind — an equivalent one for our purposes to the Taylor rule speciﬁed above
— is that we are assuming that the central bank will set inﬂation equal to its target Π∗ at all times
(without needing to concern ourselves with how exactly this is accomplished) except for when this
implies a negative nominal interest rate. In this case, the nominal interest rate is zero and inﬂation
falls below target (see Eggertsson et al. (2016) for an example of this speciﬁcation of the policy
regime).22
   20
        If labor market clearing requires nominal wages higher than the past nominal wage rate, nominal wages will rise
to their market clearing level, equating labor demand and supply.
    21
       In Appendix F, we introduce money explicitly into our model and show that our results are not affected so long
as ﬁscal policy keeps consolidated government liabilities constant.
   22
      The key assumption here is that, at the ZLB, we do not allow for the possibility that the inﬂation rate is higher
than the inﬂation target. Essentially, the central bank would not tolerate such an outcome since it could always raise
the nominal interest rate in that scenario. The only equilibria then consistent with the policy regime would be those
in which inﬂation is below target because the central bank is constrained by the ZLB. Of course, there are equilibria
consistent with higher inﬂation targets that do accommodate a negative natural rate of interest. We see these equilibria
as those that emerge from different policy regimes that are willing to accept a higher inﬂation target (see Section 7).

                                                           17
    Equilibrium in the economy with nominal rigidities is deﬁned as follows:

Deﬁnition 1. A competitive equilibrium is a sequence of quantities {Cty , Ct,o , Ctm , Bty , Btm , Lt , Yt , Zt } and
prices {Pt , Wt , Wtf lex , rt , it } that satisfy (1) , (5) , (6) , (7) , (8) , (14) , (15) , (18), (20), (21), (22) , (23) , (24),
and (25) given an exogenous process for {Dt , gt } and initial values for W−1 and B−1
                                                                                   m .


    We start by characterizing the steady state of the model, which can be shown graphically based
on two relationships between output and inﬂation in a steady state: aggregate supply and aggre-
gate demand. The aggregate supply speciﬁcation of the model consists of two regimes: one in
which the real wage equals the market-clearing real wage (if Π ≥ 1) and the other when the
bound on nominal wages is binding (Π < 1). Intuitively, positive inﬂation in the steady state
means that wages behave as if they are ﬂexible, since nominal wages must rise to keep real wages
constant. If Π ≥ 1, then labor demand equals the exogenous level of labor supply L̄, deﬁning the
full-employment level of output Y f :

                                               Y = L̄α = Y f for Π ≥ 1.                                                    (26)

This is shown in Figure 3 as a solid vertical segment.
    If there is deﬂation in the steady state (Π < 1), the wage norm binds (W = W̃ ) and the real
wage exceeds the market-clearing real wage.23 We can then derive a relationship between output
and inﬂation tracing the lower segment of the AS curve:
                                                                     1−α
                                      γ                       Y       α
                                        = 1 − (1 − γ)                      for Π < 1.                                      (27)
                                      Π                       Yf

Equation (27) is simply a nonlinear Phillips curve. The intuition is straightforward: As inﬂation
increases, real wages fall and ﬁrms hire more labor. Importantly, this Phillips curve relationship is
not a short-run relationship; instead, it describes the behavior of steady-state inﬂation and output.
The aggregate supply curve is shown in Figure 3, with the vertical segment given by (26) and the
upward sloping segment given by (27) and the kink point at Π = 1.24
    Turning to the aggregate demand relation, we again have two regimes: one in which the zero
bound is not binding and the other in which it is binding. When the nominal rate is unconstrained,
we obtain the AD curve by combining the real interest rate equation, Fisher relation, and monetary
policy rule — equations (11), (16), and (25) — to get

                                              (1 + β)(1 + g)DΓ∗ 1
                                  Y =D+                               for i > 0,                                           (28)
                                                      β        Πφπ −1

   23
        With a steady-state deﬂation rate of Π, we can use equation (24) to ﬁnd the steady-state wage rate of w =
(1−γ)αL̄α−1
  1−γΠ−1
            .
   24
        The AS and AD diagrams and numerical examples in this section assume the following parameter values: β =
0.985, γ = 0.94, α = 0.7, Π∗ = 1.01, φπ = 2, D = 0.28, and g = 0.9%.

                                                              18
where Γ∗ ≡ (1 + i∗ )−1 (Π∗ )φπ is the composite policy parameter in the monetary policy reaction
function. The upper portion of the AD curve in Figure 3 depicts this relationship. As inﬂation
increases, the central bank raises the nominal interest rate by more than one for one (since φπ > 1),
which, in turn, increases the real interest rate and reduces demand.
    At the zero lower bound, we combine the same set of equations, but now impose i = 0. We
obtain the following expression relating output and inﬂation:

                                         (1 + β) (1 + g) D
                               Y =D+                       Π for i = 0.                          (29)
                                                 β
In this case, the AD curve is upward sloping. The logic should again be relatively straightforward
for those familiar with the literature on the liquidity trap: As inﬂation increases, the nominal
interest rate remains constant, thus reducing the real interest rate. This change in the real rate
raises consumption demand, as shown by the bottom portion of the AD curve in Figure 3.
    The kink in the aggregate demand curve occurs at the inﬂation rate at which monetary policy
is constrained by the zero lower bound. That is, the AD curve depicted in Figure 3 will become
upward sloping when the inﬂation rate is sufﬁciently low that the implied nominal rate the central
bank would like to set is below zero. Mathematically, we can derive an expression for this kink
point by solving for the inﬂation rate that equalizes the two arguments in the max operator of
equation (25):
                                                               1
                                                      1       φπ
                                       Πkink =                     Π∗ .                          (30)
                                                    1 + i∗

The location of the kink in the AD curve depends on both parameters of the policy rule: the
inﬂation target Π∗ and the targeted real interest rate i∗ .
    In what follows, it will be useful to deﬁne the natural rate of interest: — the interest rate
at which output is at its full-employment level. The natural rate can be obtained by evaluating
equation (11) at the full-employment level of output Y f :

                                                  1 + β (1 + gt )Dt
                                      1 + rtf =                     .
                                                    β Y f − Dt−1
It is useful to note that the full-employment interest rate corresponds exactly to the real interest
rate we derived in the endowment economy. Hence, any of the forces that we showed affect the
real interest rate in the endowment economy will directly affect the full-employment real interest
rate in the more general setup.


6   Full Employment and Secular Stagnation

Equilibrium output and inﬂation is determined by the intersection of the aggregate demand and
aggregate supply curves. We ﬁrst consider a normal equilibrium at which the natural rate of
                                                     19
                           Figure 3: Steady-state aggregate demand and aggregate supply curves

                                
                                                                              
                                                                            
                                


                                
                      

                                


                                           
                                                            
                                              
                    




                                !


                                !
                                                                                
                                 


                                 
                                                !           !                

                                                                       


interest is positive. We assume that the central bank aims for a positive inﬂation target (that is,
Π∗ > 1) and that the nominal interest rate target is consistent with the inﬂation target: 1 + i∗ =
(1 + rf )Π∗ . With rf > 0, the aggregate demand curve intersects the aggregate supply curve on
the vertical segment of the AS curve. The exact intersection point is determined by the inﬂation
target.25 This full-employment equilibrium is displayed in Figure 3. Under our assumed policy
rule, the equilibrium depicted in Figure 3 is unique for a small enough inﬂation target and a high
enough γ.26
    The making of a secular stagnation equilibrium is shown in Figure 3. Here, we illustrate the
effect of a tightening in the collateral constraint Dt .27 We assume the shock is large enough to
move the natural rate of interest negative and, indeed, below the inﬂation target: 1 + rtf < (Π∗ )−1 .
As can be seen from equation (28), a reduction in D reduces output for any given inﬂation rate.
This fall in output stems from the decline in consumption by the young households, who cannot
borrow as much as before to ﬁnance their consumption early in life. In the normal equilibrium,
this drop in spending would be compensated by a drop in the real interest rate, restoring spending
to its pre-shock level. However, the zero lower bound prevents this adjustment. Hence, the shock
moves the economy off the full-employment segment of the AS curve to a deﬂationary steady state
where the nominal interest rate is zero. Here, steady-state deﬂation raises steady-state real wages


   25
        If the central bank targets zero inﬂation (Π∗ = 1) the intersection is at the kink of the AS curve.
   26
        Uniqueness is guaranteed if γ = 1. As γ approaches zero, more equilibria are possible. We discuss these additional
equilibria in Section 7 when they appear in a more general setting.
   27
      Or, equivalently, we could consider a fall in the rate of population or productivity growth.

                                                                   20
                                                  Figure 4: Adjustment mechanisms: wage ﬂexibility and hysteresis

                                                                                                                      !                          !                    !          
                  $!%#
                                           %
                                                                                                                       "
                  $!$&
                                                                                                                       
                  $!$#




                                                                                                  





                                                                                                                      "
                  $!#&




                                                                                                   
 




                                                                                                                      
                  $!##
                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                              %"          
                                                                                                                               
                  #!(&
                                                                                                                 %
                                                                    %
                  #!(#                                                                                              $"                                         
                                 $                                                                                                                      
                  #!'&                                                                                   $                                            
                                                       
                  #!'#                                                                                              #"
                        #!'#           #!'&     #!(#        #!(&      $!##   $!#&   $!$#                             #            $          %                             

                                                                                                                                                   



above their market-clearing level, thus depressing demand for labor and contracting output.28

Proposition 1. If γ > 0, Π∗ = 1, and i∗ = rf < 0, then there exists a unique, locally determinate secular
stagnation equilibrium.

Proof. See Appendix D.

                  As shown in Appendix C, if we linearize the model around the unique secular stagnation
steady state, the dynamic system is locally determinate. The determinacy of the secular stagnation
steady state in our model stands in contrast to the indeterminacy of the deﬂation steady state
analyzed in Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2013) and Benigno and Fornaro (2015).29 Indeterminacy of
equilibrium has been one justiﬁcation for disregarding the deﬂation steady state and restricting
analysis to the determinate positive interest rate steady state in New Keynesian models. As shown
in Proposition 1, the AD curve must be steeper than the AS curve at the intersection point that
implies the local determinacy condition. Importantly, local determinacy implies that an economy
in secular stagnation may continue to experience well-deﬁned (unique bounded) business cycle
ﬂuctuations in unemployment and output around a permanently depressed growth path.
                  Our model delivers a permanent steady-state slump with no pull towards full employment.
A natural question is, what forces can move the economy back to full employment, absent any
government intervention? First, and perhaps obviously, if the shock that pushes the natural rate
negative is only temporary, then the full-employment equilibrium can be attained. To the extent
that the shocks leading to negative real interest rates are slow moving (such as demographic fac-
tors) there is less reason to be optimistic about this adjustment mechanism.
                 28
                      As we show, outright deﬂation is not central to the mechanism. If wages are indexed to the inﬂation target, then
an inﬂation rate that falls below target results in real wages that exceed the market-clearing level and output falls below
the full-employment level.
   29
      For further discussion of the stability properties in Benhabib, Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2001), see Bullard (2010).

                                                                                             21
                                   Figure 5: Data versus model transition paths: US, Japan, and the Eurozone

                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                                             
                $ $                                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                 

                $$                                                                                                                                                          
   




                                                                                                 

                #($
                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                                               

                #'$
                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                      
                #&$
                                                                                  

                #%$                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                 
                                                                      

                #$$
                                                                                                                                                                             
                          ((    (("     ((%      ((( !! !$ !' !              
                                                                                                                                                                     



                                                                                                                                                                           

                $"
                                                                                                                                                                           


                                                                                                                                                                          
                $ 
                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                 
  




                #'                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                                               
                #%                                                                           
                                                                    '%! "
                                                                                                                                                                              
                                                                      
                                                                                                
                ##                                                                                                                                      

                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                              

                #"                                                                                                                                                     
                         '%    '%#    '&     '&#   ''     ''# ! !# !                                                                              


                                                                                                                                                                        
                                          
                $                                                                              
                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                    
                $
                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                          
                # 





                                                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                
                #





                                                                                                                                                                           
                " 
                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                                              
                "
                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                                               
                ! 
                                                                                                

                !                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                 

                                                                                                                                                                       
                         $$  $$" $$$     " $                                                                                            




                                                                                                                                22
    A key friction in triggering unemployment was the fact that wages were downwardly rigid. A
natural question, then, is whether an increase in the ﬂexibility of the wage adjustment process will
push the economy back to full employment. The answer to this question is, surprisingly, no. This
result emerges because an increase in price/wage ﬂexibility triggers a drop in expected inﬂation,
increasing the real interest rate. This cannot be offset by interest rate cuts due to the zero bound.
As wages become more ﬂexible (a decrease in the parameter γ), the slope of the AS curve steepens
(see the left-hand panel of Figure 4). For any given deﬂation steady state, a decrease in γ will
shift the steady state along the AD curve, increasing the rate of deﬂation, raising real wages, and
therefore increasing the shortfall in output. This result echoes the paradox of ﬂexibility shown in
Eggertsson and Krugman (2012) and considered in a more general setting in Bhattarai, Eggertsson
and Schoenle (2014).
    Finally, a third adjustment mechanism is a reduction in the labor force led by discouraged
workers (or workers whose skills have deteriorated) after prolonged spells of unemployment.
Labor force participation fell markedly in the US, and the duration of unemployment remains ele-
vated despite recent reductions in the unemployment rate. A reduction in the labor force reduces
downward pressures on wages and weakens deﬂationary pressure. If the contraction of the labor
force proceeds far enough, the output gap is eliminated, and the AD curve intersects the AS curve
                                                              30
at the new, lower full-employment level of output.
    In Figure 5, we present data on the evolution of output, inﬂation, and the short-term nominal
interest rate in the US, Japan, and the Eurozone. We calibrate our simple three-period model and
show how our model generates dynamics consistent with the observed behavior of these macro
aggregates. The key message of the ﬁgure is that our model has, in principle, no difﬁculty gener-
ating a persistent fall in inﬂation, interest rates at the ZLB, and output persistently below trend.
These features are in stark contrast to the standard New Keynesian model in which the model ex-
plodes (i.e., a determinate equilibrium no longer exists) if the natural rate of interest is expected to
be negative for a long enough period (see, e.g., Eggertsson and Singh (2016)). Even though highly
stylized, a straightforward calibration of our simple model does a good job of capturing the tran-
sition dynamics of output and interest rates in these stagnation episodes. To conserve space, we
defer the description of the calibration underlying Figure 5 to Appendix H, which allows us to
focus on a richer quantitative life cycle model.31

   30
        Under hysteresis mechanisms, the AS curve shifts inward along the transition path. Unemployment falls and
inﬂation rises back toward target, while nominal interest rates stay at the ZLB. Relative to the pre-stagnation trend,
output remains depressed. In this extension, there is no returning to the pre-trend level of employment. Hysteresis
mechanisms need not work solely through the labor market. See Garga and Singh (2016) for a model with hysteresis
effects on productivity growth.
    31
       To capture the slowdown in GDP per capita growth and the absence of outright deﬂation in the US and Eurozone,
we extend our basic model to incorporate hysteresis effects on productivity growth and a more general wage norm
where nominal wages are indexed to productivity growth and the inﬂation target. See Appendix G.

                                                         23
                                                                    Figure 6: Monetary and ﬁscal policy responses

                  !                           !       "                                                    !          !             "                   
                                                                                                                                                                             
                   #                                                                                                         #
                                                                                   
                                                                                                                  
                                                                                           
 




                                                                                                             
                  #                                                                                                        #                                                       
                                                                                                                                                                                          
 




                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                               
                 %#                                                                                                       %#           


                 %                                                                                                       %


                 $#                                                                                                 $#
                                                         
                                                       
                 $                                                                                                       $
                     $   $#          %           %#               #                                      $   $#       %           %#            #             

                                                                                                                                                             




7                  Monetary and Fiscal Policy

We now consider monetary and ﬁscal policy in a secular stagnation. As we show in this section,
the policy implications of our model for both monetary and ﬁscal policy are starkly different from
those of existing New Keynesian models of the zero lower bound.
                 Let us ﬁrst consider the effect of an increase in the inﬂation target Π∗ . This change has no effect
on the AS curve but instead shifts the AD curve. Speciﬁcally, a rise in the inﬂation target shifts
out the kink point in the AD curve, as shown in the left-hand panel of Figure 6. In this ﬁgure, the
initial inﬂation target is set at 1%. As the inﬂation target increases, the kink point moves upward,
effectively shifting up the downward sloping portion of the AD curve. AD1 shows the original
aggregate demand curve with a unique secular stagnation steady state. AD2 shows the effect of
a modest increase in the inﬂation target, while AD3 shows the effect of a large increase in the
inﬂation target. Notice that AD3 now intersects the aggregate supply curve at three points.
                 AD2 illustrates the perils of too small an increase in the inﬂation target. For a sufﬁciently
negative natural rate of interest, a small increase in the inﬂation target will not shift the AD curve
enough to intersect the full-employment line. The contention that a small increase in the inﬂation
target will be ineffective has been labeled by Krugman variously as the ”timidity trap” or, in
reference to Japan in the late 1990s, the ”law of the excluded middle.” Our framework readily
                                                                                       
captures this idea. Formally, the inﬂation target needs to be high enough so that 1 + rf Π∗ ≥ 1;
otherwise, the kink point in the AD curve occurs to the left of the full-employment line.
                 With a sufﬁciently large increase in the inﬂation rate (as shown by AD3 ), our model admits
three distinct steady states. The ﬁrst steady state at the top intersection of the two curves is the
normal, full-employment equilibrium at which point inﬂation is equal to the inﬂation target of
the central bank Π∗ . At this point the nominal interest rate is positive because the inﬂation target
is large enough to accommodate the negative natural rate — that is, (1 + rf )Π∗ > 1. However,
there is another equilibrium at full employment that is consistent with the policy rule. This is the
                                                                                                           24
second intersection of the two curves, where i = 0 and Π < Π∗ . This steady state, however, is
locally indeterminate.32 Importantly, even with a sufﬁciently large increase in the inﬂation target,
the secular stagnation steady state remains; an increase in the inﬂation target does not eliminate
this equilibrium. Furthermore, this steady state is locally determinate.
    This multiplicity shows that monetary policy is less effective in our environment than in mod-
els that feature temporary liquidity traps, such as those in Krugman (1998) or Eggertsson and
Woodford (2003). In those models, a permanent increase in the inﬂation target will always have
an effect because, by assumption, one can always reach the higher inﬂation target at some point in
the future. Working backwards, a commitment of this sort will always have expansionary effects
during a liquidity trap, and, provided the inﬂation target is high enough, it may even eliminate
the demand slump altogether. Since the trap is permanent in our model, however, this backward
induction breaks down; there is no future date at which one can be certain that the higher inﬂa-
tion target is reached (even if the policy regime is fully credible in the sense that people do not
expect the government to deviate from the policy rule). For the same reason, a commitment to
keep nominal rates low for a long period in a secular stagnation is of limited use and does not by
itself guarantee a recovery. Indeed, interest rate commitments of the type pursued by the Federal
Reserve during the crisis (often referred to as ”forward guidance”) would be irrelevant in shift-
ing the economy out of the deﬂationary equilibrium since households are expecting rates to stay
at zero forever. Even if a recovery were anticipated, the expansionary effect of a commitment to
keep interest rates lower in the future is far less effective, given discounting in the Euler equation
due to ﬁnite lifetimes.33 Though an increase in the inﬂation target could make a full-employment
steady state feasible, our model is silent on how a government could coordinate expectations on
the favored full-employment equilibrium.
    The fact that we have two locally determinate steady states suggests there is no obvious reason
why a higher inﬂation target should bring about full employment for an economy at the secular
stagnation steady state.       34   Moreover, as shown by Gibbs (2017), both the full-employment and

   32
      This steady state is akin to the deﬂation steady state in Benhabib, Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2001).
   33
      See McKay, Nakamura and Steinsson (2016) for a discussion.
   34
      One suggestion, proposed by John Cochrane in discussing this paper, is that the government can select between
the two determinate steady states by raising nominal interest rates since, with a high enough inﬂation target, the
nominal interest rate is positive. The main problem with this interpretation is that it presumes the Taylor rule is a
structural policy regime that can be changed by increasing the nominal rate, so that increasing interest rates today will
necessarily imply an increase in the nominal interest rate forever. If one instead interprets the Taylor rule as a reduced-
form representation of a policy regime that aims at targeting a certain level of inﬂation Π∗ , then an increase in the
nominal interest rate at time t need not imply anything about future policy commitment. If an increase in the nominal
interest rate at time t only changes the interest rate at that time, without affecting expectations, then it will have a
contractionary effect via the aggregate demand channel. This could be modeled more formally as optimal policy under
discretion (Markov Perfect Equilibrium), for example, whereby the policy objective of the government is to minimize
the deviation of inﬂation from a target.

                                                            25
secular stagnation steady-state are learnable and survive under deviations from rational expecta-
tions.35
    Given the drawbacks of monetary policy, we turn to ﬁscal policy. We extend our model to
incorporate taxes and denote taxes on each generation by Tti , where i = y, m, or o. We ﬁrst
consider the effect of ﬁscal policy on the natural rate (i.e., in the endowment economy) before
reincorporating nominal frictions. The budget constraints can now be written taking taxes into
account:

                                          Cty + Tty = Bty                                                           (31)
                               m
                              Ct+1 + (1 + rt ) Bty = Yt+1
                                                       m
                                                          − Tt+1
                                                             m
                                                                 − Bt+1
                                                                    m
                                                                                                                    (32)
                                               o
                                              Ct+2 = Yt+2
                                                       o
                                                          + (1 + rt+1 ) Bt+1
                                                                         m
                                                                             − Tt+2
                                                                                o
                                                                                    .                               (33)

Public debt now enters the asset market-clearing condition:

                                           −Nt−1 Btm = Nt Bty + Nt−1 Btg ,                                          (34)

where Btg is government debt (normalized in terms of the size of the middle-aged generation).
In previous sections, the only demand for borrowing came from the young households; now the
government also may want to borrow so that loan demand is given by the right-hand side of
equation (34):
                                                        1+g
                                                 Ld =       D + Bg .                                                (35)
                                                        1+r
We have omitted the time subscript to indicate that we are evaluating the steady state. Meanwhile,
the supply of loans can be derived in exactly the same way as before, yielding

                                              β                      1 Y o − To
                             Ls = −B m =         (Y m − D − T m ) −             .                                   (36)
                                             1+β                    1+β 1+r
Relative to the earlier speciﬁcation, loan supply must now also track tax payments. The govern-
ment’s budget constraint is the ﬁnal equation needed to determine asset market equilibrium:
                                           1                                  1
                            T m + Bg +        T o + (1 + g)T y = G + (1 + r)     Bg ,                               (37)
                                          1+g                                1+g
where G is government spending (normalized in terms of the size of the middle-aged generation).
The equilibrium real interest rate is once again the interest rate that equalizes loan supply Ls and
loan demand Ld and takes the same form as we saw previously in Section 3 and as was illustrated
by Figure 2. The key difference is that now the real interest rate can be affected by ﬁscal policy,
shifting the loan supply and loan demand curves in Figure 2. A ﬁscal policy regime corresponds
   35
        Another consideration against raising the inﬂation target and accommodating a negative natural rate of interest
is that very low rates could spur asset-price bubbles and raise ﬁnancial stability concerns. See Galı́ (2014) and Asriyan
et al. (2016) for further discussion.

                                                            26
to a choice of the level and distribution of taxation and government spending (T o , T m , T y ,G, B g )
subject to the government’s budget constraint. The overall effect of ﬁscal policy on the real interest
rate then depends on the contribution of all the ﬁscal variables. Equating (35) and (36), and taking
account of the budget constraint (37), we have two equations and six unknown variables (T o , T m ,
T y , G, B g , and 1+r). Hence, we need four restrictions on the ﬁscal policy instruments to determine
the interest rate. Previously, we implicitly assumed that T o = T m = T y = 0, G = 0, which implies
B g = 0 from the government budget constraint, leaving equations (35)-(36) to pin down the real
interest rate 1 + r.
    Consider now a more general policy regime that will help us clarify a number of results.36
The tax on the young and government spending are exogenously given by T y = T ∗ and G = G∗ .
Similarly, the overall level of real government debt is exogenously given by B∗g . Finally, we assume
that taxes on the middle aged and the old satisfy the following relation:
                                                            1 1
                                                   Tm =          T o = T,                                                  (38)
                                                            β1+r

where the level of taxation T adjusts so that the budget constraint (37) is satisﬁed. The distribution
of taxation condition given by (38) ensures that now there is no effect of ﬁscal policy on the supply
of loans given by (36).
    We ﬁrst consider an increase in public debt B∗g . Under the ﬁscal rule we have considered, an
increase in public debt only affects loan demand, shifting out the demand for debt and raising the
natural rate. In this respect, increasing government debt is a natural way of avoiding a secular
stagnation.37 Who receives the proceeds from this increase in government debt? The conditions
above show that this does not matter so long as equation (38) is satisﬁed. The increase in govern-
ment debt could be directed to the young or toward government spending, or be distributed to
the middle aged and the old in accordance with the ﬁscal rule (38). The effect of public debt also
shows that if a central bank kept the nominal level of money constant in a secular stagnation with
deﬂation, eventually the natural rate would have to rise (see Appendix F for more details). We
can similarly explore the effect of increasing government spending, funded via taxes, or various
tax redistribution schemes. The effect of those policies can be gauged by analyzing how the policy
shifts loan demand and loan supply in Figure 2. We will be a bit more speciﬁc about these types
of policy experiments in the full life cycle model.
    A critical reason for why an increase in government debt raised the natural rate of interest is
that it is expected to be permanent. To make this clear, let us consider the following policy regime.


   36
        While this particular policy regime is clearly special, we think it helps illustrate how relatively cleanly ﬁscal policy
operates in this environment.
   37
      The ability of an increase in the public debt in an OLG economy to undo the effect of credit frictions (that is, the
effect of borrowing constraints) is similar to examples presented in Woodford (1990).

                                                               27
                        Table 1: Government purchases multiplier at the zero lower bound

                                  Financing                      Multiplier     Value
                                                                  1+β 1
                                  Increase in public debt          β 1−κψ        >2
                                  Tax on the young                    0           0
                                                                      1
                                  Tax on the middle-aged            1−κψ         >1
                                  Tax on the old                 − 1+g   1
                                                                    β 1−κψ       <0


Gt = Tty = Bt−1
            g
                = 0 and

                                                  Ttm = −Btg
                                                  o
                                                 Tt+1 = (1 + rt ) Btg .

    The thought experiment here is that an increase in the public debt results in a lump-sum trans-
fer to the middle aged in period t. The old are then taxed by the same amount in the next period
(plus interest) to return the debt to its original level.38 A temporary increase in the public debt is
completely irrelevant for the interest rate: The increase in debt in period t is met by an increase in
the middle-aged savings to pay off the future tax. The point is that the effect of an increase in the
public debt considered in the previous policy regime depends critically on agents’ expectations
about future ﬁscal policy. In particular, it depends upon the expectation of the middle aged that
they will not be taxed to pay down the debt in the future.39
    So far, we have only considered the effect of ﬁscal policy on the real interest rate in the endow-
ment economy. Our results, however, carry over to the full model with endogenous production.
Fiscal policy that leads to a change in the real interest rate in the endowment economy is equiva-
lent to a policy that changes the natural rate of interest in the model with production. It therefore
corresponds directly to a shock that shifts the AD curve, as shown in the right-hand panel of Fig-
ure 6, displaying the effect of an increase in government spending via debt issuance. Thus, ﬁscal
policies that raise the natural rate of interest correspond to an outward shift in the aggregate de-
mand curve, while policies that reduce the natural rate correspond to an inward shift of the AD
curve. Importantly, in contrast to monetary policy, where an increase in the inﬂation target only
allowed for the possibility of a ”good equilibria” and suffered from multiple steady states, ﬁscal
policy can eliminate the secular stagnation equilibrium since it shifts the entire AD curve (see
Figure 6).
    To derive some analytic results for the effect of ﬁscal policy on output, let us generalize equa-
tion (29) by combining equations (35) and (36), together with equations (16) and (25), and assum-
   38
        For simplicity, we set population growth to zero.
   39
        Since money and public debt are perfect substitutes at the zero lower bound, a temporary helicopter drop would
also have the same effect. A helicopter drop is only effective to the extent that the rise in consolidated government
liabilities is permanent.

                                                           28
ing i = 0, to yield

                                               1+β g           (1 + g)(1 + β)    1
                            Y = D + Tm +          B +                         D − T o Π,                              (39)
                                                β                    β           β

where we now see how ﬁscal instruments directly affect aggregate demand at a zero interest rate.
Tracing out exactly how aggregate demand shifts requires being speciﬁc about the policy regime.
In Table 1, we derive analytically the steady-state multiplier of government spending at the zero
lower bound under different ﬁnancing conditions, under the policy regime we speciﬁed before
(except we relax equation (38) when government spending is ﬁnanced by the middle aged or
old).40
    Observe that, away from the ZLB, the multiplier is zero since labor is supplied inelastically;
once all workers are employed, government purchases will reduce private consumption one to
one without any effect on output. At the zero bound, however, the multiplier is generally different
from 0 as seen in Table 1 and critically depends on the way in which government spending is
ﬁnanced.41
    First, we consider the case in which spending is ﬁnanced via an issuance of public debt. Fi-
nancing via an increase in the public debt results in the largest multiplier shown in Table 1. Using
the formula in Table 1, we see that because β is less than 1, and κ can be no lower than zero (when
wages are perfectly ﬁxed), this multiplier has to be larger than 2. As we increase the value of κ,
the multiplier becomes larger and can even be unboundedly large — a result similar to that in
Christiano, Eichenbaum and Rebelo (2011) in the context of the standard New Keynesian model.
    However, in contrast to the NK model, government spending multipliers are not always posi-
tive at the ZLB. The sign of the multiplier depends on whether ﬁscal expansions reduce the saving
glut in a secular stagnation, which, in turn, depends on how government spending is ﬁnanced. If
instead of being ﬁnanced by increasing debt, spending is ﬁnanced via a tax on young households,
the multiplier is zero. The collateral constraint is binding in equilibrium so that the young will cut
their consumption by exactly the same amount as they are taxed. An increase in government pur-
chases then simply substitutes for existing consumption by the young, leaving output unchanged.
If an increase in spending is ﬁnanced via a tax on middle-generation households, the purchases
multiplier is still positive but smaller than if spending is ﬁnanced via debt as shown in Table 1.
We see from the analytic expression that this multiplier always has to be greater than 1. Finally,
   40
        The parameters κ and ψ — the slope of the AS and AD curves respectively — are given by
                                                       1−α1−γ
                                                    κ=
                                                        α    γ
                                                       1+β
                                                    ψ=     (1 + g) D.
                                                        β

   41
        In computing the multiplier, we consider only a small increase in spending (so the zero bound is still binding) and
a linear approximation of the model around a zero inﬂation steady state.

                                                             29
if government purchases are ﬁnanced via a tax on the old, the multiplier is negative. This nega-
tive multiplier obtains because the old generation will cut their spending one for one with the tax
(thus offsetting the higher spending by the government). Meanwhile, the middle aged will now
increase their saving, having anticipated higher future taxes, which reduces aggregate demand.
     Nevertheless, overall the model suggests a relatively positive picture of ﬁscal policy as it can
lead to an increase in demand via either debt policy or tax and spending actions.


8        A Quantitative Life Cycle Model

We now turn to a medium-scale quantitative version of the baseline model where we can incorpo-
rate a variety of additional features.42 The economy consists of a large number of households with
identical utility functions. Households enter economic maturity at age 26, after which they work,
consume, have children, and trade in asset markets. Households pass away with certainty at age
J, which we take to be 81 years. Households have children at age 26, and the population growth
rate is determined by the total fertility rate (Γ) of every family. Households face a probability of
dying stochastically before reaching maximum age J. The probability of surviving between age
j and j + 1 is denoted by sj .43 The unconditional probability of reaching age j is denoted with a
superscript sj .44
     Households receive utility from two sources: (i) consumption, which is given by a time-
separable, constant elasticity of substitution (CES) utility function u (·) with elasticity parameter
ρ, and (ii) bequests that are divided equally among all descendants. The bequest motive is also
characterized by a CES function v (·) whose argument is the amount of bequests left per descendent,
denoted by x.45 The utility function for bequests is multiplied by a parameter μ ≥ 0 that deter-
mines the strength of the bequest motive. Denoting the consumption of households of age j at
time t by cj,t and the discount rate by β, a household that enters economic maturity at time t has
lifetime expected utility given by the expression
                                           J
                                   Ut =          sj β j u (cj,t+j−1 ) + sJ β J μv (xJ,t+J−1 ) .
                                          j=26

     A household of age j can trade in a real asset aj,t at time t, which is used as productive capital.
At time t + 1, capital will pay a return of rt+1
                                             k , which is the rental rate of capital, and has a resell

value (net of depreciation) of ξt+1 (1 − δ), where ξt+1 is the exogenous relative price of capital in
terms of the consumption good. Each household has an identical exogenous labor productivity
    42
         The model is based on Auerbach and Kotlikoff (1987) and Rı́os-Rull (1996).
    43
         Age-speciﬁc survival rates may also vary over time t; however, for notational simplicity, we omit these additional
subscripts.
   44
      This can be calculated as the product of the one-period survival probabilities: sj = Πjm=26 sm .
   45
      Thus the total size of the bequest left by households is the bequest x multiplied by the fertility of the household.

                                                                30
process, or human capital proﬁle, denoted by hcj , which changes with age. Households receive
no wage income after retirement, which, in our model, occurs after age 65. We assume an inelastic
labor supply; hence, wage income is equal to the wage multiplied by the household’s age-speciﬁc
labor productivity hcj net of labor taxes (1 − τ w ).
                                                                             f
    Households also receive income from the pure proﬁts of ﬁrms, denoted by πj,t , and we assume
that proﬁts are distributed proportionally to labor income. Finally, the household may receive
a bequest qj,t . Individuals receive bequests q the year after their parents die; thus descendants
receive bequests at age J − 24. For example, if we take J to be 81, individuals would receive
bequests at age 57. Bequests made (x) are zero at all times except in the ﬁnal year of life at age
J. Following Rı́os-Rull (1996), we suppose that agents insure themselves against the idiosyncratic
risk of early death via one-period annuity contracts.
    The ﬂow budget constraint of a household of age j at time t is
                                                                                                                                1 − sj
                                                             f
cj,t + ξt aj+1,t+1 + Γ26,t−j+26 · xj,t = (1 − τ w )wt hcj + πj,t + rtk + ξt (1 − δ)                              aj,t + qj,t +          aj,t .
                                                                                                                                   sj

    Households can borrow against future income, and we impose a borrowing constraint of the
same form as in our simple model of Section 346 :

                                                                          Dt
                                                          aj,t ≥               .
                                                                        1 + rt
    There are two types of ﬁrms: producers of ﬁnal goods, and producers of intermediate goods.
The ﬁnal goods ﬁrms produce a differentiated good Ytf . The ﬁnal good composite is the CES
aggregate:
                                                                                      θt
                                                              1          θt −1        θt −1

                                                                  Ytf
                                                                           θt
                                              Yt =                                df           .
                                                          0

Each ﬁnal goods producer utilizes Ytm of intermediate goods to produce output via a linear tech-
nology: Ytf = Ytm . The presence of monopolistically competitive ﬁnal goods ﬁrms allows for
                                                θt
a time-varying markup given by                θt −1 ;   pure proﬁts due to monopoly rents are returned to the
households.
    There is a perfectly competitive intermediate goods sector that sells its production to the ﬁnal
goods sector. These ﬁrms hire workers at wage rate wt and rent capital at rate rtk . They operate a
CES production function in labor and capital with an elasticity of substitution σ. The production
function is                                                                                         σ
                                                        σ−1                              σ−1       σ−1
                                    Ytm   =    αKt       σ
                                                              + (1 − α) (At Lt )          σ              ,

where At is an exogenous, labor-augmenting technological progress, and 0 < α < 1.

   46
        We will assume, in addition, that the borrowing constraint Dt grows at the rate of productivity growth and the
household’s earning potential over the life cycle.

                                                                   31
                           Table 2: Parameters taken from the data and related literature

        Panel A: Data                                   Symbol      Value                  Source
        Mortality proﬁle                                   sj,t                 US mortality tables, CDC
        Income proﬁle                                     hcj                Gourinchas and Parker (2002)
        Total fertility rate                                n       1.88             UN fertility data
        Productivity growth                                 g      0.65%              Fernald (2012)
        Government spending (% of GDP)                     G       21.3%                    CEA
        Public debt (% of GDP)                             bg       118%              Flow of Funds


        Panel B: Related literature
        Elasticity of intertemporal substitution            ρ       0.75     Gourinchas and Parker (2002)
        Capital/labor elasticity of substitution            σ        0.6               Antras (2004)
        Depreciation rate                                   δ       12%              Jorgenson (1996)


       The government purchases some level of output Gt and may issue debt. The budget constraint
for the government becomes
                                           bg,t = Gt + (1 + rt )bg,t−1 − Tt ,

where taxes are collected on labor income. We economize on notation by omitting real and nomi-
nal bonds as assets above; these assets enter in the same way as in the simpler model (Section 5) so
there is both a well-deﬁned real interest rate rt on a risk-free one-period real bond and a nominal
interest rate it on nominal bonds.
       Monetary policy and wage rigidity are modeled as in Section 5. The full nonlinear model is
solved numerically; we solve for both the stationary equilibrium and perfect foresight transition
paths. We outline the computational details and the numerical solution algorithm in Appendix
J.47


8.1      Calibration

We ﬁrst calibrate our model to match the US economy in 2015. Considerable uncertainty remains
as to the size of the output gap in 2015. We consider two polar cases: (i) a zero output gap in
2015 based on Stock and Watson (2012), and (ii) an alternative calibration where the output gap is
−15%, which is what Hall (2016) estimates as the deviation of output from its pre-recession trend
in 2015. We consider this latter case as a sensible upper bound on the possible size of the output

   47
        The equilibrium conditions consist of roughly 170 equations in the stationary equilibrium. Transition dynamics
are more complicated as the birthrate over the past 25 years becomes a state variable in that case and agents form
expectations over the entire transition path.

                                                           32
gap.48
    We ﬁrst consider the case of the zero output gap. We calibrate our model to match the 2015
real interest rate in the US, which was −1.47%. Since we are assuming a zero output gap, this
implies that the natural rate of interest is also −1.47%. We will thus be on the upper section of
the aggregate demand and aggregate supply curves and can continue with our parameterization
without reference to nominal frictions.
    Our parameters come from three main sources. The ﬁrst is statistical data about US demo-
graphics and the economy that we can match directly, such as mortality rates, fertility levels,
productivity growth, and the size of government debt. The second source of parameters we take
directly from the related literature that has previously estimated or calibrated these parameters.
The third set is chosen to match key moments in the data, such as the investment-to-output ratio.
The moments will be matched by minimizing an objective function. We discuss each in turn.
    Panel A of Table 2 shows the ﬁrst category of parameters that are taken directly from observed
data. We use mortality data from the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) to directly match US
survival tables. The total fertility rate is taken from UN fertility data, and the retirement length
is chosen to match the average years of retirement. Government debt to GDP and government
spending to GDP are also chosen to match current values.49 The rate of productivity growth is a
key determinant of the real interest rate. Our baseline uses a productivity growth rate of 0.65%
per year, which we have taken from Fernald (2012). The wage proﬁle hcj is chosen to match the
earnings proﬁle estimated from the data by Gourinchas and Parker (2002).
    Panel B of Table 2 shows the second category of parameters taken from the related literature.
We set the intertemporal elasticity of substitution ρ equal to 0.75. This parameter has been es-
timated widely in the literature, with ranges between .25 and 1.50 The depreciation rate comes
from Jorgenson (1996) and BEA (2004), which have extensive estimates of the depreciation rate of
private and governmental nonresidential equipment.51 The value of the production elasticity of
substitution, σ, has also been estimated widely in the literature, and generally falls between 0.4
and 1.52 As these parameters are not directly observed in the data, we report in Appendix L how

   48
        To be clear, Hall (2016) does not interpret this gap as reﬂecting the output gap of the kind we see in the model, but
we still think that computing deviation from trend provides a convenient benchmark for contrasting with the opposite
extreme - an economy with no output gap.
   49
      We set government debt as the sum of federal, state, and local debt as reported by the Council of Economic
Advisers and the Census Bureau.
  50
     For example, Cooley and Prescott (1995) set ρ = 1, while Auerbach and Kotlikoff (1987) and Rı́os-Rull (1996) set
ρ = .25.
   51
      Since our model does not explicitly incorporate housing, our preferred speciﬁcation uses depreciation applicable
to equipment investment, which generally is higher than for housing. We consider a lower value in the sensitivity
analysis in the appendix.
   52
      For example, Antras (2004) estimates it is between 0.4 and 0.9, while Oberﬁeld and Raval (2014) estimate an
elasticity of 0.7 and Klump, McAdam and Willman (2007) estimate a value between 0.5 and 0.6.

                                                              33
                                     Table 3: Parameters chosen to match targets

                 Targets                                         Model/Data             Source
                 Natural rate of interest                          −1.47%         Federal Reserve
                 Investment-to-output ratio                          15.9%               NIPA
                 Consumer-debt-to-output ratio                       6.3%          Flow of Funds
                 Labor share                                         66.0%           Elsby (2013)
                 Bequests-to-output ratio                            3.0%         Hendricks (2001)


                 Parameters chosen to match targets                 Symbol               Value
                 Rate of time preference                               β                  0.98
                 Borrowing limit (% of annual income)                  D                23.4%
                 Bequests parameter                                    μ                  21.6
                 Retailer elasticity of substitution                   θ                  4.9
                 Capital share parameter                               α                  0.24


our results change for different parameter choices and we will also comment on them below.
    We choose the remaining parameters to match ﬁve key data moments as of 2015: a real interest
rate of −1.47%, an investment-to-output ratio of 15.9%, a consumer-debt-to-output ratio of 6.3%,
a labor share of 66.0%, and a bequest-to-output ratio of 3%.5354 The parameters chosen this way
are the rate of time preference β, the debt limit D, the bequest parameter μ, the capital share
parameter α, and the retailer elasticity of substitution θ. We select the parameters by minimizing
a loss function whose value is the sum of the squared differences between the moments of the
model and those we take from the data.
    Generically, there is no one-to-one mapping between these remaining parameters and the tar-
gets. Hence, we jointly choose all parameters to match the model output to the targets. Neverthe-
less, each of the parameters above corresponds relatively closely with one of the key moments we
are trying to match. The rate of time preference β has a direct effect on the real interest rate; as β
increases, the real interest rate falls. Not unexpectedly, the debt limit most directly affects the level
of consumer debt to output, while the bequest parameter μ mostly directly affects the bequests-
to-output ratio. Finally, the capital share parameter α determines the investment-to-output ratio,
while inverse proﬁt share θ controls the labor share.



   53
        Sources are listed in Table 3.
   54
        We choose to target the investment-to-output ratio, rather than the capital output ratio, as this ratio does not
require adjustment of the past capital stock for changes in the relative price of capital goods. Investment to output is
just a ratio of two nominal, readily measured quantities.

                                                            34
8.2      Negative Real Interest Rates

Table 3 shows the results of the calibration procedure with the zero output gap. With the parame-
ters selected by our minimization, each of the model moments perfectly matches those in the data.
We document in Appendix N that the parameters in Table 3 fall directly within the range of param-
eter values reported in the existing literature. Therefore, we argue that a relatively standard OLG
model with capital accumulation calibrated to match US data can generate permanently negative
real interest with standard parameter values.55
      That a standard, conservatively calibrated OLG model can deliver a substantially negative
natural rate of interest suggests a reevaluation of the standard estimate of the natural rate for
the US. Indeed, there is no reason a priori to expect a normalization of interest rates in the US.
Pre-recession estimates for the long-run neutral real interest rate remained between 2% and 3%
(see Williams (2016)). As long-term rates have continued to fall, the Federal Reserve has adjusted
downward its estimates of the neutral rate to between 0.5% and 1.8% according to FOMC pro-
jections (see FOMC (2016)). Our calibration, however, suggests that, given current productivity
and demographic trends, these estimates for the long-run neutral rate remain too optimistic. Our
benchmark calibration has the steady-state real interest rate at -1.47%, or 2.27% lower than the
FOMC estimate as of 2016.
      Our results are robust to a variety of additional speciﬁcations; in particular, we focus on three
parameters taken from the literature. Appendix L calculates the same moments in Table 3 for
three alternate speciﬁcations: (i) setting depreciation to 8%, (ii) setting the intertemporal elasticity
of substitution ρ to 1, and (iii) setting the production elasticity parameter σ to 1 (Cobb-Douglas).
For each of these speciﬁcations, we again minimize the objective function to ﬁnd β, α, μ D, and θ
to match the targets from the data. The results for these alternate speciﬁcations are similar to our
main speciﬁcation. The model still hits the targets, but with different values for the calibration
parameters that remain well within the ranges from the literature. We report results under these
alternative parameterizations for other experiments in Appendix L.
      While the model can clearly generate permanently negative real interest rates, it is also of in-
terest to explore if it can explain the reduction observed in the real interest rate over time. Before
getting there, however, it is worth asking if our model can also replicate a scenario in which the

   55
        In Appendix L, we show the optimal consumption path for households over their life cycle. Consumption tracks
income over the early part of the life cycle due to borrowing constraints, then declines gradually as households save
for retirement. This leads to the classic hump-shaped consumption proﬁle. For comparison purposes, this ﬁgure also
includes the estimated consumption proﬁle from the Consumer Expenditure Survey, as estimated by Gourinchas and
Parker (2002). We also compare the model’s population pyramid in Appendix L to the current US pyramid. The fact
that we are considering the stationary equilibrium is not innocuous. It does not take into account the dynamics of the
aging of the baby boom and the effect on interest rates as the boom ﬁlters through the population pyramid. To study
these effects, we need to consider transition dynamics, which we turn to shortly.

                                                          35
natural rate of interest is negative enough that the zero bound is binding with output below po-
tential.


8.3      Secular Stagnation in a Quantitative Life Cycle Model

We next turn to our calibration for the US economy with a substantial output gap. We keep the
ﬁrst group of parameters (those taken directly from the data) and the second group of parameters
(those taken from the literature) the same as in our initial calibration. For our third group of
parameters (those we choose to match moments), we keep all parameters unchanged save for the
rate of time preference β. In addition, we must choose the wage rigidity parameter γ.
      We jointly choose β and γ to match two moments of the US economy in 2015: the inﬂation rate
and the output gap. We model the economy as in a secular stagnation, with an inﬂation rate of
1.62% as in the data and an output gap of −15%, corresponding to the deviation of output from its
pre crisis trend in 2015 as documented in Hall (2016). A value of γ of .91 and a discount rate of β of
0.99 match these moments. Our calibrated value of γ falls within the range wage rigidity estimated
by Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2016). The value β is also consistent with common estimates from
the OLG literature (see Appendix N).
      Figure 7 shows the aggregate demand and aggregate supply curves of the secular stagnation
stationary equilibrium. The two curves cross at an output gap of −15%. The natural interest rate
in this calibration is −2.2%, and therefore an inﬂation target of 2% is too low to allow the nominal
interest rate to remain above zero. As a result, the economy is drawn into the secular stagnation
steady state. The equilibrium real interest is −1.62% and the inﬂation rate is 1.62% — 40 basis
points below target. Investment to output, bequests to output, labor share, and consumer debt to
output continue to closely match the US moments.56
      Figure 7 represents the second key quantitative ﬁnding of the paper. It suggests that the model
can replicate a permanent stagnation with a standard parameterization of precisely the same form
we have shown in the simple model. As in the three-period model, a surplus of savings over
investment opportunities pushes the equilibrium interest rate negative. If the inﬂation target is
insufﬁcient to prevent the zero lower bound from binding and nominal wage rigidities bind, a
secular stagnation emerges.


8.4      Decline in Interest Rates Since 1970

We use our model to quantitatively analyze the fall in the real interest rate observed since 1970
and to assess the relative contribution of different factors. 1970 is a natural starting point, for it

   56
        The investment-to-output ratio, consumer debt-to-output ratio, labor share, and bequests-to-output remain very
close to their values in Table 3; hence, we choose not to reparameterize the model for μ, α, D, and θ relative to the
benchmark calibration.

                                                           36
                                               Figure 7: Secular stagnation equilibrium

                                   
                                                                                           
                                                                                     
                                  "                 

                                  !




                        
                                   


                          


                                  "


                                  !
                                                              
                                                                
                                   


                                  
                                       "       "!        #        #!        !   

                                                                           



is the point at which a number of economic trends began shifting. Brieﬂy, they are (i) children of
the baby boom generation (born beginning in 1945) begin to enter the labor force; (ii) mortality
rapidly falls with life expectancy increasing from an average of 70.8 in 1970 to 78.7 in 2010; (iii)
according to Gordon (2016), the fall in the rate of productivity growth began in the 1970s; (iv)
Greenwood, Hercowitz and Krusell (1997) and Fernald (2012) have documented that the relative
price of investment goods has fallen by 30% since 1970; and (v) Karabarbounis and Neiman (2014)
have documented a signiﬁcant drop in the labor share since 1970. Also, this period saw a signif-
icant rise in government and personal debt. For a full description of the changes in the economy
since 1970, see Appendix M. For the data series used for these variables, see the Data Appendix.
   We begin by targeting our calibration of the US economy to 1970 as shown in Table 4. All
type 1 parameters (those taken directly from the data) we adjust to their 1970 counterparts (see
Panel A) with the exception of the life cycle income proﬁle, which remains unchanged. All type
2 parameters (those taken from the literature) are kept the same with the exception of the relative
price of investment goods (Panel B). For the type 3 parameters (those we take to match moments),
we keep the utility and production parameters (β, α, μ) unchanged. We adjust the collateral con-
straint D, to match the lower consumer-debt-to-output ratio observed in 1970, and the proﬁt share
θ to match the higher labor share observed in the 1970s (Panel C). The respective 1970 values for
these two parameters are then D=0.144 and θ=7.93.
   Table 5 shows the results of the simulation. The simulated 1970 real interest rate is 2.55%,
extremely close to the 2.62% observed in the data. This is an important quantitative result; our
model is able to match the entire size of the decline in real interest rates over the past 45 years. The
model predicts an investment-to-output ratio (which we did not explicitly target) slightly higher
than what is observed in the data. By our choice of D and θ the model matches the consumer-
debt-to-output ratio exactly as well as the labor share. Overall, the model does a reasonable job
                                                                        37
                                    Table 4: Change in parameters from 1970 to 2015

                      Panel A: Data                                                1970      2015
                      Life expectancy                                              70.7       78.7
                      Total fertility rate                                          2.8       1.9
                      Productivity growth                                         2.02%      0.65%
                      Government debt (% of GDP)                                   42%       118%


                      Panel B: Relative price of investment
                      Relative price of investment (index 100=2015)                130        100


                      Panel C: Change in targets
                      Consumer-debt-to-output ratio                               4.2%       6.3%
                      Labor share                                                 72.4%      66.0%

                                           Table 5: Simulation results for 1970

                                Moment                                    Model     US data
                                Natural rate of interest                 2.55%       2.62%
                                Investment-to-output ratio               19.0%       16.8%
                                Consumer-debt-to-output ratio             4.2%        4.2%
                                Labor share                              72.4%       72.4%


of explaining the fall in the real interest rate observed over the past 45 years by using observed
changes in productivity, demographics, the relative price of investment goods, credit constraints,
and changes in the labor share.
    Table 6 decomposes the contribution of each of these factors to the decline in interest rates.
We change each parameter from its steady-state value in 2015 to its steady-state value in 1970,
holding all other parameters constant. We then examine the effect of this change on the real in-
terest rate. For example, changing productivity growth from its 2015 level of 0.65% per year to
its 1970 level of 2.02% results in an increase in the steady-state real interest rate of 1.9 percentage
points. The table shows a decomposition of the relative importance of all the other factors.57 The
reductions in fertility, mortality, and the rate of productivity growth play the largest role in the
decrease in real interest rates. The main factor that has tended to counterbalance these forces is
an increase in government debt. Changes in the labor share and the relative price of investment
   57
        The decomposition is calculated by ﬁrst adding up the total change in the real interest rate from all these factors
and then dividing the effect of changing a particular forcing variable by the entire change. Numbers may not sum to
unity due to interaction effects.

                                                             38
                  Table 6: Decomposition of the decline in the natural rate of interest: 1970-2015

                          Forcing variable                              Δ in r     % of total Δ
                          Total interest rate change                    -4.02%         100%
                          Mortality rate                                −1.82           43%
                          Total fertility rate                          −1.84           43%
                          Productivity growth                           −1.90           44%
                          Government debt (% of GDP)                    +2.11          −49%
                          Labor share                                    −.52           12%
                          Relative price of investment goods            −0.44           10%
                          Change in debt limit                           +.13           -3%


goods play a smaller role in explaining the decline in real interest rates. Similarly, the increase in
the consumer debt limit does not have a signiﬁcant effect on the evolution of the interest rate in
this parameterization.58


8.5      Raising the Natural Rate of Interest

If the natural rate of interest is indeed −1.47% (the level in our baseline analysis), this poses a chal-
lenge for policymakers. With a 2% inﬂation target, small decreases in the natural rate will cause
the zero lower bound to bind, implying that downturns may be sharper and more persistent. We
now consider an alternative thought experiment, taking as given that the natural rate is −1.47% in
2015. We ask, what economic conditions would be needed to increase the steady-state real interest
rate to a positive territory of 1%? While this target is somewhat arbitrary, we ﬁnd it to be a useful
benchmark. With the Federal Reserve’s inﬂation target of 2%, a natural rate of 1% would give
policymakers a reasonable amount of room to respond to negative shocks that otherwise would
lead to a binding ZLB. It also corresponds with the current expectations of the FOMC about long-
run real interest rates. An alternative way of formulating our quantitative experiment is to ask,
which forcing variables in 2015 would one need to change to be consistent with the current FOMC
projections?
      Table 7 provides the results of this experiment and shows that substantial changes in the un-
derlying fundamentals are needed in order to increase the natural rate to 1%. Given current de-
mographic trends, it is implausible that fertility will reverse its decline and dramatically increase

   58
        As our calibration takes account of only consumer debt, we suspect that this force may play a substantially larger
role once one takes account of housing purchases and the associated debt, along with ﬁrms borrowing and lending.
Together, these forces would have tended to increase the real interest rate in the past 45 years and lowered rates during
the crisis. The increase in inequality observed during this period may have also been working to reduce interest rates;
we have not taken account of this factorin the quantitative section and leave it for future research.

                                                             39
                              Table 7: Raising the natural rate of interest to 1%

                Forcing variable                           2015 Value    Counterfactual value
                Total fertility rate                          1.88                  3.28
                Government debt (% of GDP)                   118%                   215%
                Productivity growth                          0.65%              2.43%
                Relative price of investment goods            1.00                  2.43


to 3.28 births per woman. An increase in immigration could make up a portion of the difference. It
would also be challenging to increase productivity growth to 2.43% per year given the headwinds
to productivity noted by Gordon (2016) and the fact that productivity growth has rarely exceeded
2% since 1970.
      Of particular interest is the potential impact of an increase in government debt on interest
rates, given that a higher public debt is an obvious policy lever. As Table 7 shows, government
debt would need to double to roughly 215% of GDP to increase the natural rate to 1%. Such a large
level of debt raises questions about the feasibility of this policy for we have not modeled any costs
or limits on the government’s ability to issue risk-free debt — an assumption that may be strained
at such high levels. While these results suggest that several reforms would tend to increase the
natural rate of interest, the menu of options does not paint a particularly rosy picture relative to
the alternative of raising the inﬂation target of the central bank.


8.6     Transition Dynamics

So far, we have conﬁned our analysis to stationary equilibria. While this is one natural benchmark,
we can also consider transition dynamics. This requires taking a strong stance on agents’ expec-
tations during the transition. Here, we document numerical experiments in which it is assumed
that the economy was at a stationary equilibrium in 1970, and then project the model forward,
assuming agents have perfect foresight about the path of exogenous processes.
      We feed into the model the dynamic paths for each of the forcing variables in Table 6 and
calculate the resulting transition path. We document the time series for each forcing variable in
the Data Appendix. On impact in 1970, agents have perfect foresight about each of the exogenous
and endogenous variables. For example, in 1970 all living agents will realize that there will be a
productivity slowdown over the next 40 years and will adjust their optimal decisions accordingly.
The forcing variables are set to their ﬁnal steady-state values after the year 2015.
      Since agents enter the labor force at the age of 26, the birthrates from 1945 to the 1970s are
key state variables that will affect the real interest rate beginning in the 1970s. Since individuals
entering the labor force in 1970 (age 26) were born in 1945, we use as model inputs data on fertility
from 1945 onward to measure the size of each incoming generation. The birthrate data from 1945
                                                      40
                              Figure 8: Transition path of the natural rate of interest


                          $
                                                                   
                                                                    

                          "                                      



                          !



                          



                          



                         



                         !
                               %# %#" %$ %$$ %%!  "  $ !  



are reﬂected below the solid line in the age pyramid for the US economy in Figure 9, but, in 1970,
those generations are economically inactive, entering the labor force only gradually.
    Figure 8 shows the full transition path for the real interest rate. The 1970 real interest rate is
2.55% and declines non-monotonically throughout the period until it reaches −1.0% in 2015. The
interest rate exhibits a brief recovery in the mid-to-late 1990s as productivity growth increases, but
this subsides by the mid-2000s. Note that the model projects that the interest rate will continue to
decrease until it hits a nadir in 2020. After 2020, there are cycles in the real interest rate due to the
echo effects of the baby boom. The economy gradually converges to the ﬁnal steady-state interest
rate of −1.47%.59
    One interesting observation is that our model predicts a more rapid decline in the real interest
rate than that observed in the data. A possible explanation for this, which we leave for future
research, is offered by Summers (2014). He hypothesizes that the decline in the natural rate of
interest since the late 1990s was masked by both the tech and housing bubble so that the true
natural interest rate has only been observed post crisis. This could be modeled as exogenous
   59
        One factor we do not focus on in these transition paths is debt deleveraging. While the evidence and theory
certainly suggest there was a signiﬁcant deleveraging shock in 2008, our model as of yet does not include a housing
sector. Since housing debt is a signiﬁcant portion of consumer debt, we leave the effect of debt deleveraging on interest
rates to future quantitative work.

                                                           41
ﬂuctuations in the collateral constraint D in our model.
      One interesting aspect of our model is that it does not generate an investment boom even
though real interest rates are declining. In fact, investment actually falls in our model, from 19.0%
in 1970 to 15.9% in 2015. Although lower interest rates will tend to lead to a higher capital-to-
output ratio and thus a higher investment rate, there are several counterbalancing forces in the
model. In particular, decreases in the rate of population growth and productivity growth lead
directly to a lower investment-to-output ratio, holding constant the capital-to-output ratio. Finally,
our relatively inelastic production CES parameter means that the steady-state K/Y ratio stays
relatively constant for a given interest rate, which also dampens the effect on investment.


8.7     Effects of the Baby Boom

We now study the effects of the baby boom on real interest rates. The baby boom started in 1945,
so the children of the baby boom did not enter economic maturity until 1970, when they reached
age 26. Thus, we are able to look at the impact of these demographic changes on the evolution of
interest rates starting from our model economy in 1970.
      The left-hand panel of Figure 9 shows the demographic pyramid for the model during the
transition years. In 1970, the economically active population is assumed to be in steady state; thus
the pyramid above the solid line is a triangle. The younger generation of the baby boom, not yet
in the labor force, bulges the distribution and will soon enter the labor force. Twenty-ﬁve years
later, in 1995, the bulge now shows up in the working-age population. Fifty years later, in 2020,
the baby boom generation is retired. There is also a second bulge in the population pyramid due
to the children of the baby boomers (the millennials). By the year 2170, the population pyramids
are approaching steady state.
      The right-hand panel of Figure 9 shows the interest rate transition for the baby boom simula-
tion. From 1970 until 2000, the baby boom tends to increase real interest rates owing to an increase
in the rate of population growth. Following the baby boom comes the baby bust, and fertility rates
drop as the boomers enter retirement, which leads to a sharp drop in real interest rates. The echo
effects result in cycles in the real interest rate until it reaches its ﬁnal steady-state value of around
1%.


9     Conclusion

This paper builds a quantitative theory of negative interest rates and secular stagnation. We show
how a low natural rate of interest can lead to a secular stagnation: a persistent output slump,
inﬂation below target, and a chronically binding ZLB. Our message is not that the ZLB will be
binding forever with certainty. A world of low natural rates admits business cycles in which the

                                                   42
                                     Figure 9: Baby boom and bust

                                                       $
                                                                                             

                                                       #                                

                                                                                             
                                                       "

                                                       !

                                                         

                                                       

                                                       

                                                       

                                                       

                                                       

                                                        
                                                             &$ &$# &% &%% &&!  #  % !  




short-term rate can still be temporarily positive. Instead, it is a world characterized by a ”new
normal,” in which real interest rates need on average to be negative to achieve full employment.
As in the case of Hansen’s prediction in 1938, we hope that this gloomy outlook will prove to be
wrong. If negative rates persist, our analysis has identiﬁed several measures that could eliminate
secular stagnation via appropriate policy.
   A serious challenge, however, is that our policy recommendations advocate in favor of policies
that were considered vices rather than virtues in macroeconomic theory: a higher inﬂation target,
persistent increases in the debt-to-GDP ratio, or even more generous pay-as-you-go Social Secu-
rity. This poses a conundrum for policymakers who cannot know with certainty if we are indeed
in a ”new normal” or just in a prolonged period of low interest rates that will abate in the near
future. If the ”new normal” hypothesis is incorrect, then those very policies that are desirable in
order to eliminate secular stagnation are likely to be as counterproductive and costly as existing
economic theory suggests. Given the uncertainty about the future, this creates new trade-offs for
optimal policy, which we have not touched upon but hope that future research considers.
   In closing, we brieﬂy discuss some of the main arguments against the hypothesis of perma-
nently negative interest rates, leaving a more detailed analysis to future research. The ﬁrst argu-
ment, stated by Paul Samuelson and recently recapitulated by Ben Bernanke, is that negative real
interest rates are a theoretical impossibility:

      As ... Paul Samuelson taught me in graduate school at MIT, if the real interest rate were
      expected to be negative indeﬁnitely, almost any investment is proﬁtable. For example,
      at a negative (or even zero) interest rate, it would pay to level the Rocky Mountains
      to save even the small amount of fuel expended by trains and cars that currently must
      climb steep grades. It’s therefore questionable that the economy’s equilibrium real rate
                                                  43
         can really be negative for an extended period.

    Samuelson’s argument did not take into account two factors: monopoly rents and risk. In par-
                                                                                                         1
ticular, under monopolistic competition, the rental rate of capital is given by rk =                   markup   · M P K.
With positive markups, the marginal product of capital is higher than the rental rate of capital.
Thus, in equilibrium, there can be positive social returns to capital (even net of depreciation) while
the rental rate (net of depreciation) and hence the real interest rate is negative. This is indeed the
case in our quantitative model. Moreover, even though our calibrated model produces negative
real interest rates, it can be shown that the economy is not dynamically inefﬁcient.60
    Adding risk to our model is another rejoinder to Samuelson’s argument. As Abel et al. (1989)
show, adding aggregate risk can lead to a negative risk-free interest rate, while the average and
marginal return from capital (net of depreciation) remains positive. While adding aggregate risk
to our economy is beyond the scope of this paper, we can illustrate this mechanism in a reduced-
form way. In Appendix K, we extend the model by including an additional ﬁnancial friction: All
borrowing and lending must now occur through a bank, which charges a spread between the
borrowing and lending rates of interest. With a spread of 2%, for example, it is possible to have a
borrowing rate of interest that is positive while the lending rate of interest is negative. Since ﬁrms
borrow at the higher rate, the marginal product of capital in excess of depreciation is positive in
this economy.
    The second argument against the presence of secular stagnation conditions in the US is that
the measured return on capital is stable (see, for example, Gomme, Ravikumar and Rupert (2015)).
The argument is that the most relevant measure of return is not the return on government debt
but the return on productive capital. One problem with that argument is that business income
does not just measure capital income, but also pure proﬁts.61 And over the past decades, there
is some evidence that competition has decreased and monopoly rents have risen.62 If an increase
in monopoly rents cancels out the decrease in competitive returns to capital, this would lead to a
stable measured average return on capital.63 This tends to increase the measured average return
in our model through two channels: higher pure proﬁts, and a higher marginal product of capi-
tal relative to the rental rate of capital. Although our economy exhibits a decline in the marginal
product of capital over time, proﬁts increase enough to almost completely offset this decline, and
   60
        The condition for dynamic inefﬁciency, following Abel et al. (1989), is that the economy spends more on investment
in capital than it gets out of it in terms of production: I > M P K ∗ K.
    61
       It is also possible that the NIPA accounts systematically understate the capital stock by mismeasuring intangible
capital, as discussed in McGrattan and Prescott (2010). To the extent that this bias has increased over time, the true
return on capital may be declining as our model would suggest.
   62
      See, for example, Philippon and Gutierrez (2016), CEA (2016), and Decker et al. (2016).
   63
      An increase in monopoly rents is one possible explanation for the measured decrease in the labor share over the
past 30 years. See in particular Barkai (2016), who ﬁnds that an increase in markups is responsible for a decrease in
both the labor and the capital share.

                                                             44
thus the measured average return on capital stays constant. Future research will consider alterna-
tive measures of the return on capital and evidence from ﬁrm-level data on whether returns have
fallen over time.




                                               45
References

Abel, Andrew B., N. Gregory Mankiw, Lawrence H. Summers, and Richard J. Zeckhauser. 1989.
  “Assessing Dynamic Efﬁciency: Theory and Evidence.” Review of Economic Studies, 56(1): 1–19.

Aiyagari, S. Rao. 1994. “Uninsured Idiosyncratic Risk and Aggregate Saving.” Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 109(3): 659–684.

Akerlof, George A., William T. Dickens, and George L. Perry. 1996. “The Macroeconomics of
  Low Inﬂation.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 27(1): 1–76.

Altig, David, Alan J. Auerbach, Laurence J. Kotlikoff, Kent A. Smetters, and Jan Walliser.
  2001. “Simulating Fundamental Tax Reform in the United States.” American Economic Review,
  91(3): 574–595.

Alvarez-Cuadrado, Francisco, Ngo Van Long, and Markus Poschke. 2014. “Capital Labor Substi-
  tution, Structural Change, and the Labor Income Share.” CIRANO-Scientiﬁc Publications 2014s-
  02.

Antras, Pol. 2004. “Is the US Aggregate Production Function Cobb-Douglas? New Estimates of
  the Elasticity of Substitution.” Contributions in Macroeconomics, 4(1): 1–34.

Asriyan, Vladimir, Luca Fornaro, Alberto Martin, and Jaume Ventura. 2016. “Monetary Policy
  for a Bubbly World.” National Bureau of Economic Research 22639.

Auerbach, Alan J., and Laurence J. Kotlikoff. 1987. Dynamic Fiscal Policy. Vol. 11, Cambridge
  University Press Cambridge.

Autor, David, and David Dorn. 2013. “The Growth of Low-Skill Service Jobs and the Polarization
  of the US Labor Market.” American Economic Review, 103(5): 1553–1597.

Barattieri, Alessandro, Susanto Basu, and Peter Gottschalk. 2014. “Some Evidence on the Im-
  portance of Sticky Wages.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 6(1): 70–101. National
  Bureau of Economic Research.

Barkai, Simcha. 2016. “Declining Labor and Capital Shares.” Mimeo. University of Chicago.

Barro, Robert J., and Herschel I. Grossman. 1971. “A General Disequilibrium Model of Income
  and Employment.” American Economic Review, 61(1): 82–93.

BEA. 2004. “BEA Depreciation Estimates.”

Bénassy, Jean-Pascal. 1993. “Nonclearing Markets: Microeconomic Concepts and Macroeconomic
  Applications.” Journal of Economic Literature, 31(2): 732–761.
                                                 46
Benhabib, Jess, Stephanie Schmitt-Grohé, and Martın Uribe. 2001. “The Perils of Taylor Rules.”
  Journal of Economic Theory, 96(1): 40–69.

Benigno, Gianluca, and Luca Fornaro. 2015. “Stagnation Traps.” Mimeo, London School of Eco-
  nomics.

Benigno, Pierpaolo, and Luca Antonio Ricci. 2011. “The Inﬂation-Output Trade-off with Down-
  ward Wage Rigidities.” American Economic Review, 101(4): 1436–1466.

Bernanke, Ben S. 2005. “The Global Saving Glut and the US Current Account Deﬁcit.”

Berndt, Ernst R. 1976. “Reconciling Alternative Estimates of the Elasticity of Substitution.” Review
  of Economics and Statistics, 58(1): 59–68.

Berry, Steven, James Levinsohn, and Ariel Pakes. 1995. “Automobile Prices in Market Equilib-
  rium.” Econometrica, 63(4): 841–890.

Bewley, Truman F. 1999. Why Wages Don’t Fall During a Recession. Harvard University Press.

Bhattarai, Saroj, Gauti B. Eggertsson, and Raphael Schoenle. 2014. “Is Increased Price Flexibility
  Stabilizing? Redux.” National Bureau of Economic Research 19886.

Blanchard, Olivier, and Philippe Weil. 2001. “Dynamic Efﬁciency, the Riskless Rate, and Debt
  Ponzi Games under Uncertainty.” Advances in Macroeconomics, 1(2).

Brynjolfsson, Erik, and Andrew McAfee. 2014. The Second Machine Age: Work, Progress, and Pros-
  perity in a Time of Brilliant Technologies. WW Norton & Company.

Bullard, James. 2010. “Seven Faces of the Peril.” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, 92(5): 339–
  52.

Caballero, Ricardo, and Emmanuel Farhi. 2014. “The Safety Trap.” 19927. National Bureau of
  Economic Research.

Carvalho, Carlos, and Andrea Ferrero. 2014. “What Explains Japan’s Persistent Deﬂation.”
  Mimeo, PUC-Rio.

CEA. 2016. “Beneﬁts of Competition and Indicators of Market Power.”

Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum, and Benjamin K. Johannsen. 2016. “Does the New
  Keynesian Model Have a Uniqueness Problem?” Mimeo. Northwestern University.

Christiano, Lawrence, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo. 2011. “When Is the Government
  Spending Multiplier Large?” Journal of Political Economy, 119(1): 78–121.

                                                  47
Christiano, L.J., M. Eichenbaum, and C.L. Evans. 2005. “Nominal Rigidities and the Dynamic
  Effects of a Shock to Monetary Policy.” Journal of Political Economy, 113(1).

Cochrane, John H. 2016. “Michelson-Morley, Occam and Fisher: The Radical Implications of Sta-
  ble Inﬂation at Near-Zero Interest Rates.” Mimeo. Stanford University.

Coeurdacier, Nicolas, Stephane Guibaud, and Keyu Jin. 2015. “Credit Constraints and Growth
  in a Global Economy.” American Economic Review, 105(9): 2838–2881.

Coibion, Olivier, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, and Johannes Wieland. 2012. “The Optimal Inﬂation
  Rate in New Keynesian Models.” Review of Economic Studies, 79(4): 1371–1406.

Constantinides, George M., John B. Donaldson, and Rajnish Mehra. 2002. “Junior Can’t Borrow:
  A New Perspective on the Equity Premium Puzzle.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117(1): 269–
  296.

Cooley, Thomas F., and Edward C. Prescott. 1995. “Frontiers of Business Cycle Research.” , ed.
  Thomas F. Cooley, Chapter Economic Growth and Business Cycles, 1–38. Princeton University
  Press.

Daly, Mary C., and Bart Hobijn. 2014. “Downward Nominal Wage Rigidities Bend the Phillips
  curve.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 46(S2): 51–93.

Decker, Ryan A., John Haltiwanger, Ron S. Jarmin, and Javier Miranda. 2016. “Where Has All
  the Skewness Gone? The Decline in High-Growth (Young) Firms in the US.” European Economic
  Review, 86: 4–23.

Del Negro, Marco, Marc P. Giannoni, and Christina Patterson. 2012. “The Forward Guidance
  Puzzle.” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report.

De Nardi, Mariacristina. 2004. “Wealth Inequality and Intergenerational Links.” Review of Eco-
  nomic Studies, 71(3): 743–768.

Dynan, Karen E., Jonathan Skinner, and Stephen P. Zeldes. 2004. “Do the Rich Save More?”
  Journal of Political Economy, 112(2): 397–444.

Eggertsson, Gauti B., and Michael Woodford. 2003. “The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and Op-
  timal Monetary Policy.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 34(1): 139–234.

Eggertsson, Gauti B., and Paul Krugman. 2012. “Debt, Deleveraging, and the Liquidity Trap: A
  Fisher-Minsky-Koo Approach.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(3): 1469–1513.

Eggertsson, Gauti B., and Sanjay R. Singh. 2016. “Log-linear Approximation versus an Exact So-
  lution at the ZLB in the New Keynesian Model.” National Bureau of Economic Research 22784.
                                                   48
Eggertsson, Gauti B., Neil R. Mehrotra, Sanjay R. Singh, and Lawrence H. Summers. 2016. “A
  Contagious Malady? Open Economy Dimensions of Secular Stagnation.” IMF Economic Review,
  64(4): 581–634.

Elsby, Michael, Bart Hobijn, and Ayşegül Şahin. 2013. “The Decline of the US Labor Share.”
  Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 44(2): 1–63.

Fagan, Gabriel, and Julián Messina. 2009. “Downward Wage Rigidity and Optimal Steady-State
  Inﬂation.” ECB Working Paper.

Fallick, Bruce, Michael Lettau, and William Wascher. 2011. “Downward Nominal Wage Rigidity
  in the United States During the Great Recession.” Mimeo, Federal Reserve Board.

Fernald, John. 2012. “A Quarterly, Utilization-adjusted Series on Total Factor Productivity.”
  Mimeo. Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.

FOMC. 2016. “Economic Projections of the FOMC.”

Gagnon, Etienne, Benjamin K. Johannsen, and David Lopez-Salido. 2016. “Understanding the
  New Normal: The Role of Demographics.” Mimeo. Federal Reserve Board.

Galı́, Jordi. 2014. “Monetary Policy and Rational Asset Price Bubbles.” American Economic Review,
  104(3): 721–752.

Galı́, Jordi. 2015. Monetary Policy, Inﬂation, and the Business Cycle. . 2nd ed., Princeton University
  Press.

Garga, Vaishali, and Sanjay R. Singh. 2016. “Output Hysteresis and Optimal Monetary Policy.”
  Mimeo. Brown University.

Gibbs, Christopher. 2017. “Learning to Believe in Secular Stagnation.” Mimeo. University of New
  South Wales.

Glover, Andrew, Jonathan Heathcote, Dirk Krueger, and José-Vı́ctor Rı́os-Rull. 2011. “Intergen-
  erational Redistribution in the Great Recession.” National Bureau of Economic Research 16924.

Golosov, Mikhail, and Robert E. Lucas. 2007. “Menu Costs and Phillips Curves.” Journal of Polit-
  ical Economy, 115(2): 171–199.

Gomme, Paul, B. Ravikumar, and Peter Rupert. 2015. “Secular Stagnation and Returns on Capi-
  tal.” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Economic Synopses, , (19).

Goos, Maarten, Alan Manning, and Anna Salomons. 2009. “Job Polarization in Europe.” Ameri-
  can Economic Review, 99(2): 58–63.
                                                   49
Gordon, Robert J. 2012. “Is US Economic Growth Over? Faltering Innovation Confronts the Six
  Headwinds.” National Bureau of Economic Research 18315.

Gordon, Robert J. 2015. “Secular Stagnation: A Supply-Side View.” American Economic Review,
  Papers and Proceedings, 105(5): 54–59.

Gordon, Robert J. 2016. The Rise and Fall of American Growth: The US Standard of Living Since the
  Civil War. Princeton University Press.

Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, and Jonathan A. Parker. 2002. “Consumption Over the Life Cycle.”
  Econometrica, 70(1): 47–89.

Greenwood, Jeremy, Zvi Hercowitz, and Per Krusell. 1997. “Long-run Implications of
  Investment-Speciﬁc Technological Change.” American Economic Review, 87(3): 342–362.

Guerrieri, Veronica, and Guido Lorenzoni. 2011. “Credit Crises, Precautionary Savings, and the
  Liquidity Trap.” National Bureau of Economic Research 17583.

Hall, Robert E. 2016. “The Anatomy of Stagnation in a Modern Economy.” Economica, 84(333): 1–
  15.

Hansen, Alvin. 1939. “Economic Progress and Declining Population Growth.” American Economic
  Review, 29(1): 1–15.

Hausman, Joshua K., and Johannes F. Wieland. 2014. “Abenomics: Preliminary Analysis and
  Outlook.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 45(1): 1–63.

Hendricks, Lutz. 2001. “Bequests and Retirement Wealth in the United States.” Mimeo. Arizona
  State University.

Herrendorf, Berthold, Christopher Herrington, and Akos Valentinyi. 2015. “Sectoral Technology
  and Structural Transformation.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 7(4): 104–133.

Hur, Sewon. 2016. “The Lost Generation of the Great Recession.” Mimeo. University of Pittsburgh.

Iacoviello, Matteo, and Marina Pavan. 2013. “Housing and Debt over the Life Cycle and Over the
  Business Cycle.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 60(2): 221–238.

Jorgenson, Dale W. 1996. “Empirical Studies of Depreciation.” Economic Inquiry, 34(1): 24–42.

Kaplan, Greg. 2012. “Inequality and the Life Cycle.” Quantitative Economics, 3(3): 471–525.

Karabarbounis, Loukas, and Brent Neiman. 2014. “The Global Decline of the Labor Share.” Quar-
  terly Journal of Economics, 129(1): 61–103.

                                                50
Kim, Jinill, and Francisco J. Ruge-Murcia. 2009. “How Much Inﬂation is Necessary to Grease the
  Wheels?” Journal of Monetary Economics, 56(3): 365–377.

Klump, Rainer, Peter McAdam, and Alpo Willman. 2007. “Factor Substitution and Factor-
  augmenting Technical Progress in the United States.” Review of Economics and Statistics,
  89(1): 183–192.

Kocherlakota, Naryana. 2013. “Impact of a Land Price Fall when Labor Markets are Incomplete.”
  Mimeo, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.

Krueger, Dirk, and Felix Kubler. 2006. “Pareto-Improving Social Security Reform when Financial
  Markets are Incomplete!?” American Economic Review, 96(3): 737–755.

Krugman, Paul R. 1998. “It’s Baaack: Japan’s Slump and the Return of the Liquidity Trap.” Brook-
  ings Papers on Economic Activity, 29(2): 137–205.

Krugman, Paul R. 2014. “The Timidity Trap.” The New York Times.

Krusell, Per, and Anthony A. Smith. 1998. “Income and Wealth Heterogeneity in the Macroecon-
  omy.” Journal of Political Economy, 106(5): 867–896.

Krusell, Per, Lee E. Ohanian, José-Vı́ctor Rı́os-Rull, and Giovanni L. Violante. 2000. “Capital-
  skill Complementarity and Inequality: A Macroeconomic Analysis.” Econometrica, 68(5): 1029–
  1053.

Malthus, Thomas R. 1798. An Essay on the Principle of Population. J. Johnson, London.

Mankiw, N. Gregory, David Romer, and David N. Weil. 1992. “A Contribution to the Empirics
  of Economic Growth.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(2): 407–437.

McGrattan, Ellen R., and Edward C. Prescott. 2010. “Unmeasured Investment and the Puzzling
  US Boom in the 1990s.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2(4): 88–123.

McKay, Alisdair, Emi Nakamura, and Jón Steinsson. 2016. “The Power of Forward Guidance
  Revisited.” American Economic Review, 106(10): 3133–3158.

Mehrotra, Neil. 2017. “Fiscal Policy Stabilization: Purchases or Transfers?” International Journal of
  Central Banking, Forthcoming.

Mian, Atif, and Amir Suﬁ. 2014. “What Explains the 2007-2009 Drop in Employment?” Economet-
  rica, 82(6): 2197–2223.

Midrigan, Virgiliu. 2011. “Menu Costs, Multiproduct Firms and Aggregate Fluctuations.” Econo-
  metrica, 79(4): 1139–1180.
                                                 51
Nadiri, M. Ishaq, and Ingmar R. Prucha. 1996. “Estimation of the Depreciation Rate of Physical
  and R&D Capital in the US Total Manufacturing Sector.” Economic Inquiry, 34(1): 43–56.

Nakamura, Emi, and Jon Steinsson. 2009. “Monetary Non-Neutrality in a Multi-Sector Menu
  Cost Model.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125(3): 961–1013.

Oberﬁeld, Ezra, and Devesh Raval. 2014. “Micro Data and Macro Technology.” National Bureau
  of Economic Research 20452.

Philippon, Thomas, and German Gutierrez. 2016. “Investment-less Growth: An Empirical Inves-
  tigation.” National Bureau of Economic Research 22897.

Piketty, Thomas. 2014. Capital in the 21st Century. Harvard University Press.

Rı́os-Rull, José-Vı́ctor. 1996. “Life-cycle Economies and Aggregate Fluctuations.” Review of Eco-
  nomic Studies, 63(3): 465–489.

Rı́os-Rull, José-Vı́ctor, and Virginia Sánchez-Marcos. 2008. “An Aggregate Economy with Dif-
  ferent Size Houses.” Journal of the European Economic Association, 6(2-3): 705–714.

Samuelson, Paul A. 1958. “An Exact Consumption-Loan Model of Interest With or Without the
  Social Contrivance of Money.” Journal of Political Economy, 66(6): 467–482.

Schmitt-Grohé, Stephanie, and Martin Uribe. 2011. “Pegs and Pain.” National Bureau of Eco-
  nomic Research 16847. National Bureau of Economic Research.

Schmitt-Grohé, Stephanie, and Martın Uribe. 2013. “The Making of a Great Contraction with a
  Liquidity Trap and a Jobless Recovery.” Mimeo, Columbia University.

Schmitt-Grohé, Stephanie, and Martın Uribe. 2016. “Downward Nominal Wage Rigidity, Cur-
  rency Pegs, and Involuntary Unemployment.” Journal of Political Economy, 124(5): 1466–1514.

Schmitt-Grohé, Stephanie, and Martin Uribe. 2017. “Liquidity Traps and Jobless Recoveries.”
  American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 9(1): 165–204.

Shimer, Robert. 2012. “Wage Rigidities and Jobless Recoveries.” Journal of Monetary Economics,
  59(S): S65–S77.

Stock, James H., and Mark W. Watson. 2012. “Disentangling the Channels of the 2007-2009 Re-
  cession.” National Bureau of Economic Research 18904.

Summers, Lawrence. 2013. “Why Stagnation Might Prove to be the New Normal.” The Financial
  Times.


                                                 52
Summers, Lawrence H. 2014. “US Economic Prospects: Secular Stagnation, Hysteresis, and the
  Zero Lower Bound.” Business Economics, 49(2): 65–73.

Thwaites, Gregory. 2015. “Why are Real Interest Rates so Low? Secular Stagnation and the Rela-
  tive Price of Investment Goods.” Mimeo. London School of Economics.

Tobin, James. 1972. “Inﬂation and Unemployment.” American Economic Review, 62(1/2): 1–18.

Werning, Ivan. 2012. “Managing a Liquidity Trap: Monetary and Fiscal Policy.” Mimeo, Mas-
  sachusetts Institute of Technology.

Williams, John C. 2016. “Monetary Policy in a Low R-star World.” Federal Reserve Bank of San
  Francisco Economic Letter, 23.

Woodford, Michael. 1990. “Public Debt as Private Liquidity.” American Economic Review,
  80(2): 382–388.

Woodford, Michael. 2003. Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy. Princeton
  University Press.




                                                53
                                             Online Appendix for
    A Model of Secular Stagnation: Theory and Quantitative Evaluation


                    Gauti B. Eggertsson, Neil R. Mehrotra, Jacob A. Robbins


A     Derivation of Simple Model

A.1   Households’ Problem

In this section, we specify and solve the household’s problem in the general case of income re-
ceived in all periods and taxes paid in all periods. For household i, the objective function and
budget constraints are given below:
                                                                                                
                      max                Et log (Ct (i)) + β log (Ct+1 (i)) + β 2 log (Ct+2 (i))              (A.1)
              Ct (i),Ct+1 (i),Ct+2 (i)

                     s.t.     Ct (i) = wt Lt (i) − Tty + Bt (i)                                               (A.2)
                                                                                           (1 + it )
                            Ct+1 (i) = Zt + wt+1 Lt+1 (i) − Tt+1
                                                             m
                                                                 + Bt+1 (i) −                        Bt (i)   (A.3)
                                                                                            Πt+1
                                                                      (1 + it+1 )
                            Ct+2 (i) = wt+2 Lt+2 (i) − Tt+2
                                                        o
                                                            −                     Bt+1 (i)                    (A.4)
                                                                         Πt+2
                            Bt+j (i) ≤ Et+j (1 + rt+j+1 ) Dt+j             for j = 0, 1,                      (A.5)

where the household i has exogenous labor supply endowments in each period of life, Dt+j is an
exogenous collateral constraint, and Tt+j are lump-sum taxes imposed by the government. We
allow taxes to differ across household types and taxes to change over time.
    We restrict ourselves to cases in which the collateral constraint is binding in the ﬁrst period of
life and possibly binding in the second period of life. In particular, we will assume two types of
households — a household that has sufﬁciently low labor endowment in its middle period of life
and remains credit constrained, and a household that has sufﬁciently high labor endowment in its
middle period of life and is unconstrained. For the former, borrowing in the young and middle-
aged generations is determined by the binding collateral constraints. For the latter, borrowing is
determined by the collateral constraint only while young; in the middle-aged generation, an Euler
equation determines the optimal level of saving:
                                                   1              1 + it
                                                         = βEt               .                                (A.6)
                                                 Ctm,h                 o,h
                                                                 Πt+1 Ct+1

    Let Ly be the labor endowment for the young generation, Lm,l be the labor endowment for the
poor middle-generation household, Lm,h the labor endowment for the wealthy middle-generation
household, and Lo the labor endowment in the last period. We adopt the normalization that
                                                           A.1
Ly + ηs Lm,l + (1 − ηs ) Lm,h + Lo = 1. The budget constraints for each type of household alive at
any point in time are given below:
                                          Ly                           Dt
                            Cty = αYt              − Tty + Et Πt+1                                             (A.7)
                                         Lft lex                     1 + it
                                         Lm,l                                              Dt
                          Ctm,l = αYt              + (1 − α) Yt − Ttm − Dt−1 + Et Πt+1                         (A.8)
                                         Lft lex                                         1 + it
                                         Lm,h
                         Ctm,h = αYt               + (1 − α) Yt − Ttm − Dt−1 − Btm,h                           (A.9)
                                         Lft lex
                                          Lo
                           Cto,l = αYt             − Tto − Dt−1                                              (A.10)
                                         Lft lex
                                          Lo                      1 + it−1
                          Cto,h = αYt                       m,h
                                                   − Tto + Bt−1            ,                                 (A.11)
                                         Lft lex                     Πt

where Tti are lump-sum taxes per capita and Yt is output per middle-generation household.64
Aggregate consumption in this economy is given by the following expression:
                                                                                       
         Ct = Nt Cty + Nt−1 ηs Ctm,l + (1 − ηs ) Ctm,h + Nt−2 ηs Cto,l + (1 − ηs ) Cto,h .


A.2       Firms’ Problem, Labor Supply, and Wage Determination

In this section, we specify the ﬁrm’s problem in the baseline case with no capital accumulation.
Firms choose labor to maximize proﬁts subject to a standard decreasing returns to scale production
function, taking wages as given:

                                                      Zt = max Pt Yt − Wt Ldt                                (A.12)
                                                            Lt
                                                                 α
                                             s.t.     Yt = At Ldt ,                                          (A.13)

where Ldt is the ﬁrm’s labor demand. Firms’ labor demand is determined by equating the real
wage to the marginal product of labor:
                                                    Wt           α−1
                                                       = αAt Ldt      .                                      (A.14)
                                                    Pt
    Each middle-generation household operates a ﬁrm and collects proﬁts from its operation. The
total measure of ﬁrms in the economy is Nt−1 and therefore grows with the total population. All
ﬁrms are identical, sharing the same labor share parameter α.
    Labor supply is exogenous and ﬁxed over a household’s lifetime. When population is constant
(g = 0), then labor supply is constant and can be normalized to unity. In the absence of downward
nominal wage rigidity, the real wage equalizes labor supply to labor demand:
                                                                 
                 Nt Ly + Nt−1 ηs Lm,l + (1 − ηs ) Lm,h + Nt−2 Lo = Nt−1 Lft lex ,                            (A.15)
   64
        Output is not expressed in per capita terms to avoid a proliferation of population growth rate terms. In this
economy, aggregate output is Nt−1 Yt while the total population is Nt + Nt−1 + Nt−2 .

                                                             A.2
where wtf lex deﬁnes the market-clearing real wage.
   In the presence of downward nominal wage rigidity, the real wage may exceed the market-
clearing real wage. In this case, labor is rationed with a proportional reduction in labor employed
across all households (i.e., if total labor demand is 10% below the full-employment level, then
labor falls 10% for all cohorts).
   We assume that nominal wages are downwardly rigid, implying that real wages exceed the
market-clearing level in the presence of deﬂation. The process determining the real wage is given
below:
                                          
                  Wt = max W̃t , Pt wtf lex where W̃t = γWt−1 + (1 − γ)Pt wtf lex .              (A.16)


A.3   Monetary and Fiscal Policy

Monetary and ﬁscal policies are straightforward. We assume a monetary policy rule of the follow-
ing form:
                                                 
                                                                     φπ
                                                                Πt
                                    1 + it = max 1, (1 + i∗ )             ,                      (A.17)
                                                                Π∗

where i∗ is the targeted natural rate and Π∗ is the central bank’s gross inﬂation target. If the central
bank has the correct natural rate target i∗ , then inﬂation is stabilized at Π = 1 in steady state.
   Taxation is determined by the government’s budget constraint and exogenous processes for
government spending, the public debt, and taxation of young households. We typically assume
that the ratio of taxes between the old and middle-aged households satisﬁes the following rule:

                                                      1 + it−1 m
                                            Tto = β           Tt .                               (A.18)
                                                         Πt
In steady state, this ﬁscal rule ensures that changes in taxation have no effect on loan supply. We
consider exceptions to this ﬁscal rule where taxes are levied only on old or middle-aged house-
holds, respectively. The government’s budget constraint, together with the ﬁscal rule, determines
Ttm and Tto in response to the other exogenous ﬁscal processes:

                                                 1                   1    1 + it−1 g
                Btg + Tty (1 + gt ) + Ttm +            Tto = Gt +                 Bt−1 ,         (A.19)
                                              1 + gt−1            1 + gt−1 Πt

where all ﬁscal variables are all normalized in terms of middle-generation quantities.


A.4   Market Clearing and Equilibrium

Asset market clearing requires that total lending from savers equals total borrowing from credit-
constrained young households and poor middle-generation households. This condition is given


                                                      A.3
below:
                                                              Dt                 Dt
                               (1 − ηs ) Nt−1 Btm,h = Nt           + ηs Nt−1                                   (A.20)
                                                            1 + rt             1 + rt
                                                                          Dt
                                     (1 − ηs ) Btm,h   = (1 + gt + ηs )        .                               (A.21)
                                                                        1 + rt
It can be veriﬁed that asset market clearing implies that aggregate consumption equals aggregate
output less aggregate government purchases:

                                    Ct = Nt−1 Yt − (Nt + Nt−1 + Nt−2 ) Gt .                                    (A.22)
                                                                                                                ∞
A competitive equilibrium is a set of aggregate allocations Yt , Ctm,h , Cto,h , Btm,h , Lft lex , Ttm , Tto          ,
                                      ∞                                                                         t=0
                                                                                             ∞
price processes it , Πt , wt , wtf lex      , exogenous processes {Gt , gt , Dt , Tty , Btg }t=0 and initial values
                                        t=0                                                                         
                                                                                               m,h
of household saving, nominal interest rate, real wage, and the public debt B−1                     , i−1 , w−1 , B−1
that jointly satisfy:

    1. Household Euler equation (A.6)

    2. Household budget constraints (A.9) and (A.11)

    3. Asset market clearing (A.21)

    4. Fiscal policy rule (A.18)

    5. Government budget constraint (A.19)

    6. Monetary policy rule (A.17)

    7. Full-employment labor supply (A.15)
                                                                 α−1
    8. Full-employment wage rate: wtf lex = αAt Lft lex
                                                          α−1
                                                           α
    9. Labor demand condition: wt = αAt             Yt
                                                    At
                                         
  10. Wage process: wt = max w̃t , wtf lex , where w̃t = γ wΠt−1
                                                              t
                                                                 + (1 − γ)wtf lex


B     Inequality and the Natural Rate

There is no general result about how an increase in inequality affects the real rate of interest. This
relationship will depend on how changes in income affect the relative supply and demand for
loans. Here we show a simple example illustrating that there are relatively plausible conditions
under which higher inequality will in fact reduce the natural rate of interest.


                                                          A.4
   Consider ﬁrst one form of income inequality, that of inequality across generations. As we have
seen in (11), the relative endowment of the old versus the middle-aged generation affects the real
interest rate; moving resources from the old to the middle-aged will increase savings and thereby
put downward pressure on the real interest rate. The conclusion here is that redistribution that
raises savings increases downward pressure on the real rate. Consider now the alternative: If all
generations receive the same endowment Yty = Ytm = Yto , then it is easy to see that there is no
incentive to borrow or lend, and, accordingly, the real interest rate is equal to the inverse of the
discount factor 1 + rt = β −1 . It is thus inequality of income across generations that is responsible
for our results and triggers possibly negative real interest rates.
   Generational inequality, however, is typically not what people have in mind when consider-
ing inequality; instead, commentators often focus on unequal income of individuals within the
working-age population. This type of inequality can also have a negative effect on the real interest
rate. Before getting there, however, let us point out that this need not be true in all cases. Consider,
for example, an endowment distribution Yt (z), where z denotes the type of an individual who is
known once he is born. Suppose further that once again Yty (z) = Ytm (z) = Yto (z) for all z. Once
again, income is perfectly smoothed across ages and the real interest rate is given by β −1 . The
point is that we can choose any distribution of income Y (z) to support that equilibrium so, in this
case, income distribution is irrelevant for the type of preferences we have assumed.65
   Let us now consider the case when inequality in a given cohort can in fact generate negative
pressure on real interest rates. When authors attribute demand slumps to a rise in inequality, they
typically have in mind — in the language of old Keynesian models — that income gets redis-
tributed from those with a high propensity for consumption to those who instead wish to save
their income. We have already seen how this mechanism works in the case of inequality across
generations. But we can also imagine that a similar mechanism applies if income gets redistributed
within a cohort as long as some of the agents in that cohort are credit constrained.
   Again, let us assume that only the middle-aged and old generations receive an income en-
dowment. Now, however, suppose that some fraction of households receives a larger endowment
in their middle years (i.e., high-income households) while the remaining households (i.e., low-
income households) receive a very small endowment in the middle period of life. For simplicity,
all households receive the same income endowment in old age (this could be thought of as some
sort of state-provided pension like Social Security). For sufﬁciently low levels of the middle-period
endowment and a sufﬁciently tight credit constraint, low-income households will remain credit
constrained in the middle period of life. These households will roll over their debt in the middle
years and repay their debts only in old age, consuming any remaining endowment. In this situa-
tion, only the high-income households will save in the middle period and will, therefore, supply
savings to both credit-constrained middle-aged households and the youngest generation.
  65
       More general preference speciﬁcations, however, can easily make a difference.

                                                          A.5
    As before, we can derive an explicit expression for the real interest rate in this richer setting
with multiple types of households. Under the conditions described above, the only operative
Euler equation is for the high-income households who supply loans in equilibrium. The demand
for loans is obtained by adding together the demand from young households and from the credit
constrained low-income households. The expression we obtain is a generalization of the case
obtained in equation (11):

                                     1+β    (1 + gt + ηs ) Dt                 1       o
                                                                                    Yt+1
                          1 + rt =                                       +                   ,                  (A.23)
                                      β (1 − η ) Y m,h − D                    β Y m,h − D
                                                   s     t         t−1           t        t−1


where ηs is the fraction of low-income households, Ytm,h is the income of the high-income middle
                  o is the income of these households in the next period (i.e., the pension income
generation, and Yt+1
received by all households). If ηs = 0, we recover the expression for the real interest rate derived
in (11).
    Total income for the middle-aged generation is a weighted-average of high-and low-income
workers: Ytm = ηs Ytm,l + (1 − ηs ) Ytm,h . Let us then deﬁne an increase in inequality as a redis-
tribution of middle-generation income from low-to high-income workers, without any change in
Ytm . While this redistribution keeps total income for the middle generation constant by deﬁnition,
it must necessarily lower the real interest rate by increasing the supply of savings, which is only
determined by the income of the wealthy. This can be seen in equation (A.23), where the real
interest rate is decreasing in Ytm,h without any offsetting effect via Ytm,l .66
    As this extension of our model suggests, the secular rise in wage inequality in recent decades
in the US and other developed nations may have been one factor in exerting downward pressure
on the real interest rate. Labor market polarization — the steady elimination of blue-collar occu-
pations and the consequent downward pressure on wages for a large segment of the labor force
— could show up as increase in income inequality among the working-age population, lowering
the real interest rate in the manner described here (for evidence on labor market polarization, see,
e.g., Autor and Dorn (2013) and Goos, Manning and Salomons (2009)). Several other theories have
been suggested for the rise in inequality. To the extent that they imply an increase in savings, they
could ﬁt into our story as well.



   66
        As emphasized earlier, not all forms of income inequality should be expected to have a negative effect on the real
interest rate. If middle-generation income is drawn from a continuous distribution, a mean-preserving spread that
raises the standard deviation of income could be expected to have effects on both the intensive and extensive margin.
That is, the average income among savers would rise, but this effect would be somewhat offset by an increase in the
fraction of credit-constrained households (i.e, an increase in ηs ). The extensive margin boosts the demand for loans and
would tend to increase the real interest rate. Whether inequality raises or lowers rates would depend on the relative
strength of these effects.

                                                             A.6
C    Linearization and Solution

In this section, we detail the linearization and general solution to the model without capital but
with income received in all periods. For simplicity, we do not consider the effect of population
growth shocks, which greatly complicate the linearization and the computation of analytical solu-
tions.
    The generalized model with income received in all three periods and credit-constrained middle-
aged households can be summarized by the following linearized AD curve and linearized AS
curve:

               it = Et πt+1 − sy (yt − gt ) + (1 − sw ) Et (yt+1 − gt+1 ) + sw dt + sd dt−1   (A.24)
                                   α
               yt = γw yt−1 + γw       πt ,                                                   (A.25)
                                 1−α
where various coefﬁcients are given in terms of their steady-state values:
                                             γ
                                     γw =
                                             π̄
                                             Ȳm,h
                                      sy =
                                          Ȳm,h − D̄
                                               D̄
                                     sd =
                                          Ȳm,h − D̄
                                          1 + β (1 + ḡ + ηs ) D̄
                                     sw =                      .
                                            β ī/π̄ Ȳm,h − D̄

The exogenous shocks are the collateral shock dt and the government spending shock gt , which
means that a solution to this linear system takes the form:

                                yt = βy yt−1 + βg gt + βd dt + βd,l dt−1                      (A.26)
                                πt = αy yt−1 + αg gt + αd dt + αd,l dt−1 .                    (A.27)

    Solving by the method of undetermined coefﬁcients, we obtain the following expressions for
the coefﬁcients that determine equilibrium output and inﬂation in response to collateral and gov-




                                                   A.7
ernment spending shocks:

                              βy = 0                                                              (A.28)
                                        1−α
                              αy = −                                                              (A.29)
                                          α
                                          sd
                             βd,l   =                                                             (A.30)
                                      sy + 1−α
                                             α
                                      1−α
                             αd,l   =        βd,l                                                 (A.31)
                                       γw α
                                                                             
                                                        1−α
                                            sw + βd,l   γw α   + (1 − sw )
                              βd =                                                                (A.32)
                                   sy + (1 − sw ) ρd + 1−α
                                                        α (1 − 1/γw ρd )
                                   1−α
                              αd =       βd                                                       (A.33)
                                    γw α
                                              sy + (1 − sw ) ρg
                              βg =                                                                (A.34)
                                   sy + (1 − sw ) ρg + 1−α
                                                        α (1 − 1/γw ρg )
                                   1−α
                              αg =       βg .                                                     (A.35)
                                    γw α

    By substituting (A.25) into (A.24), we can obtain a ﬁrst-order difference equation in output.
This forward-looking difference equation implies that inﬂation and output will be determinate if
and only if the following condition obtains:
                                                         1 − α 1 − γw
                                      sy − (1 − sw ) >                .
                                                           α     γw
When sw = 1, this condition is the same determinacy condition as discussed in the main text.
When the above condition holds, there is a unique rational expectations equilibrium in the deﬂa-
tion steady state. The left-hand side is always positive, so in the case of perfect price rigidity (i.e.,
γw = 1), this condition is satisﬁed and the deﬂation steady state is locally unique.


D    Properties of Secular Stagnation Equilibrium

Here we provide a formal proof for various properties of the secular stagnation equilibrium de-
scribed in the body of the text.


Proposition 1. If γ > 0, Π∗ = 1, and i∗ = rf < 0, then there exists a unique determinate secular
stagnation equilibrium.

Proof. Under the assumptions of the proposition, the inﬂation rate at which the zero lower bound
binds, given in equation (30), is strictly greater than unity. Let YAD denote the level of output
implied by the aggregate demand relation and YAS denote the level of output implied by the


                                                    A.8
aggregate supply relation. For gross inﬂation rates less than unity, YAD and YAS are given by

                                                YAD = D + ψΠ                                   (A.36)
                                                        α
                                                   γ
                                                1− Π   1−α
                                       YAS =                 Y f,                              (A.37)
                                                1−γ
              1+β
where ψ =      β    (1 + g) D > 0. The AD curve is upward sloping because Π < 1 < Πkink under our
assumptions and, therefore, the zero lower bound binds.
   When Π = γ, YAD > YAS = 0. When Π = 1, the real interest rate equals Π−1 = 1 > rf .
Thus, when Π = 1, YAD < Y f . Furthermore, from the equations above, when Π = 1, YAS = Y f .
Therefore, it must be the case that YAD < YAS when Π = 1. Since the AS and AD curves are both
continuous functions of inﬂation, it must be the case that there exists a Πss at which YAD = YAS .
   To establish uniqueness, we ﬁrst assume that there exist multiple distinct values of Πss at
which YAD = YAS . In inﬂation-output space (output on the x-axis), the AS curve lies above the
AD curve when inﬂation equals γ and the AS curve lies below the AD curve for inﬂation at unity
— see equation (27). Thus, if multiple steady states exist, given that AS is a continuous function,
there must exist at least three distinct points at which the AS and AD curves intersect.
   At the ﬁrst intersection point, the slope of the AS curve crosses the AD line from above and,
therefore, at the second intersection the AS curve crosses the AD curve from below. Since the AD
curve is a line, the AS curve as a function of output is locally convex in this region. Similarly, be-
tween the second and third intersections, the AS curve is locally concave. Thus, given an increase
in Y , the AS curve must ﬁrst have a positive second derivative followed by a negative second
derivative.
   We compute the second derivative of inﬂation with respect to output of the AS curve and
derive the following expression:
                                         
                            d2 Π                          Y         φ
                                  = G(Y ) (1 + φ) (1 − γ)               + (φ − 1)              (A.38)
                            dY 2                          Yf
                                                  φ
                                       φγ (1 − γ) YYf
                           G (Y ) =                 φ                                       (A.39)
                                    Y 2 1 − (1 − γ) YYf
                                    1−α
                               φ=       .                                                      (A.40)
                                     α
As can be seen, over the region considered, the function G (Y ) is positive and, therefore, the con-
vexity of the AS curve is determined by the second term. This term may be negative if φ < 1,
but this expression is increasing in Y between 0 and Yf . Therefore, the second derivative can-
not switch signs from positive to negative. Thus, we have derived a contradiction by assuming
multiple steady states. Therefore, there must exist a unique intersection point.
   As established before, it must be the case that the AS curve has a lower slope than the AD

                                                 A.9
curve at the point of intersection. The slope of the AS curve is
                                      dΠ   1−α1Π
                                         =       (Π − γ) .                                      (A.41)
                                      dY    α γY
    If the slope of the AS curve is less than the slope of the AD curve at the intersection point, then
it must be the case that
                                        1−αΠ        Π
                                                      − 1 < ψ −1
                                         α Y        γ
                                      1 − α ψΠ      Π
                                                      −1 <1
                                        α Y         γ
                                    1−αY −D         Π
                                                      −1 <1
                                     α     Y        γ
                                                    α       Π
                                               sy      +1>
                                                  1−α       γ
                                         γ        α
                                             sy       + 1 > 1.
                                         Π      1−α

The last inequality here is precisely the condition for determinacy discussed in Section 6. Thus,
the unique secular stagnation steady state is always determinate as required.


E    Calvo Pricing

In this section, we modify the aggregate supply block of our model to consider product market
frictions instead of downward nominal wage rigidity. As in our baseline model, we assume that
middle-aged households supply a constant level of labor L̄. However, wages adjust frictionlessly
to ensure that labor is fully employed in all periods.
    Monopolistically competitive ﬁrms produce a differentiated good l and set nominal prices pe-
riodically. Households consume a Dixit-Stiglitz aggregate of these differentiated goods, implying
that each ﬁrm faces the following demand schedule:
                                                               −θ
                                                     pt (l)
                                      yt (l) = Yt                                               (A.42)
                                                      Pt
                                                                1
                                                                1−θ
                                         Pt =        p1−θ
                                                      t   dl          ,                         (A.43)

where θ is the elasticity of substitution in the Dixit-Stiglitz aggregator and Pt is the price level of
the consumption bundle consumed by households. Production depends only on labor, and labor
market clearing requires total labor demand to equal labor supply:

                                         yt (l) = Lt (l)                                        (A.44)
                                                  
                                             L̄ = Lt (l) dl.                                    (A.45)

                                                    A.10
    Combining labor market clearing with the demand for each product (A.44), we can derive an
expression for output in terms of exogenous labor supply and a term that reﬂects losses due to
misallocation from pricing frictions:

                                                L̄
                                        Yt =                                                (A.46)
                                               Δt
                                                              −θ
                                                      pt (l)
                                        Δt =                        dl,                     (A.47)
                                                       Pt

    Under Calvo pricing, ﬁrms are periodically able to reset their prices and will choose a single
optimal reset price irrespective of the time since their last price change. Under the Calvo assump-
tion, we can derive dynamic expressions for inﬂation and the misallocation term Δt in terms of
the reset price p∗t :
                                                                            1−θ
                                                                     p∗t
                                    1 = χΠθ−1
                                          t   + (1 − χ)                                     (A.48)
                                                                     Pt
                                                                            −θ
                                                                     p∗t
                                Δt = χΠθt Δt−1 + (1 − χ)                         ,          (A.49)
                                                                     Pt

where χ is the Calvo parameter — the fraction of ﬁrms that do not adjust prices in the current
period. Equations (A.46), (A.48), and (A.49) collectively deﬁne the aggregate supply block of the
model with monopolistic competition and price friction. The IS curve and monetary policy rule
close the model.
    We can derive the long-run Phillips curve by combining the steady-state cases of equations
(A.46), (A.48), and (A.49). The steady-state AS curve is given below:
                                                                           θ
                                                                             θ−1
                                       1 − χΠθ           1−χ               .
                                Y = L̄
                                        1−χ            1 − χΠθ−1


F    Incorporating Money

In this section, we extend our baseline model to explicitly introduce a role for money and a money
demand function. Households now have preferences for real money balances to capture the value
of money in easing transactions frictions. For simplicity, we assume that households only hold
money in the middle period of life and utility over real money balances is separable. We also
assume that there exists a level of real money balances m̄ at which households are satiated: that
is, v  (m̄) = 0.
    We specify and characterize the household’s problem in the case of income received in the
middle period only and taxes paid in all periods. For household i, the objective function and




                                                     A.11
budget constraints are given below:
                                                                                                  
            max            Et log (Ct (i)) + β log (Ct+1 (i)) + βv (Mt+1 (i)) + β 2 log (Ct+2 (i))
    Ct (i),Ct+1 (i),Mt+1 (i),Ct+2 (i)

                                                                                                        (A.50)
                    s.t.     Ct (i) = Bt (i) − Tty                                                      (A.51)
                                                                                   (1 + it )
                           Ct+1 (i) = Yt+1 − Tt+1
                                              m
                                                  + Bt+1 (i) − Mt+1 (i) −                    Bt (i)     (A.52)
                                                                                    Πt+1
                                         1                     (1 + it+1 )
                           Ct+2 (i) =        Mt+1 (i) − Tt+2
                                                         o
                                                             −             Bt+1 (i)                     (A.53)
                                        Πt+1                      Πt+2
                           Bt+j (i) ≤ Et+j (1 + rt+j+1 ) Dt+j     for j = 0, 1,                         (A.54)

where Mt+1 (i) are real money balances demanded by household i. Money earns zero interest and
carries a liquidity premium on bonds away from the zero lower bound. The household’s money
demand condition is given below:
                                                                        it+1
                                          Ct+1 (i) v  (Mt+1 (i)) =            .                        (A.55)
                                                                      1 + it+1
The above expression implicitly deﬁnes a money-demand equation. The given monetary policy
rule determines real money balances via (A.55). Given a representative middle-aged cohort and
given that only the middle aged demand money, we can drop the i, and money demand per
middle-generation household is
                                                              it    1
                                              Mt = v −1                   .                            (A.56)
                                                            1 + it Ctm
    The issuance of money by the central bank modiﬁes the government’s budget constraint in
(A.19). The government’s consolidated budget constraint expressed in real terms is given below:
                                             1                   1             1 + it−1 g     1
  Btg + Mt + Tty (1 + gt ) + Ttm +                 Tto = Gt +                          Bt−1 +    Mt−1 . (A.57)
                                          1 + gt−1            1 + gt−1            Πt          Πt
    We assume a ﬁscal policy that adjust taxes Tty , Ttm , and Tto to keep the government’s consoli-
dated liabilities, Mt + Btg , at some constant target level. In particular, this means that, in periods
of deﬂation, the nominal stock of government liabilities is being reduced in proportion to the fall
in the price level. In the steady state of a stagnation equilibrium featuring a constant rate of deﬂa-
tion, nominal government liabilities are contracting at the rate of deﬂation. Under a ﬁscal policy
that keeps real government liabilities constant, the presence of money does not materially alter
our conclusions.


G     Productivity Growth and Hysteresis

In this section, we extend the baseline model to include trend productivity growth and offer a
simple extension to model hysteresis — where output gaps feed back onto the productivity growth
                                                           A.12
process. The extension of the model to include productivity growth does not greatly alter the
basic features of the model, but will allow the model to better match the dynamics of real GDP per
capita. The aggregate demand block is still summarized by an asset market clearing that relates
middle-generation income and the real interest rate:

                                                       1 + β (1 + gt ) Dt
                                           1 + rt =                                                       (A.58)
                                                         β Ytm − Dt−1
                                                       1 + β (1 + gt ) D̃t
                                                  =                          ,                            (A.59)
                                                         β Ỹtm − D̃t−1 At−1
                                                                            At

where X̃t = Xt /At are detrended variables. So long as the collateral constraint grows at the same
rate as productivity growth, there exists a balanced growth path with a constant real interest rate
in steady state and quantities growing at the rate of productivity growth. Relative to the AD curve
in the baseline model, the only difference is that higher productivity growth increases saving by
lowering the value of debt incurred when young.
    Trend productivity growth also impacts the wage norm as the ﬂexible-price real wage rises
over time. Now, deﬂation must exceed the rate of productivity growth for the wage norm to bind.
More generally, if nominal wages are indexed to the inﬂation target, the shortfall of inﬂation below
target must exceed the growth rate of productivity. The wage norm indexed to inﬂation is given
below along with the ﬂexible-price real wage:
                                                                                    
                                 Wt = max γΠ∗ Wt−1 + (1 − γ) Pt wtf lex , Pt wtf lex                      (A.60)

                               wtf lex = αAt L̄α−1 .                                                      (A.61)

    Real wages and output can be detrended by productivity growth to obtain stationary variables.
Trend stationary real wages are given by the following expression:
                                                                                
                                      ∗ w̃t−1 At−1
                       w̃t = max γΠ                + (1 − γ) w̃ f lex
                                                                      , w̃ f lex
                                                                                   ,                      (A.62)
                                         Πt At

where w̃t are detrended real wages and w̃f lex = αL̄α−1 . In steady state, the wage norm binds when
Π∗ > Π̄μ, where μ is the steady-state growth rate of productivity. The AS curve can be derived by
substituting the following expressions for output and the full-employment level of output:
                                                                     α−1
                                                        w̃t = αỸt    α
                                                                                                          (A.63)
                                                                     α−1
                                                    w̃f lex = αỸf e .α
                                                                                                          (A.64)

Equations (A.59), (A.62), and (A.63) along with the Fisher relation and the monetary policy rule
                                         
jointly determine Ỹt , w̃t , rt , Πt , it .67

   67
        Income for the middle-aged household Ỹtm is assumed to be a constant fraction of total income.

                                                           A.13
    The modiﬁed equilibrium conditions presented in this section have simply taken productivity
growth as an exogenous process. One possibility is that prolonged output gaps feed back into
slower productivity growth. Productivity growth could be related to the output gap simply by
positing a simple feedback process. This feedback process represents a reduced-form mechanism
whereby prolonged output gaps reduced productivity growth by, for example, reducing invest-
ment, technology adoption, and expenditures in public or private research and development, or
by limiting the degree of ﬁrm entry. We posit the following feedback rule:
                                                         κ
                                        At           Ỹt
                                            = μ0            ,
                                      At−1          Ỹf e

where κ determines the strength of the hysteresis effect.


H    Quantitative Calibration: US, Europe, and Japan

The simple three-period OLG model captures the salient features of secular stagnation: persis-
tently low levels of inﬂation and interest rates and below-trend output. Though our model is
obviously highly stylized, we still think it is of value to explicitly parameterize it and examine its
capacity to explain recent stagnation episodes. Figure A.1 displays the key series whose behavior
our theory is trying to explain. In all these episodes, we have witnessed a drop in the short-term
nominal interest rate to close to zero and a decline in inﬂation below the implicit inﬂation target
of the central bank. The size of the fall in inﬂation has varied. Japan has experienced outright
deﬂation, but in the US and Europe, deﬂation was very short-lived while inﬂation has remained
persistently below the target of the central banks. The size of the output gap is more controversial.
Here, we calibrate the model to recent estimates, but, conceptually, even without any remaining
output gap, low natural rates of interest pose an ongoing challenge for monetary policy.
    To evaluate the capacity of our model to match the behavior of GDP per capita, interest rates,
and inﬂation, we choose parameters to target steady-state output gaps and deviations of inﬂation
from target for each region. As discussed in the previous section, we modify the equilibrium con-
ditions of our model to allow for trend productivity growth and wage indexation to the inﬂation
target. In the case of Japan and the Eurozone, we assume that trend productivity growth fell at
the onset of secular stagnation to ﬁt the slower trend rate of GDP growth in each region. We log-
linearize the model around the secular stagnation steady state, and plot transition paths for output
per capita, nominal interest rates, and inﬂation in response to a shock to the collateral constraint
in each region. Given the three-period OLG structure, each period is taken to be 20 years.




                                                A.14
                                          Figure A.1: Data versus model transition paths: US, Japan, and Eurozone

                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                                                                   
                      $ $                                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                       

                      $$                                                                                                                                                          
         


                                                                                                       

                      #($
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                                                                     

                      #'$
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                            
                      #&$
                                                                                        

                      #%$                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                       
                                                                            

                      #$$
                                                                                                                                                                                   
                                ((    (("     ((%      ((( !! !$ !' !              
                                                                                                                                                                           



                                                                                                                                                                                 

                      $"
                                                                                                                                                                                 


                                                                                                                                                                                
                      $ 
                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                       
        




                      #'                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                                                                     
                      #%                                                                           
                                                                          '%! "
                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                            
                                                                                                      
                      ##                                                                                                                                      

                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                                    

                      #"                                                                                                                                                     
                               '%    '%#    '&     '&#   ''     ''# ! !# !                                                                              


                                                                                                                                                                              
                                                
                      $                                                                              
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                          
                      $
                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                
                      # 
      




                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                      
                      #
      




                                                                                                                                                                                 
                      " 
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                                                                                    
                      "
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                                                                     
                      ! 
                                                                                                      

                      !                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                       

                                                                                                                                                                             
                               $$  $$" $$$     " $                                                                                            




H.1    US Calibration

Table 1 shows parameters annualized for the US (hence in computing steady state, these values
need to be converted to 20 years). We pick an inﬂation target of 2% per year, consistent with the
Federal Reserve’s implicit inﬂation target. Moreover, we assume that the wage norm is indexed
at the inﬂation rate times the growth rate of productivity. In this case, the wage norm binds
whenever inﬂation falls below target. We assume trend productivity growth of 2.1% per year
to match average GDP per capita growth from 1990-2007. The rate of time preference β is set
at a conventional value of 0.96. We set US population growth of 0.7% per year based upon UN
population projections. We set α at 0.7 to match the labor share.
   The two novel parameters to choose are the degree of wage rigidity determined by γ and the
collateral constraint on the young D. We must also set an initial value for the collateral constraint

                                                                                                                                 A.15
                                 Table A.1: Parameter values for the US

                   Description                                  Parameter    Value
                   Population growth                                 g        0.7%
                   Discount rate                                     β        0.96
                   Labor share                                       α         0.7
                   Inﬂation target                                  Π∗        2.0%
                                                                  1+g Dini
                   Pre-shock collateral (% of annual GDP)        1+rini Y     126%
                                                                   1+g Dss
                   Post-shock collateral (% of annual GDP)        1+rss Y     100%
                   Wage adjustment                                   γ        0.94
                   Youth income share                              Yy /Y       0.4


as the initial point for the determining the transition path of the economy. To ﬁnd realistic values
of the collateral constraint, it is necessary to include other sources of demand. We do this by
assuming that some income is received by the young, the government issues public debt, and
the government absorbs some output through purchases that are ﬁnanced by taxes levied on the
middle aged. Government spending as a percentage of GDP is set at 20%, and public debt as a
percentage of annual GDP is set at 100%. The government budget constraint determines the level
of taxes.
   Given government spending, taxes, and public debt, the collateral constraint D, the income
distribution between young and old, and the wage rigidity parameter are set to match the follow-
ing targets: an output gap of 13%, an inﬂation rate of 1.4%, and household debt of 100% of GDP
in 2014. The output gap represents the deviation of output per capita from its 1990-2007 trendline.
The inﬂation rate is based on the growth rate of core PCE in 2014. The household debt target is
taken from the Federal Reserve Flow of Funds and is set at 100% of GDP in order to match the
sum of loans to households and nonproﬁts (13.7 trillion in 2014) and loans to nonﬁnancial non-
corporate businesses ($4.4 trillion in 2014). Finally, the pre-shock level of the collateral constraint
is set to match the average nominal interest of 2.9% between 2001 and 2007.
   How reasonable are the values we set for these parameters? The implied weight on last-period
wages (γ multiplied by the inﬂation target and productivity growth) is 0.98 per year. Schmitt-
Grohé and Uribe (2016) provide an authoritative overview of the evidence on downward nominal
wage rigidity and estimate a very similar wage adjustment curve to ours. The implied income
distribution implies that 60% of national income is received by the middle aged while 40% of na-
tional income is received by the young. Our calibration implies an initial household debt level
of 126% of GDP, which is quite close to the pre-2008 level of loans to households and small busi-
nesses of 121% of GDP. Therefore, the collateral shock we choose is quite close in magnitude to
the contraction in lending experienced during the Great Recession.

                                                 A.16
                               Table A.2: Parameter values for Japan and Eurozone

                            Description               Parameter       Japan     Eurozone
                            Population growth               g          0%           0%
                            Discount rate                   β          0.96        0.96
                            Labor share                     α          0.7          0.7
                            Inﬂation target                Π∗         2.0%         2.0%
                            Pre-shock collateral           D0          0.37        0.27
                            Post-shock collateral          D1          0.23        0.21
                            Wage adjustment                 γ          0.90        0.89
                            Hysteresis elasticity           κ          4.8          3.0


    The top row of Figure A.1 plots the transition paths for GDP per capita, inﬂation, and the in-
terest rate over the relevant data series. A collateral shock can indeed explain the drop in inﬂation
and the interest rate in our model. The nominal interest rate drops to the zero lower bound on
impact while the inﬂation rate slightly overshoots, gradually rising towards its steady-state value
of 1.4%. Output per capita falls by less on impact than in the long-run. Therefore, the output
gap is widening slightly along the transition path. Indeed, this behavior is consistent with that
of US GDP per capita, which is drifting slightly away from the pre-recession trendline. Broadly
speaking, our fairly simple model with a shock that matches the magnitude of the contraction in
lending can capture the behavior of GDP per capita, inﬂation, and interest rates in the US during
the Great Recession.


H.2       Eurozone and Japan Calibration

With hysteresis effects, we can calibrate the model to analyze stagnation episodes in the Eurozone
and Japan. As with the US calibration, we set the rate of time preference β and the labor share α
to standard values. Population growth in both regions is set to zero to reﬂect recent population
trends. The inﬂation target is set at 2% in both regions. The key remaining parameters are the
collateral constraint D, the degree of wage rigidity γ, and the hysteresis parameter κ. For both
regions, we set these parameters to match the output gap, inﬂation rate, and change in trend
output growth. The pre-shock level of the collateral constraint is set to match the nominal interest
rate prior to the stagnation episode.68 In each case, output is normalized to unity.
    In the case of Japan, we target an output gap of 10%, a rate of deﬂation of -0.25%, and a re-
duction in trend productivity growth from 3.3% to 0.7%. The last value is determined by trend
GDP per capita growth from 1970 to 1994 and from 1994 to 2008, respectively. Data on real GDP
   68
        For this calibration, we set government debt/spending to zero, assume income is received only in the middle
years, and do not seek to match the collateral constraint to measures of household debt in the Eurozone or Japan.

                                                        A.17
per capita come from the World Economic Indicators. The output gap is based on estimates from
Hausman and Wieland (2014), and the inﬂation rate is the growth rate of Japan’s CPI as reported
in the OECD main economic indicators. As Table A.2 shows, the implied degree of wage rigidity
is low (relevant parameters are annualized). Because of hysteresis effects in our model, real wages
are relatively ﬂexible in comparison to the values found in Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2011). Hys-
teresis effects limit downward pressure on prices due to the paradox of toil, and therefore limit
the degree of deﬂation despite a persistent output gap.
      In the case of the Eurozone, we target an output gap of 10%, an inﬂation rate of 0%, and a
slowdown in productivity growth from 1.8% to 0.2%. The output gap is chosen to best ﬁt the
observed decline in output per capita during the Great Recession. The inﬂation rate reﬂects the
growth rate of the harmonized CPI in the Eurozone during 2014. The slowdown in productivity
growth is estimated by simple trendlines for GDP per capita growth from 1995 to 2008 and 2009
to 2014, respectively. The degree of wage rigidity in the Eurozone is comparable to values for
Japan, and the hysteresis effects are about half as strong, reﬂecting the more modest slowdown in
trend GDP growth before and after the stagnation episode. As in the US, the output gap in the
Eurozone is gradually increasing over time along the transition path, consistent with the behavior
of EU GDP per capita post Great Recession.


I        Derivation of the Quantitative Life Cycle Model

I.1       Demographics and Labor Supply

The economy consists of a large number of households with identical utility parameters. House-
holds enter economic maturity at age 26, after which they work, consume, have children, and
participate in markets. Finally they die at age J, which we take to be 81 years. Households have
children at age 26, and the population growth rate is determined by the total fertility rate (Γ) of
every family. Individuals have a probability of dying stochastically before reaching maximum age
J. The probability of surviving between age j and j + 1 is denoted by sj .69 The unconditional
probability of reaching age j is denoted with a superscript sj .70
      The total population alive at any given time, Nt , is the sum of the population of the individual
ages, Nj,t . The population size of a given generation Nj,t is the population of the generation the
previous year that has survived. But what about at age 26 (the ﬁrst year of economic maturity in
our model)? The total population of a generation entering economic majority at time t is equal to
the total population of their parents when they entered economic maturity at time t − 25, times the
total fertility rate of their parents’ generation. Thus population evolves in the model according to
    69
         Age-speciﬁc survival rates may also vary over time t; however, for notational simplicity we omit these additional
subscripts.
   70
      This can be calculated as the production on one-period survival probabilities: sj = Πj−1
                                                                                           m=26 sm .

                                                            A.18
the law of motion given below:
                                                 J
                                         Nt =          Nj,t
                                                j=26

                                   Nj+1,t+1 = sj,t Nj,t for j ∈ {27, J}
                                      N26,t = N26,t−25 ∗ Γ26,t−25 .

      The total fertility rate along with the age at which households have children determines the
rate of population growth. In a steady state, for a given total fertility rate Γ, the rate of population
growth n is equal to
                                                         1
                                               n = Γ 25 − 1.                                     (A.65)

      In a steady state with a rate of population growth n, each generation is (1+n) times larger than
the previous. Thus the total population size can be calculated as (normalizing the total population
to 1)
                                                 J
                                         N=            Nj                                        (A.66)
                                                j=26
                                                     Nj
                                      Nj+1 = sj            for j ∈ {27, J}                       (A.67)
                                                   (1 + n)
                                N26 = N¯26 ,                                                     (A.68)

      where N¯26 is the normalized population in period 1, equal to

                                                              1
                                         N̄1 = J            sj
                                                                          .
                                                     j=26 (1+n)j−1

      Each household has an identical schedule of lifetime exogenous labor productivity, or human
capital, denoted by hcj , which varies by age. Households receive no wage income after retirement,
which in our model occurs after age 65 (model age 40). We assume labor is supplied inelastically.
Therefore, wage income at full employment is equal to the wage multiplied by the individual age-
speciﬁc labor productivity hcj net of labor taxes (1 − τ w ). In a secular stagnation, labor demand
falls below labor supply, and labor is rationed proportionally for each cohort:
                                                     J
                                           Lst =             Nj,t hcj .                          (A.69)
                                                   j=26


I.2     Household’s Problem

Households receive utility from two sources: (i) consumption, which is given by a time-separable
constant elasticity of substitution (CES) utility function u(·) with an elasticity of intertemporal
substitution parameter ρ, and (ii) bequests, which are divided equally among all descendants.
                                                     A.19
The bequest motive is also characterized by a CES function, v(·), whose argument is the amount
of bequests left per descendent71 , denoted by x. The utility of bequests is multiplied by a parameter
μ ≥ 0 that determines the strength of the bequest motive. Denoting consumption of a household
of age j at time t by Cj,t and the discount rate by β, a household born at time t then maximizes its
lifetime expected utility:
                                     J
                             Ut =          sj β j−1 u(Cj,t+j−1 ) + sJ β J−1 μv(xJ,t+J−1 ).                        (A.70)
                                    j=26

    The household of age j can purchase or borrow a real asset aj,t at price ξt at time t, which is
used as productive capital. At time t + 1, it will pay the return rt+1
                                                                   k , which is the rental rate of

capital, and has a resell value(net of depreciation) (1 − δ)ξt+1 , where ξt+1 is the relative price of
capital in terms of the consumption good. All households, prior to the terminal period, participate
in a perfectly competitive one-period annuity market as in Rı́os-Rull (1996). For a given cohort,
the assets of households that die are distributed evenly to the surviving members of the cohort.
Households also receive income from the pure proﬁts from ﬁrms, denoted by Πj,t .72 Finally, the
household may receive a bequest qj,t . Bequest received are assumed to be zero at all times except
at age J − 24. Bequests given are zero at all times, except at age J.
    The ﬂow budget constraint of a household of age j at time t can then be written as
                                                                                                          1 − sj
cj,t + ξt aj+1,t+1 + Γ26,t−j+26 · xj,t = (1 − τ w )wt hcj + Πj,t + [rtk + ξt (1 − δ)] aj,t + qj,t +              aj,t .
                                                                                                            sj
                                                                                                                 (A.71)
    Households may wish to borrow against future income and face a borrowing constraint of the
same form as in the three-period model73 :

                                                 Dt
                                                      aj,t ≥
                                                      .                                      (A.72)
                                               1 + rt
    There is one further complication with bequests. Since mortality is stochastic, not all parents
will survive to their maximum age and be able to give bequests to their children. Thus, absent any
insurance markets, there would be stochastic within-generation inequality, as some households
would receive bequests and others would not. In order to remove this channel, we assume all
generations participate in a form of bequest insurance markets. At the maximum age, all surviv-
ing members of a generation pool their optimal bequests and divide them equally among their
surviving children. Thus the relationship between bequests given (at age J) and those received by
children (at model age k) at time t is given by
                                                    NJ,t−1 xJ,t−1 · Γ26,t−J+26
                                           qk,t =                              .                                  (A.73)
                                                               Nk,t
   71
      Thus the total size of the bequest left by households is the bequest x multiplied by the fertility of the household.
   72
      We assume that these are distributed proportional to labor income.
   73
      We assume that Dt grows at the rate of productivity growth and is expressed in terms of consumption goods to
ensure balanced growth.

                                                           A.20
I.3    Final Goods Firms

There exists a continuum of ﬁnal goods ﬁrms of type i of measure one that costlessly differentiate
an intermediate good and resell to the representative household. The ﬁnal good composite is the
CES aggregate of these differentiated ﬁnal goods:
                                          1       θt −1
                                                           θ θ−1
                                                               t
                                                             t
                                               f
                                    Yt =      yt (i) t di
                                                     θ            .
                                                         0
      These ﬁrms are monopolistically competitive, set prices in each period, and face a demand
curve that takes the following form:
                                                                             −θt
                                                                    pt (i)
                                                ytf   (i) = Yt                     ,
                                                                     Pt
where θt is a time-varying shock to the ﬁrm’s market power. An increase in θt decreases a ﬁrm’s
market power and lowers equilibrium markups. Each ﬁnal goods producer uses ytm of intermedi-
ate goods to produce output, according to a linear technology function ytf = ytm . A ﬁnal goods ﬁrm
                        pt (i)
chooses real prices      Pt      and ytf (i) to maximize real proﬁts, subject to the production constraint:
                                                                   pt (i) f      pint
                                                         max             yt (i) − t ytf (i)
                                                                    Pt            Pt
                                                                             −θt
                                                                    pt (i)
                                   subject to   ytf   (i) = Yt                     ,
                                                                     Pt
         pint
where     t
          Pt    is the price of the intermediate good taken as given by the ﬁrm.
      The optimality condition for the real price of the ﬁrm’s good is a time-varying markup over
the price of the intermediate good:
                                       pt (i)         θt pint
                                                            t
                                               =                                          (A.74)
                                         Pt       θ t − 1 Pt
The nominal price index implies the following expression for the price of intermediate goods:
                                                              1
                                                              1−θt
                                                     1−θt
                                  Pt =        pt (i)      di       .

      Since the price of the intermediate good is the same, all ﬁnal goods ﬁrms make the same pricing
decisions (no pricing frictions), and thus pt (i) = Pt , yielding
                                                pint
                                                 t       θt − 1
                                                       =        .                                  (A.75)
                                                 Pt        θt
      With a retail elasticity of substitution of θt , aggregate proﬁts in equilibrium will be given by
                                                  Y
                                                    .        Πt =                         (A.76)
                                                  θ
      Proﬁts from monopolistically competitive ﬁrms are distributed according to wage income. In
equilibrium, the total distributed proﬁt must equal total proﬁts:

                                                               J
                                                      Yt
                                                         =          Nj,t Πj,t                         (A.77)
                                                      θt
                                                             j=26
                                                              A.21
I.4    Intermediate Goods Firms

There exists a perfectly competitive intermediate goods sector that sells its production to the ﬁnal
                             pint
goods sector at real price    Pt .
                              t
                                     These ﬁrms operate a CES production function with an elasticity of
substitution σ, hire labor, and rent capital. The representative intermediate goods ﬁrms maximize
static real proﬁts given the following production function:

                                               pint
                                                t
                           t = max
                          Πint                      Yt − wt Lt − rtk Kt                                              (A.78)
                                                Pt
                                                      σ−1                              σ−1
                                                                                                 σ
                                                                                                 σ−1
                             Yt = α (Ak,t Kt )         σ    + (1 − α) (Al,t Lt )        σ              .             (A.79)

Labor productivity AL,t grows at each period at the rate of gt .
      The ﬁrst-order conditions that determine labor and capital demand are given below:
                                                                                   1
                                            pint                            Yt     σ
                                        wt = t (1 − α) Al,t                                                          (A.80)
                                             Pt                             Lt
                                                                        1
                                                pint               Yt   σ
                                         rtk   = t αAk,t                    .                                        (A.81)
                                                 Pt                Kt

The risk-free real rate is related to the return on capital by a standard no-arbitrage condition:

                                                          rtk + (1 − δ) ξt
                                               1 + rt =                    .                                         (A.82)
                                                                ξt−1

I.5    Relative Price of Capital Goods

Investment-speciﬁc productivity is deﬁned as the amount of capital goods that can be produced
with one unit of investment. In particular, we will assume that capital goods are produced by
perfectly competitive ﬁrms in an investment-speciﬁc production sector, which converts the ﬁnal
composite goods into capital goods. These ﬁrms maximize the following proﬁt function subject to
a linear production function:

                                                 ΠK = ξt ∗ Kt − YtK                                                  (A.83)
                                                  Kt = zt YtK ,                                                      (A.84)

where ξt is the relative price of capital goods. Here, zt is the productivity of the capital-producing
                                                                                         1
sector. The zero proﬁt conditions mean that, in equilibrium, ξt =                        zt .     Thus, the more productive
the investment goods sector is, the lower the relative price of capital goods.
      The aggregate capital stock evolves according to the standard law of motion:

                                                                            It
                                               Kt+1 = (1 − δ)Kt +              ,                                     (A.85)
                                                                            ξt
where δ is the rate of depreciation, It is investment, and ξt is the relative price of capital goods.
                                                            A.22
      The government spends an exogenous Gt and may accumulate debt. The budget constraint is
given by
                                         bg,t = Gt + (1 + rt )bg,t−1 − Tt ,                                    (A.86)

where the total tax bill is collected with labor income tax. For the purpose of our simulations, ﬁscal
policy will be speciﬁed as an exogenous sequence of two variables: government debt to GDP and
government spending to GDP. The wage income tax will then be endogenously determined by the
model in order for the budget constraint to hold.
      We have economized on notation by omitting real and nominal bonds as assets; they enter in
the same way as in the simpler model, so there is both a well-deﬁned real interest rate rt on a
risk-free one-period bond and a nominal interest rate it .


I.6     Equilibrium

A competitive equilibrium is a set of household allocations: {{cj,t , aj,t , Πj,t , qj,t , xj,t }Jj=26 }∞
                                                                                                        t=0 , a set
                                                                                  pint
of aggregate quantities {Yt , Kt , Lt , Πt }∞
                                            t=0 , a set of prices {wt , rt , rt ,
                                                                         k                  ∞
                                                                                   Pt , ξt }t=0 , a set of government
                                                                                    t


variables {bt , τtw , τtr }∞
                           t=0 , and a set of exogenous processes      {{Nj,t , pj,t+1 }Jj=0 }∞
                                                                                              t=0 that jointly satisfy:


      1. Consumption and bequests maximizes (A.70) subject to (A.71) and (A.72).

      2. Asset holdings satisfy (A.71), with a1 = 0 given.

      3. Proﬁts are distributed proportionally to labor income.

      4. Bequests received equal bequests given by the surviving parents according to (A.73).

      5. Output is given by aggregate production function (A.78).

      6. Population by age group is given by (A.66).

      7. Aggregate labor supply is given by (A.69).

      8. Aggregate proﬁts are given by (A.76).

      9. There are perfect factor markets, and thus (A.81), (A.80) , and (A.82) hold.

  10. Markup condition: (A.74).

  11. The government satisﬁes budget equation (A.86).

  12. Asset markets clear, and thus
                                               J
                                                    Nj,t ξt aj,t = ξt Kt + bt ∀t.
                                              j=1


                                                          A.23
I.7     Stationary Equilibrium

A steady-state equilibrium is the same as the above deﬁnition, except that all variables are constant
rather than subscripted by time. With productivity and population growth greater than zero,
however, the economy is not stationary. However, since preferences are of the CRRA variety, the
economy can be rewritten as stationary by applying a transformation. All cohort level variables
are divided by (1 + g)t , aggregate variables are divided by (1 + g)t (1 + n)t , and wages are divided
by (1 + g)t .
      In a steady-state equilibrium, there are 4 ∗ J + 12 unknowns: J consumption demands cj , J asset
demands aj , J shares of aggregate proﬁts Πj , J age-speciﬁc population sizes Nj , 1 bequest given x,
1 bequest received q, aggregate output Y , aggregate capital K, aggregate labor L, aggregate proﬁts
                                                                                      pint
Π, wage rate w, return on capital rk , interest rate r, price of intermediate goods    P ,   relative price
of capital ξ, and tax rate τ w .
      There are also 4 ∗ J + 12 equations:

      1. (J-1) Euler equations

      2. (1) Optimal bequest given equation

      3. (1) Equation determining size of bequest received

      4. (J) Flow budget equations

      5. (J) Proﬁt share equations

      6. (1) Initial assets are zero

      7. (J) Population equations

      8. (1) Aggregate production function

      9. (1) Asset market clearing condition

 10. (1) Aggregate labor supply equation

 11. (1) Aggregate proﬁt equation

 12. (1) Wage equation

 13. (1) Price of intermediate goods equation

 14. (1) Rental rate of capital equation

 15. (1) Relative price of capital is exogenously given

 16. (1) Interest rate equation

 17. (1) Government budget equation
                                                 A.24
J   Computational Method

Solving the quantitative model is implemented much along the lines as described in chapter 4 of
Auerbach and Kotlikoff (1987). We begin by describing how to solve for variables in the stationary
equilibrium. In solving for the stationary equilibrium, the algorithm begins with a guess for a
subset of endogenous variables. For the purposes of the rest of the iteration, this subset of variables
is treated as exogenous. This simpliﬁcation makes the resulting system easier to solve for the
endogenous variables, including the variables for which guesses were made.
    We begin with a guess for the aggregate capital stock, the wage tax, and bequests received.
Given the aggregate capital and labor stock, we can calculate interest rates and wages, as well
as aggregate output and proﬁts. This allows us to calculate optimal household behavior for con-
sumption, asset holdings, and bequests given. Since the optimization problem of the household
includes a debt limit, we cannot solve the household’s optimal decisions analytically, as in Auer-
bach and Kotlikoff (1987). Instead, we use Matlab’s convex optimization solver ”fmincon.”
    In the steady state, the population of each age group is given by equation (A.66). Using the
population sizes of each age group, we aggregate the optimal asset supply to obtain a new value of
the aggregate capital stock. Using aggregate capital and labor, we calculate aggregate output and
proﬁts in the economy. We also update the tax rate to satisfy the government’s budget constraint.
Finally, we set bequests received to be equal to total bequests given by the individuals that survive
to 81 divided by the number of children who survived to the bequest age of 57. Typically, 20 to 30
iterations are necessary to converge to the stationary equilibrium.
    The approach used to solve for the transition path is similar to solving for the initial and ﬁnal
steady states of the model. We assume that the economy will be in a steady state after 150 years
in the transition. In the years between the initial and ﬁnal steady state, we must solve for all
endogenous variables, including the optimal consumption and bequests choices for individuals
of all generations. We assume the year 1 is in steady state and that, in the year 2, agents are
surprised by an unexpected change in the path of key economic variables, such as productivity
growth, total fertility rate, mortality proﬁles, etc. Their asset choices were made previously in
period 1, and they must now adjust their consumption and saving choices to the path of these
variables. At the time of the shock, households have perfect foresight.
    Our algorithm now begins with a guess for the same subset of endogenous variables, but now
the guess for each variable is a 150 x 1 vector for each year of the transition path. Given the vector
of guesses for the capital stock, we can calculate a vector of prices and wages and thus optimally
solve for consumption and bequests of each generation in the transition period. After the year 151,
agents assume the economy will be in the ﬁnal steady state. We then aggregate the individual asset
supply decisions to get a new value for capital supply and repeat the algorithm until convergence.



                                                 A.25
K     Extension with Financial Frictions

All borrowing and lending is done through a perfectly competitive banking system. The banking
system takes lending from individuals and matches them with borrowers, who can be either ﬁrms
or other individuals. For every 1 unit of either investment or ﬁnal good that is lent, it costs the
bank φ. Because there is perfect competition in the banking industry, the rate the bank charges
to borrowers, rb , and the rate the bank gives to lenders, rl are related by the following arbitrage
equation:


                                             rb = rl + φ.                                       (A.87)


K.1     Individuals

Individuals have the same utility function, budget constraint, and borrowing limit as they previ-
ously did. However, now the interest rate they face depends on whether they are a borrower or a
lender: If at < 0, they face the borrowing interest rate rb . If at > 0, they face the lending interest
rate al .


K.2     Firms

Intermediate goods ﬁrms face the same proﬁt maximization and production function as before.
However, now all borrowing of capital (paying the rental rate rk ) must be intermediated through
a bank as well. Firms rent capital services at rate ρb , and individuals can lend capital at rate ρl .
The arbitrage equation for the real interest rate is now given by

                                                    k + (1 − δ) ξ
                                                   rt,b           t
                                      1 + rt,b =                                                (A.88)
                                                          ξt−1
    with a similar arbitrage equation for the interest rate for lending.


K.3     General Equilibrium

In general equilibrium, the supply for loanable funds must equal the demand:


                                            S(rl ) = D(rb )                                     (A.89)


L     Supplemental Figures and Tables

We perform several robustness exercises. The ﬁrst alternate speciﬁcation holds all variables at the
levels in the main speciﬁcation, but sets depreciation at 8%. The second alternate speciﬁcation

                                                   A.26
Figure A.2: Consumption proﬁle in stationary equilibrium




                         A.27
Figure A.3: Population pyramid in stationary equilibrium




                         A.28
                      Table A.3: 2015 steady-state results, alternate speciﬁcation 1

                        Moment                                   Model     US data
                        Natural rate of interest              −1.47%       -1.47%
                        Investment-to-output ratio               15.9%      15.9%
                        Consumer-debt-to-output ratio            6.3%       6.3%
                        Labor share                            65.99%      65.99%
                        Bequests-to-output                        3%         3%

                           Table A.4: Decomposition, alternate speciﬁcation 1

                    Forcing variable                          Δ in r      % of total Δ
                    Total interest rate change                -3.60%         100%
                    Mortality rate                             −1.28          34%
                    Total fertility rate                       −1.19          32%
                    Productivity growth                        −1.67          45%
                    Government debt (% of GDP)                 +1.13         −30%
                    Labor share                                  −.45         12%
                    Relative price of investment goods         −0.36          10%
                    Change in debt limit                         +.08         -2%


holds all variables at the level in the main speciﬁcation, but sets the utility elasticity of substi-
tution equal to 1. The third alternate speciﬁcation holds all parameters at the level in the main
speciﬁcation, but sets the production elasticity equal to 1 (Cobb-Douglas). The fourth alternate
speciﬁcation sets the intertemporal elasticity of substitution to 0.5.


M     Changes in the US Economy Since 1970

Our choice of 1970 as a starting point for our analysis is motivated primarily by the fact that there
have been substantial changes in the fundamentals of the US economy since the 1970s. The baby


                  Table A.5: Raising the rate of interest to 1%, alternate speciﬁcation 1

             Forcing variable                          2015 Value       Counterfactual value
             Total fertility rate                         1.88                  5.40
             Government debt (% of GDP)                   118%                 285%
             Productivity growth                          0.65%                2.65%
             Relative price of investment goods           1.00                  2.22

                                                   A.29
         Table A.6: 2015 steady-state results, alternate speciﬁcation 2

           Moment                                    Model      US data
           Natural rate of interest              −1.47%         -1.47%
           Investment-to-output ratio                15.9%      15.9%
           Consumer-debt-to output ratio             6.3%        6.3%
           Labor share                           65.99%         65.99%
           Bequests-to-output                        3.01%        3%


              Table A.7: Decomposition, alternate speciﬁcation 2

       Forcing variable                          Δ in r        % of total Δ
       Total interest rate change                -2.86%           100%
       Mortality rate                             −1.22            43%
       Total fertility rate                       −1.36            47%
       Productivity growth                        −1.28            45%
       Government debt (% of GDP)                 +1.54           −54%
       Labor share                                   −.33          12%
       Relative price of investment goods         −0.30            10%
       Change in debt limit                          +.08          -3%


     Table A.8: Raising the rate of interest to 1%, alternate speciﬁcation 2

Forcing variable                          2015 Value         Counterfactual value
Total fertility rate                          1.88                     4.35
Government debt (% of GDP)                    118%                  279%
Productivity growth                           0.65%                 3.29%
Relative price of investment goods            1.00                     1.78


         Table A.9: 2015 steady-state results, alternate speciﬁcation 3

            Moment                                   Model      US data
            Natural rate of interest              −.81%         -1.47%
            Investment-to-output ratio            18.03%        15.9%
            Consumer-debt-to-output ratio            6.3%        6.3%
            Labor share                           65.40%        65.99%
            Bequests-to-output                        3%          3%

                                       A.30
             Table A.10: Decomposition, alternate speciﬁcation 3

       Forcing variable                          Δ in r      % of total Δ
       Total interest rate change                -2.85%         100%
       Mortality rate                             −1.45          46%
       Total fertility rate                       −1.41          45%
       Productivity growth                        −1.70          54%
       Government debt (% of GDP)                 +1.58         −50%
       Labor share                                  −.3          10%
       Relative price of investment goods            0           0%
       Change in debt limit                         +.13        −4%




    Table A.11: Raising the rate of interest to 1%, alternate speciﬁcation 3

Forcing variable                          2015 Value       Counterfactual value
Total fertility rate                         1.88                  3.18
Government debt (% of GDP)                   118%                 208%
Productivity growth                          0.65%                2.11%
Relative price of investment goods           1.00                     




         Table A.12: 2015 steady-state results, alternate speciﬁcation 4

           Moment                                   Model     US data
           Natural rate of interest              −1.43%       -1.47%
           Investment-to-output ratio               15.9%      15.9%
           Consumer-debt-to-output ratio            6.3%       6.3%
           Labor share                           65.99%       65.99%
           Bequests-to-output                       2.34%       3%




                                      A.31
                                Table A.13: Decomposition, alternate speciﬁcation 4

                          Forcing variable                          Δ in r      % of total Δ
                          Total interest rate change                -7.07%         100%
                          Mortality rate                            −3.36           38%
                          Total fertility rate                      −3.10           35%
                          Productivity growth                          −4.0         45%
                          Government debt (% of GDP)                +3.27          −37%
                          Labor share                               −1.11           13%
                          Relative price of investment goods        −0.83           9%
                          Change in debt limit                         +.29         -3%

                       Table A.14: Raising the rate of interest to 1%, alternate speciﬁcation 4

                   Forcing variable                         2015 Value        Counterfactual value
                   Total fertility rate                         1.88                  2.56
                   Government debt (% of GDP)                  118%                  163%
                   Productivity growth                         0.65%                 1.51%
                   Relative price of investment goods           1.00                  1.95


boom began soon after World War II, increasing fertility from 2.5 children per woman to a peak of
3.62 children per woman in 1960.74 Although the baby boom started in 1945, the children of the
baby boom did not enter economic maturity (age 26) until 1970; thus we are able to look at the
impact of the baby boom on the evolution of interest rates in our model starting in 1970. Mortality
has also changed substantially. In 1970 life expectancy at birth was 70.8 years, growing to 78.7
in 2010. The combination of a slower fertility rate and a decrease in mortality leads to the aging
population we see today. This data on fertility and mortality are the raw data we put into the
model. For every year from 1970 to 2015, we input the exact total fertility rate from UN fertility
data, along with the exact age-speciﬁc mortality rate from CDC life tables. After 2015, we assume
a steady state with respect to birth rates and mortality.
    Gordon (2016) argues that productivity growth in the future will likely stagnate and that long-
run growth rates might be half that of the 1.9% annual rate from 1960 to 2007. This prediction does
not rely on a forecast of a future growth slowdown, for over the past four decades productivity
growth has already slowed; since the 1970s, worker productivity has been slower by 0.8 percent-
age point per year than during the eight decades before. We incorporate this by using estimated

   74
        After the well known “baby boom” came the less well-known ”baby bust,” in which total fertility in the US
gradually fell to 1.88 children per woman, below the replacement rate, before recovering roughly to the replacement
rate seen today.

                                                        A.32
series for productivity growth rates from Fernald (2012). The exact productivity data are used as
input in the model from the 1970s to present day, while from 2015 onward we hold it constant at
0.65.
    Other important factors driving the real interest rate are the relative price of investment goods,
the labor share of output, and government debt. Greenwood, Hercowitz and Krusell (1997) and
Fernald (2012) have documented that the relative price of investment goods has fallen by 30%
since 1970. Since the relative price of investment goods directly affects capital accumulations,
this could potentially have a substantial effect on real interest rates. We set the relative price
of capital goods in our model to match the decline since the 1970s. Karabarbounis and Neiman
(2014) and Elsby, Hobijn and Şahin (2013) provide data indicating that the labor share has declined
substantially since 1970. We model the declining labor share in our model very simply, through
                                 1
an increase in the proﬁt share   θt .   We choose the path for θt to match the decline in the labor
share from Elsby, Hobijn and Şahin (2013). Government debt is also an important factor that has
changed over the period. Since 1970, total government debt (including state and local debt) has
increased to 118% of GDP. We set government debt to exactly match the data over the period.


N       Literature Estimates




                                                  A.33
                     Table A.15: Literature estimates of parameters, Part A

Parameter                                                           Source
Beta
0.988-0.990                                                     Kaplan (2012)
0.956-0.960                                            Gourinchas and Parker (2002)
1.011                                                          Rı́os-Rull (1996)
0.92                                                     Krueger and Kubler (2006)
0.96-1.04                                     Constantinides, Donaldson and Mehra (2002)


Intertemporal Elasticity of Substitution
0.54-0.62                                                       Kaplan (2012)
0.71-2.00                                              Gourinchas and Parker (2002)
0.40                                                         Glover et al. (2011)
0.25-1.00                                                      Rı́os-Rull (1996)
0.50                                                     Krueger and Kubler (2006)
0.167-0.250                                   Constantinides, Donaldson and Mehra (2002)


Borrowing Limit (Various)
0.18 (debt to GDP)                                     Guerrieri and Lorenzoni (2011)
30% average wage income                                         Kaplan (2012)
0                                                      Gourinchas and Parker (2002)
80% of the value of risky assets they own                        Hur (2016)
No borrowing limit                                             Rı́os-Rull (1996)
No borrowing limit                                       Krueger and Kubler (2006)
0                                             Constantinides, Donaldson and Mehra (2002)
20% of value of home                                Rı́os-Rull and Sánchez-Marcos (2008)
0                                                              Aiyagari (1994)
0                                                         Krusell and Smith (1998)
25% of lifetime wage                                    Iacoviello and Pavan (2013)


Capital Share
0.36                                                           Rı́os-Rull (1996)
0.25                                                   Auerbach and Kotlikoff (1987)
0.33                                                  Mankiw, Romer and Weil (1992)
0.30                                                     Krueger and Kubler (2006)
0.30-0.34                                     Constantinides, Donaldson and Mehra (2002)

                                             A.34
                       Table A.16: Literature estimates of parameters, Part B

Parameter                                                                            Source


Depreciation
0.10-0.15                                                                   Jorgenson (1996)
0.05                                                                            Rı́os-Rull (1996)
0.06-0.12                                                              Nadiri and Prucha (1996)


Production Elasticity of Substitution
0.67-0.70                                                              Oberﬁeld and Raval (2014)
1.00                                                                             Berndt (1976)
0.40-0.90                                                                        Antras (2004)
0.50-0.60                                                        Klump, McAdam and Willman (2007)
1.25                                                              Karabarbounis and Neiman (2014)
1.30-1.60                                                                        Piketty (2014)
0.84                                                        Herrendorf, Herrington and Valentinyi (2015)
0.78                                                      Alvarez-Cuadrado, Van Long and Poschke (2014)


Retailer Elasticity of Substitution
6.00                                                          Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (2005)
6.00                                                                              Galı́ (2015)
7.87                                                                        Woodford (2003)
4.00                                                                Nakamura and Steinsson (2009)
4.00                                                              Berry, Levinsohn and Pakes (1995)
3.00                                                                        Midrigan (2011)
7.00                                                                   Golosov and Lucas (2007)


Bequest Parameter
Based on bequests as a percent of permanent income                          Altig et al. (2001)
Based on a wealth transfer share of 60%                                         De Nardi (2004)




                                               A.35
