                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   FIRE IN THE BELLY? EMPLOYEE MOTIVES AND INNOVATIVE PERFORMANCE
                  IN STARTUPS VERSUS ESTABLISHED FIRMS

                                       Henry Sauermann

                                      Working Paper 23099
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23099


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2017




I am indebted to Wes Cohen for many stimulating discussions of this and related projects. I also
thank Rajshree Agarwal, Ashish Arora, Jeff Edwards, Jon Fjeld, David Hsu, Nimmi
Kannankutty, Steve Klepper, Mike Roach, Paula Stephan, Scott Stern, and Long Vo for their
feedback and comments. Support from a Kauffman Foundation Junior Faculty Fellowship is
gratefully acknowledged. I thank the National Science Foundation for providing the restricted-use
SESTAT database employed in the empirical analysis. However, “the use of NSF data does not
imply NSF endorsement of the research methods or conclusions contained in this report.” The
views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Henry Sauermann. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Fire in the Belly? Employee Motives and Innovative Performance in Startups versus Established
Firms
Henry Sauermann
NBER Working Paper No. 23099
January 2017
JEL No. J24,O31,O32

                                          ABSTRACT

We examine whether startups attract employees with different pecuniary and non-pecuniary
motives than small or large established firms. We then explore whether such differences in
employee motives lead to differences in innovative performance across firm types. Using data on
over 10,000 U.S. R&D employees, we find that startup employees place lower importance on job
security and salary but greater importance on independence and responsibility. Startup employees
have higher patent output than employees in small and large established firms, and this difference
is partly mediated by employee motives – especially startup employees’ greater willingness to
bear risk. We discuss implications for research as well as for managers and policy makers
concerned with the supply of human capital to entrepreneurship and innovation.


Henry Sauermann
Scheller College of Business
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA 30308
and NBER
henry.sauermann@scheller.gatech.edu
INTRODUCTION

       At least since Schumpeter (1942), scholars have studied what role startups and estab-
lished firms play in generating technological advance, and what advantages some types of firms
may have over others in generating innovation (Acs & Audretsch, 1990; Agrawal et al., 2014;
Arora et al., 2009; Gans et al., 2002; Lowe & Ziedonis, 2006; Zenger, 1994). This research has
made considerable progress by studying firm level-factors such as differences in resources, coor-
dination costs, or economies of scale (Cohen, 2010). Even though individual employees are typi-
cally responsible for a large part of the innovative activity inside firms, however, little work has
examined whether startups and established firms differ with respect to the characteristics of their
human capital, especially employees’ motives (Cohen & Sauermann, 2007). The lack of atten-
tion to employee motives is particularly surprising given that entrepreneurship research has high-
lighted important differences in the motives and incentives of founders compared to those of
managers and employees working in large established firms (e.g., Amit et al., 2001; Astebro &
Thompson, 2011; Shane et al., 2003). Moreover, there is increasing evidence that these founder
motives have important implications for outcomes such as entry decisions, strategic choices, firm
survival, and competitive dynamics (Arora & Nandkumar, 2011; Ding, 2009; Morton &
Podolny, 2002). It seems natural to extend this line of research and ask if startup employees also
differ from their counterparts in established firms, and whether such differences may lead to dif-
ferences in performance.
       We begin to address these questions by comparing employees’ pecuniary and non-
pecuniary motives between startups and established firms and by examining whether differences
in employee motives lead to differences in innovative performance across types of firms. To
ground our inquiry, we outline a conceptual model that integrates three building blocks. First, we
draw on work in organizational theory and economics to consider structural characteristics and
constraints that condition the job attributes different types of firms are able to provide to their
employees. While prior work has examined such attributes focusing on either firm size or age,
startups may have unique profiles since they are both small and young (see Burton et al., 2016;
Haltiwanger et al., 2013). Second, the literature on labor market sorting argues that firms offer-
ing different types of job attributes should attract workers with different motives (Agarwal &
Ohyama, 2013; Rosen, 1986), suggesting that startup employees may differ systematically from


                                                                                                       1
those joining small or large established firms. Finally, we relate employees’ motives to innova-
tive performance within and across firms. In doing so, we draw on research suggesting that mo-
tives may condition not only levels of effort but also the productivity of that effort in generating
innovative outcomes (Amabile, 1996; Ouimet & Zarutskie, 2014; Sauermann & Cohen, 2010).
Taken together, we suggest that startups offer different job attributes than established firms and
thus attract employees with different sets of motives. These differences in employee motives, in
turn, may mediate differences in innovative performance.
       We examine these relationships using the National Science Foundation’s Science and
Engineering Statistical Data System (SESTAT). Drawing on data from over 10,000 U.S. scien-
tists and engineers working in startups and established firms, we find significant differences
across firm types with respect to employees’ pecuniary as well as non-pecuniary motives. Differ-
ences in security motives emerge along both the firm size and firm age dimensions, while differ-
ences with respect to other motives such as autonomy and salary emerge primarily along firm
size. Startup employees have more patent applications than employees in small or large estab-
lished firms, a difference that is associated with firm age rather than firm size. Using a series of
regression analyses, we find evidence that employee motives partially mediate the relationship
between firm types and innovative performance. Rather than intrinsic motives or the quest for
money, however, employees’ willingness to bear risk seems to play the most important role. We
conduct robustness checks to address endogeneity concerns and alternative explanations.
       This paper makes several contributions. First, we contribute to the entrepreneurship liter-
ature by providing unique insights into the motives of startup employees and how they compare
to those of employees in small and large established firms. While a large body of work has ex-
amined the characteristics of founders (e.g., Amit et al., 2001; Eesley & Roberts, 2012;
Hamilton, 2000; Hsu et al., 2007; Shane et al., 2003), little work has studied the characteristics of
those individuals who join founders in their entrepreneurial efforts. This lack of attention to
“joiners” is particularly problematic in the context of technology-based ventures, where early
employees are critical for firm success but founders often face difficulties attracting the “right”
human capital (Burton, 2001; Neff, 2012; Roach & Sauermann, 2015; Roberts, 1991). By show-
ing significant differences in employee characteristics between startups and established firms,
our study highlights the value of future research on startup employees as a distinct group of em-
ployees and as important entrepreneurial actors.

                                                                                                       2
       Second, we contribute to the literature on human capital in knowledge-intensive settings.
Most of the existing work in this domain focuses on ability or experience as key individual char-
acteristics (Agarwal et al., 2009; Braguinsky et al., 2012; Campbell et al., 2012; Toole &
Czarnitzki, 2009). We add to this literature by examining employee motives, which are typically
hard to observe but may have important implications for labor market choices and performance,
even controlling for ability (see also Agarwal & Ohyama, 2013; Stern, 2004). Our results suggest
that a broader conceptualization of human capital as encompassing both ability and motivational
factors may result in a more complete understanding of individuals’ role in shaping important
processes and outcomes within and across organizations.
       Finally, our discussion contributes to a large body of innovation literature that has exam-
ined performance differences across firms of different size or age (see Cohen, 2010). Most of the
existing work has focused on firm-level correlates of size and age such as resources or coordina-
tion costs, yet little attention has been paid to characteristics of the individuals who actually per-
form innovative activities in firms. Scholars have recently begun to examine differences in the
ability of employees across the firm size distribution (Elfenbein et al., 2010; Zenger & Lazzarini,
2004) and we add unique insights into employees’ pecuniary and non-pecuniary motives. More-
over, our results suggest that firm age and size have different relationships with motives and in-
novative outcomes, highlighting the need to consider both firm size and age in future work.

CONCEPTUAL BACKGROUND

Job Attributes and Sorting Based on Motives

       We start from the premise that different types of organizations offer different bundles of
pecuniary and non-pecuniary job attributes such as pay, intellectual challenge, or job security.
Prospective employees, in turn, differ with respect to their preferences for these job attributes,
whereby a stronger preference (“motive”) increases the utility they derive from a unit of the cor-
responding attribute (Stern, 2004). In line with prior research, we consider motives to be relative-
ly stable and “trait-like”, i.e., heterogeneity in motives exists even before workers join particular
employers (Cable & Edwards, 2004; Halaby, 2003; Hwang et al., 1998; Killingsworth, 1987).
       Given heterogeneity in job attributes and motives, different types of organizations should
attract employees with different motives (Agarwal & Ohyama, 2013; Stern, 2004). We illustrate
this sorting mechanism using a simple example. Consider two jobs (j=1 and 2) that offer differ-

                                                                                                     3
ent levels of pay and a nonpecuniary attribute (e.g., freedom). Assume that job 1 is high on pay
but low on freedom (e.g., pay1=2, free1=1), while job 2 is low on pay and high on freedom (e.g.,
pay2=1, free2=2). Now consider two job seekers (i=1 and 2) that differ in their motives such that
individual 1 has a strong preference for pay and a weak preference for freedom (e.g., prefpay1=2,
preffree1=1), while individual 2 has a weak preference for pay and strong preference for freedom
(e.g., prefpay2=1, preffree2=2). Assuming a simple weighted additive utility function (Stern,
2004), the respective (expected) utilities are Uij=prefpayi*payj+preffreei*freej. Job 1 is relatively
more attractive than job 2 for individual 1 (U11=5 vs. U12=4), while job 2 is more attractive for
individual 2 (U21=4 vs. U22=5). Thus, the individual with a strong preference for pay is likely to
sort into the job that offers higher pay, while the individual with a strong preference for freedom
will choose the job that offers a higher level of freedom.1 As such, while the two individuals face
the same trade-offs between pay and freedom inherent in the two jobs, they resolve these trade-
offs differently given their different preferences. While individual 1 feels that it is worth giving
up one unit of freedom for an additional unit of pay, individual 2 finds it advantageous to give up
one unit of pay for an additional unit of freedom (see also Sauermann & Roach, 2014).2
          Although this example illustrates the process of sorting from individuals’ perspective, our
primary interest is in the resulting systematic differences between the employee populations ob-
served in different types of organizations. In particular, organizations offering higher levels of a
particular job attribute should employ workers with stronger preferences for this attribute than
organizations that offer lower levels of the attribute. In other words, differences in organizations’
characteristics lead – via sorting – to differences in the motives of their employees. In the next
section, we discuss more concretely potential differences in the job attributes offered by startups
and established firms, as well as resulting differences in employees’ motives.




1
  We focus on individuals’ choices of jobs and abstract from demand side conditions. Agarwal and Ohyama (2013) develop a
model of two-sided matching with similar qualitative predictions. Also consistent with our predictions, other models suggest that
firms with advantages in offering particular types of job attributes match with workers who place a high value on these job attrib-
utes (see Hwang et al., 1998; Stern, 2004). A key driver of this positive assortative matching is the complementarity between
preferences and job attributes in the utility function (Becker, 1973; Kryscynski et al., 2014).
2
  In our example, sorting allows both workers to derive similar levels of utility even though (in fact, because) these jobs offer
different job attributes. This is not a general result. For example, if workers differ in ability and jobs offer higher levels of job
attributes to high ability workers (Stern, 2004), then high ability workers will enjoy higher utility than low ability workers.


                                                                                                                                   4
Differences in Job Attributes and Motives Between Startups and Established Firms

         We now consider more systematically how jobs in startups – firms that are young and
small – may differ from jobs in other types of firms, and what kinds of workers they might at-
tract. While there is little work on job attributes in startups per se, we can draw on prior work
that has tied job attributes to either firm size or firm age. The following discussion will show that
priors with respect to some job attributes are quite strong. For other attributes, however, conflict-
ing arguments can be made, and it is not clear whether startups offer higher or lower levels. As
such, we do not make formal predictions but review key arguments to set the stage for the subse-
quent empirical analysis asking whether and how employee motives in startups differ from those
in small or large established firms.
         Our discussion focuses on five job attributes and corresponding motives: Financial in-
come, job security, independence, responsibility, and intellectually challenging work. We focus
on these particular attributes for a number of reasons. First, they include both pecuniary and non-
pecuniary attributes, consistent with a significant body of work recognizing that employees value
a broad range of financial but also nonfinancial payoffs (Amabile et al., 1994; Cable & Edwards,
2004; Rosen, 1986). Second, these motives have been the focus of emerging work on “joiners”,
individuals who join founders as startup employees (Neff, 2012; Ouimet & Zarutskie, 2014;
Roach & Sauermann, 2015). Finally, these motives have been found to be particularly important
to knowledge workers and have been linked to innovative performance (Amabile, 1996; Byron &
Khazanchi, 2012; Gambardella et al., 2015; Sauermann & Cohen, 2010), which is particularly
important given our interest in motives as mediators of differences in innovative performance.
While these five motives may not capture all relevant reasons why workers sort into startups, and
may not capture all motivational characteristics that matter for innovation, they are motives that
likely matter for both sorting and innovation.3
         Startups and established firms may differ most strongly with respect to the job security
they can offer to their employees. Firms become more stable over time and survival rates tend to
increase with firm age (Carnahan et al., 2011; Carroll & Hannan, 2000; Jovanovic, 1982). Simi-
larly, large firms have higher survival rates than small firms to the extent that they can draw on
3
  This is not to say that future work should be limited to these five motives. Other motives that may play an important role for
innovation and entrepreneurship include desires for advancement, contribution to society, or having an impact (Bode et al., 2015;
Sauermann et al., 2016). Related work has also looked at broader personality traits such as openness to new experiences
(Hamilton et al., 2014).


                                                                                                                                5
slack resources, economies of scale, or higher degrees of diversification (Agarwal & Audretsch,
2001; Brown & Medoff, 2003; Evans & Leighton, 1989). More stability and higher chances of
firm survival, in turn, should translate into higher levels of job security for employees. Differ-
ences in job security offered by startups and established firms are very salient to prospective
workers. For example, Roach and Sauermann (2010) asked a sample of U.S. science and engi-
neering PhD students about their expectations regarding job attributes in startups versus estab-
lished firms, and their respondents expected significantly higher job security in the latter. Simi-
larly, Neff (2012) provides rich qualitative insights into the important role of risk and security
concerns in workers’ decisions to join startups during the dotcom era. Overall, our discussion
suggests that job security increases with both firm size and firm age, and that startups offer the
lowest levels of job security. Assuming that workers sort with respect to their corresponding
preferences, we expect that employees working in startups have a lower preference for job secu-
rity than employees working in small or large established firms.
       A second job attribute that figures prominently in the literature is financial income. Stud-
ies using general population samples show that large firms offer higher wages than small firms
(Burton et al., 2016; Idson & Feaster, 1990; Oi & Idson, 1999). Possible explanations for this
wage premium include higher levels of resources and thus ability to pay, as well as lower levels
of certain nonpecuniary job attributes, resulting in a need to pay compensating differentials. Sim-
ilarly, some studies suggest that older firms pay higher salaries than young firms although this
relationship weakens once differences in employee ability are taken into account (Bengtsson &
Hand, 2013; Brown & Medoff, 2003). Lower levels of salary in small and young firms may be
partly offset by higher levels of variable pay. In particular, small firms may provide stronger per-
formance-contingent incentives to the extent that they are better able to observe individual work-
ers’ output (Zenger & Lazzarini, 2004). Similarly, young firms may have a higher potential for
growth and development and may promise higher financial returns in the future (e.g., via stock
options). Thus, while startups and established firms may differ with respect to the structure of
payments that can be obtained by employees, it is not clear how much they differ with respect to
overall levels of financial income and it is important to examine empirically whether and how
employees working in different types of firms differ with respect to their financial motives.
       Several arguments suggest that startup employees may enjoy higher levels of autonomy
and independence than employees in large firms. Organizational theorists argue that larger or-

                                                                                                      6
ganizations are more bureaucratic and routinized (Idson, 1990; Sorensen, 2007), which may re-
duce individuals’ autonomy and sense of independence. An alleged “conflict” between scientists’
desire for autonomy and the bureaucratic management systems of the large business enterprise
has also received considerable attention in prior innovation literature (Kornhauser, 1962;
Lacetera, 2009; Ritti, 1968). Consistent with these arguments, Benz and Frey (2008) show that
workers in small firms derive greater “procedural utility” (job satisfaction from freedom and
self-determination) than workers in large firms. Assuming that job seekers sort with respect to
their corresponding preferences, we expect that employees working in startups have a higher
preference for independence than employees working in large firms.
       A growing stream of research focuses our attention on responsibility for a wide range of
tasks as a potentially important job attribute (Astebro & Thompson, 2011; Elfenbein et al., 2010;
Lazear, 2005). It is likely that employees in small firms have fewer opportunities to specialize in
particular aspects of R&D and may also have to handle non-R&D tasks in addition to their R&D
work (see Sorensen, 2007). Early qualitative evidence is provided by Cooper (1966), who finds
that R&D employees in small firms tend to be “generalists” while those in large firms focus on
particular aspects of a given project. More recently, Elfenbein et al. (2010) showed that employ-
ees working in small firms engage in a broader range of activities than those working in large
firms, including technical but also business and managerial tasks. Assuming that workers sort
with respect to their preferences, we expect that employees working in startups have a higher
preference for responsibility than employees working in large firms.
       Finally, we turn to “intrinsic” work benefits such as exciting work and intellectual chal-
lenge. Such benefits may take different forms in different domains; for scientists and engineers,
challenges related to solving difficult and new technical problems should be most relevant
(Amabile et al., 1994; Sauermann & Cohen, 2010). Popular accounts of the early startup cultures
of firms such as Google or Apple suggest that startups can provide scientists and engineers with
very exciting and challenging work (Freiberger & Swaine, 1984; Vascellaro & Morrison, 2008).
Indeed, new firms are often the ones that introduce new technologies into the market (Prusa &
Schmitz, 1991), suggesting that they may provide their technologists with more challenges than
established firms. At the same time, many important technical advances are made by large estab-
lished firms, some of which invest considerable resources in “blue sky” research (Rosenberg,
1990). Thus, it is not clear whether startups offer higher levels of intellectual challenge to their

                                                                                                       7
scientists and engineers than established firms and, as such, whether startup employees differ
from those in established firms with respect to their desires for intellectual challenge.

Differences in Motives as Drivers of Differences in Innovative Performance

          Empirical insights into employee motives may result in a better understanding of the hu-
man capital available to different types of firms. Moreover, to the extent that employees’ motives
shape innovative activities or performance, differences in motives may lead to differences in in-
novative performance across firm types. In the following, we briefly review prior evidence on
the relationships between motives and innovation and discuss what these relationships may im-
ply for the innovative performance in startups versus established firms.
          First, social psychologists argue that intrinsic motivation based on autonomy and intellec-
tual challenge is more conducive to creativity than extrinsic motivation based on financial re-
wards because intrinsically motivated individuals explore a larger solution space and are less
likely to seek quick but possibly inferior solutions. In contrast, financial rewards are tied to ex-
ternal evaluation, which may lead to conformity with existing standards and reduce creativity
(Amabile, 1996). Thus, individuals who are driven by intrinsic motives and who value autonomy
may be more creative. Other scholars, however, argue that even extrinsic motivation may be
conducive to creativity if the reward system explicitly specifies novelty as an objective (Byron &
Khazanchi, 2012; Eisenberger & Shanock, 2003). Thus, while there is agreement that intrinsic
motivation is particularly beneficial for innovation, the role of extrinsic motivation remains de-
bated. Existing empirical evidence often relies on laboratory studies that do not necessarily gen-
eralize to firm R&D (Shalley et al., 2004). In a recent paper, Sauermann and Cohen (2010) study
industrial scientists and find a strong relationship between intrinsic motives and innovative per-
formance, while motives related to pay had a weaker – though still positive – effect.4
          Second, risk aversion and security motives may have a negative impact on innovative
performance. Innovation involves experimentation with new elements, but the success of these
experiments, both in terms of achieving technological goals and in terms of acceptance by the

4
  A related stream of work examines the impact of extrinsic incentives on motivation, suggesting that contingent rewards may
undermine or “crowd-out” intrinsic motivation (Deci et al., 1999; Frey & Jegen, 2001). The focus of that literature is primarily on
the impact of organizationally provided financial incentives on workers’ levels of effort. In contrast, the work we draw on sug-
gests that different types of motivations may also have different implications for the direction of workers’ effort (e.g., what pro-
jects they pick, how they search for solutions). Our data include a proxy for the level of effort, allowing us to explore the degree
to which motives impact performance via the level of effort versus the direction of effort.


                                                                                                                                  8
market or other evaluators, is uncertain (Simonton, 2003). In addition, novel approaches to prob-
lems often yield more uncertain outcomes including a higher likelihood of outstanding results
but also a higher risk of failure (Wang et al., 2016). As such, individuals who seek to minimize
risks may select “safer” projects and well-established approaches that are less likely to fail but
are also less likely to produce high innovative performance (Amabile & Gryskiewicz, 1987;
Dunbar, 1995; Friedman & Foerster, 2005).
       Overall, this discussion suggests that nonpecuniary motives related to challenge and in-
dependence are particularly conducive to creativity and innovation, while motives related to sala-
ry and especially job security may have less positive or even negative relationships with innova-
tion. To the extent that startups and established firms attract employees with different motiva-
tional profiles, differences in these motives may thus lead to differences in innovative perfor-
mance. Interestingly, a similar link between employee motives and firm performance is implicit
in recent work studying the characteristics of startup human capital. In particular, Ouimet and
Zarutskie (2014) find that startups employ younger workers and conjecture that younger employ-
ees may be less risk averse and select riskier projects. Consistent with this conjecture, the authors
show that firms with younger employees exhibit higher growth but also higher failure rates. In
contrast to that study, we focus not on demographic characteristics but directly on employee mo-
tives – including risk preferences but also preferences for a range of other job attributes – and the
question whether differences in employee motives between startups and established firms lead to
differences in innovative performance.

DATA AND MEASURES

Data

       We analyze data from the Scientists and Engineers Statistical Data System (SESTAT),
developed by the National Science Foundation. The sample population includes individuals who
have a college degree or higher and who are either working in a science and engineering occupa-
tion or who are trained in related fields. Most data were collected via a mailed questionnaire; a




                                                                                                     9
smaller number of questionnaires were administered by telephone, in personal interviews, and
via the Internet. Response rates for the SESTAT component surveys ranged from 60-80%.5
          Our analyses use data from 10,585 respondents included in the SESTAT 2003 who hold a
Bachelors, Masters, or PhD degree and who are full-time employees in for-profit firms. The
largest industries in the sample are computer systems design, scientific R&D services, semicon-
ductors, aerospace, telecom services/internet, chemicals, and pharmaceuticals. Since we are pri-
marily interested in innovative activities and performance, we restrict the sample to respondents
who indicate that their primary type of work is basic research, applied research, development,
design, or computer applications.

Key Dependent and Independent Variables

          Firm type: Respondents indicated the size of their employer in terms of the number of
employees in all locations combined. Respondents indicated one of eight size classes: 10 or few-
er employees, 11-24, 25-99, 100-499, 500-999, 1000-4999, 5000-24999, and 25000+ employees.
Respondents also indicated whether their employer came into being as a new business within the
past 5 years. We use firm age and size to define three firm types: (1) Startup (new business,
size<100 employees); (2) Established small firm (old business, size<100); and (3) Established
large firm (old business, size≥100).6 Overall, 580 respondents work in startups, 1,059 in estab-
lished small firms, and 8,946 in established large firms. In addition to using firm age and size to
define the three firm types, we also use these dimensions separately in our regression analyses.
        Innovative performance: Each respondent reported the number of U.S. patent applications
in which he or she was named as an inventor over the last 5 years prior to the survey. We recog-
nize that patent applications are an imperfect measure of innovative performance. In particular,
not all inventions are patented and patent propensity may differ across industries, scientific
fields, and different types of R&D (Cohen et al., 2000; Sauermann & Stephan, 2013). To miti-
gate this concern, we control for industry, scientific field, and type of R&D (see Table 1).



5
  For more information on the SESTAT data, including the survey instruments, see http://sestat.nsf.gov. While SESTAT data are
available for years after 2003, NSF did not consistently collect measures of individuals’ motives, performance, or of firm age.
6
  Our definition of startups as <6 years and <100 employees is consistent with recent empirical work on small firm or startup
employment (Campbell et al., 2012; Elfenbein et al., 2010). We will not use the cases working in young and large firms (n=341)
because firms in this group tend to be spinoffs from older corporations. In those cases, legal age differs from the age of the busi-
ness as an organization, which is the focus of our theoretical discussion (see also Burton et al., 2016; Haltiwanger et al., 2013).


                                                                                                                                 10
      Motives: Respondents were asked to rate the importance of a list of different job attributes
in response to the following question: “When thinking about a job, how important is each of the
following factors to you…?”. The attributes and their respective importance measures are “job
security”, “salary”, “degree of independence”, “level of responsibility”, and “intellectual chal-
lenge”. Economists routinely assume individuals’ motives and preferences to be exogenous, and
many social psychologists consider motives to be largely stable and “trait-like” (see Agarwal &
Ohyama, 2013; Amabile et al., 1994; Cable & Edwards, 2004; Stern, 2004). However, we will
also explore potential changes over time in supplementary analyses.
      A concern with measures using the same scale is that correlations may be inflated due to
common methods bias (Podsakoff et al., 2003). The correlations between motives range from 0
(salary and challenge) to 0.44 (responsibility and independence), suggesting that the measures
capture distinct constructs. More importantly, common methods bias is unlikely to affect the re-
lationships between our key dependent and independent variables since they were measured us-
ing different types of scales, include subjective as well as objective measures, and were placed in
different sections of the survey instrument.
       We also need to consider potential social desirability bias, i.e., that respondents might in-
flate ratings of motives that they think are socially desirable and give artificially low scores to
motives that may seems less socially desirable (Moorman & Podsakoff, 1992). The survey was
completely anonymous, and the question on motives was separated from questions on other key
variables (firm size, age, and patenting), making it unlikely that respondents changed their re-
sponses specifically to justify or rationalize particular choices or outcomes. There is also little
reason to believe that social desirability bias differs systematically by firm type, or is systemati-
cally related to innovative performance. Despite their potential limitations, the measures of mo-
tives provide unique insights into typically unobserved individual characteristics and allow us to
compare motives across different types of firms using a standardized measurement approach.
       Job attributes: SESTAT includes proxies for two job attributes featured in our conceptual
discussion. First, the survey records respondents’ basic annual salary, excluding bonuses or over-
time pay (unfortunately, SESTAT does not include information about variable pay or stock op-
tions). Second, respondents indicated which of 9 non-R&D work activities occupied more than
10% of their time (including accounting, employee relations, management, production, profes-



                                                                                                      11
sional services, sales/marketing, quality management, teaching, other). We use the count of non-
R&D activities as a proxy for the range of respondents’ responsibilities in their jobs.
       Ability and knowledge: We use several measures to proxy for ability, skills, and experi-
ence. First, we follow prior work by using educational attainment (Brown & Medoff, 1989;
Zenger & Lazzarini, 2004), coding a set of dummy variables indicating whether a respondent’s
highest degree was a Bachelors, Masters, or PhD. To further control for the quality of education,
we include a set of dummy variables indicating the Carnegie ranking of the degree granting insti-
tution (e.g., research 1, research 2, or liberal arts). Formal education should be a particularly rel-
evant measure of ability in R&D, where performance depends critically on domain-relevant
technical and cognitive skills and on substantive knowledge (Amabile, 1996; Fleming, 2001).
Measures of educational attainment may also reflect innate differences in ability and intelligence
to the extent that high ability individuals choose more demanding programs or top tier institu-
tions selectively admit students with higher ability. Finally, we use a survey measure asking re-
spondents how related their current work is to the field of their highest degree, rated on a 3-point
scale (from “not related” to “closely related”). This measure proxies for the relevance of skills
and knowledge (Ohyama, 2015; Stenard & Sauermann, 2016).

Additional Variables and Measures

       We include a range of additional variables to control for heterogeneity across industries,
employers, individuals, as well as the nature of respondents’ work (see Table 1). As such, many
potential confounds are explicitly controlled for. We consider potential remaining sources of en-
dogeneity in robustness checks.

                                 --------- Table 1 about here ---------

RESULTS

Motives in Startups and Established Firms

       Table 2 compares motives across the three types of firms. We find that startup employees
consider challenge, independence, and responsibility significantly more important than do em-
ployees in established large firms. At the same time, startup employees rate salary and job secu-
rity significantly lower (mean differences tested using ordered logistic regressions). Differences
between employees in startup versus established small firms are smaller and only the security

                                                                                                    12
motive is significantly different, with a lower rating in startups. To complement this comparison
of absolute levels of motives, we create a set of relative measures by computing the difference
between the motives regarding salary, independence, responsibility, and challenge on the one
hand, and job security on the other. These measures indicate how much stronger (or weaker)
each of the four motives is compared to job security. Figure 1 plots these differences for the three
firm types and again shows that the profiles of employee motives are very different. For exam-
ple, while startup employees rate salary, responsibility and challenge significantly more im-
portant than security, employees in large established firms rate independence and responsibility
significantly less important than security.

                                --------- Figure 1 about here ---------

       We estimate ordered logistic regressions to examine differences in employees’ motives
across firm types while controlling for demographic characteristics as well as proxies for ability
and knowledge (Table 3). Models 1-5 show that compared to startup employees, employees in
large established firms report significantly stronger preferences for job security and salary, but
weaker preferences for independence and responsibility. To illustrate the effect size, the odds
that employees in large established firms rate job security “very important” (vs. not “very im-
portant”) are more than twice the odds for startup employees (Odds Ratio 2.11). The correspond-
ing expected probabilities are 41% for startup employees compared to 59% for employees in
large established firms. The differences with respect to other motives are considerably smaller in
magnitude. Comparing the motives of startup employees with those of employees in small estab-
lished firms, we find only one significant difference: The latter have a 1.55 times higher odds of
rating job security “very important” compared to startup employees, corresponding to probabili-
ties of 51% vs. 41%. Finally, re-estimating regressions with small established firms as the omit-
ted firm type also informs us about differences in employee motives between small and large es-
tablished firms (not shown in Table 3): Employees in large established firms have significantly
stronger security motives (OR=1.36), weaker independence motives (OR=0.85), and weaker re-
sponsibility motives (OR=0.87) than employees working in small established firms.
       In models 6-10 we further explore differences in motives by using firm age (dummy vari-
able indicating that employer is older than 5 years) and firm size as separate dimensions. Securi-
ty motives increase with both firm age and size, consistent with our conceptual discussion that

                                                                                                     13
both age and size may translate into more job security for employees. Using a series of dummies
for firm size classes allows us to see that the effect of firm size levels off for firms in the 500-999
category, with no further increase in security motives in larger firms. While security motives are
strongly related to both firm age and size, the differences with respect to other motives appear
only along the firm size dimension and are smaller in magnitude.7
         Overall, we find significant differences in employee motives across firm types. Most no-
tably, startup employees report significantly weaker security motives than employees in small
and especially large established firms, perhaps reflecting a greater willingness to bear risk. Dif-
ferences with respect to salary, independence, and responsibility motives emerge primarily along
the firm size dimension; these motives do not differ significantly with firm age.

                                    --------- Tables 2 and 3 about here ---------


Job Attributes across Firm Types

         The data allow us to probe differences across firm types with respect to salary as well as
responsibility for a broader range of tasks. Model 1 in Table 4 estimates differences in (Ln) sala-
ry using OLS. We find no significant difference between startups and established large firms, but
significantly lower salary in established small firms than in startups or established large firms.
To examine potential differences in the distribution of salary, models 2-4 estimate salary differ-
ences across firm types at the 10th, 50th, and 90th percentile of the salary distribution using quan-
tile regression. The results show an intriguing pattern. In particular, salaries at the low end of the
distribution (10th percentile) are significantly lower in startups than in established large firms,
while they do not differ at the median. At the top end of the distribution, salaries are significantly
higher in startups. Thus, scientists and engineers in startups earn similar average pay as those in
established large firms, but the pay distribution in startups is wider. Model 5 uses firm age and
size as separate dimensions and shows that pay increases with firm size, with a roughly 20%
premium for employees in the largest firms. Controlling for firm size, scientists and engineers
working in old firms receive roughly 10% lower pay than those in young firms. These offsetting

7
  We also constructed a continuous firm size measure using the log of the midpoints of the size categories and used this measure
to explore potential interactions between firm size and age. However, we find no significant interactions in the regressions of
motives or of job attributes and performance. As such, while differences in motives emerge along both the size and the age di-
mension, these differences tend to be additive and we find no evidence of moderating effects.


                                                                                                                              14
effects of firm size and age explain why pay levels in startups do not differ significantly from
those in established large firms (as seen in Model 1).8
          Model 6 examines differences in job responsibilities, as proxied by the number of non-
R&D work activities. Negative binomial regressions show that scientists and engineers in large
established firms engage in roughly 17% fewer different work activities than employees working
in startups or in established small firms. Consistent with the notion that opportunities for special-
ization are primarily a function of firm size, model 7 shows that the number of non-R&D activi-
ties decreases with firm size but has no relationship with firm age. The detailed firm size dum-
mies again reveal nonlinear effects, with coefficients stabilizing around a firm size of 500-999.

                                          --------- Table 4 about here ---------

Innovative Performance in Startups versus Established Firms

          We now examine whether differences in employee motives across firm types are associ-
ated with differences in innovative performance. Our performance regressions use the count of
patent applications as the dependent variable and are estimated using negative binomial regres-
sion to account for overdispersion (Table 5).
          Model 1 includes only control variables – including proxies for ability and relevant
knowledge – as well as the firm type dummies. Compared to startup employees, researchers in
established small firms have 51.9% lower patent application counts and researchers in large es-
tablished firms have 29.8% lower counts. Model 2 adds individuals’ motives and shows that
challenge and independence motives have a significant positive relationship with output (Inci-
dence Rate Ratio >1), while security motives have a negative relationship (IRR<1). These obser-
vations confirm prior findings (Sauermann & Cohen, 2010) and are consistent with the notion
that intrinsic motives are particularly conducive to creativity while risk aversion and a concern
with failure may reduce the scope of search and lead individuals to pursue safer but also poten-
tially less novel projects and approaches (Amabile, 1996; Ouimet & Zarutskie, 2014).


8
  Recent work using Danish general population data also shows a positive relationship of wages with firm size but a negative
relationship with firm age. In that study, however, the size effect outweighs the age effect for most people, leading to lower wag-
es in small and young firms (Burton et al., 2016). In contrast, Kim (2016) finds no wage difference between VC-backed startups
and established firms once individuals’ ability is controlled for. Consistent with our quantile regressions, these results suggest
that wage differences may depend on the sample studied, with less of a discount (or even a premium) for startup employees in
upper parts of the ability distribution.


                                                                                                                                15
       However, our focus is not on the relationships between motives and performance per se,
but on the degree to which employee motives mediate the relationship between firm types and
innovative performance. In particular, if the motives typical of startup employees are more bene-
ficial than those of employees in established firms, the estimated performance differences be-
tween firm types should be reduced once differences in motives are accounted for. One approach
to test mediation is, therefore, to test the change in firm type dummies once motives are included
(see Baron & Kenny, 1986; Elfenbein et al., 2010). Consistent with our expectation, the firm
type coefficients are significantly reduced in Model 2 (the Incidence Rate Ratios move closer to
one; Chi2(2)=9.80, p<0.01). Especially for established large firms, the change in firm type dum-
mies is also economically significant: The performance gap compared to startups is reduced from
29.8% to 19.5% (from 51.9% to 46.9% for established small firms). The significant remaining
differences between firm types likely reflect a number of other mechanisms that may also medi-
ate differences in patent output (see discussion below). Mediation analyses using the product of
coefficients approach detailed in the next section confirm significant mediation by motives and
also reveal that security motives have by far the largest effect. The prominent role of security
motives as mediator reflects both the large differences in security motives across firm types (see
Table 3), and the large negative effect of security motives on innovative performance (Table 5).
       Model 3 additionally includes the measure of hours worked. As expected, individuals
who work more hours have higher performance. However, the inclusion of this proxy for the
quantity of effort leads to no noticeable change in the coefficients of motives, suggesting that
motives influence innovative performance primarily by shaping the direction or quality of effort
rather than the level of effort (Amabile, 1996; Sauermann & Cohen, 2010). Nevertheless, ac-
counting for differences in effort further reduces the coefficients of firm types, and the perfor-
mance difference between startups and established large firms is no longer significant.
       Models 4-6 use the firm size and age measures instead of the firm type dummies. Model
4 shows that employees in old firms have significantly fewer patents than those in young firms.
While firm size shows no strong relationship with patent counts, employees in the largest firms
appear to be somewhat more productive than those in the smallest firms (IRR=1.367, n.s.). Thus,
the performance advantage of startups is associated primarily with their young age rather than
their small size. When we include individuals’ motives (model 5), the coefficient of firm age is
significantly reduced (Chi2(1)=5.69, p<0.05), again providing evidence of partial mediation.

                                                                                                     16
                                --------- Table 5 about here ---------

Supplementary Analyses

Testing Mediation Using the Product of Coefficients Approach

       In the prior section, we provided evidence of mediation using the method popularized by
Baron and Kenny (1986). A more powerful method is the product of coefficients approach
(Agarwal et al., 2016; Hayes, 2009; Preacher & Hayes, 2008), which allows us to compute and
test mediating effects separately for each of the firm types and for each of the five motives. The
idea is that the effect of a variable (X) on an outcome (Y) that is mediated by another variable
(M) can be computed by multiplying the coefficient of X in a regression of M on X and the coef-
ficient of M in a regression of Y on M and X. Since this approach has been developed for linear
regressions, we use seemingly unrelated regression to estimate five OLS models of motives (our
M) that include firm types as the primary independent variables, as well as one regression of the
(Ln) patent count that includes both firm types and motives. We then compute for each motive
the product of the coefficients in the two equations and obtain confidence intervals for these
products using bootstrapping with 5,000 repetitions (Preacher & Hayes, 2008).
       The results shown in Table 6 confirm that employee motives significantly explain lower
innovative performance observed in small established firms and in large established firms rela-
tive to startups. We also find that the mediating effect is roughly twice as large for large estab-
lished firms, consistent with our observation that large established firms differ more strongly
from startups with respect to employee motives than do small established firms (see Figure 1).
Estimates for each of the motives separately show highly significant mediation of job security
motives, but no significant effects of the other motives. Thus, while several motives differ across
firm types (Table 3), security motives play the primary role in mediating the relationships be-
tween firm types and innovative performance.

                                --------- Table 6 about here ---------

Potential Changes in Motives over Time

       Our conceptual discussion emphasized ex ante selection mechanisms, i.e., that individu-
als with strong pre-existing motives sort into organizations that offer high levels of the corre-
sponding job attributes. However, motives were measured at the time of the survey and may also

                                                                                                      17
have changed ex post due to socialization processes (Allen & Katz, 1992; Chatman, 1991;
Sorensen, 2007). While differences in motives across firm types are important even if they re-
flect ex post changes, we now seek to gain additional insights into the relative role of ex ante se-
lection versus ex post changes.
       A first piece of indirect evidence comes from existing work using samples of scientists
and engineers prior to their initial career transitions, i.e., before they were exposed to potential
socialization in a particular type of firm. In particular, Roach and Sauermann (2015) surveyed
U.S. science and engineering PhD students, collecting measures of both motives and career pref-
erences. The authors found that respondents who were less risk averse and had stronger desires
for autonomy found R&D positions in startups relatively more attractive than positions in estab-
lished firms. Thus, there is evidence that heterogeneity in motives exists before employment and
that motives may have an important role in shaping career choices and sorting.
       Second, we estimate regressions of motives separately for individuals working in startups
and established large firms and include a variable measuring tenure in the current job. If sociali-
zation were to explain our key results, motives related to job security and salary would have to
increase with job tenure in large firms, while motives related to independence and responsibility
would have to decrease. The opposite pattern would have to be observed in startups. The results
(Table S1, models 1-10) show no relationship between job tenure and motives among startup
employees. In established large firms, the independence motive increases (rather than decreases)
with tenure, suggesting that the observed lower levels of independence motives compared to
startups are not due to socialization. At the same time, job security motives increase and chal-
lenge motives decrease, consistent with a socialization argument. To assess the magnitude of this
effect, we compared differences in security and challenge motives between startups and estab-
lished large firms for two sets of individuals: those who started their job within the last two years
(where socialization effects are likely limited) and those who started more than two years ago
(socialization likely stronger). The difference in the share of respondents reporting that job secu-
rity is “very important” is 16.5 percentage points among those who joined their employer recent-
ly (40.8% vs. 57.3%), compared to 20.1 percentage points in the older cohort (39.1% vs. 59.2%),
suggesting that socialization effects are relatively weak compared to selection. For challenge, the
difference in the younger cohort is 4 percentage points (72.9% vs. 68.9% “very important” rat-
ings) compared to 9.9 (74.1% vs. 64.2%) in the older cohort, suggesting that the large firm envi-

                                                                                                       18
ronment may indeed have a noticeable impact on employees’ challenge motives. A caveat in in-
terpreting correlations between tenure in an organization and motives as evidence of socializa-
tion is that in a cross-sectional analysis, these correlations may also reflect the selective retention
of individuals whose motives are aligned with the organization (Chatman, 1991). Overall, these
analyses relating motives to job tenure suggest that the patterns of motives in startups are primar-
ily due to selection rather than socialization. In large established firms, we find no evidence for
socialization with respect to independence motives, but security and challenge motives may part-
ly reflect socialization as well as ex post and ex ante selection. Future research using longitudinal
data is needed to more clearly identify the role of selection and socialization, and to explore how
the motivational characteristics of the workforce change as organizations mature.
       We also consider potential endogeneity with respect to performance, e.g., that researchers
who are successful begin to care more about challenging work, while those who underperform
worry about job security. To explore this possibility, we conduct the following thought experi-
ment: Given that many respondents have no patent application, even having just a small number
of patents may indicate good R&D performance. As such, any reverse effects running from per-
formance to security or challenge motives should occur primarily at the lower end of the perfor-
mance distribution. In contrast, the mechanisms highlighted in our conceptual discussion – such
as the potentially detrimental impact of risk aversion on creativity – should operate across the
full range of output, and may even be most pronounced at the high end of the performance distri-
bution. To examine these relationships empirically, Model 1 in Table S2 estimates a probit re-
gression distinguishing respondents without patents and those with 1 patent. Models 2-6 use the
sample of individuals with at least 1 patent and estimate a series of quantile regressions ranging
from the 30th to the 90th percentile. The results show no significant coefficients of motives in the
probit regression, and relatively small coefficients for the lower quantiles. The coefficients of
motives – especially of challenge and security - increase in size and significance as we move to
higher quantiles. Thus, under the assumption that reverse causality would be more pronounced at
the lower end of the performance distribution, our data somewhat mitigate endogeneity concerns.
Of course, this analysis is only an initial effort to address endogeneity concerns within the limita-
tions of the SESTAT data; future work is needed to address reverse causality between motives
and performance using different data sets and empirical approaches.



                                                                                                    19
Supplementary Analyses of Performance

          Our measure of innovative performance has a skewed distribution with some individuals
reporting a very high number of patent applications. To ensure that our results are not driven by
these outliers, we estimate key regressions dropping those cases with more than 20 patent appli-
cations. The results are robust (Table S2, models 7-8).
          By focusing on employee motives, our discussion thus far has abstracted from other fac-
tors that may shape innovative performance across types of firms. We now briefly discuss such
additional factors and how they may affect our results. First, sorting of employees is likely to
lead to a correlation between motives and corresponding job attributes such as levels of job secu-
rity, pay, or the range of responsibilities. If these job attributes have an independent impact on
performance, our regressions may confound the effects of motives with those of unobserved job
attributes. While we do not have the data to account for all potentially relevant job attributes, we
can take an initial step by controlling for respondents’ salary and non-R&D responsibilities.
Models 9 and 10 in Table S2 show a strong positive coefficient of salary but no effect of the
range of non-R&D activities. More importantly, the coefficients of responsibility and salary mo-
tives are not different from the baseline, showing no evidence of a bias due to omission of these
two job attributes.9 Even though we lack controls for the other three job attributes, we can make
a conceptual argument that at least for the security motive – which appears to be the primary
mediator – unobserved actual levels of job security are unlikely to drive our results. In particular,
while sorting may lead to a positive correlation between security motives and actual levels of job
security, it is difficult to see why lower levels of job security in startups would be beneficial for
innovation (other than by attracting less risk averse workers). The prior literature suggests exact-
ly the opposite: Organizations seeking to encourage innovation should offer job stability and of-
fer protection against the negative consequences of failing (see Levinthal & March, 1993;
O'Reilly, 1989). Thus, while a weaker concern with security among startup employees is likely
to foster exploration and innovation, lower actual job security offered by startups is not.



9
  Even with these additional controls, the firm type dummies are significantly reduced once motives are included (model 9 vs. 10,
Chi2(2)=7.03, p<0.05), consistent with our baseline models. This supplementary analysis should be interpreted with caution be-
cause salary may well be endogenous to individuals’ prior performance. As such, the coefficients of job attributes (salary in par-
ticular) should not be interpreted as reflecting a causal effect of pay or incentive systems on performance. Our goal is merely to
assess potential changes in the coefficients of motives once proxies of the corresponding job attributes are included.


                                                                                                                               20
        One may be concerned that higher innovative performance in startups reflects that
startups can be found primarily in nascent technological areas with greater technological oppor-
tunities. This possibility should to a large extent be addressed by the inclusion of industry and
field fixed effects. In addition, all regressions control for the nature of research (i.e., basic, ap-
plied, etc.) and for different sources of funding. We further probe robustness by restricting the
sample to firms in industries with high startup activity (i.e., more than 5% of respondents work-
ing in a startup). Regressions 11-12 in Table S2 show that our results hold.
        Another possibility is that there are differences in patent propensity, e.g., that startups re-
ly more strongly on patents as a signal of their quality or as a mechanism to appropriate value
from inventions (Belenzon & Pattaconi, 2012; Hsu & Ziedonis, 2013). Such differences would
be captured in the coefficients of firm type dummies in both our baseline regression and in the
regression including motives as mediators. However, such differences are unlikely to be related
to employee motives and would not explain why firm type dummies change once motives are
included or why the product of coefficients approach yields significant evidence of mediation.
        An important question is whether observed performance differences across firm types
may reflect selection at the firm level. The seminal model developed by Jovanovic (1982) is use-
ful for thinking about this possibility. In this model, young firms start out small, vary in random-
ly assigned capabilities, and learn about these capabilities over time. Those firms that turn out to
possess superior capabilities have an incentive to leverage them and grow, while firms below a
certain capability threshold exit. Firms that are good enough to survive but not good enough to
grow remain small. By incorporating heterogeneity in firm capabilities, this model provides an
explanation for our observation that small established firms perform worse than large established
firms and than startups: they may be firms that had a draw from the lower end of the capability
distribution and were not good enough to grow. Selection on capabilities does not, however, pro-
vide a ready explanation for the observed higher performance in startups compared to large es-
tablished firms since the latter should be more strongly selected based on superior capabilities
than the former (Jovanovic, 1982). While this argument suggests that advantages with respect to
employee motives for firms of certain age and size are different from superior firm-specific ex
ante endowments in capabilities, it also raises the interesting possibility that attention to job at-
tributes and employee motives may inform our understanding of the evolution of (innovative)
capabilities as firms grow and mature.

                                                                                                         21
       Finally, prior work has discussed other factors that may also affect innovative perfor-
mance across types of firms (e.g., Acs & Audretsch, 1990; Agarwal & Audretsch, 2001; Cohen,
2010; Cooper, 1964; Criscuolo et al., 2012; Schumpeter, 1942). Among others, large firms may
benefit from better access to financing, scale economies and fixed cost spreading, or complemen-
tarities between R&D and other activities. Small firms may have advantages in R&D because of
easier communication and coordination. Similar to other potential drivers of innovative perfor-
mance discussed earlier, these factors may be reflected in the firm type dummies estimated in our
regressions. However, there is little reason to expect these factors to be correlated with the em-
ployee motives featured in our analysis. As such, they are unlikely to explain the observed rela-
tionships between motives and innovative performance, or the significant evidence of mediation
we find using both the Baron & Kenny method and the product of coefficients approach.

Relationship with Prior Work

       It is useful to highlight differences and complementarities with particularly relevant relat-
ed work. A first important study is Elfenbein et al.’s (2010) examination of the phenomenon that
small firm employees are more likely to become self-employed in a subsequent period than em-
ployees working in large firms. Elfenbein et al. explore a range of possible mechanisms, includ-
ing the possibility that individuals with a long-standing preference for self-employment first join
small firms to then transition into self-employment (“preference sorting”). The Elfenbein et al.
study contributes to the entrepreneurship literature by examining employees’ transition into sub-
sequent self-employment as the primary outcome of interest, while our study focuses on differ-
ences in the characteristics of employees across firm types and how they relate to innovative per-
formance during employment. Moreover, while Elfenbein et al. examine preference sorting by
measuring individuals’ preference for self-employment, we examine a range of more specific
motives such as desires for job security or challenge. Finally, while Elfenbein et al. examine sort-
ing only with respect to firm size, our study distinguishes firm size and firm age, showing that
they relate in different ways to both employee motives and to innovative performance.
       Our study also relates to work by Sauermann and Cohen (2010), who use a sample of re-
spondents to the Survey of Doctorate Recipients (a component of SESTAT) to show systematic
relationships between individuals’ motives and innovative performance in industrial R&D. We
take this prior evidence as a building block and ask whether motives differ between startups and
established firms and whether any such differences lead to differences in innovative performance
                                                                                                     22
across types of firms. The findings of Sauermann & Cohen say little about these questions
because they do not provide insights into whether and how motives differ across firm types; it is
not clear whether any such differences work for or against startups; and it is not clear whether
differences in motives across firm types are large enough to translate into significant
performance differences.10

SUMMARY AND DISCUSSION

         Using data on over 10,000 U.S. scientists and engineers, we examine whether employees’
pecuniary and nonpecuniary motives differ between startups and established firms and whether
any such differences in motives lead to differences in innovative performance. We find that
compared to employees in large established firms, startup employees place a lower value on sala-
ry and job security, the latter possibly reflecting a more general willingness to bear risk. On the
other hand, startup employees have stronger motives related to independence and responsibility,
although these differences are smaller than might be expected. We also find that scientists and
engineers in startups have more patent applications than those in small and large established
firms, and this performance difference is partially mediated by employee motives.

Limitations and Future Research

         We acknowledge important limitations and resulting opportunities for future research.
First, we document significant differences in employee motives across firm types but we made
limited progress towards identifying the underlying reasons. While our discussion focused on ex
ante selection, we cannot fully distinguish this mechanism from selective retention ex post or
from changes in motives during employment. However, related research using samples of indi-
viduals prior to labor market entry as well as our own supplementary analyses suggest that ex
ante selection plays an important and perhaps dominant role. More importantly, whether due to
selection or ex post changes, differences (and similarities) in employee motives in startups versus
established firms are interesting and relevant, especially given the lack of attention to motives in

10
   The relationships we observe between motives and performance are similar to those in Sauermann & Cohen (2010). However,
likely due to the use of different samples, we observe somewhat stronger relationships between patenting and security motives,
and somewhat weaker relationships between patenting and salary and responsibility motives. SESTAT also includes measures of
motives regarding advancement and contributing to society. Due to the lack of relationships with performance in Sauermann &
Cohen (2010), the absence of priors regarding systematic differences across firm types, and to limit the complexity of our anal-
yses, we excluded these motives. Robustness checks show that these motives have no relationship with performance and their
inclusion does not change our featured results (available upon request).


                                                                                                                             23
prior empirical work. Second, we observed significant relationships between employee motives
and innovative performance, but the data do not allow us to assess the role of the different mech-
anisms raised in the conceptual discussion or to conclusively establish the causal relationship
between motives and performance. In particular, although we include a broad range of proxies
for individuals’ ability and relevant knowledge, we cannot rule out that motives are correlated
with remaining unobserved heterogeneity in ability and knowledge. Any such correlation, how-
ever, would raise intriguing questions regarding the role of unobserved motives in much of the
prior literature focusing exclusively on ability without considering motivational characteristics.
Third, although the literatures on career choice and innovation highlight the particular motives
studied here as particularly important, there may be other motives and individual characteristics
that also play an important role. We hope that our findings demonstrate the potential value of
studying such individual characteristics and of exploring their potential role in shaping innova-
tive performance in different types of firms. Fourth, while the data include a broad range of indi-
vidual-level measures, measures of job attributes and firm characteristics are limited. As such,
we cannot completely rule out that differences in innovative performance may also reflect re-
maining unobserved differences in job attributes or firm characteristics. Given the lack of atten-
tion devoted to motivational characteristics of human capital, however, it is an important first
step to demonstrate empirical patterns that strongly suggest motives as one possible explanation
for performance differences across firms. Finally, we measure innovative performance using pa-
tent applications, which may reflect not only underlying innovative performance but also firms’
strategic choices on whether to patent their inventions. As such, higher rates of patenting ob-
served in startups do not necessarily imply higher rates of innovation. However, firms’ patent
strategies would not explain the relationships between employee motives and patenting, or why
estimated performance differences are reduced when motives are included as a mediator. Never-
theless, future work is needed to replicate our results with other measures of innovation. Indeed,
future research could build on our work by studying whether differences in employee motives
across firm types may result in differences in important outcomes other than innovation.

Contributions

       Our study makes several contributions. First, we add to recent work on the human capital
of entrepreneurial firms by characterizing startup employees with respect to their motives and by
comparing them to employees in small and large established firms. Ouimet and Zarutskie (2014)
                                                                                                    24
provide insights into startup employees’ demographic characteristics and conjecture about risk
preferences as important correlates; we complement their work using direct measures of prefer-
ences for risk as well as a range of other potentially important motives. More importantly, our
results suggest that the motivational characteristics of their human capital may provide startup
firms with an advantage in innovation, informing a growing literature seeking to understand the
role of startups in the larger economy, and potential advantages in innovation in particular
(Agarwal et al., 2009; Lerner, 2009; Schramm, 2006). We also add to the entrepreneurship litera-
ture by highlighting that startups differ from other firms with respect to both their age and their
size and that these two dimensions can have very different relationships with other variables of
interest. As such, future research may benefit from considering more explicitly how certain fea-
tures of startups (e.g., innovativeness, job creation, human capital etc.) result from their young
age versus their small size. Future research is needed especially to study what happens as young
firms mature. While small firms may stay small, young firms that survive will invariably age and
may change with respect to the job attributes they offer (Beckman & Burton, 2008; Chen et al.,
2012). If these changes are inconsistent with the motives of early employees, employees may
decide to move and it may be the most “entrepreneurial” and productive employees who are
most likely to leave aging firms to join a new venture (Baron et al., 2001; Sorensen, 2007).
       Second, we contribute to the literature on the role of human capital in knowledge inten-
sive settings. Much of this literature has focused on ability, skills, and experience and has exam-
ined how heterogeneity across individuals or organizations shapes important outcomes such as
labor mobility, organizational performance, or the distribution of rents (Agarwal et al., 2016;
Agarwal et al., 2009; Campbell et al., 2012; Coff & Kryscynski, 2011; Rothaermel & Hess,
2007; Zenger & Lazzarini, 2004). We complement this work by studying whether and how em-
ployee motives differ across different types of firms, and whether such differences explain dif-
ferences in innovative performance. Our results suggest that a conceptualization of human capi-
tal as encompassing both ability and motivational aspects may result in a more complete under-
standing individuals’ role in shaping important processes and outcomes within and across organ-
izations. Such a broader conceptualization of human capital raises a number of interesting ques-
tions. For example, while we considered sorting primarily as a result of general structural charac-
teristics such as firm age and size, managers within a given type of firm may have significant
latitude in determining job attributes in an effort to attract employees with particular motives. As

                                                                                                     25
such, research is needed on how firms can more deliberately attract workers with particular mo-
tives, and whether doing so can give individual firms a competitive advantage. Similarly, firms
may find ways to influence individuals’ motives, both to increase performance at a given point in
time, but also to retain flexibility if existing motives are inconsistent with desired changes in
strategy (Besley & Ghatak, 2005). Third, it seems important to study the sustainability of com-
petitive advantages based on employee motives. To the extent that motives are difficult to ob-
serve by outsiders and relatively stable, competitive advantages may be quite sustainable, per-
haps even more so than advantages based on employees’ skills and knowledge (Coff &
Kryscynski, 2011; Ganco et al., 2014). Finally, superior performance likely depends on both
ability and motivation, and future research could examine their interplay. For example, an inter-
esting question is whether certain kinds of motives may lead some employees to learn faster than
others, or to willingly invest in firm-specific knowledge.
       Finally, our study contributes to the innovation literature examining performance differ-
ences across types of firms (Cohen, 2010). We advance research on the role of firm size and age
by linking these firm-level characteristics to specific job attributes and employee motives, thus
providing conceptual and empirical insights into micro-level correlates of size and age. Despite
the popular notion that employee motives may differ across firm types (Freiberger & Swaine,
1984; Schumpeter, 1942), empirical evidence regarding the direction and magnitude of such dif-
ferences has been lacking. Moreover, our analysis suggests that higher rates of patenting are as-
sociated primarily with firm age rather than size. Thus, while much prior work on innovation has
studied firm size, future work should consider more explicitly the role of firm age and the inter-
play between size and age.
       For managers, our results highlight challenges that established firms may face when seek-
ing to “acqui-hire” human capital by buying innovative startups (Selby & Mayer, 2013; Younge
et al., 2015). If the resulting integration changes job attributes towards those typical of estab-
lished firms, employees who initially joined a startup because they valued the entrepreneurial
environment may soon become disenfranchised and seek to leave. Conversely, our results also
suggest potential benefits from creating entrepreneurial units within large firms that explicitly
seek to replicate features of young and small organizations.
       For policy makers, our results highlight potential advantages of startups not only with re-
spect to job creation (Haltiwanger et al., 2013) but also with respect to innovation. To the extent

                                                                                                     26
that higher rates of innovation in startups reflect characteristics of their human capital, however,
it is not clear that increasing the number of startups per se will yield the greatest dividends: Ad-
ditional firms may not be able to draw on the same labor supply as existing startups. As such, the
most promising policies may relate to the development of science and engineering human capi-
tal. Although educational policies currently focus on increasing skills and substantive
knowledge, there may be additional benefits from developing mechanisms that help identify and
support individuals with motives that are particularly beneficial for entrepreneurship and innova-
tion. Future research on the nature and potential benefits of such policies seems particularly im-
portant.




                                                                                                   27
                         Table 1: Additional Variables and Measures

Variable           Description

Quantity of ef-  As a proxy for the level of effort, we include the hours worked in a typical
fort (Hours      work week, as reported by the respondents. While this measure is likely to be
worked)          noisy and may not capture less conscious cognitive effort (e.g., during “show-
                 er time”), it should be a reasonable proxy (see also Sauermann & Cohen,
                 2010; Zenger & Lazzarini, 2004).
Primary type of Work activity on which the respondent spends the most hours during a typical
R&D              work week, including basic research, applied research, development, design,
                 and computer applications or programming.
Funding by       To control for heterogeneity in the nature of research, we include dummies
DoD/NASA and indicating whether the respondent’s projects were funded by the Department
by NIH/NSF       of Defense / NASA or by the NIH/NSF. The former projects may be less like-
                 ly to be disclosed in patents due to secrecy concerns. Projects funded by
                 NIH/NSF may be particularly promising.
Interactions     Respondents indicated whether they had attended at least one professional
with profession- meeting in the last year. We use this proxy to control for heterogeneity in re-
al community     spondents’ research orientation and in the degree to which employers pursue
(Professional    an “open science” strategy, both of which may be related to both motives and
meeting)         innovative performance (Sauermann & Roach, 2014; Stern, 2004). This vari-
                 able may also control for the “cutting edge” nature of research and for re-
                 spondents’ (or firms’) desire to demonstrate research capabilities to outsiders.
Job tenure       Years since starting the current job, used in auxiliary analysis of potential so-
                 cialization.
Field of highest Dummy coding for 19 fields (biochemistry, cell & molecular biology, micro-
degree           biology, other biology, chemistry, physics, earth sciences, environmental and
                 health sciences, food sciences, computer science, mathematics, chemical en-
                 gineering, electrical engineering, mechanical engineering, civil and industrial
                 engineering, aerospace engineering, materials engineering, other engineering,
                 and other fields).
Age              Employee age in years. Among others, this measure may proxy for the vin-
                 tage of education, providing an additional control for relevant skills and
                 knowledge (Ouimet & Zarutskie, 2014).
Race/ethnicity   Dummies for Asian, black, Hispanic, white, and other.
U.S. citizenship Dummy coded 1 for U.S. citizens.
Marital status   Dummy coded 1 for individuals who are married or in a marriage-like rela-
                 tionship.
Children         Count of children under the age of 18 living in the same household as the re-
                 spondent.
Industry classi- Dummies for 28 industries (2 to 4-digit NAICS classification). Industry
fication         dummies are intended to control for differences in technological opportunity
                 and other industry-level conditions affecting R&D productivity.



                                                                                               28
                                Table 2: Descriptive Statistics by Firm Type

                                                    Full Sample                Startup    Established     Established
                                                                                             small            large
                                                     (n=10,585)                (n=580)     (n=1,059)       (n=8,946)
                                          Mean       SD       Min      Max      Mean         Mean            Mean
   Importance of job security                3.53     0.59          1        4     3.28            3.44             3.55
   Importance of salary                      3.56     0.53          1        4     3.48            3.51             3.57
   Importance of independence                3.48     0.59          1        4     3.53            3.52             3.48
   Importance of responsibility              3.28     0.63          1        4     3.34            3.30             3.28
   Importance of intellectual challenge      3.64     0.53          1        4     3.71            3.68             3.63
   Imp. salary-Imp.security                  0.03     0.67         -3        3     0.20            0.07             0.02
   Imp. independence-Imp.security           -0.04     0.81         -3        3     0.24            0.08           -0.07
   Imp. challenge-Imp. security              0.12     0.78         -3        3     0.43            0.24             0.08
   Imp. responsibility-Imp. security        -0.24     0.82         -3        3     0.06           -0.14           -0.27
   Patent applications                       1.19     4.56          0      96      1.64            0.85             1.20
   Non-R&D activities                        1.54     1.47          0        8     1.66            1.79             1.50
   Salary                                  84876    36,267    10,000 500,000 §   89,450         79,256           85,244
   Ln salary                                11.28     0.37      9.21   13.12§     11.30           11.18           11.29
   Firm size: 1-10                           0.03                   0        1     0.28            0.17             0.00
   Firm size: 11-24                          0.03                   0        1     0.24            0.20             0.00
   Firm size: 25-99                          0.09                   0        1     0.48            0.62             0.00
   Firm size: 100-499                        0.10                   0        1     0.00            0.00             0.12
   Firm size: 500-999                        0.05                   0        1     0.00            0.00             0.06
   Firm size: 1,000-4,999                    0.13                   0        1     0.00            0.00             0.16
   Firm size: 5,000-24,999                   0.17                   0        1     0.00            0.00             0.21
   Firm size: 25,000+                        0.38                   0        1     0.00            0.00             0.45
   Firm age                                  0.95                   0        1     0.00            1.00             1.00
   Bachelors                                 0.46                   0        1     0.36            0.50             0.46
   Masters                                   0.24                   0        1     0.24            0.21             0.25
   PhD                                       0.30                   0        1     0.40            0.29             0.29
   Carnegie rank: Research 1                 0.47                   0        1     0.54            0.44             0.47
   Carnegie rank: Research 2                 0.09                   0        1     0.08            0.08             0.09
   Carnegie rank: Doctorate granting         0.12                   0        1     0.09            0.12             0.13
   Carnegie rank: Compreh./Liberal arts      0.19                   0        1     0.14            0.19             0.19
   Carnegie rank: Other institution          0.13                   0        1     0.14            0.17             0.12
   Job related to degree                     2.53     0.66          1        3     2.52            2.53             2.53
   Hours worked                             45.40     6.63        35      90§     47.48           45.53           45.25
   Professional meeting                      0.44                   0        1     0.44            0.43             0.44
   Funding DoD/NASA                          0.13                   0        1     0.07            0.13             0.14
   Funding NIH/NSF                           0.02                   0        1     0.06            0.05             0.01
   Job tenure                                6.88     7.35          0     40§      1.74            5.27             7.40
   Basic research                            0.03                   0        1     0.04            0.05             0.03
   Applied research                          0.20                   0        1     0.23            0.18             0.20
   Development                               0.24                   0        1     0.23            0.21             0.24
   Design                                    0.19                   0        1     0.09            0.19             0.20
   Computer apps.                            0.33                   0        1     0.41            0.37             0.32
   Age                                      40.73    10.01       22§      70§     38.37           41.03           40.85
   Children                                  0.93     1.14          0      8§      0.94            0.87             0.94
   Married                                   0.75                   0        1     0.70            0.73             0.75
   U.S. citizen                              0.85                   0        1     0.77            0.84             0.85


Note: NSF confidentiality restrictions prohibit reporting descriptive statistics for cells below a certain number
of cases. The sign “§” indicates that we report not the actual minimum/maximum but the closest value that
satisfies the NSF requirement. Imp.=Importance of.

                                                                                                                           29
                                                     Table 3: Differences in Motives across Firm Types

                                                  1               2          3           4          5           6           7           8           9         10
                                               ologit         ologit      ologit     ologit      ologit     ologit      ologit      ologit      ologit      ologit
                                              Imp.Sec.       Imp.Sal. Imp.Ind. Imp.Resp. Imp.Chal. Imp.Sec. Imp.Sal. Imp.Ind. Imp.Resp. Imp.Chal.
                                      Startup  omitted        omitted     omitted    omitted     omitted
                           Established small   1.547**            1.068      0.986       0.989      0.933
                                                [0.088]        [0.205]     [0.074]    [0.071]     [0.151]
                           Established large   2.111**          1.295* 0.836**       0.855**        0.794
                                                [0.122]        [0.134]     [0.041]    [0.043]     [0.118]
                                    Firm age                                                                1.502**         1.027       1.018       0.987      0.925
                                                                                                             [0.107]     [0.202]     [0.076]     [0.075]     [0.152]
                              Firm size: 1-10                                                               omitted     omitted     omitted     omitted     omitted
                             Firm size: 11-24                                                                   1.313       1.004     0.791*        0.963      0.892
                                                                                                             [0.192]     [0.152]     [0.078]     [0.093]     [0.148]
                             Firm size: 25-99                                                                   1.296       1.292 0.761**           1.004      1.028
                                                                                                             [0.247]     [0.172]     [0.071]     [0.110]     [0.137]
                          Firm size: 100-499                                                                  1.443*      1.427* 0.675**            0.909       0.91
                                                                                                             [0.210]     [0.233]     [0.057]     [0.086]     [0.130]
                          Firm size: 500-999                                                                1.899**         1.319 0.734**             0.93     0.857
                                                                                                             [0.324]     [0.266]     [0.059]     [0.114]     [0.153]
                      Firm size: 1,000-4,999                                                                1.607**       1.483* 0.678**            0.850      0.770
                                                                                                             [0.231]     [0.229]     [0.083]     [0.095]     [0.107]
                     Firm size: 5,000-24,999                                                                1.727**           1.45 0.670**        0.796*       0.821
                                                                                                             [0.259]     [0.282]     [0.064]     [0.072]     [0.104]
                          Firm size: 25,000+                                                                1.812**         1.417 0.675**           0.866      0.862
                                                                                                             [0.249]     [0.292]     [0.071]     [0.090]     [0.121]
                             Masters degree       0.770**         0.952      1.061     1.158* 1.254**       0.766**         0.949       1.063     1.159* 1.252**
                                                   [0.047]     [0.047]     [0.068]    [0.067]     [0.062]    [0.047]     [0.047]     [0.070]     [0.068]     [0.062]
                                 PhD degree       0.603**     0.684**     1.289**    1.332**     1.830**    0.597**     0.684**     1.290**     1.335**     1.828**
                                                   [0.032]     [0.037]     [0.098]    [0.087]     [0.112]    [0.031]     [0.039]     [0.099]     [0.089]     [0.115]
                               Carnegie rank           incl.        incl.      incl.       incl.      incl.       incl.       incl.       incl.       incl.      incl.
                              Degree field fe          incl.        incl.      incl.       incl.      incl.       incl.       incl.       incl.       incl.      incl.
                      Demographic controls             incl.        incl.      incl.       incl.      incl.       incl.       incl.       incl.       incl.      incl.
                       Industry fixed effects          incl.        incl.      incl.       incl.      incl.       incl.       incl.       incl.       incl.      incl.
                                Observations        10585        10585      10585       10585      10585       10585       10585       10585       10585      10585
                                             df          24           24         24          24         24          24          24          24          24         24


Note: Ordered logit, odds ratios reported. Standard errors clustered by industry in brackets. *=significant at 5%, **=significant at 1%. Omitted categories:
Bachelors degree. Imp.Sec.=Importance of job security; Imp.Sal.=Importance of salary; Imp.Ind.=Importance of independence; Imp.Resp.=Importance of
responsibility; Imp.Chal.=Importance of intellectual challenge.

                                                                                                                                                                         30
                                      Table 4: Differences in Job Attributes

                                          1         2        3         4                       5           6           7
                                         OLS    qreg(10) qreg(50) qreg(90)                   OLS       nbreg       nbreg
                                      Ln salary  Salary   Salary    Salary               Ln salary Non-R&D Non-R&D
                 Established small    -0.093** -4.837** -6.286** -9.568**                                  0.995
                                        [0.024]   [1.329]  [1.183]   [2.571]                            [0.043]
                  Established large       0.025 7.195**      0.928 -7.294**                            0.827**
                                        [0.025]   [1.121]  [0.997]   [2.167]                            [0.021]
                           Firm age                                                      -0.105**                      1.022
                                                                                            [0.028]                 [0.038]
                    Firm size: 1-10                                                       omitted                  omitted
                   Firm size: 11-24                                                            0.028                   0.906
                                                                                            [0.034]                 [0.065]
                   Firm size: 25-99                                                          0.082*                0.832**
                                                                                            [0.038]                 [0.036]
                Firm size: 100-499                                                        0.117**                  0.794**
                                                                                            [0.036]                 [0.030]
                Firm size: 500-999                                                        0.125**                  0.725**
                                                                                            [0.029]                 [0.032]
            Firm size: 1,000-4,999                                                        0.164**                  0.692**
                                                                                            [0.027]                 [0.029]
           Firm size: 5,000-24,999                                                        0.180**                  0.739**
                                                                                            [0.024]                 [0.033]
                Firm size: 25,000+                                                        0.210**                  0.709**
                                                                                            [0.026]                 [0.033]
                   Masters degree       0.085**    6.701**       6.974**    4.061**       0.081**      0.930**     0.933**
                                         [0.008]    [0.670]       [0.583]    [1.259]        [0.007]     [0.021]     [0.021]
                        PhD degree      0.256** 19.620**        21.336** 24.702**         0.250**      0.832**     0.835**
                                         [0.019]    [0.826]       [0.710]    [1.554]        [0.018]     [0.030]     [0.030]
                      Carnegie rank          incl.      incl.         incl.      incl.           incl.       incl.       incl.
         Degree field fixed effects          incl.      incl.         incl.      incl.           incl.       incl.       incl.
                     Basic research -0.096** -6.681**           -6.392** -8.597**        -0.094**      0.827**     0.828**
                                         [0.017]    [1.484]       [1.301]    [2.817]        [0.017]     [0.043]     [0.042]
                      Development         -0.003     -0.331        -0.230     -0.808         -0.001        1.010       1.010
                                         [0.010]    [0.826]       [0.714]    [1.561]        [0.010]     [0.028]     [0.028]
                              Design    -0.025*      -0.621      -1.659*    -4.354*        -0.023*         0.933       0.933
                                         [0.011]    [0.932]       [0.813]    [1.801]        [0.011]     [0.033]     [0.033]
           Computer applications       -0.042**    -1.877*      -3.977** -5.967**        -0.041**      0.758**     0.758**
                                         [0.012]    [0.894]       [0.770]    [1.656]        [0.011]     [0.025]     [0.025]
                Job related degree      0.037**    3.068**       1.844**    3.452**       0.039**        1.026*      1.023*
                                         [0.006]    [0.421]       [0.371]    [0.834]        [0.006]     [0.012]     [0.011]
            Demographic controls             incl.      incl.         incl.      incl.           incl.       incl.       incl.
             Industry fixed effects          incl.      incl.         incl.      incl.           incl.       incl.       incl.
                           Constant     9.879** -17.944**       -12.078*      -3.008      9.829**
                                         [0.052]    [5.507]       [4.743] [10.227]          [0.047]
                       Observations       10585      10585         10585      10585           10585       10585       10585
                                    df         26         68            68         68              26          25          25
                            alphaest                                                                       0.203          0.2
                          R-squared        0.368                                               0.376


Note: Models 1 and 5 OLS, 2-4 quantile regression, 6-7 negative binomial (Incidence Rate Ratios reported).
Standard errors in brackets (clustered in models 1, 5-7). *=sig. at 5%, **=sig. at 1%. Omitted: Startup; Bache-
lors degree. Models 2-4 use salary in thousands. Non-R&D=Number of non-R&D work activities.

                                                                                                                                 31
                           Table 5: Differences in Innovative Performance

                                               1           2           3           4           5           6
                                            nbreg       nbreg       nbreg       nbreg       nbreg       nbreg
                                           Patents     Patents     Patents     Patents     Patents     Patents
                     Established small       0.481**     0.531**     0.553**
                                              [0.062]     [0.068]     [0.066]
                      Established large      0.702**      0.805*        0.843
                                              [0.084]     [0.087]     [0.096]
                Importance of security                   0.773**     0.784**                 0.768**     0.779**
                                                          [0.038]     [0.039]                 [0.039]     [0.040]
                  Importance of salary                      1.053       1.073                   1.054       1.074
                                                          [0.064]     [0.064]                 [0.072]     [0.071]
           Importance of independence                     1.147*     1.159**                  1.136*      1.148*
                                                          [0.068]     [0.066]                 [0.068]     [0.066]
            Importance of responsibility                    0.926       0.901                   0.940       0.915
                                                          [0.051]     [0.050]                 [0.058]     [0.057]
               Importance of challenge                   1.443**     1.417**                 1.418**     1.392**
                                                          [0.097]     [0.096]                 [0.095]     [0.095]
                        Hours worked                                 1.019**                             1.019**
                                                                      [0.003]                             [0.003]
                             Firm age                                            0.495**     0.549**     0.576**
                                                                                  [0.068]     [0.077]     [0.075]
                        Firm size: 1-10                                          omitted     omitted     omitted
                       Firm size: 11-24                                             0.700       0.755       0.748
                                                                                  [0.173]     [0.191]     [0.186]
                       Firm size: 25-99                                             0.742        0.74       0.721
                                                                                  [0.225]     [0.209]     [0.209]
                    Firm size: 100-499                                              0.745       0.794       0.781
                                                                                  [0.155]     [0.160]     [0.155]
                    Firm size: 500-999                                              0.942       0.961       0.934
                                                                                  [0.269]     [0.272]     [0.267]
                 Firm size: 1,000-4,999                                             0.994       1.064       1.060
                                                                                  [0.283]     [0.288]     [0.286]
                Firm size: 5,000-24,999                                             1.142       1.211       1.205
                                                                                  [0.443]     [0.452]     [0.452]
                    Firm size: 25,000+                                              1.367       1.422       1.395
                                                                                  [0.483]     [0.476]     [0.459]
                   Educational controls          incl.       incl.       incl.       incl.       incl.       incl.
                 Work activity controls          incl.       incl.       incl.       incl.       incl.       incl.
                 Demographic controls            incl.       incl.       incl.       incl.       incl.       incl.
                  Industry fixed effects         incl.       incl.       incl.       incl.       incl.       incl.
                         Observations          10585       10585       10585       10585       10585       10585
                                    df             25          25          25          25          25          25
                              alphaest          4.165       4.067       4.038       4.114       4.019       3.988

Note: Negative binomial regression, Incidence Rate Ratios reported. Standard errors clustered by industry in
brackets. *=sig. at 5%, **=sig. at 1%. Omitted categories: Startup.

                                                                                                                32
        Table 6: Testing Mediation Using Products of Coefficients and Bootstrapping

        Motive         Firm Type               Product of Coefficients [95% Confidence Interval]
        Job security   Established small                    -0.00682      -0.01233      -0.00263
                       Established large                    -0.01171      -0.01864      -0.00574
                       All firm types                       -0.01853      -0.03057      -0.00867
        Salary         Established small                     0.00056      -0.00087       0.00251
                       Established large                     0.00177      -0.00018       0.00432
                       All firm types                        0.00233      -0.00048       0.00658
        Independence Established small                      -0.00008      -0.00172       0.00150
                       Established large                    -0.00108      -0.00306       0.00019
                       All firm types                       -0.00116      -0.00456       0.00130
        Responsibility Established small                     0.00031      -0.00088       0.00197
                       Established large                     0.00081      -0.00041       0.00278
                       All firm types                        0.00112      -0.00084       0.00452
        Challenge      Established small                    -0.00033      -0.00362       0.00302
                       Established large                    -0.00261      -0.00567       0.00021
                       All firm types                       -0.00294      -0.00874       0.00287
        All motives    Established small                    -0.00637      -0.01285      -0.00082
                       Established large                    -0.01281      -0.02066      -0.00583
                       All firm types                       -0.01918      -0.03287      -0.00724

Note: Based on seemingly unrelated OLS regressions of motives on firm types dummies and a regression of
(Ln) patents on firm type dummies and motives, including controls. Confidence intervals based on bootstrap-
ping with 5,000 repetitions.




                                                                                                          33
                    Figure 1: Profile of Employee Motives Across Firm Types




                  .5
                  .4
                  .3
                  .2
                  .1
                  0
                  -.1
                  -.2
                  -.3




                             Startup            Established small       Established large


                                 Salary-Security                    Independence-Security
                                 Responsibility-Security            Challenge-Security


Note: Differences between salary, independence, responsibility and challenge motives on the one hand, and
security motives on the other. Averaged across individuals by firm type, including 95% confidence intervals.




                                                                                                           34
REFERENCES
Acs, Z. J., & Audretsch, D. B. 1990. Innovation and Small Firms. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Agarwal, R., & Audretsch, D. B. 2001. Does entry size matter? The impact of the life cycle and
        technology on firm survival. The Journal of Industrial Economics, 49(1): 21-43.
Agarwal, R., Campbell, B., Franco, A., & Ganco, M. 2016. What do I take with me? The mediating effect
        of spin-out team size and tenure on the founder-firm performance relationship. Academy of
        Management Journal, 59(3): 1060-1087.
Agarwal, R., Ganco, M., & Ziedonis, R. H. 2009. Reputations for toughness in patent enforcement:
        Implications for knowledge spillovers via inventor mobility. Strategic Management Journal,
        30(13): 1349-1374.
Agarwal, R., & Ohyama, A. 2013. Industry or academia, basic or applied? Career choices and earnings
        trajectories of scientists. Management Science, 59(4): 950-970.
Agrawal, A. K., Cockburn, I. M., Galasso, A., & Oettl, A. 2014. Why are some regions more innovative
        than others? The role of small firms in the presence of large labs. Journal of Urban Economics,
        81: 149-165.
Allen, T. J., & Katz, R. 1992. Age, education and the technical ladder. IEEE Transactions on
        Engineering Management, 39(3): 237-245.
Amabile, T. 1996. Creativity in Context. Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press.
Amabile, T. M., & Gryskiewicz, S. S. 1987. Creativity in the R&D Laboratory: Center for Creative
        Leadership.
Amabile, T. M., Hill, K. G., Hennessey, B. A., & Tighe, E. M. 1994. The work preference inventory -
        Assessing intrinsic and extrinsic motivational orientations. Journal of Personality and Social
        Psychology, 66(5): 950-967.
Amit, R., MacCrimmon, K. R., Zietsma, C., & Oesch, J. M. 2001. Does money matter?: Wealth
        attainment as the motive for initiating growth-oriented technology ventures. Journal of Business
        Venturing, 16(2): 119-143.
Arora, A., Gambardella, A., Magazzini, L., & Pammolli, F. 2009. A breath of fresh air? Firm type, scale,
        scope, and selection effects in drug development. Management Science, 55(10): 1638-1653.
Arora, A., & Nandkumar, A. 2011. Cash-out or flameout! Opportunity cost and entrepreneurial strategy:
        Theory and evidence from the information security industry. Management Science, 57(10):
        1844-1860.
Astebro, T., & Thompson, P. 2011. Entrepreneurs, Jacks of all trades or Hobos? Research Policy, 40(5):
        637-649.
Baron, J. N., Hannan, M. T., & Burton, M. D. 2001. Labor pains: change in organizational models and
        employee turnover in young, high-tech firms. American Journal of Sociology, 106(4): 960-1012.
Baron, R. M., & Kenny, D. A. 1986. The moderator-mediator variable distinction in social psychological
        research. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 51(6): 1173-1182.
Becker, G. S. 1973. A theory of marriage: Part I. The Journal of Political Economy: 813-846.
Beckman, C. M., & Burton, M. D. 2008. Founding the future: Path dependence in the evolution of top
        management teams from founding to IPO. Organization Science, 19(1): 3-24.
Belenzon, S., & Pattaconi, A. 2012. Performance, firm size, and the "basicness" of research, Working
        Paper.
Bengtsson, O., & Hand, J. 2013. Employee compensation in entrepreneurial companies. Journal of
        Economics & Management Strategy, 22(2): 312-340.
Benz, M., & Frey, B. S. 2008. Being independent is a great thing: Subjective evaluations of self-
        employment and hierarchy. Economica, 75(298): 362-383.
Besley, T., & Ghatak, M. 2005. Competition and incentives with motivated agents. American Economic
        Review, 95(3): 616-636.
Bode, C., Singh, J., & Rogan, M. 2015. Corporate social initiatives and employee retention. Organization
        Science, 26(6): 1702-1720.

                                                                                                     35
Braguinsky, S., Klepper, S., & Ohyama, A. 2012. High-tech entrepreneurship. Journal of Law and
         Economics, 55(4): 869-900.
Brown, C., & Medoff, J. 1989. The employer size wage effect. Journal of Political Economy, 97(5):
         1027-1059.
Brown, C., & Medoff, J. L. 2003. Firm age and wages. Journal of Labor Economics, 21(3): 677-697.
Burton, M. D. 2001. The company they keep: Founders' models for organizing new firms. In C.
         Schoonhoven, & E. Romanelli (Eds.), The Entrepreneurship Dynamic: Origins of
         Entrepreneurship and the Evolution of Industries: 13-39: Stanford University Press.
Burton, M. D., Dahl, M., & Sorenson, O. 2016. Do startups create good jobs?, Working Paper.
Byron, K., & Khazanchi, S. 2012. Rewards and creative performance: A meta-analytic test of
         theoretically derived hypotheses. Psychological Bulletin, 138(4): 809-830.
Cable, D. M., & Edwards, J. R. 2004. Complementary and supplementary fit: A theoretical and empirical
         integration. Journal of Applied Psychology, 89(5): 822-834.
Campbell, B. A., Ganco, M., Franco, A. M., & Agarwal, R. 2012. Who leaves, where to, and why worry?
         employee mobility, entrepreneurship and effects on source firm performance. Strategic
         Management Journal, 33: 65-87.
Carnahan, S., Campbell, B., Agarwal, R., & Franco, A. 2011. Brids of a feather flock together: Two sided
         incomplete information and human capital composition over the firm lifecycle, DRUID
         Conference.
Carroll, G., & Hannan, M. T. 2000. The Demography of Corporations and Industries. Princeton, N.J.:
         Princeton University Press.
Chatman, J. A. 1991. Matching people and organizations: Selection and socialization in public accounting
         firms. Administrative Science Quarterly, 36(3): 459-484.
Chen, P.-L., Williams, C., & Agarwal, R. 2012. Growing pains: Pre-entry experience and the challenge of
         transition to incumbency. Strategic Management Journal, 33(3): 252-276.
Coff, R., & Kryscynski, D. 2011. Drilling for micro-foundations of human capital–based competitive
         advantages. Journal of Management, 37(5): 1429-1443.
Cohen, W. M. 2010. Fifty years of empirical studies of innovative activity and performance. Handbook
         of the Economics of Innovation, 1: 129-213.
Cohen, W. M., Nelson, R. R., & Walsh, J. P. 2000. Protecting their intellectual assets: Appropriability
         conditions and why U.S. manufacturing firms patent (or not), NBER Working Paper #7552.
Cohen, W. M., & Sauermann, H. 2007. Schumpeter’s Prophecy and Individual Incentives as a Driver of
         Innovation. In F. Malerba, & S. Brusoni (Eds.), Perspectives on Innovation: 73-104.
Cooper, A. 1964. R&D is more efficient in small companies. Harvard Business Review, 42(3): 75-83.
Cooper, A. 1966. Small companies can pioneer new products. Harvard Business Review, (Sept.-Oct.):
         162-179.
Criscuolo, P., Nicolaou, N., & Salter, A. 2012. The elixir (or burden) of youth? Exploring differences in
         innovation between start-ups and established firms. Research Policy, 41(2): 319-333.
Deci, E. L., Koestner, R., & Ryan, R. M. 1999. A meta-analytic review of experiments examining the
         effects of extrinsic rewards on intrinsic motivation. Psychological Bulletin, 125(6): 627-668.
Ding, W. 2009. The impact of founder professional education background on the adoption of open
         science by for-profit biotechology firms, Working Paper.
Dunbar, K. 1995. How scientists really reason: Scientific reasoning in real-world laboratories. In R. J.
         Sternberg, & J. E. Davidson (Eds.), The Nature of Insight: 365-395. Cambridge, MA: MIT
         Press.
Eesley, C. E., & Roberts, E. B. 2012. Are you experienced or are you talented?: When does innate talent
         versus experience explain entrepreneurial performance? Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal,
         6(3): 207-219.
Eisenberger, R., & Shanock, L. 2003. Rewards, intrinsic motivation, and creativity: A case study of
         conceptual and methodological isolation. Creativity Research Journal, 15: 121-130.


                                                                                                      36
Elfenbein, D. W., Hamilton, B. H., & Zenger, T. R. 2010. The small firm effect and the entrepreneurial
        spawning of scientists and engineers. Management Science, 56(4): 659-681.
Evans, D. S., & Leighton, L. S. 1989. Why do smaller firms pay less? The Journal of Human Resources,
        24(2): 299-318.
Fleming, L. 2001. Recombinant uncertainty in technological search. Management Science, 47(1): 117-
        132.
Freiberger, P., & Swaine, M. 1984. Fire in the Valley: The Making of the Personal Computer. Berkeley,
        Calif.: Osborne/McGraw-Hill.
Frey, B. S., & Jegen, R. 2001. Motivation crowding theory. Journal of Economic Surveys, 15(5): 589-
        611.
Friedman, R. S., & Foerster, J. 2005. Effects of motivational cues on perceptual asymmetry: Implications
        for creativity and analytical problem solving. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 88:
        263-275.
Gambardella, A., Panico, C., & Valentini, G. 2015. Strategic incentives to human capital. Strategic
        Management Journal, 36(1): 37-52.
Ganco, M., Ziedonis, R. H., & Agarwal, R. 2014. More stars stay, but the brightest ones still leave: Job
        hopping in the shadow of patent enforcement. Strategic Management Journal.
Gans, J. S., Hsu, D. H., & Stern, S. 2002. When does start-up innovation spur the gale of creative
        destruction? The RAND Journal of Economics, 33(4): 571-586.
Halaby, C. N. 2003. Where job values come from: family and schooling background, cognitive ability,
        and gender. American Sociological Review: 251-278.
Haltiwanger, J., Jarmin, R. S., & Miranda, J. 2013. Who creates jobs? Small versus large versus young.
        Review of Economics and Statistics, 95(2): 347-361.
Hamilton, B. H. 2000. Does entrepreneurship pay? An empirical analysis of the returns to self-
        employment. Journal of Political Economy, 108(3): 604-631.
Hamilton, B. H., Papageorge, N. W., & Pande, N. 2014. The right stuff? Personality and
        entrepreneurship, Working Paper.
Hayes, A. F. 2009. Beyond Baron and Kenny: Statistical mediation analysis in the new millennium.
        Communication Monographs, 76(4): 408-420.
Hsu, D., Roberts, E., & Eesley, C. 2007. Entrepreneurs from technology-based universities: Evidence
        from MIT. Research Policy, 36(5): 768-788.
Hsu, D. H., & Ziedonis, R. H. 2013. Resources as dual sources of advantage: Implications for valuing
        entrepreneurial-firm patents. Strategic Management Journal, 34(7): 761-781.
Hwang, H., Mortensen, D. T., & Reed, W. R. 1998. Hedonic wages and labor market search. Journal of
        Labor Economics, 16(4): 815-847.
Idson, T. L. 1990. Establishment size, job-satisfaction and the structure of work. Applied Economics,
        22(8): 1007-1018.
Idson, T. L., & Feaster, D. J. 1990. A selectivity model of employer-size wage differentials. Journal of
        Labor Economics, 8(1): 99-122.
Jovanovic, B. 1982. Selection and the evolution of industry. Econometrica, 50(3): 649-670.
Killingsworth, M. 1987. Heterogeneous preferences, compensating wage differentials, and comparable
        worth. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 102(4): 727-742.
Kim, D. 2016. Is there a startup wage premium? Evidence from MIT graduates, Working Paper.
Kornhauser, W. 1962. Scientists in Industry: Conflict and Accommodation. Berkeley: University of
        California Press.
Kryscynski, D., Coff, R., & Campbell, B. 2014. Utility Players and Utility Functions: Value Creation and
        Capture of ex ante Worker-Firm Complementarities, Working Paper.
Lacetera, N. 2009. Different missions and commitment power in R&D organizations: Theory and
        evidence on industry-university alliances. Organization Science, 20(3): 565-582.
Lazear, E. P. 2005. Entrepreneurship. Journal of Labor Economics, 23(4): 649-680.
Lerner, J. 2009. Boulevard of Broken Dreams: Princeton Univ Press.

                                                                                                     37
Levinthal, D. A., & March, J. G. 1993. The myopia of learning. Strategic Management Journal, 14(S2):
         95-112.
Lowe, R. A., & Ziedonis, A. A. 2006. Overoptimism and the performance of entrepreneurial firms.
         Management Science, 52(2): 173-186.
Moorman, R. H., & Podsakoff, P. M. 1992. A metaanalytic review and empirical test of the potential
         confounding effects of social desirability response sets in organizational behavior research.
         Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology, 65(2): 131-149.
Morton, F. M. S., & Podolny, J. M. 2002. Love or money? The effects of owner motivation in the
         California wine industry. Journal of Industrial Economics, 50(4): 431-456.
Neff, G. 2012. Venture Labor: Work and the Burden of Risk in Innovative Industries. Cambridge, MA:
         MIT Press.
O'Reilly, C. 1989. Corporations, culture, and commitment: Motivation and social control in organizations.
         California Management Review, 31(4): 9-25.
Ohyama, A. 2015. Entrepreneurship and Job-relatedness of Human Capital. Economica, 82(328): 740-
         768.
Oi, W. Y., & Idson, T. L. 1999. Firm size and wages. In O. Ashenfelter, & D. Card (Eds.), Handbook of
         Labor Economics, Vol. 3B: 2165-2214. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Ouimet, P., & Zarutskie, R. 2014. Who works for startups? The relation between firm age, employee age,
         and growth. Journal of Financial Economics, 112(3): 386-407.
Podsakoff, P. M., MacKenzie, J. Y., & Lee, J. Y. 2003. Common methods bias in behavioral research: A
         critical review and recommended remedies. Journal of Applied Psychology, 88(5): 879-903.
Preacher, K. J., & Hayes, A. F. 2008. Asymptotic and resampling strategies for assessing and comparing
         indirect effects in multiple mediator models. Behavior Research Methods, 40(3): 879-891.
Prusa, T. J., & Schmitz, J. A. 1991. Are new firms an important source of innovation? Evidence from the
         PC software industry. Economics Letters, 35(3): 339-342.
Ritti, R. 1968. Work goals of scientists and engineers. Industrial Relations, 7(2): 118-131.
Roach, M., & Sauermann, H. 2010. A taste for science? PhD scientists' academic orientation and self-
         selection into research careers in industry. Research Policy, 39(3): 422-434.
Roach, M., & Sauermann, H. 2015. Founder or Joiner? The role of preferences and context in shaping
         different entrepreneurial interests. Management Science, 61(9): 2160-2184.
Roberts, E. B. 1991. Entrepreneurs in High Technology: Lessons from MIT and beyond. New York:
         Oxford University Press.
Rosen, S. 1986. The theory of equalizing differences. In O. Ashenfelter, & R. Layard (Eds.), Handbook
         of Labor Economics: 641-692: North-Holland.
Rosenberg, N. 1990. Why do firms do basic research (with their own money)? Research Policy, 19: 165-
         174.
Rothaermel, F. T., & Hess, A. M. 2007. Building dynamic capabilities: innovation driven by individual,
         firm, and network level effects. Organization Science, 18: 898-921.
Sauermann, H., & Cohen, W. 2010. What makes them tick? Employee motives and firm innovation.
         Management Science, 56(12): 2134-2153.
Sauermann, H., Cohen, W. M., & Stephan, P. E. 2016. Doing well or doing good? The motives,
         incentives, and commercial activities of academic scientists and engineers, Working Paper.
Sauermann, H., & Roach, M. 2014. Not all scientists pay to be scientists: PhDs' preferences for
         publishing in industrial employment. Research Policy, 43(1): 32-47.
Sauermann, H., & Stephan, P. 2013. Conflicting logics? A multidimensional view of industrial and
         academic science. Organization Science, 24(3): 889-909.
Schramm, C. J. 2006. The Entrepreneurial Imperative: How America's Economic Miracle Will
         Reshape the World: Collins New York.
Schumpeter, J. A. 1942. Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy: Harper & Brothers.
Selby, J., & Mayer, K. 2013. Startup firm acquisition as a human resource strategy for innovation: The
         Acqhire phenomenon, Working Paper.

                                                                                                      38
Shalley, C. E., Zhou, J., & Oldham, G. R. 2004. The effects of personal and contextual characteristics on
        creativity: Where should we go from here? Journal of Management, 30(6): 933-958.
Shane, S., Locke, E. A., & Collins, C. J. 2003. Entrepreneurial motivation. Human Resource
        Management Review, 13: 257-279.
Simonton, D. K. 2003. Scientific creativity as constrained stochastic behavior: the integration of product,
        person, and process perspectives. Psychological Bulletin, 129(4): 475-494.
Sorensen, J. B. 2007. Bureaucracy and entrepreneurship: Workplace effects on entrepreneurial entry.
        Administrative Science Quarterly, 52(3): 387-412.
Stenard, B. S., & Sauermann, H. 2016. Educational mismatch, work outcomes, and entry into
        entrepreneurship. Organization Science, 27(4): 801-824.
Stern, S. 2004. Do scientists pay to be scientists? Management Science, 50(6): 835-853.
Toole, A. A., & Czarnitzki, D. 2009. Exploring the relationship between scientist human capital and firm
        performance: The case of biomedical academic entrepreneurs in the SBIR program. Management
        Science, 55(1): 101-114.
Vascellaro, J., & Morrison, S. 2008. Google gears down for tougher times, Wall Street Journal: A1.
Wang, J., Veugelers, R., & Stephan, P. 2016. Bias against novelty in science: A cautionary tale for users
        of bibliometric indicators, NBER Working Paper #22180.
Younge, K. A., Tong, T. W., & Fleming, L. 2015. How anticipated employee mobility affects acquisition
        likelihood: Evidence from a natural experiment. Strategic Management Journal, 36(5): 686-708.
Zenger, T. R. 1994. Explaining organizational diseconomies of scale in R&D: Agency problems and the
        allocation of engineering talent, ideas, and effort by firm size. Management Science, 40(6): 708-
        729.
Zenger, T. R., & Lazzarini, S. G. 2004. Compensating for innovation: Do small firms offer high-powered
        incentives that lure talent and motivate effort? Managerial and Decision Economics, 25: 329-
        345.




                                                                                                        39
                                                        SUPPORTING INFORMATION

                                              Table S1: Potential Changes in Motives over Time

                                      1          2          3          4          5          6          7          8          9         10
                                   ologit     ologit     ologit     ologit     ologit     ologit     ologit     ologit     ologit     ologit
                                  Imp.Sec. Imp.Sal. Imp.Ind. Imp.Resp. Imp.Chal. Imp.Sec. Imp.Sal. Imp.Ind. Imp.Resp. Imp.Chal.
                     Job tenure       0.981      1.006      1.025      0.992      0.984 1.013**         0.998     1.006*      0.998 0.990**
                                    [0.061]    [0.084]    [0.056]    [0.078]    [0.074]    [0.005]    [0.004]    [0.003]    [0.004]    [0.003]
               Masters degree         0.649      0.746      0.803      1.163        0.63 0.793**        0.935      1.049      1.112 1.229**
                                    [0.222]    [0.189]    [0.235]    [0.369]    [0.167]    [0.050]    [0.047]    [0.087]    [0.081]    [0.068]
                    PhD degree        0.468     0.502*      1.143      1.056      1.199 0.667**      0.698**      1.241* 1.236**      1.680**
                                    [0.191]    [0.149]    [0.536]    [0.347]    [0.437]    [0.039]    [0.050]    [0.134]    [0.091]    [0.114]
         Industry fixed effects         incl.      incl.      incl.      incl.      incl.      incl.      incl.      incl.      incl.      incl.
          Educational controls          incl.      incl.      incl.      incl.      incl.      incl.      incl.      incl.      incl.      incl.
            Field fixed effects         incl.      incl.      incl.      incl.      incl.      incl.      incl.      incl.      incl.      incl.
        Demographic controls            incl.      incl.      incl.      incl.      incl.      incl.      incl.      incl.      incl.      incl.
        Work activity controls          incl.      incl.      incl.      incl.      incl.      incl.      incl.      incl.      incl.      incl.
                  Observations           580        580        580        580        580      8946       8946       8946       8946       8946
                               df         22         22         22         22         22         24         24         24         24         24
Note: Ordered logit, odds ratios reported. Standard errors clustered by industry in brackets. *=sig. at 5%, **=sig. at 1%. Omitted categories: Bachelors
degree. Imp.Sal.=Importance of salary; Imp.Ind.=Importance of independence; Imp.Resp.=Importance of responsibility; Imp.Chal.=Importance of intel-
lectual challenge.




                                                                                                                                                       40
                                                          Table S2: Auxiliary Analyses of Performance

                                      If Patents<2                       If Patents>0                                    If Patents<21              Full sample            High startup share
                                              1          2        3             4          5        6                     7           8             9           10            11           12
                                           logit     qreg(30) qreg(50) qreg(70) qreg(80) qreg(90)                      nbreg       nbreg         nbreg       nbreg          nbreg       nbreg
                                         Patents      Patents  Patents      Patents    Patents   Patents              Patents     Patents       Patents     Patents        Patents     Patents
                   Established small       0.633**      -0.078     -0.16       -0.649   -1.427*    -1.821              0.477**     0.505**       0.518**     0.549**        0.565**     0.616**
                                            [0.104]    [0.240]  [0.393]       [0.840]    [0.689]  [1.254]               [0.068]     [0.067]       [0.066]     [0.067]        [0.082]     [0.103]
                   Established large           0.862    -0.091    0.152        -0.328     -0.571    0.193              0.717**       0.788*      0.711**       0.778*       0.713**         0.829
                                            [0.123]    [0.186]  [0.303]       [0.638]    [0.521]  [0.981]               [0.069]     [0.075]       [0.086]     [0.091]        [0.091]     [0.093]
                Importance security            0.879    -0.097   -0.146        -0.297   -0.479* -1.329**                           0.798**                   0.815**                    0.710**
                                            [0.065]    [0.077]  [0.130]       [0.277]    [0.226]  [0.432]                           [0.043]                   [0.045]                    [0.046]
                  Importance salary            0.872     0.098    0.213           0.37    0.531*    0.645                             1.037                      1.046                    1.111*
                                            [0.062]    [0.085]  [0.145]       [0.319]    [0.262]  [0.516]                           [0.043]                   [0.060]                    [0.058]
          Importance independence            0.877*     0.174*   0.364*         0.568 0.873**       0.797                            1.105*                      1.108                  1.284**
                                            [0.057]    [0.086]  [0.147]       [0.313]    [0.253]  [0.464]                           [0.051]                   [0.066]                    [0.046]
           Importance responsibility           1.003    -0.047   -0.176        -0.343     -0.345    -0.34                            0.902*                      0.916                      0.949
                                            [0.049]    [0.081]  [0.138]       [0.302]    [0.237]  [0.442]                           [0.040]                   [0.058]                    [0.058]
              Importance challenge             1.125     0.075    0.171         0.533     0.609* 1.402**                           1.423**                   1.384**                    1.559**
                                            [0.100]    [0.108]  [0.176]       [0.368]    [0.292]  [0.520]                           [0.095]                   [0.093]                    [0.147]
                            Ln Salary                                                                                                            4.245**     3.939**
                                                                                                                                                  [0.590]     [0.524]
                 Non-R&D activities                                                                                                                 0.985        0.988
                                                                                                                                                  [0.024]     [0.028]
                     Masters degree         1.289        0.173        0.064      -0.178       -0.259       -0.601     1.496**      1.468**       1.444**     1.420**       1.573**      1.545**
                                          [0.192]      [0.154]      [0.251]     [0.539]      [0.428]      [0.761]      [0.088]      [0.077]       [0.094]     [0.084]       [0.117]      [0.083]
                         PhD degree      2.618**      0.492**      0.818**       1.196*     2.343**      3.361**      3.847**      3.714**       3.461**     3.381**       5.156**      4.984**
                                          [0.316]      [0.150]      [0.244]     [0.519]      [0.413]      [0.743]      [0.505]      [0.432]       [0.535]     [0.491]       [1.207]      [0.996]
                Educational controls          incl.        incl.        incl.       incl.        incl.        incl.        incl.        incl.         incl.        incl.        incl.        incl.
              Work activity controls          incl.        incl.        incl.       incl.        incl.        incl.        incl.        incl.         incl.        incl.        incl.        incl.
              Demographic controls            incl.        incl.        incl.       incl.        incl.        incl.        incl.        incl.         incl.        incl.        incl.        incl.
               Industry fixed effects         incl.        incl.        incl.       incl.        incl.        incl.        incl.        incl.         incl.        incl.        incl.        incl.
                             Constant                   -0.278       -1.895      -6.179     -7.873*      -10.756
                                                       [1.182]      [1.990]     [4.283]      [3.430]      [6.154]
                       Observations          8789         2508         2508        2508         2508         2508       10509        10509         10585        10585          5623         5623
                           alphaest                                                                                      3.556        3.485         3.815        3.761        3.936        3.773

Note: Model 1 logit, odds ratios reported. Models 2-6 quantile regression. Models 7-12 negative binomial (Incidence Rate Ratios reported). Standard er-
rors in brackets (clustered by industry in Models 1, 7-12). *=sig. at 5%, **=sig. at 1%. Omitted categories: Startup; Bachelors degree.
                                                                                                                                                                                                     41
