NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DO ENERGY EFFICIENCY INVESTMENTS DELIVER AT THE RIGHT TIME?
Judson P. Boomhower
Lucas W. Davis
Working Paper 23097
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23097

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2017

We are grateful to Severin Borenstein, Jim Bushnell, Andrew Campbell, Steve Cicala, Peter Jacobs
and seminar participants at Carnegie Mellon, Indiana University, Lawrence Berkeley National Lab,
Resources for the Future, Stanford University, UC Berkeley, UC San Diego, UC Santa Cruz, University
of Chicago, University of Michigan, and the AERE annual meeting for helpful comments and to Ellen
Lin and Matt Woerman for excellent research assistance. This research was supported by the California
Energy Commission under EPC-14-026. The authors have not received any financial compensation
for this project nor do they have any financial relationships that relate to this research. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2017 by Judson P. Boomhower and Lucas W. Davis. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Do Energy Efficiency Investments Deliver at the Right Time?
Judson P. Boomhower and Lucas W. Davis
NBER Working Paper No. 23097
January 2017
JEL No. D40,Q41
ABSTRACT
Electricity cannot be cost-effectively stored even for short periods of time. Consequently, wholesale
electricity prices vary widely across hours of the day with peak prices frequently exceeding off-peak
prices by a factor of ten or more. Most analyses of energy-efficiency policies ignore this variation,
focusing on total energy savings without regard to when those savings occur. In this paper we demonstrate
the importance of this distinction using novel evidence from a rebate program for air conditioners
in Southern California. We estimate electricity savings using hourly smart-meter data and show that
savings tend to occur during hours when the value of electricity is high. This significantly increases
the overall value of the program, especially once we account for the large capacity payments received
by generators to guarantee their availability in high-demand hours. We then compare this estimated
savings profile with engineering-based estimates for this program as well as a variety of alternative
energy-efficiency investments. The results illustrate a surprisingly large amount of variation in economic
value across investments.

Judson P. Boomhower
Stanford University SIEPR
366 Galvez Street
MC: 6015
Stanford, CA 94305
boomhower@stanford.edu
Lucas W. Davis
Haas School of Business
University of California
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
and NBER
ldavis@haas.berkeley.edu

1

Introduction

Unlike most other goods, electricity cannot be cost-effectively stored even for short periods.
Supply must meet demand at all times, or the frequency in the grid will fall outside of
a narrow tolerance band, causing blackouts. In addition, electricity demand is highly
variable and inelastic. As a result, electricity markets clear mostly on the supply side,
with production ramping up and down to meet demand. During off-peak hours electricity
prices tend to be very low. However, during peak hours prices rise substantially, frequently
to two- or three- times the level of off-peak prices. Moreover, there are a small number
of peak hours during the year when prices increase much more, often to ten- or twentytimes the level of off-peak prices. During these ultra-peak hours generation is operating at
full capacity and there is little ability to further increase supply so demand reductions are
extremely valuable.
These features of electricity markets are well known, yet most analyses of energy-efficiency
policies ignore this variation. When the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) considers new
appliance energy-efficiency standards and building energy codes, they focus on total energy
savings without regard to when they occur.1 When state utility commissions evaluate
energy-efficiency programs, they focus on total energy savings, typically with little regard
to timing.2 Also, most large-scale energy models including the DOE’s National Energy
Modeling System lack temporal granularity altogether and instead model energy demand
1

For appliance energy standards, see Commercial Package Air Conditioning and Heating Equipment
and Warm Air Furnaces (81 FR 2420, January 15, 2016); Ceiling Fan Light Kits (81 FR 580, January
6, 2016); Single Package Vertical Air Conditioners and Heat Pumps (80 FR 57438, September 23, 2015);
Commercial Clothes Washers (79 FR 12302, March 3, 2014); Residential Clothes Dryers and Room Air
Conditioners (76 FR 22454, April 21, 2011); and Incandescent Lamps, Dishwashers, and Other Appliances
(DOE 2009, Technical support document: Impacts on the Nation of the Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007). For residential building energy codes, see DOE, “Determination Regarding Energy
Efficiency Improvements in the 2015 International Energy Conservation Code (IECC)”, 80 FR 33250, June
11, 2015; and technical support documents cited therein. For commercial building energy codes, see DOE,
“Determination Regarding Energy Efficiency Improvements in ANSI/ASHRAE/IES Standard 90.1–2013:
Energy Standard for Buildings, Except Low-Rise Residential Buildings”, 79 FR 57900, September 26, 2014.
Citations with FR refer to the Federal Register.
2
See, for example, California Public Utilities Commission, “Energy Efficiency Annual Progress Evaluation Report”, March 2015; Public Service Commission of Maryland, “The EmPOWER Maryland Energy
Efficiency Act Standard Report of 2015”, April 2015; Massachusetts Energy Efficiency Advisory Council,
“2013 Annual Report: Energy Efficiency Sets the Stage for Sustainable, Long-Term Savings”, 2014; Northwest Power and Conservation Council, “2014 Achievements: Progress Toward the Sixth Plan’s Regional
Conservation Goals”, November 2015; Consortium for Energy Efficiency, “2015 State of the Efficiency
Program Industry”, March 2016.

1

at the monthly or even annual level. With a few notable exceptions that we discuss later in
the paper, there is surprisingly little attention both by policymakers and in the academic
literature to how the value of energy efficiency depends on when savings occur.
In part, these limitations reflect historical technological constraints. Before smart meters
and other advanced metering infrastructure, it was impossible to measure policy impacts
at the hourly level. The necessary high frequency data simply did not exist, since meters
were only read once per billing cycle. This situation is rapidly changing. Today in the
United States more than 40% of residential electricity customers have smart meters, up
from less than 2% in 2007.3
In this paper we demonstrate the importance of accounting for the timing of energy savings using novel evidence from a rebate program for energy-efficient air conditioners in
Southern California. We use hourly smart-meter data to estimate the change in electricity
consumption after installation of an energy-efficient air conditioner, and show that savings
tend to occur disproportionately during July and August, and during the hours 3 p.m. to
9 p.m. With hourly data from 6,000+ participants, we are able to precisely characterize
the savings profile both across seasons and hours of the day.
Our estimated time profile of energy savings is similar to ex ante engineering estimates,
but there are several interesting differences. Most importantly, the econometric estimates
indicate peak savings between 6 p.m. and 7 p.m., compared to between 4 p.m. and 5 p.m.
in the engineering estimates. This seemingly small difference has important implications
for electricity markets given growing concern about meeting electricity demand during
the early evening hours as the sun sets and solar generation decreases (see, e.g., CAISO,
2013).
We then use price data from wholesale energy and forward capacity markets to quantify
the economic value of these estimated savings. Savings are strongly correlated with the
value of electricity, making the program 48% more valuable than under a naive calculation
ignoring timing. As we demonstrate, including capacity payments is important in this
calculation. Most of the value of electricity in ultra-peak hours is captured by forward
capacity payments to generators to guarantee their availability.
Finally we compare air conditioning to a much larger set of energy-efficiency investments,
3

U.S. Department of Energy, “Electric Power Annual”, Released February 2016, Tables 2.1 and 10.10.

2

both residential and non-residential. Overall, there is a remarkably wide range of value
across investments. Across six major U.S. markets, we find that air conditioning investments are on average 29% more valuable than under a naive calculation ignoring timing.
For commercial and industrial heat pumps and chillers the “timing premiums” are 29% and
25%, respectively. Other investments like refrigerators and freezers have timing premiums
below 5% because savings are only weakly correlated with value. Lighting also does surprisingly poorly, reflecting that savings occur disproportionately during evening and winter
hours when electricity tends to be less valuable.
These findings have important policy implications. Energy-efficiency is a major focus of
energy policy in the United States and other countries. Electric utilities in the United
States, for example, spent $36 billion on energy-efficiency programs between 2006 and
2015, leading to more than 1.5 million gigawatt hours in reported total electricity savings.4
In addition, the U.S. Federal government has spent $12 billion since 2009 on income tax
credits for residential energy-efficiency investments (Borenstein and Davis, 2015). Virtually
all analyses of these programs have ignored the timing of energy savings.
The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides background about electricity markets and
energy-efficiency. Section 3 describes our empirical application, estimating framework, and
savings estimates. Section 4 then examines the correlation between savings and the value
of electricity, incorporating engineering-based estimated savings profiles from alternative
energy-efficiency investments. Section 5 concludes.

2

Background

2.1

Electricity Markets

Electricity is supplied in most markets by a mix of generating technologies. Wind, solar,
and other renewables are at the bottom of the supply curve with near-zero marginal cost.
Nuclear, coal, and natural gas combined-cycle plants come next, all with low marginal cost.
Higher up the supply curve come generating units like natural gas combustion turbines
and even oil-burning “peaker” plants, which have high marginal costs but low fixed costs.
4

Tabulations by the authors based on data from U.S. Department of Energy, Energy Information Administration, “Electric Power Annual”, 2012 (Tables 10.2 and 10.5) and 2015 (Tables 10.6 and 10.7).
Expenditures are reported in year 2015 dollars.

3

Beyond that the supply curve for electricity is perfectly vertical, reflecting the maximum
total generating capacity.
This mix is necessary because electricity cannot be cost-effectively stored. Demand for
electricity is price inelastic and varies widely across hours. Consequently, electricity markets clear primarily on the supply side, with generation ramping up and down to meet
demand. During off-peak hours, the marginal generator typically has a relatively low or
even zero marginal cost. But during peak hours the marginal generator has a much higher
marginal cost. Even within natural gas plants, for example, marginal costs can vary by a
factor of two or more. There are also typically a small number of ultra-peak hours each
year in which demand outstrips the maximum capacity of generation, leading the market
to clear on the demand side and resulting in prices that can spike to many times any plant’s
marginal cost.
An immediate implication of these features of electricity markets is that the value of demand
reductions varies widely across hours. Most buyers do not see real-time prices (Borenstein,
2005; Borenstein and Holland, 2005; Holland and Mansur, 2006). Instead, many electric
utilities have implemented demand response programs, optional critical peak pricing tariffs,
and other policies aimed at curbing electricity demand during ultra-peak periods.
Wholesale energy prices provide a measure of how the value of electricity varies across
hours. In an idealized “energy-only” market, this would be the complete measure of value
and the only signal power plant owners would need when deciding whether to enter or
exit. In a competitive market in long-run equilibrium, the number of power plants would
be determined by price competition and free entry. Additional plants would be built until
the average price across all hours just equaled average cost. In such a market, the hourly
wholesale electricity price represents the full value of avoided electricity consumption in
any given hour.
The reality of electricity markets, even “deregulated” ones, is more complex. In many
markets the amount of power plant capacity is set by regulation. Because price cannot
instantaneously clear the market, there is a risk of excess demand in peak periods, potentially leading to blackouts or costly equipment damage.5 Regulators set minimum “reserve
5
In principle, household-level interruptible tariffs could solve this problem but they have historically
been infeasible (although this may be changing with new technologies). Some electricity markets also
include price caps, which can depress energy market revenues and create an additional rationale for market
intervention.

4

margins” (generation capacity in excess of expected peak demand) that reduce the risk
of electricity shortages below some target level, such as one event every ten years. These
reserve margin requirements are implemented through dedicated capacity markets where
generators commit to make their plants available to sell power during future periods.6 The
equilibrium capacity price just covers the shortfall between expected energy market revenues and total cost for the marginal new power plant at the desired reserve margin. In
the US, much of the price signal for new investment in electricity markets is communicated
through capacity markets.
It is important to take capacity markets into account when measuring how the value of
electricity varies across hours. As we will show later, considering only wholesale electricity
prices (“energy prices”) tends to systematically understate the degree to which the value
of electricity varies across hours. Although the total size of capacity markets tends to
be much smaller than the electricity markets themselves, the amounts of these payments
depend only on the highest few demand hours each year. In the extreme, consider a
“peaker” plant which receives a significant capacity payment for being available to be used
only a very small number of hours each year. Accounting for these capacity payments
increases the marginal cost of electricity in this handful of hours enormously, to potentially
50+ times the hourly prices in the energy market.
Finally, another important feature of electricity markets is large externalities. These external costs of energy production also vary across hours and across markets. Callaway et al.
(2015) use site-level data on renewables generation and engineering estimates of the hourly
load profiles for lighting to show how the total social value of those resources varies across
U.S. markets. There are large regional differences with particularly large external damages
in the Midwest. In this paper, however, we limit our focus to private energy cost savings.
Perhaps contrary to popular expectation, the large majority of the stated benefits from
most energy-efficiency policies come from reduced private energy costs (Gayer and Viscusi,
6

For example, the California Public Utilities Commission adopts a forecast of peak demand for each
month and requires utilities to enter into “resource adequacy” contracts to ensure that they can meet 115%
of this demand. The payments in these contracts are very high in months when peak electricity demand is
expected to be near total system capacity. As we show later, reducing forecast peak demand in August by
one megawatt-hour avoids thousands of dollars in resource adequacy payments, which is many times the
energy market price in those hours. For more discussion of capacity markets see Bushnell (2005); Cramton
and Stoft (2005); Joskow (2006); Joskow and Tirole (2007); Alcott (2013). Many electricity markets also
provide additional payments for frequency regulation and other ancillary services, but these payments tend
to be smaller than capacity payments and energy-efficiency is less well-suited for providing these services.

5

2013). For example, nine new standards promulgated by the DOE in 2016 achieve a total
present value of $76 billion in energy cost savings, vs. $28 billion in avoided CO2 emissions
and $5 billion in avoided NOx emissions.7 That is, more than two-thirds of the benefits
come from private energy cost savings. Moreover, the hourly variation in external costs is
small relative to the hourly variation in electricity prices and capacity values. Private value
varies across hours by a factor of ten or more, while emission rates vary only by about a
factor of two between fossil-fuel plants. For both of these reasons, in this paper we focus
exclusively on private costs and refer readers interested in externalities to Callaway et al.
(2015).

2.2

Energy Efficiency

Electricity is a widely-used input, both in manufacturing and in the production of cooling,
lighting, refrigeration, and other household services. Energy efficiency is the rate at which
energy inputs are converted into these outputs. Households and firms can choose to improve
energy efficiency through a variety of (usually capital-intensive) investments. The ultimate
level of investment in energy efficiency depends on capital costs, energy prices, discount
rates, and other factors.
Governments intervene in energy efficiency to reduce peak demand, increase “energy security”, and reduce externalities from energy consumption. Most economists argue for
better-targeted policies, such as emissions taxes and real-time pricing of electricity, but
these are politically unpopular. Instead, there are a growing number of policies aimed at
increasing energy efficiency. This paper fits into a recent literature that emphasizes the importance of rigorous ex-post analyses of these programs using real market outcomes (Davis
et al., 2014; Fowlie et al., 2015; Allcott and Greenstone, 2015). In this paper we extend
that work to include the hourly shape of demand reductions.
The vast majority of existing economic analyses of energy efficiency have focused on total
7

We made these calculations based on the nine new standards listed in DOE’s February, 2016 and
August, 2016 semi-annual reports to Congress. The individual rulemakings are Single Package Vertical Air
Conditioners and Heat Pumps (80 FR 57438, September 23, 2015); Ceiling Fan Light Kits (81 FR 580,
January 6, 2016); Refrigerated Beverage Vending Machines (81 FR 1028, January 8, 2016); Commercial
Package Air Conditioning and Heating Equipment and Warm Air Furnaces (81 FR 2420, January 15, 2016);
Residential Boilers (81 FR 2320, January 15, 2016); Commercial and Industrial General Pumps (81 FR
4368, January 26, 2016); Commercial Prerinse Spray Valves (81 FR 4748, January 27, 2016); Battery
Chargers (81 FR 38266, June 16, 2016); and Dehumidifiers (81 FR 38338, June 31, 2016).

6

savings, rather than on when these savings occur (see e.g. Dubin et al. (1986); Metcalf
and Hassett (1999); Davis (2008); Arimura et al. (2012); Barbose et al. (2013); Davis et al.
(2014); Fowlie et al. (2015)). An important exception is Novan and Smith (2016) which uses
hourly data from a similar energy-efficiency program to illustrate important inefficiencies
with current retail rate designs for electricity. Our paper in contrast is much more focused
on the timing of energy savings and how this impacts the total value of energy-efficiency
investments.
Like academic research, regulatory analyses conducted during the design and evaluation of
energy efficiency policies have also overwhelmingly ignored the timing of savings. Minimum
efficiency standards are probably the most pervasive form of government intervention in
energy efficiency. There are standards for 40+ categories of residential and commercial
technologies in the United States. Analyses of these standards focus on total energy savings,
ignoring timing. Meyers et al. (2015), for example, calculate energy costs savings for U.S.
federal energy-efficiency standards using average annual energy prices, thus ignoring any
potential correlation between savings and the value of electricity. They find that U.S.
energy-efficiency standards saved households and firms $60 billion in 2014. The DOE
performs additional economic analyses every time a new U.S. standard is implemented but
again, the emphasis is on total energy savings without regard to when these savings occur
(see references in Footnote 1).
Another major category of policies are subsidies for energy-efficient technologies. This
includes federal and state income tax credits for energy efficiency investments, sales tax
holidays, and, at the state level, utility-sponsored rebates and upstream manufacturer
incentives. Most state utility commissions require these programs to be evaluated by thirdparty analysts. Although thousands of studies have been performed looking at subsidy
programs, the vast majority focus on total energy savings (for example, see references
cited in Footnote 2).8
There are exceptions. California requires that proposed utility-sponsored energy-efficiency
programs be evaluated against engineering models of hourly electricity values before programs are implemented. California’s Title 24 building efficiency standards also explicitly
8

Some evaluations acknowledge timing in a very coarse way by reporting the effect of programs on
annual peak demand. This recognizes the importance of physical generation constraints, but ignores the
large hour-to-hour variation in the value of electricity in all other hours. This approach also does not assign
an economic value to peak load reductions.

7

consider time value. Some recent federal energy efficiency standards consider seasonal
differences in savings values, but still ignore the enormous variation within seasons and
across hours of the day.9 In addition, while the vast majority of third-party analyses of
energy-efficiency programs ignore the timing of savings, a notable exception is Evergreen
Economics (2016), which compares random coefficients versus alternative models for estimating hourly savings for several California energy-efficiency programs.

3

Empirical Application

For our empirical application, we focus on a residential air conditioner program in Southern California. Section 3.1 briefly describes the key features of the program, Section 3.2
provides graphical evidence on average electricity savings, Sections 3.3 and 3.4 plot savings
estimates by daily temperature and hour-of-day, respectively, and then Section 3.5 reports
regression estimates.

3.1

Program Background

Our empirical application is an energy-efficiency rebate program offered by Southern California Edison (SCE), a major investor-owned utility. SCE is one of the largest electric
utilities in the United States, providing electricity service to 14 million people. SCE purchases power in the wholesale electricity market operated by the California Independent
System Operator and sells it to residential, commercial, and industrial customers.
The program is known as the Quality Installation Program. It provides incentives of up to
$1,100 to households that install an energy-efficient central air conditioner. This program
is an excellent empirical setting in which to examine the time-specific value of energy
savings. Air conditioning is responsible for 10% of average residential electricity use and
15% of average commercial electricity use in California (California Energy Commission,
2012). California’s investor-owned utilities, under the direction of the California Public
Utilities Commission, have devoted significant resources to programs aimed at reducing
energy use from air conditioning. More broadly, air conditioning is projected to be one of
the fastest growing uses of electricity worldwide (see, e.g., Davis and Gertler, 2015). This
9

For example, the 2016 standards for Ceiling Fan Light Kits (81 FR 580, January 6, 2016).

8

large demand for air conditioning is concentrated in certain seasons of the year and hours
of the day.
The Quality Installation Program is administered similarly to most energy-efficiency subsidy programs in the United States. As with other programs, the household claims the
rebate through the mail after the new air conditioner is installed. And as with other programs, the state utility commission compensates SCE for running the program by allowing
the utility to pass on costs to ratepayers in the form of higher electricity prices. The Quality
Installation Program includes an additional focus on proper installation of the new subsidized central air conditioner, which can further improve energy performance (California
Public Utilities Commission, 2011).
The data consist of detailed information about program participants and hourly electricity
consumption records. Our main empirical analyses are based on 6,000+ households who
participated in the program between January 2012 and April 2015. The online appendix
provides additional details, descriptive statistics, and results from alternative specifications
including analyses which incorporate data from non-participating households.

3.2

Event Study

We first present graphical evidence on average energy savings in the form of an event study
figure. This evidence motivates the more detailed analyses that follow and confirms that the
observed changes in electricity consumption coincide with the timing of new air conditioner
installation. In constructing these figures we exploit the natural variation in the timing of
program participation to control for trends in electricity consumption, weather, and other
time-varying factors.
Figure 1 describes the effect of new air conditioner installation on electricity consumption
during the summer and winter, respectively. The horizontal axis is the time in years before
and after installation, normalized so that the year of installation is equal to zero. The figure
plots estimated coefficients and ninety-fifth percentile confidence intervals corresponding
to event time indicator variables from the following regression,
yit =

4
X

αk 1[τit = k]it + ωct + it .

k=−4

9

(1)

The dependent variable yit is average hourly electricity consumption for household i in year
t and τ denotes the event year defined so that τ = 0 is the exact year in which the new air
conditioner was installed, τ = −3 for three years before, τ = 3 for three years after, and so
on. We do not include an indicator variable for the year before installation (τ = −1), so
the other coefficients are measured relative to that year. We include year by climate zone
fixed effects, ωct , to remove the effect of annual changes in average electricity consumption
in each climate zone due to weather and other time-varying factors.
For summer, we estimate this regression using July and August data from 2012 to 2015
collapsed to the year-by-household level. The sample includes households who installed new
air conditioners between January 2012 and April 2015. We drop data from installations
that occurred during August, September, and October to ensure that participants did not
have new air conditioners during the zero-year summer. This exclusion is for the event
study figure only and these installations are included in all subsequent analyses.
The event study figure for summer shows a sharp decrease in electricity consumption in the
year in which the new air conditioner is installed. The magnitude of the decrease is about
0.2 kilowatt hours per hour. A typical LED lightbulb uses about 10 watts, so this decrease
is equivalent to shutting off 20 LEDs. Electricity consumption is otherwise approximately
flat, both during the four years before and during the four years after.
The event study figure for winter was constructed in exactly the same way but using data
from January and February, and excluding data from installations that occurred during
February, March, or April. As expected, winter consumption is essentially unchanged after
the new air conditioner is installed. This is reassuring because it suggests that the sharp
drop in electricity consumption during summer is indeed due to the new air conditioner
and not some other unrelated change in household appliances or behavior.10
These event study figures and estimates in later sections measure the electricity savings
from a new air conditioner installation. This is different, however, from the causal effect
of the rebate program. Many participants in energy-efficiency programs are inframarginal,
getting paid to do what they would have done otherwise (Joskow and Marron, 1992).
Measuring the causal impact also requires figuring out how the program changed the type
10
These estimates of aggregate program impact are quantitatively similar to estimates in SCE-sponsored
Evergreen Economics (2016) based on a random coefficients model. The Evergreen study estimates program
impacts for this program using a much smaller number of homes, and also estimates savings for two other
California energy-efficiency programs.

10

of appliances that were purchased. In the extreme case in which all participants are inframarginal, a program may have no causal impact whatsoever, even while the savings
from an investment are large. Recent studies have used regression discontinuity and other
quasi-experimental techniques to attempt to tease out these causal effects and perform
cost-benefit analysis (Boomhower and Davis, 2014; Houde and Aldy, Forthcoming).

3.3

Impacts by Local Temperature

As another validity test, we next examine the relationship between energy savings and
daily outdoor temperature. A potential concern in our application is that participating
households might have experienced other changes at the same time they installed a new
air conditioner. For example, program take-up might coincide with a home remodel or the
arrival of a new baby, both of which would affect electricity consumption. However, air
conditioning has a very particular pattern of usage that we can use to validate our estimates. Unlike other energy-using durable goods, air conditioner usage is highly correlated
with temperature. Thus, we can validate our empirical approach by confirming that our
estimated savings are large on hot days and near zero on mild days.
We use daily mean temperature data at the four kilometer grid cell level from the PRISM
Climate Group (PRISM Climate Group, 2016). Figure 2 plots estimated electricity savings
against daily mean temperature for each household’s nine-digit zip code. We report regression coefficients for 22 different temperature bins interacted with an indicator variable
for after a new air conditioner is installed. So, for example, the left-most marker reports
the effect of a new air conditioner on days when the temperature is below 40 degrees
Fahrenheit.
On mild days, between 50 and 70 degrees Fahrenheit, estimated energy savings are zero
or not statistically distinguishable from it. The lack of consumption changes on these
days implies that participants are not simultaneously changing their stock or usage of
refrigerators, lighting, or other appliances. From 70 to 100+ degrees, there is a steep,
continuous relationship between temperature and energy savings, as expected from a new
air conditioner. Air conditioner usage is largest on the hottest days, so energy-efficiency
gains have the largest effect on these days. There is also a small decrease in consumption
on days below 50 degrees following air conditioner replacement. This may be explained by
improvements to ductwork, insulation, thermostats, or other HVAC-related upgrades that
11

could in some cases occur as part of a central air conditioner replacement.

3.4

Hourly Impacts by Season

Figure 3 plots estimated electricity savings by hour-of-day. We plot separate estimates for
summer and non-summer months. The coefficients and standard errors for this figure are
estimated using 48 separate least squares regressions. Each regression includes electricity consumption for a single hour-of-the-day and either summer- or non-summer months.
For example, for the top left coefficient the dependent variable is average electricity consumption between midnight and 1 a.m. during non-summer months. All regressions are
estimated at the household-by-week level and control for week-of-sample by climate zone
and household by month-of-year fixed effects.
The figure reveals large differences in savings across seasons and hours. During July and
August there are large energy savings, particularly between noon and 10 p.m. Savings
reach their nadir in the summer at 6 a.m. which is typically the coolest time of the day.
During non-summer months savings are much smaller, less than 0.05 kilowatt hours saved
on average per hour, compared to 0.2 to 0.3 kilowatt hours saved on average per hour
during July and August.

3.5

Regression Estimates

Finally, we turn to a regression framework for characterizing the distribution of energy
savings across hours of the day and months of the year. Our regression equation can be
described as follows,
yith = βhm 1[N ew Air Conditioner]it 1[hour/month]hm + γihm + ωth + ith .

(2)

Here yith is electricity consumption by household i during week-of-sample t and hour-ofday h, measured in kilowatt hours. We estimate the model in levels because our primary interest is in the number and timing of kilowatt hours saved. The indicator variable
1[N ew Air Conditioner]it , is equal to one for participating households after they have installed a new air conditioner. Installation dates vary, allowing us to compare households
who have already installed a new air conditioner to households who have not. The main

12

covariates of interest are a set of interaction terms between this indicator variable and a
vector of indicator variables 1[hour/month] for each hour-of-day (h) by month-of-year (m)
pair. For example, one pair is 1:00-2:00 p.m. during November. We estimate 288 separate
β coefficients, each equal to the average change in hourly electricity consumption for a
particular hour-of-day and month-of-year.
All specifications include household by hour-of-day by month-of-year fixed effects, γihm .
That is, for each household we include 288 separate fixed effects that allow for differing
household-level average consumption over the day and across the year. This allows for rich
heterogeneity across households in typical seasonal electricity usage.
All specifications also include week-of-sample by hour-of-day fixed effects ωth . This controls flexibly for territory-wide trends in electricity consumption. These fixed effects absorb
average trends caused by weather variation or secular trends in household electricity consumption. Some specifications include, instead, separate week-of-sample by hour-of-day
fixed effects for each of 8 climate zones. This richer specification controls for climate-zone
specific variation in weather, as well as differential trends across climate zones. This is
potentially important because there are large climatological and demographic differences
between California’s coastal and inland areas. Finally, the error term ith captures unobserved determinants of consumption across periods.
Table 1 reports estimates from three different specifications. For each specification we
report average annual energy savings per household in kilowatt hours per year. Standard
errors are clustered to allow for arbitrary error correlations at the nine-digit zip code
level.
In columns (1) and (2) the implied annual savings per household are 375 and 358 kilowatt
hours per year, respectively. The difference between these two specifications is that the
latter adds the richer set of time fixed effects. Finally, in column (3) we restrict the
estimation sample to exclude, for each household, the eight weeks prior to installation.
This might make a difference if an old air conditioner was not working or if the installation
date was recorded incorrectly. The estimates are somewhat larger in column (3) but overall
the average savings are similar across the three columns.
Prior to installing a new air conditioner, program participants consumed an average of
9,820 kilowatt hours annually, so this is a 4.5% decrease in household consumption. A
typical central air conditioner (3 ton, 13 SEER) in this region uses about 4,237 kilowatt
13

hours per year, so the savings represent a 10% decrease in annual electricity consumption
for air conditioning. This is broadly similar to, but slightly less than, what would be
expected based on a simple engineering prediction. For example, a Department of Energy
calculator shows that ignoring rebound and other factors a typical central air conditioner
upgrade in Los Angeles saves 565 kilowatt hours per year.11
For computational reasons, we estimate all of these regressions using weekly average consumption at the household by hour-of-day level. Estimation with the hourly microdata is
computationally demanding and does not yield different estimates. Using hourly microdata, household by month-of-year by hour-of-day fixed effects, hour-of-sample by climate
zone fixed effects, and the sample exclusions in Column (3), the estimate of annual program
savings is 442 kilowatt hours per year.

4

The Value of Energy Efficiency

In this section we show that the value of electricity varies substantially across hours and we
demonstrate the importance of accounting for this variation when valuing energy-efficiency
investments. We start by showing data on wholesale energy prices and capacity values
(Section 4.1). Then, with the empirical application from the previous section, we measure
the correlation between electricity savings and the value of electricity (Section 4.2) and we
quantify the average value of savings (Section 4.3). With this proof of concept completed,
we then turn to engineering estimates from a broader set of energy-efficiency investments.
We show that the time profile differs significantly between investments (Section 4.4) and
that these different profiles imply large differences in value (Section 4.5).

4.1

The Value of Electricity in U.S. Markets

Figure 4 plots hourly wholesale electricity prices and capacity values for two months-of-year
(February and August) and for two major U.S. electricity markets (California/CAISO and
Texas/ERCOT). We selected February and August because they tend to be relatively low11

Typical central air conditioner electricity usage and predicted savings are from Energy Star Program, “Life Cycle Cost Estimate for 1 ENERGY STAR Qualified Central Air Conditioner(s)”, 2013.
https://www.energystar.gov/. These statistics assume replacement of a 3-ton 13 SEER unit with 3-ton
15 SEER without programmable thermostat before or after.

14

and high-demand months but adjacent months look similar. For each market we report
average prices by hour-of-day for 2011 through 2015. The energy and capacity price data
that we use come from SNL Financial and are described in the online appendix. We include
ERCOT as a benchmark for our California capacity value estimates; because ERCOT has
no capacity market, the full value of electricity is encoded in hourly energy prices.
For California, the figures plot average wholesale energy prices as well as four alternative
measures of capacity value. As discussed in Section 2.1, capacity payments are made
to electricity generators to remain open and available, thereby ensuring desired reserve
margins. Capacity costs are zero or close to it during off-peak hours because electricity
demand can be easily met by existing inframarginal generators (plants that are not close
to the margin between staying in the market and exiting). However, during peak hours
large capacity payments are required to ensure desired reserve margins. ERCOT has no
capacity market and, not coincidentally, has higher energy market prices than California
during peak hours.
In California, generation capacity is procured at the monthly level (that is, capacity contracts obligate generators to be available every hour of one month). In order to value
energy savings in a given hour, we need to allocate these monthly capacity prices across
individual hours. We do this in several different ways and report the results of each. In
the first approach, we use hourly load data to calculate the hour-of-the-day with the highest average load each month. We then assign the capacity contract price for that month
entirely to that hour-of-the-day. This means dividing the monthly contract price by the
number of days in the month, and assigning the resulting amount to the peak hour. In
other specifications, we divide the capacity contract price evenly over the top two or three
hours-of-the-day with the highest load each month. The final approach treats each day of
load data as a single observation of daily load shape in a given month. We calculate the historical likelihood that each hour-of-the-day was the daily peak hour, and allocate monthly
capacity prices to hours of the day proportionally according to these probabilities.
Incorporating capacity values substantially increases the value of electricity during peak
periods. In California during August, for example, capacity values increase the value of
electricity during peak evening hours to between $200 and $600 per megawatt hour. And,
overall, the pattern is very similar across the four approaches for allocating capacity value
across hours. As expected, allocating the entire capacity value to the single highest-load

15

hour results in the highest peak, though the other approaches have similar shapes. In
addition, the general shape of the capacity-inclusive hourly values for California matches
the shape in Texas, providing some reassurance that our allocation strategy recovers the
price shape that would exist in an energy-only market.12 The value of electricity in Texas
surges in August to $200+ during the late afternoon, considerably higher than the marginal
cost of any generator.
An alternative approach to valuing capacity would be to use engineering estimates for the
cost of new electricity generating equipment like a natural gas combustion turbine plant.
This would address the concern that capacity markets may not be in long-run equilibrium,
and thus may not reflect the true long-run cost of capacity. Some market participants
have argued, for example, that the recent influx of renewables into U.S. electricity markets
has pushed capacity market prices down below long-run equilibrium levels. If this is the
case then over time entry and exit decisions should lead to increased capacity prices and
it would be straightforward to repeat our calculations with updated data. Larger capacity
prices would lead to larger variation in economic value between off-peak and peak, thus
strengthening our central findings.
The calculations which follow also account for line losses in electricity transmission and
distribution. In the United States, an average of 6% of electricity is lost between the point
of generation and the point of consumption (DOE, 2016, Table 7.1), so 1.0 kilowatt hour
in energy savings reduces generation and capacity requirements by 1.06 kilowatt hours.
Line losses vary over time by an amount approximately proportional to the square of
total generation. We incorporate these losses explicitly following Borenstein (2008) and, in
practice, they range from 4.4% during off-peak periods to 8.4% during ultra-peak periods.
Incorporating line losses thus further increases the variation in economic value between
off-peak and peak.

4.2

Correlation between Savings and Value

Figure 5 shows the correlation between energy savings and the value of energy. Panel A
compares hourly average energy savings to energy prices only. Panel B compares the same
savings estimates to the sum of energy and capacity values. Each marker in each plot
12
We return to this point later, when we show that valuing energy savings using the Texas price shape
yields similar results to our approach using California energy and capacity prices.

16

corresponds to an hour-of-day by month-of-year pair (for example, 1:00–2:00 p.m. during
November). The vertical axes show average hourly energy savings. These are the 288 β
coefficients from estimating Equation 2. In Panel A, the horizontal axis shows average
wholesale energy prices from California for 2010–2014. In Panel B, the horizontal axis
shows energy and capacity values, using the probabilistic allocation method for capacity
prices described in Section 4.1.
Several facts are apparent in Panel A. First, the summer months include many more highprice realizations than the winter months. We use blue markers to indicate April through
September, and the number of intervals with energy prices above $40 per MWh is clearly
higher during these summer months. Second, this energy-efficiency investment delivers
much larger savings in the summer. We saw this before in Figure 3, with average savings
in excess of 0.1 kilowatt-hours per hour in many summer hours.
The figure also includes least-squares fitted lines for April–September (in red) and October–
March (in yellow). The fitted line for summer slopes steeply upward. In the top panel,
predicted savings when energy prices are $55/MWh are twice as large as predicted savings
at $35/MWh. The fitted line for winter, however, is essentially flat. This energy-efficiency
investment delivers essentially zero electricity savings in all hours during the winter, so
there is little correlation between savings and prices.
The same patterns are apparent in Panel B. However, this panel emphasizes the importance of accounting for hourly capacity values. There are a few ultra-peak hours in the
summer when generation capacity is extremely valuable, and the value of energy surges
to above $200/MWh. Air conditioner investments deliver above-average savings in all of
these hours.

4.3

Quantifying the Value of Energy Savings

Table 2 quantifies the value of the energy savings from this investment. We report estimates
using five alternative approaches for valuing electricity. In column (1) we ignore capacity
values and use wholesale energy prices only. For each hour-of-day and month-of-year pair,
we multiply our estimate of electricity savings in that period by the average wholesale price
in the California market in that period. Summing up these hourly values across all days
of the year gives the annual value of electricity savings. Dividing total annual value by

17

total annual savings gives the average value of each megawatt hour saved, which is what
we report in Row (A) of the table. Under this calculation that accounts for timing, the
average value of savings is $45 per megawatt hour. This is 17% higher than the naive value
estimate using average annual prices and ignoring timing, as in Row (B).
In columns (2) through (5) we incorporate capacity values. Each column takes a different
approach to allocating monthly capacity payments across hours of the day, as described
in Section 4.1 and shown graphically in Figure 4. Incorporating capacity values significantly increases the value of air conditioning investments to $68 per megawatt hour. This
reflects the positive correlation between electricity savings and peak hours. Air conditioning investments save electricity during the hours-of-day and months-of-year when large
capacity payments are needed to ensure that there is sufficient generation to meet demand.
The naive calculation that ignores timing greatly understates these capacity benefits. The
naive estimate in Row (B) increases only modestly from $39 per megawatt hour to $46 per
megawatt hour after including capacity value. This reflects the fact that most hours have
zero capacity value, so while a few peak hours have capacity values well above $100 per
megawatt-hour the average across the year is only about $6.50 per megawatt hour.
Exactly how we account for capacity values has little impact, changing the estimated timing
premium only slightly across Columns (2) through (5). This is because the estimated
energy savings are similar during adjacent hours, so spreading capacity costs across more
peak hours does not significantly impact the estimated value of savings. In the results that
follow we use the “top 3 hours” allocation (Column (4)) as our preferred measure, but
results are almost identical using the other allocation methods.13
13
Results are also similar using alternative specifications that: 1) distinguish between weekdays and weekends/holidays, or 2) compare to load-weighted average prices. In the first of these, we account for weekends
(including holidays) by estimating twice as many coefficients (576), one for each hour-of-day, month-of-year,
and weekend or weekday combination. Savings are then valued using weekend- and weekday-specific hourly
wholesale prices. Capacity values are assigned to weekdays only, consistent with the significantly higher
level of net system load. This more complicated specification yields quite similar results, with a timing
premium of 46% compared to 48% in the baseline specification. In the second of these, we compare our main
estimates to load-weighted average prices instead of simple average prices. The load weights are calculated
using hourly CAISO load from SNL. The timing premium relative to load-weighted average prices is 39%.

18

4.3.1

How Might These Values Change in the Future?

Air conditioners are long-lived investments, so it is also worth considering how the associated timing premiums could change in the future. Environmental policies that favor
renewable energy technologies are expected to cause significant changes in electricity markets. California, for example, has a renewable portfolio standard which requires that the
fraction of electricity sourced from renewables increase to 33% by 2020 and 50% by 2030.
These high levels of renewables penetration, and, in particular, solar generation, make
electricity less scarce during the middle of the day, and more valuable in the evening after
the sun sets (CAISO, 2013). The expected steep increase in net load during future evening
periods has prompted concern among grid managers and policymakers.
To examine how this altered price shape could affect the value of energy efficiency, we
performed a sensitivity analysis using forecast prices and load profiles for California in
2024 from Denholm et al. (2015).14 The authors provided us with monthly energy prices
by hour-of-day, and net load forecasts by hour-of-day and season for a scenario with 40%
renewable penetration. We calculated future capacity values by allocating current monthly
capacity contract prices over the three highest net load hours of day in each future month.
Under these assumptions, the timing premium increases from 48% to 74%. Air conditioning
efficiency improvements are even more valuable in this future scenario because increased
solar penetration shifts peak prices further into the late afternoon and early evening, when
energy savings are largest.
This estimate should be interpreted with caution. Predicting the future requires strong
assumptions about electricity demand, natural gas prices, the deployment of electricity
storage, and other factors. This calculation does, however, show how predicted future
prices can be incorporated into this framework for evaluating potential impacts.

4.4

Savings Profiles for Selected Investments

We next bring in engineering estimates of hourly savings profiles for air conditioning and a
wide variety of other energy-efficiency investments. We compare the engineering estimates
14
In related work, Martinez and Sullivan (2014) uses an engineering model to examine the potential for
energy efficiency investments to reduce energy consumption in California from 4:00 p.m. to 7:00 p.m. on
March 31st (a typical Spring day), thereby mitigating the need for flexible ramping resources.

19

for air conditioning to our econometric estimates. Then we use the engineering estimates
for other investments to explore more broadly the question of whether energy efficiency
delivers at the right time. The engineering estimates that we use come from the Database
for Energy Efficient Resources (DEER), a publicly-available software tool developed by the
California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC).15 These are ex ante estimates of energy
savings, constructed using weather data and engineering information on the technological
characteristics of the different technologies.
Figure 6 compares our econometric estimates with engineering estimates for residential air
conditioning investments in this same geographic area. Since our interest is in when savings
occur, both panels are normalized to show the share of total annual savings that occur in
each month and hour (Section 3.5 includes a comparison of total savings amounts). The
two savings profiles are broadly similar, but there are interesting differences. First, the
econometric estimates indicate peak savings later in the evening. The engineering-based
savings estimates peak between 4 p.m. and 5 p.m., while the econometric estimates peak
between 6 p.m. and 7 p.m. This difference is important and policy-relevant because of
expected future challenges in meeting electricity demand during sunset hours, as discussed
in the previous section.
There are other differences as well. The econometric estimates show a significant share of
savings during summer nights and even early mornings, whereas the engineering estimates
show savings quickly tapering off at night during the summer, reaching zero at midnight.
It could be that the engineering estimates are insufficiently accounting for the thermal
mass of California homes and how long it takes them to cool off after a warm summer day.
The econometric estimates also show greater concentration of savings during the warmest
months. Both sets of estimates indicate July and August as the two most important
months for energy savings. But the engineering estimates indicate a significant share of
savings in all five summer months, and a non-negligible share of savings during winter
months. In contrast, the econometric estimates show that almost all of the savings occur
June through September with only modest savings in October and essentially zero savings
in other months.
15

The DEER is used by the CPUC to design and evaluate energy-efficiency programs administered by
California investor-owned utilities. For each energy-efficiency investment the DEER reports 8,760 numbers,
one for each hour of the year. We use the savings profiles developed in 2013/2014 for the Southern California
Edison service territory. See the Appendix and http://deeresources.com for data details.

20

Differences between ex ante predictions and ex post econometric evaluations are not unusual for energy efficiency technologies (Davis et al., 2014; Fowlie et al., 2015; Allcott and
Greenstone, 2015) or for other frequently-subsidized technologies such as improved cookstoves (Hanna et al., 2016). These previous studies underscore the value of grounding
ex-ante predictions using actual ex-post data from the field. In our case, however, we find
that the ex-ante and ex-post estimates for air conditioning predict broadly similar patterns
for the timing of savings. This rough accuracy gives us confidence in using engineeringbased savings profiles for a broader set of energy-efficiency investments in the analyses that
follow.
Figure 7 plots hourly savings profiles for eight different investments, four residential and
four non-residential. Savings profiles for additional energy-efficient investments are available in the online appendix. The profiles are remarkably diverse. The flattest profile is
residential refrigeration, but even this profile is not perfectly flat. Savings from residential
lighting investments peak between 8 p.m. and 9 p.m. all months of the year, while savings
from residential heat pumps peak at night during the winter and in the afternoon during
the summer. The non-residential profiles are also interesting, and quite different from the
residential profiles. Whereas savings from residential lighting peak at night, savings from
commercial and industrial lighting occur steadily throughout the business day. Commercial
and industrial chillers and air conditioning follow a similar pattern but are much more concentrated during summer months. Finally, savings from commercial and industrial heat
pumps are assumed to peak only in the summer, unlike the residential heat pumps for
which the engineering estimates assume both summer and winter peaks.

4.5

Comparing the Value of Alternative Investments

Finally, we calculate timing premiums for this wider set of investments. Just as we did
in Table 2, we calculate timing premiums as the additional value of each investment in
percentage terms relative to a naive calculation that ignores timing. As before, we value
electricity using both wholesale prices and capacity payments, and we incorporate data not
only from California but from five other U.S. markets as well.
Table 3 compares investments and markets. Each column is a different U.S. market. Each
row is a different energy-efficiency investment. The first row uses our econometric estimates,
and all other rows use the engineering savings profiles described in Section 4.4. We present
21

estimates for California (CAISO), Texas (ERCOT), the Mid-Atlantic (PJM), the Midwest
(MISO), New York (NYISO), and New England (NE-ISO). See the appendix for details on
prices in these additional markets. Capacity values are allocated to the three highest-load
hours of the day in each month in CAISO and NYISO, and to the 36 highest hour-of-day by
month-of-year pairs in PJM, MISO, and ISONE (ERCOT has no capacity market).
Air conditioning investments in California and Texas have the highest timing premiums.
This is true regardless of whether the econometric or engineering estimates are used, and
reflects the relatively high value of electricity in these markets during summer afternoons
and evenings. In other U.S. markets air conditioning has a timing premium greater than
zero, but nowhere else is the value as high as in California and Texas (states that between
them represent 21% of total U.S. population).
Other investments also have large timing premiums. Commercial and industrial heating
and cooling investments, for example, all return premiums of about 25%, reflecting the
relatively high value of electricity during the day. This is particularly true in CAISO and
ERCOT (30+%).
The timing premiums of other investments, like refrigerators and freezers, are much lower.
The savings from these investments are only weakly correlated with system load. Lighting,
as well, does surprisingly poorly as the savings occur somewhat after the system peak in
all U.S. markets and disproportionately during the winter, when electricity tends to be less
valuable. This could change in the future as increased solar generation moves net system
peaks later in the evening, but for the moment both residential and non-residential lighting
have timing premiums of about 10% or below in all markets. There are no investments
with negative timing premiums, reflecting the fact that all of these investments are at least
weakly positively correlated with demand (no investment disproportionately saves energy
in the middle of the night, for example).
The timing premiums reported in this table rely on many strong assumptions. For example,
we have econometric estimates for only one of the nine technologies, so these calculations
necessarily rely heavily on the engineering estimates. In addition, although we have incorporated capacity payments similarly for all markets, there are differences in how these
markets are designed that make the capacity payments not perfectly comparable. These
important caveats aside, the table nonetheless makes two valuable points: (1) that timing
premiums vary widely across investments and that, (2) these broad patterns are likely to
22

be similar across U.S. markets.

5

Conclusion

Hotel rooms, airline seats, restaurant meals, and many other goods are more valuable
during certain times of the year and hours of the day. The same goes for electricity. If
anything, the value of electricity is even more variable, often varying by a factor of ten or
more within a single day. Moreover, this variability is tending to grow larger as a greater
fraction of electricity comes from solar and other intermittent renewables. This feature of
electricity markets is widely understood yet it tends to be completely ignored in analyses
of energy-efficiency policy. Much attention is paid to quantifying energy savings, but not
to when those savings occur.
In this paper, we’ve shown that accounting for timing matters. Our empirical application
comes from air conditioning, one of the fastest growing categories of energy consumption
and one with a unique temporal “signature” that makes it a particularly lucid example.
We found that energy-efficiency investments in air conditioning lead to a sharp reduction
in electricity consumption in summer months during the afternoon and evening. We then
used electricity market data to document a strong positive correlation between energy
savings and the value of energy.
Overall, accounting for timing increases the value of this investment by about 50%. Especially important in this calculation was accounting for the large capacity payments received
by electricity generators. In most electricity markets in the U.S. and elsewhere, generators earn revenue through capacity markets as well as through electricity sales. These
payments are concentrated in the highest demand hours of the year, making electricity in
these periods much more valuable than is implied by wholesale prices alone.
We then broadened the analysis to incorporate a wide range of different energy-efficiency
investments. For every single investment which we consider, the energy savings are at least
weakly positively correlated with energy value. Thus, ignoring timing understates the
value of all energy-efficiency investments, though to widely varying degrees. Residential
air conditioning has an average timing premium of 29% across markets. Commercial and
industrial heat pumps, chillers, and air conditioners have 25-30% average premiums. Lighting, in contrast, does considerably worse with a 8-10% average premium, reflecting that
23

these investments save electricity mostly during the winter and at night, when electricity
tends to be less valuable. Finally, refrigerators and freezers have average premiums below
5%, as would be expected for an investment that saves approximately the same amount of
electricity at all hours of the day.
These results have immediate policy relevance. For example, energy-efficiency programs
around the world have tended to place a large emphasis on lighting.16 These programs
may well save large numbers of kilowatt hours, but they do not necessarily do so during
time periods when electricity is the most valuable. Rebalancing policy portfolios toward
different investments could increase the total value of savings. We find a remarkably wide
range of timing premiums across investments so our results suggest that better optimizing
this broader portfolio could yield substantial welfare benefits.
Our paper also highlights the enormous potential of smart-meter data. Our econometric
analysis would have been impossible just a few years ago with traditional monthly billing
data, but today more than 50 million smart meters have deployed in the United States
alone. This flood of high-frequency data can facilitate smarter, more evidence-based energy
policies that more effectively address market priorities.

References
Alcott, Hunt, “Real-Time Pricing and Electricity Market Design,” Working Paper, NYU
2013.
Allcott, Hunt and Michael Greenstone, “Measuring the Welfare Effects of Energy
Efficiency Programs,” Working Paper July 2015.
Arimura, T., S. Li, R. Newell, and K. Palmer, “Cost-Effectiveness of Electricity
Energy Efficiency Programs,” Energy Journal, 2012, 33 (2), 63–99.
Barbose, G., C. Goldman, I. Hoffman, and M. Billingsley, “The Future of Utility
Customer-Funded Energy Efficiency Programs in the United States: Projected Spending
and Savings to 2025,” Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory Working Paper, LBNL-5803E 2013.
16
For example, in California, 81% of estimated savings from residential energy efficiency programs come
from lighting. Indoor lighting accounted for 2.2 million kilowatt-hours of residential net energy savings
during 2010–2012. Total residential net savings were 2.7 million kilowatt-hours. California Public Utilities
Commission 2015. “2010–2012 Energy Efficiency Annual Progress Evaluation Report.”

24

Boomhower, Judson and Lucas W Davis, “A Credible Approach for Measuring Inframarginal Participation in Energy Efficiency Programs,” Journal of Public Economics,
2014, 113, 67–79.
Borenstein, Severin, “The Long-Run Efficiency of Real-Time Electricity Pricing,” Energy Journal, 2005, pp. 93–116.
, “The Market Value and Cost of Solar Photovoltaic Electricity Production,” Center for
the Study of Energy Markets, 2008.
and Lucas W Davis, “The Distributional Effects of US Clean Energy Tax Credits,”
in “Tax Policy and the Economy, Volume 30,” University of Chicago Press, 2015.
and Stephen Holland, “On the Efficiency of Competitive Electricity Markets with
Time-Invariant Retail Prices,” RAND Journal of Economics, 2005, 36 (3), 469–493.
Bushnell, James, “Electricity Resource Adequacy: Matching Policies and Goals,” Electricity Journal, 2005, 18 (8), 11 – 21.
California Energy Commission, “The Electric Program Investment Charge: Proposed
2012-2014 Triennial Investment Plan,” CEC-500-2012-082-SD, 2012.
California Independent System Operator, “Demand Response and Energy Efficiency:
Maximizing Preferred Resources,” CAISO, 2013.
California Public Utilities Commission, “California Energy Efficiency Strategic Plan:
January 2011 Update,” San Francisco, CA: CPUC, 2011.
Callaway, Duncan, Meredith Fowlie, and Gavin McCormick, “Location, Location, Location: The Variable Value of Renewable Energy and Demand-Side Efficiency
Resources,” Energy Institute at Haas Working paper, 2015.
Cramton, Peter and Steven Stoft, “A Capacity Market that Makes Sense,” Electricity
Journal, 2005, 18 (7), 43–54.
Davis, Lucas W., “Durable Goods and Residential Demand for Energy and Water: Evidence from a Field Trial,” RAND Journal of Economics, 2008, 39 (2), 530–546.
Davis, Lucas W, Alan Fuchs, and Paul Gertler, “Cash for Coolers: Evaluating a
Large-Scale Appliance Replacement Program in Mexico,” American Economic Journal:
Economic Policy, 2014, 6 (4), 207–238.
and Paul J Gertler, “Contribution of Air Conditioning Adoption to Future Energy
Use under Global Warming,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2015,
112 (19), 5962–5967.
Denholm, Paul, Matthew O’Connell, Gregory Brinkman, and Jennie Jorgenson, “Overgeneration from Solar Energy in California: A Field Guide to the Duck
25

Chart,” National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Tech. Rep. NREL/TP-6A20-65023,
Nov, 2015.
Dubin, Jeffrey A., Allen K. Miedema, and Ram V. Chandran, “Price Effects of
Energy-Efficient Technologies: A Study of Residential Demand for Heating and Cooling,”
RAND Journal of Economics, 1986, 17 (3), 310–325.
Evergreen Economics, “AMI Billing Regression Study,” 2016.
Fowlie, Meredith, Michael Greenstone, and Catherine Wolfram, “Do Energy
Efficiency Investments Deliver? Evidence from the Weatherization Assistance Program,”
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 2015.
Gayer, Ted and W Kip Viscusi, “Overriding consumer preferences with energy regulations,” Journal of Regulatory Economics, 2013, 43 (3), 248–264.
Hanna, Rema, Esther Duflo, and Michael Greenstone, “Up in Smoke: The Influence
of Household Behavior on the Long-Run Impact of Improved Cooking Stoves,” American
Economic Journal: Economic Policy, February 2016, 8 (1), 80–114.
Holland, Stephen P and Erin T Mansur, “The Short-Run Effects of Time-Varying
Prices in Competitive Electricity Markets,” The Energy Journal, 2006, pp. 127–155.
Houde, S. and J.E. Aldy, “Consumers’ Response to State Energy Efficient Appliance
Rebate Programs,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, Forthcoming.
Joskow, P. and D. Marron, “What Does a Negawatt Really Cost? Evidence from
Utility Conservation Programs,” Energy Journal, 1992, pp. 41–74.
Joskow, Paul, “Competitive Electricity Markets and Investment in New Generating Capacity,” AEI-Brookings Joint Center for Regulatory Studies Working Paper 2006.
and Jean Tirole, “Reliability and Competitive Electricity Markets,” RAND Journal
of Economics, 2007, 38 (1), 60–84.
Martinez, Sierra and Dylan Sullivan, “Using Energy Efficiency to Meet Flexible Resource Needs and Integrate High Levels of Renewables Into the Grid,” Conference Proceedings 2014.
Metcalf, Gilbert E and Kevin A Hassett, “Measuring the Energy Savings from Home
Improvement Investments: Evidence from Monthly Billing Data,” Review of Economics
and Statistics, 1999, 81 (3), 516–528.
Meyers, Stephen, Alison A. Williams, Peter T. Chan, and Sarah K. Price, “Energy and Economic Impacts of U.S. Federal Energy and Water Conservation Standards
Adopted From 1987 Through 2014,” Lawrence Berkeley National Lab, Report Number
LBNL-6964E 2015.

26

Novan, Kevin and Aaron Smith, “The Incentive to Overinvest in Energy Efficiency:
Evidence From Hourly Smart-Meter Data,” U.C. Davis Working Paper April 2016.
PRISM Climate Group, http://prism.oregonstate.edu, Oregon State University 2016.
U.S. DOE, Energy Information Administration, “Monthly Energy Review June
2016,” 2016.

27

Figure 1: The Effect of New Air Conditioner Installation on Electricity Consumption

-.3

Hourly Eletricity Consumption (KWh)
-.2
-.1
0
.1

.2

Summer

-3

-2

-1
0
1
Years Before and After Replacement

2

3

2

3

-.3

Hourly Eletricity Consumption (KWh)
-.2
-.1
0
.1

.2

Winter

-3

-2

-1
0
1
Years Before and After Replacement

Notes: These event study figures plot estimated coefficients and ninety-fifth percentile confidence intervals
describing average hourly electricity consumption during July and August and January and February,
respectively, before and after a new energy-efficient air conditioner is installed. Time is normalized relative
to the year of installation (t = 0) and the excluded category is t = −1. The regression includes year by
climate zone fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by nine-digit zip code.

-.6

Hourly Electricity Consumption (KWh)
-.4
-.2

0

Figure 2: Electricity Savings by Temperature

<40 40

46

52

58

64

70

76

82

88

94

>100

Daily Mean Temperature (°F)

Notes: This figure plots regression coefficients and ninety-fifth percentile confidence intervals from a single
least squares regression. The dependent variable is average electricity consumption at the household by
day-of-sample level. Coefficients correspond to 22 indicator variables for daily mean temperature bins,
interacted with an indicator variable for after a new air conditioner installation. Each temperature bin
spans three degrees; the axis labels show the bottom temperature in each bin. The regression also includes
household by month-of-year fixed effects and day-of-sample by climate zone fixed effects. Temperature data
come from PRISM, as described in the text. Standard errors are clustered at the nine digit zip code level.

29

Hourly Electricity Consumption (KWh)
-.3
-.2
-.1

0

Figure 3: Electricity Savings by Hour-of-Day

All Other Months

-.4

July and August

1 am

4 am

8 am

Noon

4 pm

8 pm

Midnight

Notes: This figure plots estimated coefficients and ninety-fifth percentile confidence intervals from 48 separate least squares regressions. For each regression, the dependent variable is average electricity consumption
during the hour-of-the-day indicated along the horizontal axis. All regressions are estimated with householdby-week observations and control for week-of-sample by climate zone and household by month-of-year fixed
effects. The sample for all regressions includes all households who installed a new air conditioner between
2012 and 2015, and all summer- or non-summer months, as indicated. Standard errors are clustered by
nine-digit zip code.

30

Figure 4: Wholesale Electricity Prices and Capacity Values

500

0

0

100

100

200

200

300

300

400

500
400

California - August

600

600

California - February
Energy Market Only
Top Hour
Top 2 Hours
Top 3 Hours
Probability-Weighted

1 am

4 am

8 am

Noon

4 pm

8 pm

4 am

8 am

4 pm

8 pm

11 pm

4 pm

8 pm

11 pm

500
400
300
200
100
0

0

100

200

300

400

500

Noon

Texas - August

600

Texas - February

600

1 am

11 pm

1 am

4 am

8 am

Noon

4 pm

8 pm

11 pm

1 am

4 am

8 am

Noon

Notes: This figure shows the average hourly value of electricity in February and August in California and Texas, under
various assumptions about capacity value in California. The vertical axis units in each figure are dollars per megawatthour. The hour labels on the horizontal axis refer to the beginning time of each one-hour interval. See text for details.

Figure 5: Correlation Between Savings and Prices, By Season

.3

Panel A. Energy Prices Only

Average Savings (KWh/Hour)
.1
.2

April - September
October - March

r = 0.69

0

r = 0.08

20

30

40
Average Value ($/MWh)

50

60

.4

Panel B. Energy and Capacity Prices
April - September
October - March
Average Savings (KWh/Hour)
.2
.3
.1

r = 0.45

0

r = -0.01

0

100

200
Average Value ($/MWh)

300

400

Notes: These scatterplots show the correlation between electricity savings and the value of electricity. Each
observation is an hour-of-day by month-of-year pair (e.g. 1–2 p.m. during November). Electricity savings
are estimated using a regression which controls for household by hour-of-day by month-of-year and weekof-sample by climate zone fixed effects. Electricity savings are identical in Panels A and B. Panel A uses
wholesale electricity prices only, while Panel B also includes hourly capacity values. Energy and capacity
price data are from the California electricity market during 2011–2015. See text for details. The figure also
includes least squares fitted lines for April-September and October-March observations with the correlation
indicated in text above.

32

Figure 6: Comparing Estimates of Electricity Savings

.0008

Econometric Estimates
Jan
Feb
Mar
May
Jun
Jul
.0004

Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov

.0002

Dec

0

Share of Annual Savings

.0006

Apr

1am

4am

8am

Noon

4pm

8pm

Midnight

8pm

Midnight

.0008

Engineering Estimates
Jan
Feb
Mar
May
Jun
Jul
.0004

Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
.0002

Dec

0

Share of Annual Savings

.0006

Apr

1am

4am

8am

Noon

33

4pm

Figure 7: Savings Profiles for Selected Energy-Efficiency Investments
.0008

Feb

Mar

Mar

Apr

Apr

.0006

.0006

Feb

Share of Annual Savings

May
Jun
Jul

.0004

Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov

May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec

0

0

.0002

Dec

.0002

Share of Annual Savings

Residential Refrigerator or Freezer
Jan

.0004

.0008

Residential Lighting
Jan

1am

4am

8am

Noon

4pm

8pm

Midnight

1am

4am

.0008

Apr

.0006

.0006

Mar

Apr
Share of Annual Savings

Jun
Jul
.0004

Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov

8pm

Midnight

8pm

Midnight

8pm

Midnight

8pm

Midnight

May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec

0

0

.0002

Dec

.0002

Share of Annual Savings

Feb

Mar

4am

8am

Noon

4pm

8pm

Midnight

1am

4am

.0008

Mar

Apr

Apr

.0006

.0006

Feb

Mar

Share of Annual Savings

Jun
Jul
Aug

.0004

Noon

4pm

Jan

Feb

May

Sep
Oct
Nov

May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec

0

0

.0002

Dec

.0002

8am

Commercial and Industrial Chillers

Jan

.0004

.0008

Commercial and Industrial Lighting

Share of Annual Savings

4pm

Jan

Feb

May

1am

1am

4am

8am

Noon

4pm

8pm

Midnight

1am

4am

.0008

Mar

Apr

Apr

.0006

.0006

Feb

Mar

Share of Annual Savings

Jun
Jul
Aug

.0004

Noon

4pm

Jan

Feb

May

Sep
Oct
Nov

May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec

0

0

.0002

Dec

.0002

8am

Commercial and Industrial Heat Pump

Jan

.0004

.0008

Commercial and Industrial Air Conditioning

Share of Annual Savings

Noon

Residential Heat Pump

Jan

.0004

.0008

Residential Clothes Washer

8am

1am

4am

8am

Noon

4pm

8pm

Midnight

1am

4am

8am

Noon

4pm

Table 1: Average Energy Savings from a New Central Air Conditioner

Energy Savings Per Household (kWh/year)

Household by hour-of-day by month-of-year fixed effects
Week-of-sample by hour-of-day fixed effects
Week-of-sample by hour-of-day by climate zone fixed effects
Drop 8 weeks pre-installation
Number of observations
Number of households

(1)

(2)

(3)

375.3
(32.2)

358.0
(32.2)

436.3
(36.0)

Y
Y

Y

Y

Y

Y
Y

28.6 M
5,973

27.3 M
5,972

28.6 M
5,973

Notes: This table reports results from three separate regressions. The dependent variable in all regressions
is average hourly electricity consumption measured at the household by week-of-sample by hour-of-day
level. The main variables of interest in these regressions are 288 month-of-year by hour-of-day indicators
interacted with an indicator for observations after a new air conditioner installation. Annual average
energy savings is calculated as the weighted sum of these 288 estimates. Standard errors are clustered
by nine-digit zip code. The regressions are estimated using data from 2012 to 2015 for all participating
households.

35

Table 2: Does Energy Efficiency Deliver at the Right Time?

Energy Prices
Only

Energy Plus Capacity Prices,
Various Assumptions

(1)

Capacity
Value in
Top 4%
of Hours
(2)

Capacity
Value in
Top 8%
of Hours
(3)

Capacity
Value in
Top 12%
of Hours
(4)

Capacity
Value
Allocated
Probabilistically
(5)

(A) Accounting for Timing

$45.20

$67.66

$68.26

$67.80

$68.05

(B) Not Accounting for Timing

$38.71

$45.76

$45.75

$45.75

$45.75

17%

48%

49%

48%

49%

Average Value of Savings ($/MWh)

)
Timing Premium ( A−B
B

Notes: These calculations were made using estimated energy savings for each hour-of-day by month-of-year from the full
regression specification as in Column (3) in Table 1. Energy prices are wholesale electricity prices from the California
electricity market (CAISO-SP15-Day Ahead Market) between January 2011 and December 2015. Capacity prices are based
on Resource Adequacy contract prices reported in California Public Utilities Commission, “2013–2014 Resource Adequacy
Report”. In Columns (2), (3), and (4), monthly capacity prices are allocated evenly across the one, two, and three
(respectively) hours of the day with the highest average load each month. In Column (5), monthly capacity prices are
allocated to hours of the day based on their historical probability of containing the monthly peak load event. Hourly load
data are from SNL Financial.

36

Table 3: Timing Premiums for Selected Energy-Efficiency Investments

California
(CAISO)

Texas
(ERCOT)

MidAtlantic
(PJM)

Midwest
(MISO)

New
York
(NYISO)

New
England
(ISONE)

Average

A. Residential
Air Conditioning
(Econometric Estimates)

48%

54%

30%

21%

11%

9%

29%

Air Conditioning

64%

69%

33%

25%

26%

18%

39%

Lighting

12%

7%

7%

5%

9%

8%

8%

Clothes Washers

10%

14%

13%

13%

14%

13%

13%

Refrigerator or Freezer

7%

7%

3%

3%

3%

2%

4%

Heat Pump

6%

10%

4%

0%

3%

5%

5%

B. Commercial and Industrial
Heat Pump

38%

47%

27%

23%

23%

16%

29%

Chillers

34%

41%

23%

21%

18%

11%

25%

Air Conditioners

32%

39%

23%

21%

20%

13%

25%

Lighting

11%

13%

10%

9%

10%

8%

10%

Notes: This table reports the estimated timing premiums for nine energy efficiency investments. As in the final row
of Table 2, the statistics in each cell of this table represent the additional value (in percentage terms) compared to an
investment with a completely flat savings profile. Except for the first row (econometric estimates for air conditioning), all
estimates are based on engineering estimates of savings profiles from the California Public Utility Commission’s Database
for Energy Efficient Resources. Values are estimated using wholesale energy prices and capacity prices from six major
U.S. markets as indicated in row headings. See text for details. The final column is the simple average across markets.

37

Not For Publication Appendix

A

Electricity Market Data

A.1

Wholesale Electricity Prices and Load

Hourly wholesale price data are day-ahead prices from SNL Financial and are for 2011–2015. For
California, we use CAISO market at the SP-15 node. For New England, we use ISO-NE real-time
prices at the H Internal hub. For Texas, we use ERCOT real-time prices at the HB North hub. For
New York, we use NYISO real-time prices at the J Hub. For PJM, we use prices at the Western hub.
For MISO, we use prices at the Illinois hub. All times in the paper are reported in local prevailing time:
Standard Time or Daylight Time according to which is in effect. The load data in each market come
from the SNL hourly “Actual Load” series for 2011–2015. Appendix Figure 1 plots hourly average
load profiles by month-of-year for each market.

A.2

Capacity Prices

Capacity values were calculated for each electricity market under a range of assumptions. For each
market, we used auction or regulatory data to infer monthly or annual capacity prices, and allocated
those values across hours based on historical hourly load. Capacity market institutions vary across
regions, so capacity values are not perfectly comparable across markets. However, we have attempted
to use relatively comparable data and methods and to be transparent about our exact sources and
calculations.

A.2.1

California (CAISO)

There is no capacity auction in CAISO, but the California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC)
surveys utilities to track bilateral capacity contract prices. We use monthly capacity contract prices
from the CPUC “2013–2014 Resource Adequacy Report,” page 28, Table 13. This document reports
average, 85th-percentile, and maximum contract prices for each month. We use the 85th-percentile
values, on the reasoning that these provide a conservative estimate of the marginal cost of procuring
capacity (We could instead use the maximum, but choose the 85th percentile to limit the influence of
potential outlier observations). These reported prices include capacity contracts from 2013 through
2017. However, most of the reported transactions are for 2013–2015 (page 29, Figure 9).

A.2.2

New York (NYISO)

Capacity prices for New York come from NYISO’s monthly spot capacity auctions for the NYCA
region from May 2013 through April 2016. This auction runs two to four days prior to the beginning
of the month being transacted for. NYISO also runs auctions for six-month “strips” of summer or
winter capacity, as well as additional monthly auctions one to five months in advance.

1

Not For Publication Appendix

A.2.3

New England (ISO-NE)

Capacity prices for New England come from ISO-NE’s annual “forward capacity auctions” for 2013
through 2016, as reported by SNL Financial. We use the simple average of prices across the several
zones in the market.

A.2.4

Mid-Atlantic (PJM)

Capacity prices for PJM are “Market Clearing Prices” from the annual “Base Residual Auction.”
We use the simple average across years and geographic zones for 2013–2016. Data are from SNL
Financial.

A.2.5

Midwest (MISO)

Capacity prices for MISO come from annual capacity auction prices for 2013 through 2016. We use
the simple average of prices across the several geographic zones. Data are from SNL Financial.

2

Not For Publication Appendix

Appendix Figure 1: Load Profiles in Six Major U.S. Electricity Markets

60,000

(b) Texas (ERCOT)

Jan

Feb

May

Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec

50,000

Apr

May

Average Hourly Load (MW)

Mar

Apr

Jun

30,000

Jan

Mar

Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec

20,000

30,000

25,000

Average Hourly Load (MW)

35,000

Feb

40,000

40,000

(a) California (CAISO)

1am

4am

8am

Noon

4pm

8pm

Midnight

1am

4am

90,000

Mar

Apr

Apr

80,000

Feb

Mar

Average Hourly Load (MW)

May
Jun
Jul
Aug

100,000

4pm

8pm

Midnight

8pm

Midnight

8pm

Midnight

Jan

Feb

Sep
Oct
Nov

Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec

50,000

60,000

60,000

Dec

May

70,000

120,000

Jan

1am

4am

8am

Noon

4pm

8pm

Midnight

1am

4am

Feb

4pm

Feb
Mar

Apr

Apr

18,000

Mar

Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov

Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec

10,000

10,000

12,000

Dec

May

16,000

Average Hourly Load (MW)

May

20,000

Noon

Jan

14,000

25,000

Jan

15,000

8am

(f) New England (ISONE)
20,000

(e) New York (NYISO)

Average Hourly Load (MW)

Noon

(d) Midwest (MISO)

80,000

Average Hourly Load (MW)

140,000

(c) Mid-Atlantic (PJM)

8am

1am

4am

8am

Noon

4pm

8pm

Midnight

1am

3

4am

8am

Noon

4pm

Not For Publication Appendix

B
B.1

Additional Data Description
Program Data

The program data describe all 10,848 households who participated in the Quality Installation Program
program between 2010 and 2015. These data were provided by Southern California Edison. We
drop 968 duplicate participant records. These records have the exact same account number as other
participant records, so are clear duplicates. We also drop an additional 291 households who installed a
new heat pump rather than a new central air conditioner; the expected energy savings for heat pumps
follows a very different temporal pattern than the temporal pattern for air conditioning so it does not
make sense to include these participants. We further drop 2,431 households who participated before
the start of 2012; we use electricity consumption data beginning in 2012, so these early participants
would not contribute to our savings estimates. We also drop an additional 757 households who installed
rooftop solar at any time during our sample period; rooftop solar dramatically changes household net
electricity consumption (we only observe net consumption, not generation and consumption separately)
so we drop these households to avoid biasing our savings estimates. In addition, we drop 60 households
for whom we do not have a nine-digit zip code; a nine-digit zip code is required for merging with
temperature data, and we cluster all standard errors at the nine-digit zip code. We successfully
merged 94% of the participant records to the electricity consumption data, so we are left with a total
of 5,973 participants in our analysis dataset. Appendix Figure 2 shows the pattern of participation
between 2012 and 2015.

B.2

Electricity Consumption Data

The electricity consumption data describe hourly electricity consumption for all program participants.
We were provided with the complete history of hourly consumption for these households beginning
when each household received a smart meter and continuing until August 2015, or, in some cases,
somewhat before August 2015. Most Southern California Edison customers received a smart meter
for the first time in either 2011 or 2012. Appendix Figure 3 shows the number of participants with
smart meter billing data during each week of the sample.

B.3

Engineering-Based Savings Profiles

Appendix Figure 4 plots savings profiles for eight additional energy-efficiency investments. These figures are constructed in exactly the same way as Figure 7, and describe five residential investments and
three commercial/industrial investments. As described in the paper, these engineering-based savings
profiles come from the Database for Energy Efficient Resources (DEER), maintained by the California
Public Utilities Commission. We use values developed in 2013/2014 for DEER 2011, reported in the
file DEER2011-HrlyProfiles-SCE.xls. For each energy-efficiency investment the DEER reports 8,760
numbers, one for each hour of the year. We use these data to construct average hourly profiles by
4

Not For Publication Appendix

month. These savings profiles are intended to reflect average impacts in Southern California Edison
territory.
The underlying model that generates the DEER hourly profiles does not account for daylight savings
time. Building occupants are assumed to observe Standard Time for the full year. As a result, the
model inputs for physical phenomena such as solar angle and temperature are correct, but inputs
related to human schedules, like building opening times, are “off” by one hour. Some analysts adjust
for daylight savings after the fact by “shifting” the DEER profile one hour: that is, replacing predicted
savings for all hours during Daylight Time with predicted savings one hour later. This corrects building
schedules but introduces error in physical factors. Whether such a shift helps or hurts accuracy depends
on whether building schedules or physical factors are more important in determining hourly savings.
We do not make any adjustments to the DEER profiles in our main specifications. If we do impose
a “shift” during Daylight Time, the estimated timing premiums for DEER investments change only
slightly.

5

Not For Publication Appendix

0

100

Installations
200
300

400

500

Appendix Figure 2: Histogram of Installation Dates

Jan 2012

Jan 2013

Jan 2014
Month

6

Jan 2015

7
15

20

1/

7/

15

20

1/

1/

20
14

1/

7/

20
14

1/

1/

01
3

1/
2

7/

20
13

1/

1/

1/
20
12

7/

1/
20
12

1/
0

1,000

Number of Meters
2,000
3,000
4,000
5,000
6,000

Not For Publication Appendix

Appendix Figure 3: Number of Participants with Smart Meter Data

Not For Publication Appendix

Appendix Figure 4: Savings Profiles for Additional Energy-Efficiency Investments
.0008

Feb

Mar

Mar

Apr

Apr

.0006

.0006

Feb

Share of Annual Savings

May
Jun
Jul

.0004

Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov

May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec

0

0

.0002

Dec

.0002

Share of Annual Savings

Residential HVAC Refrigerant Charge
Jan

.0004

.0008

Residential HVAC Duct Sealing
Jan

1am

4am

8am

Noon

4pm

8pm

Midnight

1am

4am

.0008

Apr

.0006

.0006

Mar

Apr
Share of Annual Savings

Jun
Jul
.0004

Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov

8pm

Midnight

8pm

Midnight

May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec

0

0

.0002

Dec

.0002

Share of Annual Savings

Feb

Mar

4am

8am

Noon

4pm

8pm

Midnight

1am

4am

.0008

Mar

Apr

Apr

.0006

.0006

Feb

Mar

Share of Annual Savings

Jun
Jul
Aug

.0004

Noon

4pm

Jan

Feb

May

Sep
Oct
Nov

May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec

0

0

.0002

Dec

.0002

8am

Commercial and Industrial Lighting (Flourescent)

Jan

.0004

.0008

Residential Refrigerator Recycling

Share of Annual Savings

4pm

Jan

Feb

May

1am

1am

4am

8am

Noon

4pm

8pm

Midnight

1am

4am

.0008

Mar

Apr

Apr

.0006

.0006

Feb

Mar

Share of Annual Savings

Jun
Jul
Aug

.0004

Noon

4pm

8pm

Midnight

Jan

Feb

May

Sep
Oct

May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov

.0002

Nov
Dec

Dec

0

0

.0002

8am

Commercial and Industrial HVAC Duct Sealing

Jan

.0004

.0008

Commercial and Industrial HVAC Refrigerant Charge

Share of Annual Savings

Noon

Residential Building Shell Insulation

Jan

.0004

.0008

Residential HVAC Refrigerant and Ducts

8am

1am

4am

8am

Noon

4pm

8pm

Midnight

1am

8

4am

8am

Noon

4pm

8pm

Midnight

Not For Publication Appendix

C

Alternative Specifications Using Data from Non-Participants

This section presents estimates from alternative specifications which incorporate electricity consumption data from non-participating households. Overall, these alternative estimates are quite similar to
the main estimates in the paper.
The key challenge in our empirical analysis is to construct a counterfactual for how much electricity the
participants would have consumed had they not installed a new air conditioner. The analyses in the
paper construct this counterfactual using data from participants only, exploiting the natural variation
in the timing of program participation to control for trends in electricity consumption, weather, and
other time-varying factors. An alternative approach, however, is to estimate the model using data
from both participants and non-participants.
There are advantages and disadvantages with this alternative approach. The potential advantage of
including non-participant data is that these data may help better control for trends in electricity
consumption, weather, and other time effects, while also potentially improving the precision of the
estimates. The disadvantage is that non-participants tend to be quite different from participants,
making them potentially a less valid counterfactual. Without any ex ante reason to prefer one approach
over the other, it makes sense to report estimates from both approaches.
Appendix Table 1 provides descriptive statistics. The columns refer to three different samples. The
first column describes the 5,973 participants used for the main estimates in the paper. The second column describes a random sample of non-participants. We were provided with data from a 5% random
sample of Southern California Edison residential customers who did not participate in the program,
and this is a random subset of 5,973 households from that sample. Finally, the third column describes
a matched sample of non-participants. For the matched sample we selected non-participants based on
zip codes. In particular, for each participant, we randomly selected a non-participant from the same
nine-digit zip code, or five-digit zip code when nine-digit zip code is not available. Weather is a major
determinant of electricity consumption so this matching ensures that comparison households are experiencing approximately the same weather as the treatment households. In addition, households in close
geographic proximity tend to have similar income and other demographics. Some non-participants
matched to more than one participant, yielding 5,633 unique households in the matched sample of
non-participants. For both random and matched samples we excluded households with rooftop solar
or a missing nine-digit zip code, just as we did for participants.
Across all households, mean hourly electricity consumption is about one kWh per hour. Participants
tend to consume more than non-participants, especially during summer months. But this appears to
be largely a question of geography and the pattern of consumption in the matched sample is much
more similar to participants. More generally, the characteristics of the matched sample are more
similar but not identical to the characteristics of participants. Among participants, 13% are on the
low-income tariff, compared to 30% in the random sample and 25% in the matched sample. Similarly,
only 2% of participants are on the all-electric tariff, compared to 10% in the random sample and 6.5%

9

Not For Publication Appendix

in the matched sample.
We used these alternative samples to construct alternative estimates of several of our main results.
Appendix Figure 5 plots event study estimates analogous to Figure 1 in the paper. Whereas the event
study figure in the paper is estimated using data from participants only, these are estimated using
data from both participants and non-participants. The plots on the top include the random sample of
non-participants while the plots on the bottom include the matched sample. These alternative event
studies follow a very similar pattern to the event study figures in the paper. Summer consumption
drops sharply in the year that the new air conditioners are installed and the magnitude of this decrease
is 0.2 kilowatt hours per hour, identical to the decrease in the event study figure in the paper. Moreover,
the pattern for winter is very similar to the event study figure in the paper, with no change when the
new air conditioners are installed.
Next, Appendix Table 2 reports regression estimates of total energy savings from new air conditioner
installation. This table is constructed in exactly the same way as Table 1, but estimated using data
from both participants and non-participants. Including data from non-participants has little overall
effect. The estimates are slightly larger, but the pattern across specifications is similar, increasing
when dropping eight weeks pre-installation in Column (3).
Finally, Appendix Figure 6 plots estimates of energy savings by month-of-year and hour-of-day. These
figures are constructed in exactly the same way as Figure 6, but are estimated using data from both
participants and non-participants. Overall, including data from non-participants has very little effect
on the temporal pattern of savings. Electricity savings still tend to occur disproportionately during
July and August, and during the hours 3 p.m. to 9 p.m. In addition, during winter months the
estimates remain very close to zero during all hours of the day. Moreover, the random and matched
samples yield virtually identical estimates across hours and months.

10

Not For Publication Appendix

Appendix Figure 5: Event Study Figures, Alternative Specifications
Random Sample of Non-Participants

Hourly Eletricity Consumption (KWh)
-.2
-.1
0
.1
-.3

-.3

Hourly Eletricity Consumption (KWh)
0
-.2
-.1
.1

.2

Winter

.2

Summer

-3

-2

-1
0
1
Years Before and After Replacement

2

3

-3

-2

-1
0
1
Years Before and After Replacement

2

3

Matched Sample of Non-Participants

Hourly Eletricity Consumption (KWh)
-.2
-.1
0
.1
-.3

-.3

Hourly Eletricity Consumption (KWh)
-.2
-.1
0
.1

.2

Winter

.2

Summer

-3

-2

-1
0
1
Years Before and After Replacement

2

3

-3

11

-2

-1
0
1
Years Before and After Replacement

2

3

Not For Publication Appendix

Appendix Figure 6: Econometric Estimates of Electricity Savings, Alternative Specifications

.0008

Random Sample of Non-Participants
Jan
Feb
Mar
May
Jun
Jul
.0004

Aug
Sep
Oct

.0002

Nov
Dec

0

Share of Annual Savings

.0006

Apr

1am

4am

8am

Noon

4pm

8pm

Midnight

.0008

Matched Sample of Non-Participants
Jan
Feb
Mar
May
Jun
Jul
.0004

Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov

.0002

Dec

0

Share of Annual Savings

.0006

Apr

1am

4am

8am

Noon

4pm

8pm

Midnight

Not For Publication Appendix

Appendix Table 1: Smart Meter Data, Descriptive Statistics

(1)

Random
Sample of
Non-Participants
(2)

Matched
Sample of
Non-Participants
(3)

p-Value:
Column 1 vs
Column 2
(4)

p-Value:
Column 1 vs
Column 3
(5)

Mean Hourly Electricity Consumption
All Months
Summer Months (July and August)
Winter Months (January and February)

1.076
1.521
0.852

0.878
1.205
0.729

1.025
1.480
0.806

0.000
0.000
0.000

0.000
0.000
0.000

Type of Electricity Tariff
Proportion on Low-Income Tariff
Proportion on All-Electric Tariff

0.128
0.020

0.303
0.101

0.254
0.065

0.000
0.000

0.000
0.000

Participants

Notes: Columns (1), (2), and (3) report the variables listed in the row headings for the group listed at the top of the column.
There are a total of 5,973 participants and an equal number of non-participating households in the random and matched samples.
Electricity consumption is measured in kilowatt hours. Columns (4) and (5) report p-values from tests that the means in the
subsamples are equal.

Not For Publication Appendix

Appendix Table 2: Average Energy Savings, Alternative Specifications
(1)

(2)

(3)

Random Sample of Non-Participants
Energy Savings Per Household (kWh/year)

494.4
(42.8)

435.8
(42.6)

507.3
(47.5)

Number of observations
Number of households

27.0 M
5,976

27.0 M
5,976

26.4 M
5,975

Matched Sample of Non-Participants
Energy Savings Per Household (kWh/year)

447.9
(43.3)

434.5
(42.8)

503.4
(47.3)

Number of observations
Number of households

27.2 M
5,893

27.2 M
5,893

26.6 M
5,892

Y
Y

Y

Y

Y

Y
Y

Household by hour-of-day by month-of-year fixed effects
Week-of-sample by hour-of-day fixed effects
Week-of-sample by hour-of-day by climate zone fixed effects
Drop 8 weeks pre-installation

Notes: This table reports results from six separate regressions and is identical to Table 1 in the paper
except for the sample includes data on non-participating households. In particular, Panel A includes a random sample of non-participating households and Panel B includes a matched sample of non-participating
households in which the non-participating households are drawn from the same nine digit zip code as participating households. For computational reasons, we restrict these regressions to a 50% random sample
of participating households along with an equal number of non-participating households.

