                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




DIRECT AND SPILLOVER EFFECTS OF MIDDLE SCHOOL VACCINATION REQUIREMENTS

                                    Christopher S. Carpenter
                                       Emily C. Lawler

                                      Working Paper 23107
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23107


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2017




 Lawler acknowledges support from the Vanderbilt Economics Department’s Walter M. Noel
 Dissertation Fellowship. We thank Amanda Faulkner and Sandra Roush at the CDC for help
 with morbidity data. We thank Lenisa Chang, Monica Deza, Marie Griffin, Mike Lovenheim,
 Bill Schaffner, Lisa Schulkind, Sebastian Tello-Trillo, and seminar participants at the 2016
 APPAM Fall Research Conference, the University of Cincinnati, Colorado State University, and
 Vanderbilt University for helpful comments. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein
 are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
 Economic Research.

 NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
 peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
 official NBER publications.

 © 2017 by Christopher S. Carpenter and Emily C. Lawler. All rights reserved. Short sections of
 text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
 credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Direct and Spillover Effects of Middle School Vaccination Requirements
Christopher S. Carpenter and Emily C. Lawler
NBER Working Paper No. 23107
January 2017
JEL No. I1

                                         ABSTRACT

We study the direct and spillover effects of state requirements that middle school youths obtain a
tetanus, diphtheria, and pertussis (Tdap) booster prior to middle school entry. These mandates
increased vaccine take-up by 29 percent and reduced pertussis (whooping cough) incidence in the
population by a much larger 53 percent due to herd immunity effects. We also document cross-
vaccine spillovers: the mandates increased adolescent vaccination for meningococcal disease and
human papillomavirus (which is responsible for 98 percent of cervical cancers) by 8-34 percent,
with particularly large effects for children from low SES households.


Christopher S. Carpenter
Department of Economics
Vanderbilt University
VU Station B, Box #351819
2301 Vanderbilt Place
Nashville, TN 37235
and NBER
christopher.s.carpenter@vanderbilt.edu

Emily C. Lawler
Department of Economics
Vanderbilt University
VU Station B, Box #351819
2301 Vanderbilt Place
Nashville, TN 37235
emily.c.lawler@vanderbilt.edu
Direct and Spillover Effects of Middle School Vaccination Requirements




        Reductions in vaccine-preventable diseases through increased uptake of

vaccinations are some of the most significant public health improvements in

American history (Centers for Disease Control 1999). These improvements have

been particularly striking for diseases that have historically harmed infants and

young children such as measles, mumps, and rubella. Public policies, information

and education campaigns, and general changes in attitudes have all received credit

for dramatically reducing the incidence of these childhood diseases.

        Vaccination of slightly older adolescent children is also a key health

priority, but improvements for this age group have been slower and less

remarkable than for elementary school-age children.                      For example, while

HealthyPeople 2020 (HP2020) recommends maintenance of the already high

vaccination rates for kindergarten age children, those same recommendations

explicitly acknowledge the need to increase vaccination coverage for adolescents.

The Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) – an advisory body

that issues recommendations regarding vaccinations (similar to the United States

Preventive Services Task Force) – currently recommends four vaccinations for

routine administration to middle school age youths: one dose of tetanus-

diphtheria-acellular pertussis (Tdap) booster vaccine, one dose of meningococcal

conjugate vaccine (MCV), three doses of human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccine,

and an annual influenza vaccine. Of these, only the Tdap booster vaccination




                                               1
Direct and Spillover Effects of Middle School Vaccination Requirements




rates currently meet their HP2020 target of 80 percent.1 A particular challenge in

vaccinating adolescents is that they primarily encounter healthcare providers only

for acute injuries and sports-related physicals, and as a result they have much

lower rates of attachment to the healthcare system than individuals in other age

groups (Woodwell and Cherry 2004, Humiston and Rosenthal 2005).

         In an effort to increase adolescent vaccination rates and reduce the

morbidity consequences of vaccine-preventable diseases, in the last decade 46

states have adopted laws requiring adolescents to receive a Tdap booster prior to

middle school entry.2 We provide the first comprehensive quasi-experimental

evaluation of the effects of these middle school vaccination mandates on

vaccination take-up and on pertussis (whooping cough) morbidity using the

staggered timing of mandate adoption.                Prior studies in public health have

examined the effects of these vaccination policies by comparing means across

states stratified based on mandate status or have examined the experiences of

single states before and after a middle school mandate. However, no prior work

has used multiple states and years in the two-way fixed effects and event study

frameworks that have become standard in the economics literature.


1
  In contrast, the vaccination rate for 13-15 year olds for MCV in 2012 was 73.8 percent (target of
80 percent), and the seasonal influenza vaccination rate for children 6 months to 17 years was 46.9
percent in the 2010-11 flu season (target of 70 percent). The case of HPV is even worse: only
28.1 percent of girls and 6.9 percent of boys had received all three doses of the HPV vaccine by
2012, far below of the HP2020 target of 80 percent.
2
  As of January, 2015, nineteen of those 46 states also require MCV vaccination, and only two
states had adopted requirements that students receive the HPV vaccine series. No state requires
students to receive the influenza vaccine.




                                                2
Direct and Spillover Effects of Middle School Vaccination Requirements




        The primary outcomes we consider are receipt of vaccinations by the age

of 13 for Tdap (direct effect) and for MCV, HPV, and influenza (possible cross-

vaccine spillover effects). Using the same empirical models, we also estimate

mandate effects on the incidence of pertussis (protected by the Tdap booster) and

salmonellosis (which is not vaccine-preventable) in the population and by five-

year age groups. These morbidity analyses allow us to disentangle the extent to

which population morbidity effects are due to adolescents being directly targeted

by vaccine mandates versus herd immunity effects accruing to infants, younger

children, adults, and the elderly (i.e., cross-age spillovers).

        Understanding the effects of middle school vaccination requirements is

important for several reasons. First, the large majority of states have adopted

these requirements, and so it is important to document whether these laws have

worked to increase take-up of the covered vaccines and reduce morbidity from the

associated diseases. Notably, Figure 1 shows that adolescent vaccination rates for

Tdap and MCV have both increased sharply since they were approved by the

Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in 2005: while no youths were receiving

these vaccinations prior to 2005, by 2014 over 70 percent of adolescents had

received the immunizations.3 Second, there is substantial latitude for further

improvements if the middle school mandates are found to be effective at


3
  Disentangling the extent to which this increase is driven by mandates is particularly relevant
given that mandating vaccination prior to school entry has become increasingly controversial as
the anti-vaccination movement has gained popularity in the United States.




                                               3
Direct and Spillover Effects of Middle School Vaccination Requirements




increasing vaccination and reducing morbidity. In addition to the remaining states

adopting any vaccination requirements, states with existing requirements could

strengthen them (for example by requiring other vaccines in addition to Tdap).

        Third, the literature specifically regarding determinants of adolescent HPV

vaccination has largely failed to identify meaningful policy levers that could

increase HPV vaccine uptake among adolescents. As the HPV vaccine has the

largest gap between current and targeted immunization rates for adolescents,

understanding any credible policy lever to increase HPV vaccine uptake in this

age group is important. Finally, the literature on the effectiveness of public

policies at promoting adolescent health is relatively underdeveloped compared to

literatures on children at the younger and older ends of the age spectrum. While

we know a substantial amount about the causes and consequences of early child

health (Almond and Currie 2011, Almond et al. 2017) and high school student

health (Gruber 2001), there is comparatively less research on the critical period of

early adolescence. In addition to the clinical changes associated with puberty, the

vast majority of high risk behaviors are initiated during adolescence.

Documenting the role vaccination policies play in adolescent health therefore

contributes to a more complete picture of child development.4

        To preview, we find clear evidence that state laws requiring youths to

obtain a Tdap booster prior to middle school entry were extremely effective at




                                               4
Direct and Spillover Effects of Middle School Vaccination Requirements




directly increasing Tdap booster take-up.               Using the staggered timing of

implementation of the Tdap booster requirements across states, we find that

adoption of a Tdap booster mandate increased the likelihood that an adolescent

received a Tdap booster between 10 and 12 years of age by 13.4-13.6 percentage

points.     We also estimate the same difference-in-differences type models on

pertussis morbidity and find substantial reductions in disease incidence as a result

of the mandates, with an effect on population-wide pertussis incidence that is

much larger (53 percent reduction) than the effect on vaccination (29 percent

increase). Additional analyses using age-specific morbidity data from the CDC

confirm that the middle school vaccination requirements significantly reduced

pertussis morbidity not only for the age group directly affected (10-14 year olds)

but also for nearly all other age groups: infants, younger children, adults, and the

elderly. We also show that there are no systematic effects of the middle school

vaccination requirements on age-specific morbidity for salmonellosis (which is

not vaccine-preventable).

          Finally, we find evidence of cross-vaccination spillovers: in the 27 states

where the middle school requirement included only the Tdap booster and not the

MCV vaccine, we estimate that the Tdap booster requirement increased MCV

vaccination rates by 2.1-2.9 percentage points. Even more striking, we find that

the Tdap booster requirement significantly increased HPV vaccination initiation

4
    In fact, one reason why HPV-promoting public policies have been controversial is that some




                                               5
Direct and Spillover Effects of Middle School Vaccination Requirements




by 4.2-4.9 percentage points and HPV vaccination completion by 2.5-3.3

percentage points. These spillover effects are larger for youths from households

with low socioeconomic status (SES). Our results are the first to document that

middle school vaccination requirements induced extremely large improvements in

adolescent and child health. Furthermore, given the spillover effects to HPV

vaccination, there are likely to be large longer-run payoffs due to reduced risk of

HPV-caused cancers in both men and women, especially cervical cancer.

          Our paper proceeds as follows: Section I provides institutional background

on the mandates and conditions we study, and Section II provides a brief literature

review.     Section III describes the data and outlines the empirical approach.

Section IV presents the results, and Section V discusses and concludes.



                              I. Institutional Background

          In this section we briefly describe the diseases and vaccinations under

study as well as the middle school mandates and the mechanisms for spillovers.5

                                A. Conditions Under Study

          Tetanus, diphtheria, and pertussis (or ‘whooping cough’) are all diseases

caused by bacteria, and vaccination against them with a combination vaccine

series (currently DTaP) has been routinely recommended for young children since

the 1940s and 1950s. In 2005 a booster for the series, the Tdap vaccine, was


believe the HPV vaccine promotes sexual promiscuity.




                                               6
Direct and Spillover Effects of Middle School Vaccination Requirements




approved for use in adolescents and was recommended to be administered at age

11 or 12. Tetanus and diphtheria are now extremely rare diseases, but pertussis

remains endemic in the United States. Pertussis is a highly contagious respiratory

disease that is transmitted from person-to-person through respiratory secretions.

Infants under 12 months of age are hospitalized in 63 percent of pertussis cases

(compared to 2 percent of infected adolescents) and account for 90 percent of the

pertussis-related mortality.          Notably, infants cannot be vaccinated against

pertussis until 2 months of age.

           Meningococcal disease includes infections of the lining of the brain and

spinal cord (meningitis) and of the bloodstream (septicemia and bacteremia). We

focus on the quadrivalent meningococcal conjugate vaccine (MCV4), which

provides protection against most meningococcal disease serogroups and has been

routinely recommended for children age 11 or 12 since 2005.

           Human papillomavirus (HPV) is the most common sexually transmitted

infection in the United States: the CDC estimates that nearly all sexually active

men and women will get HPV at some point in their lives. Most HPV infections

are asymptomatic and resolve on their own. High risk types of HPV cause the

large majority of the cancers of the cervix, vagina, penis, anus, mouth, and throat.

The first HPV vaccine was licensed for use in females in the United States in June

2006, and it was further approved for males in October 2009. The vaccine is only

5
    The Appendix provides more detailed information on each condition we study.




                                                 7
Direct and Spillover Effects of Middle School Vaccination Requirements




effective if it is given before an infection occurs. It is currently recommended

that all youths initiate the HPV vaccine series between ages 11-12.

         Seasonal flu (common in fall and winter months) is an acute and highly

contagious viral infection that causes mild to severe illness; among infants and the

elderly there is elevated risk of death due to complications. The flu vaccine varies

from season to season with respect to the particular strains of the influenza virus

that it protects against. The annual influenza vaccine was routinely recommended

for children over the age of 6 months for the first time in 2010.

     B. Middle School Vaccination Requirements and ACIP Recommendations

         There is a long history in the United States of using school-based

mandatory vaccination laws as a tool to increase vaccination rates, in part because

compulsory schooling laws provide an effective means for enforcement.6

Although all states presently mandate the receipt of some vaccines, there is

considerable variation in the set required for school attendance in each state




6
  A limitation to the effectiveness of mandates is the availability of individual exemptions. During
our sample period exemptions could be obtained for individuals whose religious beliefs oppose
vaccination in all but 2 states, and 20 states additionally allowed exemptions for
personal/philosophical beliefs (NCSL 2015a). All states grant exemptions for children who
cannot be vaccinated due to medical reasons. To our knowledge there is not good evidence on
how children who do not meet the vaccination requirements are induced to get the required
vaccinations (i.e., how the laws are enforced). School-based nurses are unlikely to be able to
fulfill the vaccination requirements, however, because most schools lack the administrative
requirements to handle the billing and reimbursement for the vaccinations.




                                                 8
Direct and Spillover Effects of Middle School Vaccination Requirements




(Malone and Hinman 2003).7 As of January 2015, forty-six states have adopted

middle school entry requirements for the Tdap booster (Figure 2).

        In the United States recommendations on the use of vaccines are set by the

Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). The ACIP is a 15

member committee composed of doctors and public health professionals and was

established in 1964. Their guidelines are directly linked to a number of health

policies, as many states anchor their laws to current ACIP recommendations.8

Currently the ACIP recommends that 11-12 year olds receive an annual influenza

vaccination, one dose of Tdap, three doses of HPV vaccine, and a single dose of

quadrivalent meningococcal conjugate vaccine.9

                                        C. Spillovers

        In this paper we examine the direct effects of Tdap booster mandates on

take-up of the Tdap booster and on pertussis morbidity among the targeted age

group (10-14 year olds), but we are also interested in two types of spillover



7
  There have been school vaccine mandates implemented in all 50 states and Washington D.C.
since 1980.
8
   For example, under the Affordable Care Act (ACA) preventive care provision (effective
September 23, 2010), all new insurance plans must provide all ACIP-recommended vaccines
without cost sharing. Moreover, once the ACIP designates a vaccine as ‘routinely recommended’,
the Vaccines for Children (VFC) program has to pay for them. Individuals are eligible for free
vaccinations under the VFC program if they are 18 years of age or younger, and are Medicaid-
eligible, uninsured, American Indian or Alaskan Native, or are underinsured.
9
  Out-of-pocket cost for this bundle of vaccines is potentially high. Walgreens, for example,
currently charges $249.99 for the first dose of the HPV vaccine, $214.99 for both the second and
third doses of the HPV vaccine, $133.99 for the meningococcal vaccine, $63.99 for the Tdap
booster, and $31.99 for the influenza immunization, for a total expense of nearly $700 (Walgreens
2016). Prior to the ACA, some private insurance plans covered some portion of these vaccines,




                                               9
Direct and Spillover Effects of Middle School Vaccination Requirements




effects. First, we examine the effects of the reduced disease transmission of the

10-14 year olds on the morbidity rates of younger and older individuals in the

state. In medical and public health literatures, this is termed the ‘herd immunity’

effect or the ‘community’ effect of the increased vaccinations induced by the state

Tdap mandates.         The second type of spillover we study is a cross-vaccine

spillover from state Tdap mandates to immunization rates for other non-mandated

vaccines, such as the MCV, HPV, or flu vaccines. These types of spillovers may

occur if the vaccine mandates cause increased contact with health care providers

who inform patients about and recommend receipt of other age-appropriate

vaccinations.       Alternatively, the mandates may directly increase parental

knowledge about other vaccines, perhaps through local news coverage or

information provided by the school or state department of health.10



                                    II. Literature Review

         Our paper relates to a substantial literature on the economics of infectious

diseases and vaccination (Philipson 2000). Philipson (1996) shows that higher

measles prevalence in an individual’s state is associated with earlier age at first



and several states adopted laws requiring private insurance plans in the state to cover the vaccines
(see Chang 2016a for evidence on these).
10
   Appendix Figure 1 shows an example of this type of information provided to parents by the
Wisconsin Department of Health. Question 9 on the flyer asks ‘Are there any other vaccines that
are recommended for my adolescent?’. The answer provided instructs parents that, even though
Tdap is the only immunization required under law for middle school entry, adolescents in this age
group are also recommended to receive MCV, HPV, and seasonal influenza vaccinations.




                                                10
Direct and Spillover Effects of Middle School Vaccination Requirements




measles vaccination, suggesting that vaccination responds to disease prevalence.

Oster (2016) finds a similar result for pertussis: whooping cough disease

outbreaks increase vaccination rates of children in the following year, with effect

sizes that are too large to reflect actual changes in disease risk. She interprets

these findings in a model where perceived disease risk is a function of whether the

agents are aware of any cases of the disease. Multiple studies have examined the

vaccination effects of the MMR-autism controversy in which a study in a major

medical journal in the UK suggested that the measles, mumps, and rubella vaccine

might cause autism, showing that highly educated mothers responded to the

information by reducing MMR vaccination rates for their children (Anderberg et

al. 2011, Chang 2016b).11

          Our study of middle school vaccination requirements is also related to

several quasi-experimental studies in economics that have examined similar

vaccination mandates for kindergarten or childcare entry. Abrevaya and Mulligan

(2011) show that such vaccination mandates for varicella were associated with

significant increases in varicella vaccination rates for young children using data

from the 1996-2007 National Immunization Survey (NIS).                    Lawler (2016,

forthcoming) also uses NIS data to study similar requirements for hepatitis A and

finds that both ACIP recommendations and state vaccination requirements

significantly increased vaccination rates for hepatitis A and reduced hepatitis A

11
     Numerous subsequent studies have failed to confirm a link between the MMR vaccine and




                                              11
Direct and Spillover Effects of Middle School Vaccination Requirements




morbidity. Ward (2011) and Luca (2014) both consider the implementation of the

first modern school vaccination laws (adopted between 1963 and 1980) and find

reductions in morbidity and mortality for the vaccine-targeted diseases.12

        Within the medical and public health literature there are a number of

papers that have considered the effects of state middle school vaccination

mandates. These studies generally use only a limited number of years (e.g., 2009

and 2010 in Bugenske et al. 2012) or study the experiences of a small number of

states (e.g., New York in Kharbanda et al. 2010), though it is important to note

that some of these studies have explicitly examined the possibility of cross-

vaccine spillovers from Tdap vaccination mandates to take-up of MCV and HPV

vaccines (see, for example, Dempsey and Schaffer 2010). Our work builds on the

prior work in public health by using much more comprehensive nationally

representative data spanning adoption of numerous state Tdap vaccination

mandates. The data and variation allow us to carefully test the parallel trends

assumption required for identification in difference-in-differences models and to



autism, and the original study that purported the connection was retracted in 2010.
12
   Other economics studies examine the role of non-mandate related vaccination policies. For
example, Chang (2016a) finds that state insurance mandates for various childhood vaccinations
significantly increased infant vaccination rates, and Ward (2014) finds that influenza
immunization campaigns are effective at increasing influenza vaccination rates. A number of
studies focus particularly on the HPV vaccine, although we are not aware of any quasi-
experimental literature that has identified significant causal determinants of adolescent HPV
vaccination rates. Moghtaderi and Adams (2016) use NIS-Teen data from 2008-2011 and find no
effects of: requirements that parents and/or students receive education and information about the
HPV vaccine; mandates requiring the vaccine for school entry; mandates requiring private insurers
to cover the HPV vaccine; laws granting pharmacists the authority to give vaccinations; and
general awareness campaigns. Trogdon et al. (2016) use NIS-Teen data from 2008-2014 and also




                                               12
Direct and Spillover Effects of Middle School Vaccination Requirements




estimate credible event study models that trace out the immediate and medium

term effects of the mandates. We also go further by directly examining age-

specific morbidity effects.


                   III. Data Description and Empirical Approach

        Data on adolescent vaccination come from the 2008-2013 waves of the

National Immunization Survey – Teen (NIS-Teen).13                        This survey targets

adolescents between 13 and 17 years of age and includes provider-verified

immunization histories and basic household sociodemographic characteristics. In

these data we observe immunization status for Tdap, MCV, HPV, and seasonal

influenza vaccinations, as well as for other childhood vaccines. Importantly for

our analyses, these data include the age (in month and year) at which the child

received each vaccination, even if it occurred years prior to the NIS-Teen

interview. We use this information to restrict our analysis to vaccination doses

received between 10 and 13 years of age - the age range for which middle school

mandates are most likely to be binding. Our effective sample for vaccination

outcomes is therefore individuals who were age 13 between 2004 and 2013.

        Our data on disease incidence were obtained directly from the CDC.

These data consist of counts of cases of a subset of nationally notifiable diseases




find no significant relationship between pharmacist vaccination authority and either HPV vaccine
initiation or completion.




                                              13
Direct and Spillover Effects of Middle School Vaccination Requirements




by state, year, and five-year age group.14 Availability of information on age

group enables us to separately estimate the direct effects (on the ages targeted by

the mandates) and indirect effects (on other age groups) of the middle school

mandates on disease incidence in the population.                      We observe morbidity

outcomes for pertussis (covered by Tdap) and salmonellosis (a control condition

not protected by any vaccine) from 2002-2013.

         To estimate the effect of the Tdap mandates, we estimate standard

difference-in-differences models that rely on plausibly exogenous variation in the

timing of mandate adoption across states. Specifically, we estimate:

     (1) Yist = β0 + β1Xist + β2(MIDDLE SCHOOL ENTRY VACCINATION

         MANDATE)st + β3Zst + β4Ss + β5Tt + β6Ss*TREND + εist

where Yist are the vaccination take-up outcomes available in the NIS-Teen data

for individual i in state s who was age 13 in year t. Xist is a vector of individual

characteristics available in the NIS-Teen, including: child’s gender, fixed effects

for child’s age at time of survey, child’s race/ethnicity (Hispanic, white, black,

with other as the excluded category), number of other children under 18 years old

living in the home (only 1 child, 2 to 3 children, with 4 or more children as the


13
   Due to a survey revision in 2014, later waves of the NIS-Teen survey are not directly
comparable to the 2008-2013 waves (CDC 2015b). For completeness, however, we show that our
results are robust to adding the 2014 and 2015 waves in an Appendix table described below.
14
   The number of cases of nationally notifiable diseases is voluntarily reported to the CDC by state
and territorial jurisdictions for nationwide monitoring of disease. These data are considered the
most comprehensive information available on U.S. national disease incidence, although they only
include reported cases and thus represent a substantial undercount of true disease incidence. For




                                                14
Direct and Spillover Effects of Middle School Vaccination Requirements




excluded category), maternal education (less than high school, high school, some

college, relative to the excluded category of college or above), maternal age group

(34 years old or younger, 35 to 44 years old, with 45 years or older as the

excluded category) and an indicator variable for whether the mother is married.15

         MIDDLE SCHOOL ENTRY VACCINATION MANDATE is a vector of

disease-specific indicator variables equal to one in the states and years in which

there is a vaccination mandate in effect. Since all vaccination outcomes are

observed at age 13 in year t, a vaccination mandate is considered in effect for

individual i in state s if there was a binding mandate for 12 year olds in year t-1 or

for 11 year olds in year t-2 in state s.16 This vector captures vaccination mandates

for the tetanus, diphtheria, and pertussis booster (Tdap),17 the meningococcal

vaccine (MCV), and the human papillomavirus series (HPV).                              These three

vaccines are the only immunizations for which routine administration is

recommended for the first time at age 11 or 12.                      The influenza vaccine is


example, they do not include cases where the individual did not go to a health care provider or
misdiagnosed cases.
15
   Number of other children living in the home and maternal education, age group, and marital
status are all observed at the time of the survey, not at the time the child was age 13. Our main
results are not sensitive to removing the controls in the X vector.
16
   There is variation across states in the age for which a middle school mandate is binding. For
example, some states require vaccination by age 11, while in others the requirement is by age 12.
Additionally, some requirements are by grade level, in which case we consider 6 th grade entry
equivalent to age 11 and 7th grade entry equivalent to age 12. We assume that there is no cross-
state mobility between ages 11 and the time at which the child is surveyed (age 13-17); in a
robustness test we have confirmed that our results are not sensitive to restricting attention to the 78
percent of our sample whose current state of residence matches their birth state of residence.
17
   Among the states that have Tdap booster mandates, 9 previously had mandates requiring receipt
of a TD-containing vaccine prior to middle school entry. In the baseline specification we consider
a TD-containing mandate to be equivalent to a mandate for the Tdap booster.




                                                  15
Direct and Spillover Effects of Middle School Vaccination Requirements




additionally recommended annually for ages 6 months through 18 years, although

as of 2016 no state has mandated receipt of the influenza vaccine for school

attendance. Information on the timing of adoption of these mandates was taken

from the Immunization Action Coalition.18

         Additionally contained in the vector MIDDLE SCHOOL ENTRY

VACCINATION MANDATE are indicator variables that capture if individuals

faced a newly binding `catch up’ middle school entry mandate for hepatitis A,

hepatitis B, varicella, or a measles-containing vaccine.                   These vaccines are

frequently required for middle school entry, although they are routinely

recommended for children much younger than middle school age. Consequently,

many states have companion kindergarten entry mandates for these diseases.

State requirements regarding these other diseases are still relevant, however,

because some share of young adults are ‘caught’ by them (i.e., they were too old

at time of implementation of the disease-specific kindergarten vaccination

mandate in their state to have been treated by it).19


18
    Only two states over our sample period ever adopted a mandate for HPV vaccination
(Washington DC and Virginia). Given the well-documented challenges associated with credibly
estimating difference-in-differences models with a small number of policy changes (Conley and
Taber 2011, MacKinnon and Webb 2016), we do not present estimates for this variable, as they
are highly sensitive to specification. Twenty two states adopted MCV vaccination requirements,
and we control for these throughout. Note that a state never adopted a middle school vaccination
requirement for MCV prior to adopting one for Tdap.
19
   Specifically, we consider there to be an effective (newly binding) `catch up’ mandate if a child
residing in state s who is age 13 in year t was subject to the mandate for middle school entry (i.e.
there was a mandate effective for 12 year olds in year t-1 or for 11 years olds in year t-2) and was
not subject to a mandate for the same vaccine prior to kindergarten entry (i.e. there was not a
mandate in effect in state s for the same vaccine when the child was age 5 in year t-8).




                                                16
Direct and Spillover Effects of Middle School Vaccination Requirements




         Zst is a vector of other potentially relevant state vaccination-related public

policies, some of which have been studied in prior work. These include: state

mandates requiring insurance policies to cover various vaccinations (Chang

2016a) and well-child visits;20 nonmedical exemption policy (Bradford and

Mandich 2015);21 state education requirements for the HPV and meningococcal

vaccines (Moghtaderi and Adams 2016, Bugenske et al. 2012); high school and

college immunization requirements for the meningococcal vaccine; immunization

mandates for childcare/kindergarten entry for other diseases such as hepatitis A

(Lawler 2016, forthcoming); and income eligibility thresholds for the state

Medicaid/Children’s Health Insurance Program.22 The Z vector also includes

controls for state unemployment rates and state demographic characteristics

(fraction female; fraction black, Hispanic, and other non-white races; fraction of

individuals with high school degrees and college or more, fraction of individuals

under 21 and between 21-64; and fraction of individuals below the federal poverty




20
   Note that the preventive services requirement of the Affordable Care Act (ACA) required most
insurance plans to cover ACIP-recommended vaccinations and well-child visits without cost-
sharing beginning September 2010. As such, we turn the insurance coverage indicator ‘on’ for all
observations in years 2011 and later.
21
   Over our sample period only two states changed their exemption policy for vaccinations; both
did so by eliminating the personal belief exemption.
22
   In a series of robustness checks we verify our results are unaffected by the inclusion of several
additional controls for which we have data only for a subset of our sample years. These include:
state Section 317 funding, state Vaccines For Children (VFC) policies, and scope of practice laws
regarding pharmacists with respect to prescribing authority for the HPV vaccine (Trogdon et al.
2016)




                                                17
Direct and Spillover Effects of Middle School Vaccination Requirements




line).23 In order to best capture the state characteristics that would have feasibly

been relevant to the vaccination decisions considered here, all variables contained

in the Zst vector are measured in the year in which the child was 11 (year t-2). We

also include in the Zst vector the lagged population-wide pertussis and

meningococcal disease rates in the state, following Philipson (1996) and Oster

(2016). All models additionally control for a full set of state, year of survey, and

birth cohort fixed effects. In some models we further control for state-specific

linear time trends where we interact each state fixed effect with a variable

TREND that equals 1 in 2004, 2 in 2005, and so forth. We use sample weights

provided by NIS-Teen, and we cluster standard errors at the state level (Bertrand,

Duflo, and Mullainathan 2004).24

        β2 represents our coefficient of interest and reflects the direct and indirect

(i.e., spillover) effects of middle school vaccination requirements.                   The key

identifying assumption in this difference-in-differences style model is that

vaccination outcomes would have evolved similarly in states that did and did not

adopt a middle school vaccination requirement in the absence of the mandate, or

alternatively that there were no other unobserved shocks to vaccination outcomes


23
   State unemployment rates come from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. State demographic
characteristics are from the Census Bureau. Our main results are not sensitive to removing the
controls in the Z vector.
24
   In 2011 NIS-Teen switched from single frame landline-only sampling to dual frame sampling
that included landlines and cell phones, and in that year only both single and dual frame weights
are provided. In all reported estimates we use dual frame weights starting in 2011. We verify that
none of the main results is sensitive either to this decision or to the exclusion of weights.




                                               18
Direct and Spillover Effects of Middle School Vaccination Requirements




in states coincident with adoption of the middle school vaccination requirements.

In some models we replace the vector of Tdap, MCV, and HPV middle school

vaccination requirements with a series of indicator variables representing years

relative to adoption of the respective state vaccination requirement. This event-

study style framework allows us to explicitly address and visually inspect the

parallel trends assumption in the two-way fixed effects framework.

        For analyses of the morbidity data we estimate a variant of equation (1)

where the outcome is the age-specific morbidity rate in state s and year t,

measured as number of cases per 100,000 population. Age-specific morbidity

rates are calculated using the number of cases for each disease by age group (as

provided to us by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention) and age-

specific population estimates from the Surveillance and Epidemiologic End

Results (SEER) system.          In this more aggregate level model, all policies are

considered in effect at the start of the calendar year following implementation,

and we include the state unemployment rate and state-level demographic controls

from year t-1. These models use age-specific state population weights.



                                        IV. Results

                                   A. Descriptive Statistics

        Appendix Table 1 presents means of key variables relating to Tdap, MCV,

HPV and influenza vaccination-related outcomes and demographic characteristics




                                              19
Direct and Spillover Effects of Middle School Vaccination Requirements




from the NIS-Teen 2008-2013 sample. By age 13, 45 percent of the NIS-Teen

sample received the Tdap booster, and 35.7 percent received the MCV vaccine.

These rates are respectively higher in states that had implemented a middle school

entry mandate for the Tdap booster by 2013.                    Notably, MCV and HPV

vaccination rates were also higher in states with Tdap vaccination requirements in

place by 2013, though the same is not true for seasonal influenza vaccination

rates. In the full sample, HPV and seasonal influenza vaccination rates are both

substantially lower than Tdap booster vaccination rates at 23.6 and 12.2 percent,

respectively. As mentioned previously, Figure 1 shows the trends in Tdap, MCV,

and HPV vaccination rates for adolescents over our sample period; all have

increased substantially since 2005. Appendix Table 1 also shows that slightly less

than half the NIS-Teen sample is female, over 57 percent is white, 20 percent is

Hispanic, and over 14 percent is black. At the time of the survey, over a third of

the mothers in the NIS-Teen sample were college educated, while 69.6 percent

were married.

              B. Direct Effects of Tdap Mandates for Middle School Entry

        In Table 1 we present difference-in-differences estimates of the effects of

state middle school vaccination mandates on vaccine take-up and morbidity

outcomes that take explicit advantage of the plausibly exogenous variation in the

timing of policy adoption across states. Columns 1 and 2 (without and with linear

state trends, respectively) of Table 1 present results from separate regressions of




                                              20
Direct and Spillover Effects of Middle School Vaccination Requirements




the model specified in equation (1) where the outcome variable is receipt of the

Tdap booster between ages 10 and 12. We report the coefficients on the policy

indicator for the state Tdap booster requirement.

         The results in columns 1 and 2 of Table 1 provide strong evidence that

Tdap vaccination mandates for middle school entry were effective at increasing

take-up of the Tdap vaccine. The estimate in column 1 indicates that Tdap

mandates were associated with a 13.4 percentage point increase in the likelihood

that an adolescent received a Tdap booster between 10 and 12 years of age, and

this finding is invariant to the inclusion of smooth state-specific linear time

trends. Figure 1 showed that over our sample period Tdap vaccination rates

increased from about 0 to 80 percent; the estimates in columns 1 and 2 of Table 1

indicate that Tdap mandates can explain about 17 percent of this overall

increase.25 We show visually event-study-based estimates of the direct effect of

Tdap mandates on Tdap-vaccine uptake in Figure 3 (the actual estimates from the

event study specification are presented in Appendix Table 2). Figure 3 shows that

the Tdap mandates induced large, immediate, and significant increases in Tdap

booster take-up, and there is no evidence of systematic trends prior to Tdap


25
   Note that vaccination rates are not 100%. This is due in part to the fact that five states still have
not adopted requirements for the Tdap booster as a condition of middle school entry. It is also due
to some amount of noncompliance, though the channels of noncompliance are quite rare. For
example, adolescents and parents can evade state Tdap booster requirements for middle school
entry by homeschooling their children, though nationally the rate of homeschooling is less than
3.5 percent during our sample period (Snyder, de Brey, and Dillow 2016). State mandates apply
to both private and public school students in the vast majority of states; only in four states is the
treatment of private school students unclear (CDC 2016b).




                                                  21
Direct and Spillover Effects of Middle School Vaccination Requirements




mandate adoption. This is consistent with the validity of the parallel trends

assumption required for identification.

        Were these increases in vaccination rates effective at reducing morbidity?

We present difference-in-differences estimates of the effect of Tdap mandates on

population-wide pertussis morbidity in columns 3 and 4 of Table 1. The outcome

variable in these columns is the population incidence rate of pertussis per 100,000

population. The estimates in columns 3 and 4 of Table 1 show clear evidence that

the Tdap booster requirements for middle school entry were effective at reducing

population-wide pertussis incidence. Specifically, we estimate that adoption of a

Tdap booster mandate significantly reduced pertussis morbidity by 3.7-4.7 cases

per 100,000 population, or by at least 53 percent relative to the sample mean. We

additionally present event-study estimates of the effect of the Tdap mandates on

population-wide pertussis morbidity in Figure 4 (coefficient estimates are

presented in Appendix Table 3).26 These results demonstrate that the mandate

effect on disease incidence was immediate and sustained, and also provide

evidence that the mandates were not implemented in response to particularly high

rates of disease in the state.

        The estimated size of the population-wide pertussis morbidity reduction is

striking given that the mandates we study here only directly applied to middle


26
  Figures 3 and 4 (event studies for Tdap vaccine take-up and pertussis morbidity, respectively)
show estimates from models without linear state trends. Estimates from the models with trends
were qualitatively similar (see Appendix Tables 2 and 3).




                                              22
Direct and Spillover Effects of Middle School Vaccination Requirements




school age youths. They suggest the presence of large herd immunity effects,

which we directly examine in Table 2. Specifically, Table 2 makes use of age-

specific morbidity data for two diseases: pertussis and salmonellosis (which is not

vaccine-preventable). With these data we estimate two-way fixed effects models

as in columns 3 and 4 of Table 1, but we replace the outcome variable with an

age-group specific rate of pertussis incidence. All regressions are weighted by

age-group specific population measures.             The results from this analysis are

presented in columns 1 and 2 of Table 2, and we report only the coefficient on the

single Tdap mandate indicator. Thus, each table entry is the coefficient from a

separate regression, where the relevant age group is provided in the row label. All

regressions include the full set of state-level controls and state and year fixed

effects; column (2) adds state-specific linear time trends.

        The results in Table 2 provide strong evidence that the middle school

vaccination requirements for the Tdap booster were extremely effective at

reducing morbidity among the targeted group: 10-14 year olds. We estimate that

a Tdap mandate reduced pertussis cases of 10-14 year olds by 16.54 cases per

100,000 population. Perhaps more strikingly, however, the Tdap mandates for

middle school entry are also estimated to significantly reduce pertussis morbidity

for every other age group, consistent with the possibility of large herd immunity

effects induced by the increased vaccination of disease transmitters (adolescents).

These reductions are statistically significant for nearly every age group and are




                                              23
Direct and Spillover Effects of Middle School Vaccination Requirements




insensitive to the inclusion of linear state trends. Moreover, they are large, both

absolutely and proportionally. The estimates for 0-4 year olds are nearly as large

in absolute terms as the direct reductions for 10-14 year olds whose vaccine

behaviors were directly affected, and the effects for the older adults relative to

their lower rate of pertussis morbidity are also very large in proportional terms.27

Large spillover effects to infant pertussis morbidity is not surprising, as infants

cannot be vaccinated against pertussis until two months of age, and it takes

multiple doses over several months for them to fully develop immunity.

          As a robustness/falsification analysis we also estimate the effects of the

Tdap mandates on age-specific salmonellosis morbidity, the only other disease for

which we were able to obtain age-specific morbidity data at the state/year level

from the CDC.          Salmonellosis is a relatively common infection caused by

salmonella bacteria, and humans are typically infected by eating contaminated

food.28     Symptoms include diarrhea, fever, and abdominal cramps, and the

morbidity consequences are most significant for infants and the elderly.

Salmonellosis is not vaccine-preventable; thus, if we observed effects of the Tdap

booster mandates on salmonellosis morbidity for 10-14 year olds (or for other age


27
   We show this visually in Appendix Figure 2 which shows the estimated proportional pertussis
morbidity reduction attributable to the Tdap mandates (relative to the age-group specific 2005
mean) across the life course. Appendix Figure 2 confirms that the effects of the Tdap mandates
for middle school entry were large across all age groups but were particularly effective for babies,
young children, 30-39 year olds (who are potentially the parents of the directly targeted
adolescents and their siblings), and the elderly.
28
   The mean rate of salmonellosis during our sample period was 12.6 cases per 100,000
population.




                                                24
Direct and Spillover Effects of Middle School Vaccination Requirements




groups), this would be suggestive of a model misspecification or an omitted

variables problem.          We present the estimates of the Tdap mandates on

salmonellosis morbidity in columns (3) and (4) of Table 2. The estimates are

small and statistically insignificant in all models. Thus, overall we find strong

evidence that the Tdap mandates for middle school entry generated large

reductions in pertussis morbidity that extended well beyond the directly targeted

age group (10-14 year olds).29

                                C. Cross-Vaccination Spillovers

         We next consider the potential for cross-vaccination spillovers among

middle school-aged children. For these analyses we take advantage of the fact

that among the 46 states that mandate receipt of any of the vaccines routinely

recommended for 11-12 year olds prior to middle school entry, all mandate the

Tdap booster, nearly half mandate the MCV vaccine, only 2 mandate HPV, and

none mandate seasonal influenza. In all states, Tdap was the first among this set

of vaccines to be required for middle school entry. If after controlling for all



29
  The cross-age morbidity spillovers documented in Table 2 might not be herd immunity effects
of there were cross-age behavioral spillovers to increased vaccination rates of non-targeted age
groups. We tested this possibility directly in Appendix Table 4 using vaccination data from the
2003-2015 National Immunization Survey, which is a counterpart to (and precursor of) the NIS-
Teen and which targets children age 19-35 months. Using a similar two-way fixed effects model
as presented in equation (1), we estimate the effect of the Tdap mandates for middle school entry
on the probability that a young child is up-to-date with the infant diphtheria, tetanus, and pertussis
vaccine, DTaP (for infants age 19-35 this is 4 doses). We find no evidence that Tdap mandates
were associated with meaningful changes in infant DTaP vaccination rates, and this null finding
was not sensitive to the presence of other children in the household. This suggests that the vast
majority of the 53 percent reduction in population-wide pertussis morbidity is driven by the 29




                                                 25
Direct and Spillover Effects of Middle School Vaccination Requirements




other middle school vaccination mandates there is an effect of the Tdap mandate

on receipt of other vaccines among middle school-aged individuals, then we

interpret this as evidence of cross-vaccination spillovers from Tdap booster

mandates to non-Tdap vaccination rates.

        We present these findings in Table 3 for the other ACIP-recommended

vaccines for adolescents: MCV (columns 1-2), HPV vaccine initiation by age 13

(columns 3-4), HPV vaccine completion by age 13 (columns 5-6), and seasonal

influenza vaccine between the ages of 10 and 13 (columns 7-8) for models

without and with linear state trends in the odd and even-numbered columns,

respectively.30 Results in Table 3 indicate the presence of cross-vaccine spillover

effects of Tdap mandates for middle school entry. The estimate in columns 1 and

2 of Table 3, for example, indicate that Tdap mandates increased the probability

an adolescent received the MCV vaccine by 2.1-2.9 percentage points, and these

estimates are statistically significant in models with linear state trends.31 The

Tdap mandate effect in these models is identified from the 27 states that adopted

Tdap requirements but not MCV requirements, as well as from the small number




percent increase in Tdap booster vaccination rates of 11-12 year olds (i.e. due directly to the
reduced transmission of the directly targeted 10-14 year olds).
30
   To account for the fact that the HPV vaccine was not approved for use in males until 2009, the
estimation sample for HPV vaccination outcomes is restricted to females who were age 13
between 2007-2013 and males who were age 13 between 2011-2013.
31
   In results not reported but available upon request, we also found a large direct effect of MCV
mandates on take-up of the MCV vaccine. This effect was similar in magnitude to the direct take-
up effect for the Tdap booster mandates.




                                               26
Direct and Spillover Effects of Middle School Vaccination Requirements




of states that first adopted a Tdap requirement and then years later adopted an

MCV requirement.

        Columns 3 through 6 of Table 3 also show striking evidence of sizable

cross-vaccination spillover from Tdap mandates to HPV initiation (columns 3 and

4) and completion (columns 5 and 6). Specifically, our estimates in columns 3

and 4 suggest that the Tdap mandates increased HPV vaccine initiation by 4.2-4.9

percentage points, and these estimates are highly statistically significant.

Moreover, columns 5 and 6 indicate that the Tdap mandates also significantly

increased completion of the three-dose series of the HPV vaccine on the order of

2.5-3.3 percentage points, and these estimates are not sensitive to inclusion of

state trends.32 Finally, columns 7 and 8 of Table 3 provide no evidence that Tdap

mandates increased take-up of the seasonal influenza vaccine.

        What might explain the null effect of the Tdap mandates on seasonal

influenza vaccination? One possibility is timing. Whereas vaccines for Tdap,

MCV, and HPV are generally available throughout the year – including prior to


32
   Appendix Table 5 shows event study estimates for the Tdap mandate spillovers to MCV
vaccination, HPV vaccine initiation, and HPV vaccine completion. In general we find little
evidence of systematic pre-trends in outcomes prior to Tdap mandate adoption and significant
immediate increases in vaccination rates for MCV, HPV initiation, and HPV completion, none of
which were mandated by the policy whose event time coefficients are reported. Appendix Table 6
shows that if we define cross-vaccine spillovers in a different way by considering outcomes that
are the combination of the Tdap booster with each of the other ACIP-recommended vaccines, we
continue to find that the Tdap mandates for middle school entry had spillover effects at increasing
take-up of MCV and HPV vaccines. Appendix Table 7 shows that our spillover estimates are
robust to adding data from the 2014 and 2015 NIS-Teen which used different criteria for
determining completeness of provider vaccination data than earlier years. Appendix Table 8
shows that the spillover effects to MCV and HPV are largely driven by years in which the




                                                27
Direct and Spillover Effects of Middle School Vaccination Requirements




the start of the school year – the same is not true for seasonal influenza. Typically

seasonal flu vaccines become available in September, after most adolescents have

started the school year. Thus, it could be that when parents take their child to a

healthcare provider for the required Tdap vaccine prior to middle school entry, the

MCV and HPV vaccines are in stock but the seasonal flu vaccine is not.33

                                        D. Heterogeneity

        In Table 4 we investigate heterogeneity in the effects of the Tdap

mandates for middle school entry on Tdap vaccination rates (the direct effect) and

on vaccination rates for the other routinely recommended vaccines for youths in

this age range where we find spillovers: MCV, HPV vaccine initiation, and HPV

vaccine completion. In each entry of Table 4 we present the relevant subsample

mean and the coefficient on the Tdap mandate (and its associated standard error)

from a separate fully saturated regression model with linear state trends. The

outcome variable for each regression is provided in the column header, and each

row reports results for a different subsample; we reprint the results for the full

sample in the top row. We separately consider the effects of the Tdap mandate on




respective vaccine was ACIP-recommended for adolescents. Note that once a vaccine is ACIP-
recommended, the Vaccines for Children program must pay for it for low-income children.
33
   Also, the flu vaccine is different from the other vaccines in that it was the most recent to be
recommended for routine vaccination, and it is also recommended for adolescents and the rest of
the members of the household on an annual basis. It could be that getting the flu vaccine is a
qualitatively different experience for the family, since everyone in the household is recommended
to get the influenza vaccine every year.




                                               28
Direct and Spillover Effects of Middle School Vaccination Requirements




vaccination by gender of the child (rows 2 and 3), race/ethnicity (rows 4-6), and

maternal education (rows 7 and 8).

        Table 4 reveals several intriguing patterns with respect to heterogeneous

effects. First, we find that the direct compliance effect of the Tdap mandate on

Tdap vaccination rates (column 1) is larger for girls than for boys and is larger for

mothers with lower education relative to mothers with higher education. This

gradient could reflect that the children with lower educated mothers have a lower

vaccination rate in the absence of the mandate and thus have further to go to

achieve compliance.34

        In terms of spillover effects, several patterns are notable. The gender

difference in the direct effect (i.e., larger effects for girls) is also observed for the

spillover effect of Tdap mandates to MCV and HPV vaccination.                               For

race/ethnicity, we find that although the direct effect of the Tdap mandate is

largely invariant to race/ethnicity, the spillover effects to HPV vaccine initiation

are much larger for Hispanic youth compared to white youth, while the spillover

effects to HPV vaccine completion are largest for black youths.

        Finally, the spillover effects of Tdap mandates also vary by maternal

education. Lower educated mothers are much more likely to take-up the MCV


34
   Specifically, in states and years in which there is not an effective Tdap mandate for middle
school entry, the Tdap vaccination rate by age 13 for children whose mothers have a bachelor’s
degree is 35.9 percent, compared to 27.8 percent of children whose mothers whose highest level of
education is less than a bachelor’s degree. A similar pattern holds if we stratify by household
income instead of mother’s education.




                                               29
Direct and Spillover Effects of Middle School Vaccination Requirements




vaccine and the first dose of the HPV vaccine for their children compared to

highly educated mothers when their state requires their child to receive the Tdap

booster. This could happen for several possible reasons, including the possibility

that the information sent home to parents is more of a treatment for low educated

mothers than for highly educated mothers (who may have known about the other

ACIP-recommended vaccines even in the absence of the Tdap mandate). It could

also be that the low-educated mothers are complying with the Tdap mandate in

qualitatively different ways than the high-educated mothers, for example by

visiting different types of providers where the interaction leads to different types

of cross-vaccine spillovers.35            Finally, it could be an income effect: if low-

educated mothers are more likely to be eligible for free vaccines under the

Vaccines for Children program, the increased take-up of the MCV vaccines could

reflect downward sloping demand. We explore mechanisms in the next section.

                                             E. Mechanisms

          Our final sets of analyses attempt to disentangle mechanisms for the

cross-vaccination spillovers observed in Tables 3 and 4. We think of the possible

mechanisms in two broad categories: patient (here, parent) behavior versus


35
   In results not reported but available upon request, we additionally considered heterogeneity in
mandate effects by type of provider; the NIS-Teen data allow us to identify whether the child
received her vaccines exclusively at public institutions (e.g., public clinics), exclusively at private
institutions (e.g., a physician’s office or retail clinic), or in a mixture of public and private settings.
Acknowledging that the type of setting chosen for vaccination is endogenous, we do find that the
spillover effects of the Tdap mandates were significantly larger for individuals whose vaccinations
were received exclusively at public providers.




                                                    30
Direct and Spillover Effects of Middle School Vaccination Requirements




provider behavior. It could be that state Tdap mandates cause parents to receive

new information about other age-recommended vaccines, and this causes them to

get their child vaccinated against those conditions even though it is not required.

Alternatively, it could be that the Tdap mandates simply cause parents to have

increased contact with the healthcare system whereby a provider informs them

about other age-appropriate vaccinations for their child. These mechanisms have

different implications for the most effective policy for increasing immunizations.

        We investigate these issues in a variety of ways. First, we consider a

range of outcomes available in the NIS-Teen data: whether the parent had ever

heard of human papillomavirus or HPV; whether the parent had ever heard of a

vaccine for HPV called Gardasil or Cervarix (the trade names for the HPV

vaccine); whether the parent reports that her doctor ever recommended the HPV

vaccine; and whether the child had an 11-12 year old well-child visit. A positive

effect of the Tdap mandates on these last two outcomes – receipt of a physician

recommendations for the HPV vaccine or the likelihood that the youth had a well-

child visit (and thus interacted with the healthcare system) – would provide

evidence in favor of the provider mechanism. The first two outcomes, parental

knowledge of HPV and of the HPV vaccine, are more ambiguous and could be

affected through receipt of new information regarding vaccination from the school

or through the provider channel. In the absence of other evidence for the provider

mechanism, however, an effect on these outcomes would lend support for the idea




                                              31
Direct and Spillover Effects of Middle School Vaccination Requirements




that patient behavior underlies the spillover. Table 5 presents these results for the

sample of youths who were age 13 at the time of survey (and for whom the

reference window of the questions is most recent and relevant). We find little

evidence that Tdap mandates are significantly associated with increases in the

likelihood of any of the outcomes except for a robust and statistically significant

increase in the likelihood of having had an 11-12 year old well-child visit. This

offers some mixed support for the provider mechanism, though in this case we

would have also expected Tdap mandates to have increased the likelihood of

having received a physician recommendation for the HPV vaccine.36

         We also investigated the patient mechanism using data from Google

Trends which captures the relative popularity of specific search terms in an area

from 2005 to the present. These data have been used by other scholars studying a

range of topics, including vaccination (see, for example, Oster 2016).                           The

advantage of the Google Trends data in our setting is that we can examine the

popularity of searches for, say, ‘Tdap’ to see if adoption of Tdap mandates for

middle school entry at the state level is associated with meaningful increases in

search behavior. Since parents far outnumber providers (and we think providers

are not using Google to find out about various vaccinations), any relationship


36
   It could also be that children are receiving vaccines that they or their parents are not aware they
are receiving. Anecdotally some parents follow a rule of thumb whereby they instruct the provider
to give any vaccination that is recommended for their child. While vaccine information statements
are required to be provided to parents, it is not obvious how much the parent/provider interaction
is an informed negotiation.




                                                 32
Direct and Spillover Effects of Middle School Vaccination Requirements




between the mandates and the search behavior is likely to reflect parent behavior.

At a minimum it may suggest that information about the Tdap vaccine is

disseminating broadly in the community following Tdap mandate adoption.

Moreover, we can examine searches for MCV and HPV-related terms as well to

provide additional tests of the role of information and parent search behavior in

driving the spillover effects.

        The results of the Google Trends analyses are presented in Table 6.

Specifically we present coefficients on the Tdap mandate in a two-way fixed

effects regression on the relative search popularity score provide by Google for

each state, where each state’s popularity is anchored at 100 in the month/year

combination for that state where the search was most popular. We also report the

coefficient on the pertussis rate in the state as an additional validity check, as

Oster (2016) shows using Google Trends data that disease outbreaks increase

vaccination in part by increasing information. The results in Table 6 provide

striking evidence in favor of an information-based mechanism driving the direct

and spillover effects of Tdap mandates for middle school entry. Columns 1 and 2

(without and with linear state trends, respectively) show that a Tdap mandate for

middle school entry is significantly and positively associated with increased

searches for ‘tdap’ and that the current pertussis rate in a state is also significantly

and positively associated with searches for ‘tdap’. Columns 3 and 4 and columns

5 and 6, respectively, show that the former relationship is also true for searches




                                              33
Direct and Spillover Effects of Middle School Vaccination Requirements




related to the meningococcal vaccine and HPV: the popularity of both searches in

a state is estimated to increase significantly when the state adopts a Tdap

mandate. This is strongly consistent with parent behavior playing an important

role in driving the cross-vaccine spillovers identified above.37



                             V. Discussion and Conclusion

        We provide a variety of analyses showing that state mandates requiring

Tdap vaccination prior to middle school entry were extremely effective at

significantly increasing Tdap vaccine uptake between the age of 10 and 12 by

13.4-13.6 percentage points, or by about 29 percent of the sample mean. Event

study analyses show that there are not systematic pre-trends in vaccination

outcomes prior to mandate adoption and that the direct vaccination effects of the

mandates occur immediately.           Similarly specified models of population-wide

morbidity show even larger effects of Tdap mandates on whooping cough: we

estimate a reduction on the order of 53 percent.                  Disaggregated pertussis

morbidity data by five year age group confirm that the Tdap mandates for middle

school entry substantially reduced pertussis rates among 10-14 year olds (whose

vaccination rates were directly affected) but also induced extremely large



37
  We also note that the fact we find any effect of state Tdap mandates on completion of the HPV
vaccine series – which requires three doses, each administered during separate visits to a
healthcare provider over a minimum of 6 months – strongly suggests that patient behavior has to
play an important role. Notably, this finding contrasts with that in Lawler (2016, forthcoming)




                                              34
Direct and Spillover Effects of Middle School Vaccination Requirements




reductions in pertussis morbidity for infants, younger children, older children,

young adults, adults, and the elderly.              These effects occurred due to herd

immunity, or the reduced transmission attributable to 10-14 year olds.

        We also find clear evidence of cross-vaccination spillovers: state

requirements that middle school youths obtain the Tdap booster resulted in sizable

and statistically significant increases in MCV vaccination even in states that did

not require MCV vaccination for middle school entry. More striking, the Tdap

mandates also significantly increased HPV vaccination rates. We also find that

these spillover effects are larger for females, nonwhites, and children of less

educated mothers. When we investigate mechanisms, we find some evidence that

the mandates increased contact with healthcare providers.                   There is stronger

evidence that the laws increased parent search behavior for information on the

Tdap booster, meningococcal disease, and HPV. Taken together these patterns

suggest that both parents and providers are responsible for the remarkable cross-

vaccine spillovers attributable to state Tdap mandates.

        Our results suggest that the private and social returns to middle school

vaccination requirements for the Tdap booster are extremely large. Estimates

from Table 2 suggest that they reduced population-wide pertussis cases by 3.3 per

100,000 population.        This translates to approximately 10,500 fewer cases of

whooping cough that were avoided each year due to increased vaccination of 10-


who finds in the context of a different vaccine (hepatitis A) that vaccination recommendations are




                                               35
Direct and Spillover Effects of Middle School Vaccination Requirements




12 year olds (320 million people in the US * 3.3/100,000 cases). For children,

this means reduced days missed from school; for parents, it translates to reduced

days missed from work (both to care for sick kids and due to reduced adult illness

as documented in Table 2). Lost work days due to illness at childcare centers and

schools likely fell by much larger amounts. There are also the direct health

consequences of pertussis: a study of hospital discharge databases in four states

found that the mean length of stay for infants (who constitute 90% of all pertussis

cases) was 6 days at a cost of $9,586 per stay (O’Brien and Caro 2005). Average

costs for children and adolescents/adults were $4,729 and $5,683 per

hospitalization, respectively. In less than one percent of cases, pertussis will

result in death.

         Our spillover estimates, however, suggest even larger returns, particularly

for HPV. Our most conservative estimate suggests that HPV vaccine completion

rates increased by 2.5 percentage points (column 5 of Table 3). Given that there

are 4 million 11 year olds in the United States, this translates to about 100,000

adolescents and young adults who received all three doses of the HPV vaccine

because their state required them to get a Tdap booster prior to middle school

entry. The American Cancer Society indicates that the lifetime risk of developing

cervical cancer is about 0.6 percent; given that the HPV vaccine protects against

the viruses that cause 70% of all cervical cancers, we estimate that Tdap mandates


effective at inducing initiation but not completion of a vaccine series in young children.




                                                 36
Direct and Spillover Effects of Middle School Vaccination Requirements




will prevent about 210 cases of cervical cancer (50,000 adolescent girls having

completed the HPV vaccine due to Tdap mandates * 0.006 * .70). Similar

calculations suggest that the Tdap booster mandates will also prevent 659 cases of

throat cancer, 160 cases of anal cancer, and 74 cases of cancer of the vulva.38

        Future work could also examine other longer term consequences of the

Tdap booster mandates for middle school entry. For example, since the laws

increased interactions with healthcare providers, it is possible that other

adolescent health outcomes and behaviors could have been affected. And by

identifying an exogenous increase in HPV vaccine uptake, our work offers a new

setting for tests for the moral hazard concerns about increased risky sexual

behaviors in the context of HPV vaccination. One might also imagine that the

policy changes had longer term effects on preventive cancer screenings for the

youths whose HPV vaccine behavior was affected. These and related effects on

longer term outcomes are fruitful avenues for future work.




38
  Information on lifetime risk of developing various cancers comes from the American Cancer
Society (2017) and the National Cancer Institute (2017a, b). Information on the proportion of
cancers by type that are caused by HPV comes from the CDC (2016a).




                                              37
Direct and Spillover Effects of Middle School Vaccination Requirements




                                      REFERENCES

Abrevaya, Jason, and Karen Mulligan (2011). “Effectiveness of state-level
      vaccination mandates: Evidence from the varicella vaccine,” Journal of
      Health Economics, 30: 966-976.

Almond, Douglas and Janet Currie (2011). “Human Capital Development Before
     Age Five.” In Handbook of Labor Economics, David Card and Orley
     Ashenfelter, Eds. Amsterdam: Elsevier.

Almond, Douglas, Janet Currie, and Valentina Duque (2017). “Childhood
     Circumstances and Adult Outcomes: Act II,” NBER Working Paper
     #23017.

American Cancer Society (2017). “Lifetime Risk of Developing or Dying from
      Cancer.”         Available     at:   http://www.cancer.org/cancer/cancer-
      basics/lifetime-probability-of-developing-or-dying-from-cancer.html.
      Accessed on January 18, 2017.

----- (2015). “Cancer Facts & Figures for Hispanics/Latinos 2015-2017.” Atlanta:
        American       Cancer       Society.      Report       available     at:
        http://www.cancer.org/acs/groups/content/@research/documents/documen
        t/acspc-046405.pdf. Accessed on September 7, 2016.

Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan (2004). “How Much
       Should We Trust Difference-In-Differences Estimates?,” Quarterly
       Journal of Economics, 119(1): 249-275.

Bradford, W. David, and Anne Mandich (2015). “Some State Vaccination Laws
       Contribute To Greater Exemption Rates And Disease Outbreaks In The
       United States,” Health Affairs, 34(8): 1383-1390.

Bugenske, Erin, Shannon Stokley, Allison Kennedy, and Christina Dorell (2012).
      “Middle school vaccination requirements and adolescent vaccination
      coverage,” Pediatrics, 129(6): 1056-1063.

Cameron, A. Colin, Jonah Gelbach, and Douglas Miller (2008). “Bootstrap-
      Based Improvements for Inference with Clustered Errors,” Review of
      Economics and Statistics, 90(3): 414-427.




                                              38
Direct and Spillover Effects of Middle School Vaccination Requirements




Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2016a). “HPV and Cancer,”
       Division of Cancer Prevention and Control. Available at:
       https://www.cdc.gov/cancer/hpv/statistics/cases.htm. Accessed on
       January 17, 2017.


----- (2016b). “State School Immunization Requirements and Vaccine Exemption
        Laws,” Office for State, Tribal, Local and Territorial Support, Centers for
        Disease      Control      and      Prevention.           Available       at:
        http://www.cdc.gov/phlp/docs/school-vaccinations.pdf.       Accessed on
        October 16, 2016.

----- (2015a). “Epidemiology and Prevention of Vaccine-Preventable Diseases.”
        Eds: Hamborsky J, Kroger A, Wolfe S. 13th ed. Washington D.C. Public
        Health Foundation.

----- (2015b). “National Immunization Survey-Teen: A User’s Guide for the 2014
        Public-Use Data File,” National Center for Immunization and Respiratory
        Diseases and National Center for Health Statistics, Centers for Disease
        Control          and        Prevention.              Available       at:
        ftp://ftp.cdc.gov/pub/Health_Statistics/NCHS/Dataset_Documentation/NI
        S/NISTEENPUF14_DUG.pdf. Accessed on January 5, 2017.

----- (1999). “Ten Great Public Health Achievements – United States, 1900-
        1999,” Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 48(12): 241-243.

Chang, Lenisa V. (2016a). “The Effect of State Insurance Mandates on Infant
      Immunization Rates,” Health Economics, 25(3): 372-386.

---- (2016b). “The Measles-Mumps-Rubella Vaccine and the Autism Controversy:
        Did Autism Concerns Affect Vaccine Take Up?” working paper.

Conley, Tim and Christopher Taber (2011). “Inference with ‘Difference in
      Differences’ with a small number of policy changes,” Review of
      Economics and Statistics 93(1): 113-125.

Dempsey, Amanda F. and Sarah E. Schaffer (2011). “Human papillomavirus
     vaccination rates and state mandates for tetanus-containing
     vaccines,” Preventive Medicine, 52(3): 268-269.




                                              39
Direct and Spillover Effects of Middle School Vaccination Requirements




Dempsey, Amanda F. and Gregory D. Zimet (2015). “Interventions to Improve
     Adolescent Vaccination: What May Work and What Still Needs to be
     Tested,” American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 49(6S4): S445-S454.

Georgia Department of Health (2014).             “New 7th Grade Vaccination
       Requirements: Guidance for School Nurses & Public Health Nurses.”
       Report                             available                          at:
       http://dph.georgia.gov/sites/dph.georgia.gov/files/Immunizations/Tdap_M
       en_SchoolsQ&A_FINAL_022414_0.pdf. Accessed on February 8, 2016.

Gruber, Jonathan (2001). Risky Behavior Among Youths: An Economic
       Analysis. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Humiston, Sharon G. and Susan L. Rosenthal (2005). “Challenges to vaccinating
      adolescents: vaccine implementation issues,” Pediatric Infectious Disease
      Journal, 24(6S): S134-S140.

Kharbanda, Elyse Olshen, Melissa S. Stockwell, James Colgrove, Karthik
      Natarajan, and Vaughn I. Rickert (2010). “Changes in Tdap and MCV4
      Vaccine Coverage Following Enactment of a Statewide Requirement of
      Tdap Vaccination for Entry Into Sixth Grade,” American Journal of
      Public Health, 100(9): 1635-1640.

Lawler, Emily C. (2016, forthcoming).          “Effectiveness of Vaccination
       Recommendations versus Mandates: Evidence from the hepatitis A
       vaccine,” Journal of Health Economics, forthcoming.

Luca, Dara Lee (2014). “The Long-Term Effects of Post-Neonatal Childhood
      Health: Evidence from Mandatory School Vaccination Laws,” working
      paper.

MacKinnon, James G. and Matthew D. Webb (2016). “Randomization Inference
     for Difference-in-Differences with Few Treated Clusters,” Queen’s
     Economics Department Working Paper No. 1355.

Moghtaderi, Ali and Scott Adams (2016).        “The Role of Physician
      Recommendations and Public Policy in Human Papillomavirus
      Vaccinations,” Applied Health Economics and Health Policy, 14: 349-
      359.




                                              40
Direct and Spillover Effects of Middle School Vaccination Requirements




National Cancer Institute (2017a). “Cancer Stat Facts: Vulvar Cancer.”
       Available at: https://seer.cancer.gov/statfacts/html/vulva.html. Accessed
       on January 18, 2017.

-----   (2017b).       “Cancer Stat Facts: Anal Cancer.”            Available at:
         https://seer.cancer.gov/statfacts/html/anus.html. Accessed on January 18,
         2017.

National Council of State Legislatures (2015a). Immunizations Policy Issues
       Overview.      http://www.ncsl.org/research/health/immunizations-policy-
       issues-overview.aspx. [27 June 2015].

----- (2015b). States With Religious and Philosophical Exemptions from School
        Immunization Requirements. ttp://www.ncsl.org/research/health/school-
        immunization-exemption-state-laws.aspx . [27 June 2015].

O’Brien, Judith A. and J. Jaime Caro (2005). “Hospitalization for pertussis:
      profiles and case costs by age,” BMC Infectious Diseases, open access
      available at: http://bmcinfectdis.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/1471-
      2334-5-57. Accessed on January 10, 2017.

Oster, Emily (2016). “Does Disease Cause Vaccination? Disease Outbreaks and
       Vaccination Response,” NBER Working Paper #22464.

Philipson, Tomas (2000). Economic epidemiology and infectious diseases.
       Handbook of Health Economics, 1, 1761-1799.

----- (1996). “Private Vaccination and Public Health: An Empirical Examination
        for US Measles,” Journal of Human Resources, 31(3): 611-630.

Snyder, Thomas D., Cristobal de Brey, and Sally A. Dillow (2016). Digest of
       Education Statistics 2014. National Center for Education Statistics,
       Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department of Education.
       Washington, DC.

Trogdon, Justin, Paul Shafer, Parth Shah, and William A. Calo (2016). “Are state
      laws granting pharmacists authority to vaccinate associated with HPV
      vaccination rates?” Vaccine, 34(38): 4514-9.

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Healthy People 2020:
      Immunization          and         Infectious         diseases.




                                              41
Direct and Spillover Effects of Middle School Vaccination Requirements




        http://www.healthypeople.gov/2020/topics-objectives/topic/immunization-
        and-infectious-diseases/objectives. [27 June 2015].

Walgreens (2016).        “Price Menu: Vaccines.”               Available    at:
      https://www.walgreens.com/topic/healthcare-clinic/price-menu.jsp.
      Accessed October 16, 2016.

Ward, Courtney J. (2014). “Influenza Vaccination Campaigns: Is an Ounce of
      Prevention Worth a Pound of Cure?,” American Economic Journal:
      Applied Economics, 6(1), 38-72.

----- (2011). “The Effects of Immunization Mandates: Does Prenatal Exposure to
        State School Immunization Policy Impact Later Economic Well-Being?”
        Dalhousie University Working Paper.

Woodwell, Donald A. and Donald K. Cherry (2004). “National Ambulatory
     Medical Care Survey: 2002 summary,” Adv Data, 346: 1-44.




                                              42
Direct and Spillover Effects of Middle School Vaccination Requirements




                                Figure 1:
 Trends in Adolescent Vaccination Rates for ACIP-Recommended Vaccines




Notes: Data are from NIS-Teen. Vaccination status is measured directly prior to age 13, and
assigned to the year in which the individual was age 12.



                                    Figure 2:
                     Timing of Tdap Mandate Policy Adoption




                                              43
Direct and Spillover Effects of Middle School Vaccination Requirements




                                 Figure 3:
  Event Study Estimates of the Direct Effects of Middle School Vaccination
                   Requirements for the Tdap Booster




Notes: Coefficients are relative to the excluded group of the two years prior to policy
implementation.    The coefficients presented for -6 periods and 5 periods relative to
implementation should be interpreted as the coefficient on 6 or more years prior to
implementation, and 5 or more years since implementation, respectively.

                                 Figure 4:
       Event Study Estimates of Effects of Middle School Vaccination
    Requirements for the Tdap Booster on Population Pertussis Morbidity




Notes: Coefficients are relative to the excluded group of the two years prior to policy
implementation.    The coefficients presented for -6 periods and 5 periods relative to
implementation should be interpreted as the coefficient on 6 or more years prior to
implementation, and 5 or more years since implementation, respectively.




                                              44
Direct and Spillover Effects of Middle School Vaccination Requirements




                                Table 1:
Middle School Tdap Vaccination Requirements Increased Tdap Vaccination
    Rates by age 13 and Reduced Population-Wide Pertussis Morbidity
            NIS-Teen (2008-2013) and CDC Data (2002-2013)
                                      (1)                (2)            (3)               (4)
                                  1 dose Tdap        1 dose Tdap     Pertussis         Pertussis
                                    booster            booster       morbidity         morbidity
Sample mean                          0.449              0.449         6.955             6.955

Tdap Mandate for Middle             0.134***          0.136***        -3.720**          -4.705**
School Entry                        (0.015)           (0.017)         (1.749)           (1.910)

R-squared                              0.335              0.338        0.458             0.534
N                                     116304             116304         611               611
Individual characteristics?              Y                  Y            Y                 Y
Other policy controls?                   Y                  Y            Y                 Y
Other state/time varying Xs?             Y                  Y            Y                 Y
State and year fixed effects?            Y                  Y            Y                 Y
Linear state trends?                     N                  Y            N                 Y
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Sample means are calculated
over the full period. Results in columns 1 and 2 are from linear probability models and use NIS-
Teen sampling weights. The outcome in columns 1 and 2 is an indicator for whether the
individual received the Tdap booster by age 13. Individuals are observed at ages 13-17 between
2008 and 2013. All models include controls for individual demographic characteristics (age at
observation fixed effects, gender, race, number of children in the household, and mother's age,
education level, and marital status); state, year of survey, and birth cohort fixed effects; state
mandates for insurance coverage of well-child visits and vaccines; state college and high school
immunization and education requirements for MCV; state HPV policies (see text for details); state
immunization mandates for child care/kindergarten entry; lagged state pertussis and
meningococcal disease incidence; state children’s Medicaid/CHIP income eligibility thresholds;
state unemployment rates; and state demographic characteristics (fraction black, Hispanic, and
other races, fraction of individuals with high school degree and with some college or more, and
fraction below the federal poverty level). Results in columns 3 and 4 are estimated using disease
incidence data from the CDC and are weighted by state population. The dependent variable in
columns 3 and 4 is the number of reported cases of pertussis per 100,000 population. These
models include controls for state mandates for insurance coverage of well-child visits and
vaccines; all child care/school vaccination mandates; state HPV and MCV policies; lagged
pertussis incidence; state children’s Medicaid/CHIP income eligibility thresholds;            state
unemployment rates; state demographic characteristics (fraction black, Hispanic, and other races,
fraction of individuals with high school degree and with some college or more, and fraction below
the federal poverty level); and state and year fixed effects. Columns 2 and 4 also include linear
state trends. Standard errors are clustered at the state level.




                                                45
Direct and Spillover Effects of Middle School Vaccination Requirements




                                 Table 2:
Middle School Tdap Vaccination Requirements Reduced Pertussis Morbidity
               Across the Life Course, CDC Data 2002-2013
            Each entry is the coefficient on the Tdap mandate
                              (1)                  (2)                  (3)                  (4)
                           Pertussis            Pertussis           Salmonellosis        Salmonellosis
                           morbidity            morbidity             morbidity            morbidity
Direct effect:
Age 10-14               -16.54 (7.423)**     -20.82 (8.598)**       0.050 (0.684)        0.434 (0.757)

Herd immunity
effects:
Age 0-4                 -14.91 (6.666)**     -17.65 (7.299)**      -6.061 (4.467)        -3.044 (4.429)
Age 5-9                 -10.24 (4.307)**     -13.08 (4.938)**      -0.350 (1.047)         0.496 (1.218)

Age 15-19                -5.326 (3.028)*     -6.484 (2.788)**      -0.041 (0.625)          0.381 (0.638)
Age 20-24                -1.207 (0.615)*     -1.419 (0.585)**      -0.076 (0.609)          0.257 (0.717)
Age 25-29               -1.197 (0.554)**     -1.394 (0.541)**       0.619 (0.554)          0.320 (0.751)
Age 30-34               -1.346 (0.619)**     -1.751 (0.678)**       0.363 (0.726)          0.204 (0.957)
Age 35-39               -1.428 (0.666)**     -1.881 (0.755)**      -0.169 (0.562)         -0.398 (0.642)
Age 40-44                -1.151 (0.715)       -1.285 (0.752)*      -0.138 (0.615)         -0.168 (0.745)
                                        *                    *
Age 45-49                -1.082 (0.614)       -1.194 (0.613)        0.213  (0.860)         0.480 (1.057)
                                        *                   **
Age 50-54                -0.970 (0.506)      -1.270 (0.526)        -0.125 (0.649)         -0.041 (0.780)
Age 55-59                -0.727 (0.458)      -1.067 (0.476)**      -0.320 (0.806)         -0.125 (0.971)
Age 60-64                -0.703 (0.361)*     -0.917 (0.393)**      -0.165 (0.873)          0.043 (0.991)
Age 65+                  -0.524 (0.291)*     -0.759 (0.356)**      -0.956 (0.868)         -0.511(0.958)
Linear state trends?            N                    Y                    N                     Y
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. The dependent variable is the
number of reported cases of each disease per 100,000 population, separately for five year age
groups (reported in each row). Each entry is from a separate regression. All models include
controls for state mandates for insurance coverage of well-child visits and vaccines; all child
care/school vaccination mandates; state HPV and MCV policies; lagged pertussis incidence; state
children’s Medicaid/CHIP income eligibility thresholds; state unemployment rates; state
demographic characteristics (fraction black, Hispanic, and other races, fraction of individuals with
high school degree and with some college or more, and fraction below the federal poverty level);
and state and year fixed effects. Columns 2 and 4 also include linear state trends. Regressions are
weighted by age-specific state population. Standard errors are clustered at the state level.




                                                46
Direct and Spillover Effects of Middle School Vaccination Requirements




                                                Table 3:
  Middle School Tdap Vaccination Requirements Had Cross-Vaccine Spillovers to Other ACIP-Recommended
                              Vaccines for Adolescents, NIS-Teen 2008-2013
                           (1)            (2)             (3)              (4)          (5)             (6)            (7)            (8)
                         1 dose          1 dose        Initiated      Initiated     Completed       Completed         Had             Had
                         MCV             MCV             HPV            HPV           HPV             HPV          influenza       influenza
                                                       vaccine        vaccine        vaccine         vaccine      vaccine, age    vaccine, age
                                                                                                                     10-13           10-13
Sample mean               0.357          0.357          0.236            0.236         0.099          0.099          0.122           0.122

Tdap Mandate for         0.0214          0.0285*      0.0489***       0.0419***      0.0248***       0.0334***       0.0130          0.0075
Middle School           (0.0157)        (0.0143)      (0.0150)        (0.0153)       (0.0089)        (0.0106)       (0.0081)        (0.0066)
Entry

R-squared                 0.285           0.289          0.111         0.114          0.065           0.067           0.176          0.178
N                        116304          116304          57133        57133           57133           57133          116304         116304
Linear state trends?        N               Y              N             Y              N               Y               N              Y
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. See notes to Table 1 for details on the specification and control variables.
Columns 3-6 are restricted to females who were age 13 between 2007-2013 and males who were age 13 between 2011-2013.




                                                                      47
Direct and Spillover Effects of Middle School Vaccination Requirements




                                                     Table 4:
       Heterogeneity in the Effects of Middle School Tdap Vaccination Requirements, NIS-Teen 2008-2013
                                Each entry is the coefficient on the Tdap mandate
                                              (1)                       (2)                        (3)                        (4)
                                         1 dose Tdap               1 dose MCV            Initiated HPV vaccine      Completed HPV vaccine
                                        (direct effect)          (spillover effect)         (spillover effect)         (spillover effect)
1. Full sample, mean                        0.449                      0.357                      0.236                      0.099
Tdap mandate effect:                   0.136 (0.017)***           0.029 (0.014)*             0.042 (0.015)***          0.033 (0.011)***

2. Girls, mean                              0.448                     0.355                      0.265                       0.117
Tdap mandate effect:                   0.152 (0.018)***           0.039 (0.019)**            0.035 (0.015)**            0.037 (0.013)***

3. Boys, mean                               0.449                      0.358                     0.123                        0.028
Tdap mandate effect:                   0.121 (0.018)***            0.018 (0.013)             -0.061 (0.048)               0.032 (0.052)

4. White, mean                              0.453                     0.343                      0.205                       0.095
Tdap mandate effect:                   0.148 (0.019)***           0.037 (0.018)**            0.044 (0.017)**            0.034 (0.011)***

5. Black, mean                              0.412                     0.347                       0.238                      0.078
Tdap mandate effect:                   0.152 (0.041)***          0.075 (0.024)***             0.046 (0.034)              0.061 (0.023)**

6. Hispanic, mean                           0.456                      0.389                      0.303                      0.118
Tdap mandate effect:                   0.129 (0.016)***            0.032 (0.020)             0.102 (0.037)***            0.048 (0.019)**

7. Mother has at least BA, mean             0.509                      0.403                      0.206                      0.094
Tdap mandate effect:                   0.110 (0.021)***            0.005 (0.020)              0.029 (0.019)             0.032 (0.011)***

8. Mother has less than BA, mean              0.418                     0.333                      0.252                      0.101
Tdap mandate effect:                     0.149 (0.019)***          0.039 (0.014)***          0.048 (0.017)***            0.035 (0.014)**
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Columns 3 and 4 are restricted to females aged 13 between 2007-2013, and
males aged 13 between 2011-2013. See notes to Table 1 for details on the specification and control variables. All models include state trends.




                                                                     48
Direct and Spillover Effects of Middle School Vaccination Requirements




                                                           Table 5:
                                          Evidence on Mechanisms, NIS-Teen 2008-2013
                             (1)            (2)             (3)              (4)           (5)             (6)            (7)             (8)
                         Ever heard     Ever heard     Ever heard      Ever heard       Doctor          Doctor        Had an 11-     Had an 11-
                          of HPV         of HPV        of cervical     of cervical      recom-          recom-        12yo well      12yo well
                                                         cancer          cancer         mended          mended        child visit    child visit
                                                        vaccine,        vaccine,         HPV             HPV
                                                         genital         genital        vaccine         vaccine
                                                          warts           warts
                                                        vaccine,        vaccine,
                                                       HPV shot,       HPV shot,
                                                       Gardasil, or    Gardasil, or
                                                        Cervarix        Cervarix
Sample mean:               0.939           0.939          0.904           0.904           0.454          0.454           0.909          0.909


Tdap Mandate for           -0.0084        0.0234          0.0247*         0.0390         0.0228          0.0053         0.0232**      0.0413***
Middle School Entry       (0.0148)       (0.0187)        (0.0131)        (0.0244)       (0.0158)        (0.0341)       (0.00919)      (0.0132)

R-squared                   0.0646         0.0734         0.0997         0.106           0.0997           0.104          0.0374         0.0404
N                           12063          12063           12063         12063           27100           27100           37788           37788
Linear state trends?           N              Y              N              Y               N               Y               N              Y
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. See notes to Table 1 for details on the specification and control variables. All
samples are restricted to individuals who are age 13 at time of survey, as the outcomes in columns 1-6 are measured at time of interview; they
are not able to be retrospectively measured at age 13. The outcomes in columns 1-4 are only reported for 2008-2011, and so the estimation
sample for these outcomes is females who are age 13 at the time of survey, 2008-2011. The estimation sample for columns 5 and 6 consists of
the set of females aged 13 at time of survey, for the 2008-2013 survey waves and males aged 13 at time of survey for the 2011-2013 survey
waves.




                                                                        49
Direct and Spillover Effects of Middle School Vaccination Requirements




                                                        Table 6:
                                 Further Evidence on Mechanisms, Google Trends 2005-2014
                                     (1)                (2)                (3)                 (4)                 (5)                (6)
                              Relative Google    Relative Google    Relative Google     Relative Google     Relative Google    Relative Google
                                   search             search             search              search              search             search
                               popularity for     popularity for    popularity of the   popularity of the    popularity for     popularity for
                                  ‘Tdap’             ‘Tdap’         ‘Meningococcal      ‘Meningococcal           ‘hpv’              ‘hpv’
                                                                     vaccine’ topic      vaccine’ topic
Sample mean                        27.46              27.46              27.84               27.84              49.76               49.76

Tdap Mandate for Middle           3.585**            6.733***             2.016             3.318**             2.011**            1.449**
School Entry                      (1.609)            (1.374)             (1.739)            (1.566)             (0.877)            (0.691)

Pertussis rate in the state       0.126*              0.214**            0.0032              0.0136             -0.0320            -0.0310
                                 (0.0670)            (0.0862)           (0.0254)            (0.0254)           (0.0245)           (0.0272)

R-squared                           0.661               0.731             0.614              0.656              0.793                0.803
N                                    4845               4845              4825                4825              5508                 5508
Linear state trends?                  N                   Y                 N                  Y                  N                    Y
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. The outcome variable is a measure of the popularity of a given search term or
topic, in which, for each state, the month of peak search volume is normalized to 100. All models include the state policy controls and state
demographics as described in the notes to Table 1 as well as fixed effects for each state and for each month-year. Columns 2, 4, and 6 also
include linear state trends




                                                                      50
Direct and Spillover Effects of Middle School Vaccination Requirements




                                 APPENDIX
                        FOR ONLINE PUBLICATION ONLY

        This Appendix describes in greater detail the diseases under study.

1.1 Tetanus, Diphtheria, and Pertussis

        Tetanus, diphtheria, and pertussis are all diseases caused by bacteria, and

vaccination against them with a combination vaccine series (DTP or DTaP) has

been routinely recommended for young children since the 1940s and 1950s. In

early 2005 a new vaccine, Tdap (tetanus, diphtheria toxoid and acellular

pertussis), was approved for use in adolescents and was recommended for

preteens aged 11 or 12 as a booster for their DTP/DTaP series.39

        Over the past 50 years there have been consistently high immunization

rates for DTP/DTaP and, likely as a result, tetanus and diphtheria have become

extremely rare in the United States.40              That vaccine series has proven less

effective against pertussis in the long-run, however, and so pertussis (or

‘whooping cough’) remains endemic in the United States.




39
   Prior to the development of the Tdap vaccine, it had been recommended that adolescents receive
a dose of the tetanus and diphtheria toxoids vaccine (Td) at age 11 or 12. This vaccine did not
provide protection against pertussis, however. Protection under the acellular pertussis vaccines
(DTaP and Tdap) wanes between 5-10 years after vaccination.
40
   Specifically, for the duration of our study period there have been 41 or fewer cases of tetanus
(an infection that attacks the nervous system and causes muscle spasms) per year in the United
States (approximately 0.01 cases per 100,000 population). Over that same time period that have
been 2 or fewer cases of diphtheria (an infection that causes a thick covering in the back of the
throat) per year. Due to the extremely low incidence of these diseases we are unable to credibly
examine the effect of middle school vaccination mandates on the prevalence of diphtheria and
tetanus.




                                               51
Direct and Spillover Effects of Middle School Vaccination Requirements




        Pertussis is a highly contagious respiratory disease,41 and its symptoms

include nose and throat inflammation and a violent cough. It is transmitted from

person-to-person through respiratory secretions expelled while coughing or

sneezing. The morbidity consequences of pertussis are most severe for infants

under 12 months of age – they are hospitalized in 63 percent of cases (compared

to 2 percent of infected adolescents) and account for 90 percent of the pertussis-

related mortality.

1.2 Meningococcal Disease

Meningococcal disease encapsulates the set of infections caused by the bacteria

Neisseria meningitidis and includes infections of the lining of the brain and spinal

cord (meningitis) and of the bloodstream (septicemia and bacteremia). There are

numerous different serogroups (variations) of the bacteria; serogroups A, B, C, Y,

and W are the most significant sources of meningococcal disease in the United

States.42 In our analysis we focus on the quadrivalent meningococcal conjugate

vaccine (MCV4), which provides protection against serogroups A, C, Y, and W

and has been routinely recommended for children age 11 or 12 since 2005.43




41
   Secondary cases are estimated to occur at a rate of 80 percent among susceptible contacts in a
household in which there has been a case of pertussis (CDC 2015a).
42
   The relative importance of each serogroup varies by age group: among children under the age of
5, serogroup B accounts for 60 percent of the cases of meningococcal disease, while for
individuals over the age of 10, serogroups C, Y, and W cause 73 percent of the cases.
43
   The first vaccine providing protection against serogroup B was not approved in the United
States until late 2014.




                                               52
Direct and Spillover Effects of Middle School Vaccination Requirements




Older teens are recommended to receive a second booster shot of MCV4 when

they are 16 years old.

1.3 Human Papillomavirus (HPV)

         HPV is the most common sexually transmitted infection in the United

States: the CDC estimates that nearly all sexually active men and women will get

HPV at some point in their lives.              An estimated 79 million Americans are

currently infected with HPV, with about 14 million people becoming newly

infected each year. Most HPV infections are asymptomatic and typically resolve

on their own. In some cases, however, infections persist and cause symptoms

which can take years to develop. There are numerous types of HPV: low-risk

types which can cause skin warts, and high risk types which cause the majority of

the cancers of the cervix, vagina, penis, anus, mouth, and throat. 44 In the United

States, rates of cervical cancer incidence and mortality are substantially higher

among blacks and Hispanics (American Cancer Society 2015).45

         The first HPV vaccine was licensed for use in females in the United States

in June 2006, and it was further approved for males in October 2009. This

vaccine is a 3-dose series and provides protection against HPV types 6, 11, 16,


44
   Nearly all cervical cancer (11,000 cases per year in the United States) is due to HPV, with two
specific types (HPV16 and HPV18) accounting for over 65% of all cervical cancers, 55% of all
cancers of the vagina, 49% of all cancers of the vulva, 48% of all cancers of the penis, 79% of all
cancers of the anus, 79% of all cancers of the rectum, and 60% of all cancers of the throat (CDC
2016a).
45
   In the United States over the period 2008-2012, cervical cancer incidence rates were 44 percent
higher for Hispanics and 41 percent higher for blacks, relative to whites. Over that same time




                                                53
Direct and Spillover Effects of Middle School Vaccination Requirements




and 18. The vaccine is only effective if it is given before an infection occurs, and

so should be given prior to an individual’s sexual debut. The ACIP currently

recommends that all boys and girls initiate the HPV vaccine series between ages

11 and 12. Individuals who are not vaccinated by age 13 are recommended to

receive catch-up vaccinations through age 21 (26) for men (women).

1.4 Seasonal influenza

        Seasonal flu (common in fall and winter months) is an acute viral infection

that can cause mild to severe illness with fever, cough, sore throat, runny nose,

muscle aches, fatigue, vomiting, and/or diarrhea.                It is highly contagious;

individuals can infect other people up to an entire day before and up to a week

after symptoms develop.            Young children, the elderly, and people with

compromised immune systems are at particularly high risk for seasonal flu

complications. The flu vaccine varies from season to season with respect to the

particular strains of the influenza virus that it protects against.              The annual

influenza vaccine was routinely recommended for children over the age of 6

months for the first time in 2010; in the subsequent flu season less than half of

youths between 6 months and 17 years of age received the influenza vaccine.

Each year millions of people in the United States become ill from the seasonal flu,

hundreds of thousands are hospitalized, and tens of thousands die.



period, mortality rates for Hispanics were 35 percent higher and 105 percent higher for blacks,
relative to whites.




                                              54
Direct and Spillover Effects of Middle School Vaccination Requirements




                          Appendix Figure 1:
Example of State Department of Health Flyer for Middle School Vaccination
                        Requirement: Wisconsin




                                              55
Direct and Spillover Effects of Middle School Vaccination Requirements




                     Appendix Figure 1, continued:
Example of State Department of Health Flyer for Middle School Vaccination
                        Requirement: Wisconsin




                                              56
Direct and Spillover Effects of Middle School Vaccination Requirements




                            Appendix Figure 2:
   Estimated Effect Sizes of Direct and Herd Immunity Effects of Tdap
  Mandates on Pertussis Incidence Across the Life Course (relative to 2005)




Notes: Each point is equal to the coefficient on the Tdap mandate indicator variable from a
regression in which the outcome variable is the rate of disease incidence for the given age group,
divided by the age-group specific disease incidence rate in the base year of 2005. These values are
then multiplied by negative one, in order to obtain the estimated percent reduction in disease
incidence. All coefficients are from specifications that include the full set of state policy controls
as described in the notes to Table 1and state-specific linear time trends.




                                                 57
Direct and Spillover Effects of Middle School Vaccination Requirements




                                  Appendix Table 1:
                      Descriptive Statistics, NIS-Teen 2008-2013
                                              (1)               (2)                  (3)
                                         Full sample      Individuals in       Individuals in
                                                         states that had a   states that did not
                                                         Tdap mandate by        have a Tdap
                                                               2013          mandate by 2013
Child’s vaccination rates, by age 13
Tdap Booster                               0.449               0.454               0.379
Meningococcal Vaccine                      0.357               0.360               0.312
Initiation of HPV series                   0.236               0.238               0.204
Completion of HPV series                   0.099               0.100               0.079
Influenza vaccine (past 3 years)           0.122               0.121               0.137

Child’s characteristics
Female                                     0.488               0.488               0.490
Hispanic                                   0.203               0.212               0.079
White                                      0.576               0.577               0.554
Black                                      0.142               0.134               0.251
Other ethnicity                            0.079               0.076               0.116
11-12 year old check-up                    0.897               0.898               0.888

Mother's characteristics
Less than high school                      0.140               0.143               0.099
High school                                0.261               0.260               0.272
Some college                               0.259               0.259               0.256
College degree or above                    0.340               0.338               0.372
Married                                    0.696               0.697               0.684
Age: <35 yrs                               0.094               0.093               0.102
Age: 35-44 yrs                             0.455               0.455               0.451
Age: 45+ yrs                               0.451               0.452               0.447

Morbidity Rates per 100,000 pop.
Pertussis, population rate                  6.96                6.92                8.88
Pertussis, 10-14 year old rate              21.7                21.6                27.7

Observations                               116304             100899             15405
Notes: All values are weighted means calculated by the authors from NIS-Teen 2008-2013 data,
using provided sample weights. The mean rates of HPV vaccine series initiation and completion
are calculated using the sample of females who were aged 13 between 2007-2013 and males who
were aged 13 between 2010-2013.




                                              58
Direct and Spillover Effects of Middle School Vaccination Requirements




                             Appendix Table 2:
   Event Study Estimates of the Direct Effect of Middle School Vaccination
                    Requirements, NIS-Teen 2008-2013
                                               (1)                              (1)
                                       1 dose Tdap booster              1 dose Tdap booster

Sample mean                                   0.449                            0.449

6+ years before Tdap mandate              -0.003 (0.032)                   -0.063 (0.058)
5 years before Tdap mandate               -0.022 (0.029)                   -0.061 (0.047)
4 years before Tdap mandate               -0.014 (0.018)                   -0.049 (0.033)
3 years before Tdap mandate               -0.002 (0.014)                   -0.026 (0.023)

Year of Tdap mandate                     0.122 (0.014)***                 0.127 (0.018)***
1 year after Tdap mandate                0.178 (0.019)***                 0.191 (0.038)***
2 years after Tdap mandate               0.194 (0.028)***                 0.217 (0.066)***
3 years after Tdap mandate               0.166 (0.032)***                 0.191 (0.075)**
4 years after Tdap mandate               0.193 (0.028)***                 0.208 (0.104)**
5+ years after Tdap mandate              0.216 (0.036)***                  0.201 (0.163)

N                                             116304                          116304
R-Squared                                      0.336                           0.339
Other policy controls?                           Y                               Y
Other state/time varying Xs?                     Y                               Y
State and year fixed effects?                    Y                               Y
Linear state trends?                             N                               Y
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. See notes to Table 1 for details
on the specification and control variables.




                                                59
Direct and Spillover Effects of Middle School Vaccination Requirements




                             Appendix Table 3:
   Event Study Estimates of the Direct Effect of Middle School Vaccination
                    Requirements, CDC Data 2002-2013
                                                   (1)                           (2)
                                           Pertussis Morbidity           Pertussis Morbidity

Sample mean                                       6.955                         6.955

6+ years before Tdap mandate                   2.886 (2.477)                 1.284 (3.989)
5 years before Tdap mandate                    1.192 (1.642)                 1.383 (2.922)
4 years before Tdap mandate                    2.600 (2.943)                 3.122 (2.665)
3 years before Tdap mandate                   -0.227 (1.650)                 0.347 (1.783)

Year of Tdap mandate                          -2.174 (1.140)*                -1.871 (1.491)
1 year after Tdap mandate                     -5.106 (2.545)*               -5.671 (2.982)*
2 years after Tdap mandate                   -4.566 (1.726)**               -4.969 (2.806)*
3 years after Tdap mandate                    -4.894 (2.456)*                -6.226 (4.048)
4 years after Tdap mandate                    -0.013 (5.285)                 -0.187 (7.113)
5+ years after Tdap mandate                   -3.120 (4.697)                 -2.704 (7.822)

N                                                   611                          611
R-Squared                                          0.481                        0.554
Other policy controls?                               Y                            Y
Other state/time varying Xs?                         Y                            Y
State and year fixed effects?                        Y                            Y
Linear state trends?                                 N                            Y
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. See notes to Table 1 for details
on the specification and control variables.




                                                60
Direct and Spillover Effects of Middle School Vaccination Requirements




                            Appendix Table 4:
Cross-Age Morbidity Effects Were Disease-Related, Not Vaccination-Related
       (i.e., Herd Immunity Effects, not Behavioral Spillover Effects)
                      NIS 2003-2015, 19-35 month olds
                                  (1)                       (2)                         (3)
                         Up-to-date, 4 doses of    Up-to-date, 4 doses of      Up-to-date, 4 doses of
                                DTaP               DTaP other children in        DTaP, no other
                                                           HH                     children in HH
Sample mean:                     0.846                    0.834                        0.882

Tdap Mandate for                 -0.0088                    -0.0071                    -0.0131
Middle School Entry             (0.0055)                   (0.0069)                   (0.0084)

R-squared                        0.0419                     0.0444                    0.0288
N                               212202                      159157                     53045
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Results are from linear
probability models and use NIS sampling weights. All models include controls for individual
demographic characteristics (age at observation fixed effects, gender, race, number of children in
the household, and mother's age, education level, and marital status); state and year fixed effects;
state mandates for insurance coverage of well-child visits and vaccines; child care and school
vaccination mandates; state HPV policies; lagged state pertussis and meningococcal disease
incidence; state children’s Medicaid/CHIP income eligibility thresholds; state unemployment
rates; and state demographic characteristics (fraction black, Hispanic, and other races, fraction of
individuals with high school degree and with some college or more, and fraction below the federal
poverty level). All models also include linear state trends. Standard errors are clustered at the state
level.




                                                  61
Direct and Spillover Effects of Middle School Vaccination Requirements




                                                     Appendix Table 5:
            Event Study Estimates of the Spillover Effects of Middle School Vaccination Requirements for Tdap,
                                                    NIS-Teen 2008-2013
                            (1)                    (2)                    (3)                    (4)                  (5)                    (6)
                       1 dose MCV             1 dose MCV          1 dose HPV Vaccine         1 dose HPV          Completed HPV          Completed HPV
                        vaccination            vaccination                                     Vaccine              Vaccine                Vaccine
Sample mean:               0.357                  0.357                  0.236                  0.236                0.099                  0.099
Years relative to
Tdap mandate:
6+ years before       -0.060 (0.028)**       -0.071 (0.038)*         -0.035 (0.035)          0.069 (0.063)         0.003 (0.021)          0.051 (0.045)
5 years before         -0.037 (0.023)         -0.043 (0.029)        -0.046 (0.026)*          0.051 (0.043)        -0.020 (0.015)          0.035 (0.033)
4 years before       -0.055 (0.019)***      -0.067 (0.026)***       -0.044 (0.019)**         0.013 (0.027)        -0.016 (0.016)          0.017 (0.027)
3 years before         -0.009 (0.015)         -0.022 (0.015)        -0.025 (0.013)*         -0.009 (0.019)       -0.018 (0.008)**        -0.008 (0.013)

Year of               0.026 (0.018)           0.032 (0.018)*        0.040 (0.015)**        0.039 (0.017)**        0.024 (0.014)*         0.027 (0.015)*
1 year after         0.067 (0.019)***        0.084 (0.024)***       0.056 (0.025)**         0.058 (0.035)         0.020 (0.012)          0.016 (0.017)
2 years after        0.074 (0.022)***        0.098 (0.038)**        0.044 (0.023)*          0.070 (0.045)         0.026 (0.015)*         0.028 (0.024)
3 years after         0.056 (0.032)*          0.097 (0.051)*         0.040 (0.035)          0.077 (0.063)         0.020 (0.019)          0.016 (0.029)
4 years after        0.103 (0.034)***        0.139 (0.057)**         0.056 (0.038)          0.115 (0.077)         0.024 (0.026)          0.022 (0.038)
5+ years after       0.099 (0.043)**          0.119 (0.080)         -0.007 (0.053)          0.091 (0.109)         0.008 (0.037)          0.008 (0.045)

N                         116304                  116304                 57133                   57133                   57133                  57133
R-Squared                  0.287                    0.289                0.112                   0.114                   0.066                  0.068
Linear state                 N                        Y                    N                        Y                      N                      Y
trends?
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. See notes to Table 1 for details on the specification and control variables. Columns 3-6
are restricted to females who were aged 13 between 2007-2013 and males who were aged 13 between 2010-2013. All models include the full set of
controls, columns 2, 4, and 6 additionally include state linear trends.




                                                                          62
Direct and Spillover Effects of Middle School Vaccination Requirements




                                           Appendix Table 6:
 Other Ways to Measure Cross-Vaccine Spillover Effects of Tdap Mandates: Combinations of Outcomes, NIS-
                                            Teen 2008-2013
                                      (1)                    (2)                    (3)                    (4)                    (5)
                              Had 1 dose Tdap         Had 1 dose Tdap        Had 1 dose Tdap        Had 1 dose Tdap       Had 1 dose Tdap
                              AND 1 dose MCV         AND Initiated HPV       AND Completed         AND 1 dose MCV         AND 1 dose MCV
                                                          vaccine             HPV vaccine          AND Initiated HPV       AND Completed
                                                                                                        vaccine             HPV vaccine
Sample mean                          0.303                  0.170                  0.076                 0.150                 0.068


Tdap Mandate for Middle            0.0454***              0.0459***              0.0506***              0.0490***              0.0462***
School Entry                       (0.0122)               (0.0163)               (0.0161)               (0.0146)               (0.0134)

R-squared                               0.297                    0.161            0.081                   0.145                 0.074
N                                      116304                    58474           58474                   58474                  58474
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. See notes to Table 1 for details on the specification and control variables.
Columns 2-5 are restricted to females who were aged 13 between 2007-2013 and males who were aged 13 between 2011-2013. All models
include the full set of controls, including linear state trends.




                                                                      63
Direct and Spillover Effects of Middle School Vaccination Requirements




                                               Appendix Table 7:
             Main Vaccination Results Are Robust to Including NIS-Teen 2014 and 2015 Sample Waves,
                                              NIS-Teen 2008-2015
                           (1)            (2)             (3)              (4)          (5)             (6)            (7)            (8)
                      1 dose Tdap     1 dose Tdap       1 dose         1 dose         Initiated      Initiated     Completed      Completed
                        booster         booster         MCV            MCV              HPV            HPV           HPV            HPV
                                                                                      vaccine        vaccine        vaccine        vaccine
Sample mean               0.530          0.530          0.438            0.438         0.265          0.265          0.111          0.111

Tdap Mandate for        0.136***        0.154***       0.0326**       0.0365**       0.0331***        0.0157        0.0181***       0.0152**
Middle School           (0.0142)        (0.0155)       (0.0136)       (0.0147)       (0.0120)        (0.0130)       (0.0052)        (0.0073)
Entry

R-squared                 0.339           0.342          0.300         0.302          0.117           0.118           0.060          0.062
N                        158268          158268         158268        158268          97233           97233           97233          97233
Linear state trends?        N               Y              N             Y              N               Y               N              Y
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. See notes to Table 1 for details on the specification and control variables.
Columns 5-8 are restricted to females who were age 13 between 2007-2015 and males who were age 13 between 2011-2015.




                                                                      64
Direct and Spillover Effects of Middle School Vaccination Requirements




                                              Appendix Table 8:
            Other Ways to Measure Cross-Vaccine Spillover Effects of Tdap Mandates: the Role of ACIP
                                   Recommendations, NIS-Teen 2008-2013
                                              (1)                          (2)                       (3)                        (4)
                                         1 dose MCV             Initiated HPV vaccine     Completed HPV vaccine       Had seasonal influenza
                                                                                                                       vaccine, age 10-13
Sample mean                                  0.357                       0.236                     0.099                       0.122

Tdap Mandate for Middle                    -0.0525*                    0.00230                     0.0204                     0.0053
School Entry                               (0.0313)                    (0.0264)                   (0.0141)                   (0.0067)


Tdap Mandate ACIP                          0.0807***
recommendation for MCV                     (0.0249)


Tdap Mandate ACIP                                                      0.0469**                    0.0154
recommendation for HPV                                                 (0.0197)                   (0.0117)


Tdap Mandate ACIP                                                                                                             0.0250*
recommendation for Flu                                                                                                       (0.0136)

R-squared                                        0.289                 0.114                       0.067                       0.178
N                                               116304                 57133                       57133                      116304
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. See notes to Table 1 for details on the specification and control variables.
Columns 2-3 are restricted to females who were aged 13 between 2007-2013 and males who were aged 13 between 2011-2013. All models
include the full set of controls, including linear state trends.




                                                                      65
