NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FIRM PERFORMANCE AND THE VOLATILITY OF WORKER EARNINGS
Chinhui Juhn
Kristin McCue
Holly Monti
Brooks Pierce
Working Paper 23102
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23102

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2017

We would like to thank Kathryn Shaw, Luigi Pistaferri, and Edward Lazear for helpful comments
on an earlier version. Any opinions and conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily represent the views of the U.S. Census Bureau, the U.S. Bureau of Labor
Statistics, or the National Bureau of Economic Research. All results have been reviewed to
ensure that no confidential information is disclosed.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Chinhui Juhn, Kristin McCue, Holly Monti, and Brooks Pierce. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Firm Performance and the Volatility of Worker Earnings
Chinhui Juhn, Kristin McCue, Holly Monti, and Brooks Pierce
NBER Working Paper No. 23102
January 2017
JEL No. J01,J3
ABSTRACT
Using linked employer-employee data for the U.S., we examine whether shocks to firm revenues
are transmitted to the earnings of continuing employees. While full insurance is rejected, the
elasticity of worker earnings with respect to persistent shocks in firm revenues is small and
consistent with the notion that firms insulate workers from idiosyncratic shocks. Exploring
heterogeneity of effects, we find the largest elasticity in professional services, among employees
in the top 5% of their employers’ earnings distribution, suggesting that in certain jobs
performance pay may be a countervailing force to wage insurance.

Chinhui Juhn
Department of Economics
University of Houston
Houston, TX 77204-5882
and NBER
cjuhn@uh.edu
Kristin McCue
U.S. Census Bureau
CES/2K130E
4600 Silver Hill Rd
Washington DC 20233-6300
kristin.mccue@census.gov

Holly Monti
Economist
Social, Economic, and Housing Statistics Divison
Bureau of the Census
4600 Silver Hill Road
Washington, DC 20233
holly.monti@gmail.com
Brooks Pierce
Bureau of Labor Statistics
Pierce_b@bls.gov

I. Introduction
What role do firms play in generating earnings volatility for workers? Earnings
volatility—within-worker fluctuations in earnings from year to year—contributes to cross
sectional earnings inequality. The seminal paper by Gottschalk and Moffit (1994) showed that
nearly one-third of the increase in male earnings inequality over the 1970-1987 period was due
to a rise in within-worker volatility in earnings. The evidence for more recent decades has been
mixed. Papers based on the Panel Study of Income Dynamics find further increases (Shin and
Solon (2011)) while other papers find little change or even a declining trend using other data sets
(Gathright and Monti (2013), Celik, Juhn, McCue, and Thompson (2012), Dahl, DeLeire, and
Schwabish (2007)).
If not fully anticipated, earnings volatility is one source of financial risk for workers.
There is some concern that American families may now be more subject to financial risk, given
trends such as the shift in retirement benefits from defined benefit to defined contribution plans,
rising health care costs, rising housing prices in certain areas of the country and even rising
college tuition rates (Hacker (2006)). Given this context, one question of interest is whether
fluctuations in demand faced by employers are an important source of worker earnings volatility.
That is, are shocks to firm performance transmitted to worker earnings?
A rich literature on implicit contracts posits that firms will shield workers from
fluctuations in demand (Baily (1974), Azariadis (1975), Rosen (1985)). This makes sense from
the perspective of risk, as entrepreneurs or stockholders are likely to have better access to capital
markets than workers, and to have more expertise in diversifying risk. According to Baily
(1974), firms offer workers a joint product: employment and insurance. Guiso et al. (2005) test
1

for wage insurance using matched employer-employee data from Italy and find that firms insure
workers against temporary shocks but not permanent shocks. Other papers have followed using
employer-employee data from other European countries and found similar results.1
In contrast, employers might favor variable pay as a way to provide incentives when
worker effort is unobserved. In such cases, performance pay based on worker output may
increase productivity (Lazear (1986), Lazear (2000)). Performance pay may also have desirable
sorting effects and so attract higher quality workers. During a period of rising skill demand,
firms may institute performance pay in order to attract more skilled workers (Lemieux,
MacLeod, and Parent (2009)). These models focus on performance pay based on individual
output. Firms may also vary pay with firm or group-level performance based on different
reasoning. In the CEO pay literature, tying CEO compensation to firm performance will help
solve the principal-agent problem. Lazear (1999) and Oyer and Schaefer (2005) argue that tying
compensation to firm performance may help the firm sort workers who are more optimistic about
the firm’s prospects or have private information about the value of the firm. Whether incentives
or sorting motivate firm compensation practices, these arguments suggest that variable pay is
likely to be more prevalent for managers and other workers who have a more direct impact on
firm performance.
The literature on wage insurance is also closely related to rent-sharing literature, which
explores the extent to which equally qualified workers are paid higher wages in firms that

1

The list of papers include Fagereng et al. (2016), Cardoso and Portela (2009), Katay (2009), Guertzgen (2014),and
Le Barbanchon and Tarasonis (2011). These papers generally find no transmission of temporary shocks and a partial
transmission of permanent shocks which range from 0.03 to 0.10.

2

command economic rents.2 More recently available employer-employee data linking individual
workers to firms has allowed for estimation of rent sharing parameters that control for worker
fixed effects. This approach essentially uses evidence on stayers and hence avoids difficulties
associated with highly able workers sorting into higher productivity firms. Card, Cardoso and
Kline (2016) use linked employer-employee data from Portugal to estimate responses of worker
earnings to changes in firms’ value added. They find a small positive coefficient relating threeyear changes in firm value added to three-year changes in worker earnings. They interpret the
pass-through estimate mainly in terms of rent sharing. While motivated by different theories,
empirically, the insurance story is the opposite of the rent-sharing story. A low elasticity
suggests more insurance and risk-sharing between workers and firms. A higher elasticity
suggests less risk-sharing and more rent-sharing. Card, Cardoso, Heining and Kline (this
volume) provides a survey of studies that relate wages to measures of firm performance. They
find that parameters estimated from job stayers are smaller than parameters estimated from job
movers. Wage insurance for workers who remain with the firm may be one reason for this gap in
the two types of estimates.
In this paper we make two contributions. First, we document the extent to which changes
in worker earnings are influenced by shocks to firm outcomes using a set of matched employeremployee data for the U.S. Previous papers examining wage insurance have examined evidence
from European countries with high levels of unionization and collective wage bargaining

2

See, for example, Hildreth and Oswald (1997), Blanchflower, Oswald and Sanfey (1996), Abowd and Lemieux
(1993), and Van Reenen (1996).

3

agreements. With a centralized wage bargaining process, firms may not be able to adjust worker
wages to idiosyncratic firm-level shocks. These factors are less of an issue in the U.S., so U.S.
data may provide more fertile ground for testing wage insurance models.3
Our second contribution is to explore important aspects of heterogeneity—by nature of
the shock and by worker and firm characteristics. We examine whether the extent of wage
insurance varies by the size of the shock and whether the impact of positive and negative shocks
differ. The performance pay literature suggests that the trade-off between insurance and
incentives should be most stark for employees who have a large direct impact on firm
performance. We test whether this prediction is borne out by comparing effects for highly paid
(top 5%) versus the low-paid (bottom 20%) workers in the firm. Finally we explore
heterogeneity by worker tenure. While wage insurance predicts little or no transmission of firmlevel shocks to worker earnings, a competing explanation is that labor markets are competitive
and firms have little leeway in setting wages. This is more likely to be true for just-hired workers
who have no accumulated firm-specific human capital. The just-hired provide a counterfactual
for pay adjustments in a more competitive setting. To the extent that the coefficients differ
substantially across these worker types, we may conclude that mobility of workers across firms
is more important than any considerations of insurance.
Our findings show that the OLS coefficient on short term (1-year) changes in firm
revenues on worker earnings is close to zero, ranging from 0.007 for manufacturing and 0.013

3

It may also be that lower firing costs in the U.S. induce firms to lay-off workers more readily so that focusing on
wage insurance provided to stayers may provide an incomplete picture of the overall insurance provided to workers
by firms.

4

and 0.015 for retail and professional services respectively. We find the coefficient to be -0.003
and insignificant in finance. Estimates are generally larger for 3-year and 5-year changes which
may be due to either reduced measurement error or isolating more persistent shocks. IV
estimates, which are an alternative method for correcting for measurement error and isolating
permanent shocks, produce small and positive coefficients which range from 0.02 in
manufacturing to 0.05 in professional services. While full insurance is rejected, the elasticity is
small and consistent with the notion that firms insulate workers from idiosyncratic shocks. We
find that the elasticity varies by sector and also by relative earnings rank of the worker in the
firm. We find the largest coefficient—0.09—among highly paid workers (the top 5%) in
professional services. For lower paid workers in professional services (those in the first
quintile), the coefficient is close to zero.

II. Related Literature
Guiso et al. (2005) use matched employer-employee data from Italy to test for wage
insurance. Other papers have followed their methods using matched employer-employee data
from other European countries. However, we are not aware of other papers which have used
matched employer-employee data for the U.S. with linked information on firm performance such
as revenues or value-added to examine this question. While our paper is the first that we know
of to conduct this exercise, other papers examining the U.S. are nevertheless closely related to
our paper. Comin, Groshen, and Rabin (2009) investigate the extent to which volatility of firm
revenues are transmitted to average wages of workers in the firm using a sample of large
publicly-traded firms in the COMPUSTAT data. They find that the relationship between firm
5

and wage volatility has become more positive over time which they attribute to a shift in the
composition of jobs towards those with more bonus pay. They also investigate variation across
industries and find that the relationship is stronger in services than in manufacturing. One
drawback to their study is the use of average firm wages, for which variation could be driven by
changes in worker composition. Using matched employer-employee data bypasses this difficulty
by measuring earnings changes for individual workers who remain employed in the firm.
Strain (2013) examines the relationship between firm employment volatility and volatility
of worker earnings and finds a robust positive relationship. But one difficulty for his findings is
the use of firm employment as the measure of firm performance. While shifts in firm
employment may reflect exogenous shifts in product demand, employment is more likely to be
affected by firm choices. Firm performance measures such as revenues or value-added are
arguably more exogenous and so it is more likely that the direction of causality goes from firm
volatility to volatility of worker earnings.
Barth et al. (2016) use the U.S. data from the Census’s Longitudinal Business Database
and economic censuses to estimate the relationship between establishment average payroll per
employee and revenues per worker. Since they use establishment average earnings rather than
changes in individual-level earnings, they find a somewhat larger positive coefficient relating
firm revenues to worker earnings. As with Card, Cardoso, and Kline (2016), the authors interpret
the coefficient as a rent-sharing parameter. Nevertheless, the authors conclude that the rentsharing model accounts for only a small portion of the rise in earnings inequality between
establishments.

6

III. Data
We base our empirical analysis on revenue data collected from samples of firms which
we link to administrative records on the earnings, work histories, and demographics of their
employees. Here we first describe the firm and employee data separately and then discuss how
we join them.

Firm data
The results presented here are based on data from three Census annual business surveys
that collect information on revenues for a particular industry or industry group:


The Annual Retail Trade Survey (ARTS) collects information on sales and expenses for a
panel of firms sampled from retail trade (NAICS 44-45) and accommodation and food
services (NAICS 72).



The Annual Survey of Manufactures (ASM) collects information from employers in a wide
set of manufacturing industries (NAICS 31-33).



The Services Annual Survey (SAS) collects data from selected industries in other sectors.

The coverage of the SAS has expanded over time, so while it now covers a large portion of the
services sector broadly defined, many of the currently included industries have relatively short
time series. Rather than pooling all of the available data, we have produced estimates for selected
industries, and only present two of them here: what we will refer to as finance (though it is based

7

on a subset of industries in that sector)4 and professional services.5 We included finance based
on the hypothesis that compensation practices in that industry would be more influenced by pay
for performance and less influenced by wage insurance than most. Professional services was
selected because it has substantial employment, and because we found a nontrivial relationship
between worker earnings growth and firm revenue growth for workers in that industry.6
The designs of these surveys share several common elements that influence our samples.
The purpose of collecting these data is to support timely estimates of aggregate activity, so firms
with more revenues have higher probabilities of selection. For this reason, our sample is
primarily made up of larger firms, making our results more representative of employment than of
the population of firms.7
For each of the survey panels, a new sample is drawn every 5 years, once new
information from the quinquennial Economic Census is incorporated into the sampling frame.
Over the span of years in our data, new samples for ARTS and SAS started in 2001, 2006, and
2011, while new ASM panels began in 1999, 2004, and 2009. While new firms appear in the

4

The sample we use is made up of firms from NAICS 5231 (securities and commodity contracts intermediation and
brokerage) and 5239 (Other financial activities).
5
This samples from NAICS 541 (Professional, scientific, and technical services). A few examples of detailed
industries in this sector are legal services, architectural and engineering services, and computer system design.
6
The other SAS industries that we produced estimates for but do not include were NAICS 621 (Ambulatory Health
Care), 622 (Hospitals), 623 (Nursing and Residential Care), and 811 (Repair and Maintenance). Results based on
data from those industries generally showed small and often insignificant coefficients.
7
For example, economic census statistics from 2012 show that the average firm in the industries sampled for the
ARTS survey (NAICS 44/45 and 72) had $4.3M in revenues in 2012, while the employment-weighted average for
those industries was $14M. This compares to a linked-worker weighted firm average in our broadest ARTS sample
of $119M in revenues in $2012 (see Appendix Table 1). For professional services, those statistics are $1.9M (firm
mean), $48M (worker weighted population), and $1,687M (our sample). For manufacturing: $22M (firm average),
$135M (worker-weighted population), and $788M (our sample). For finance, they are $9M (firm), $101M (worker
weighted population) and $6,165M (our sample).

8

panel primarily in those years, large firms may be selected again in subsequent panels and so
remain in our data set for more than five years.8 The ARTS and SAS surveys sample firms, or in
some cases the part of a firm that operates in an in-sample industry. The ASM differs from the
other surveys in that it samples establishments (individual locations) rather than firms.
We use data from these annual business surveys primarily to measure changes in firm
revenues. While some firms in the ARTS and SAS report sales separately for different parts of
their organization or broken down by detailed industry, we use total sales reported for the firm
within a three-digit NAICS industry as our measure of firm outcomes. In manufacturing, where
we have information on revenues by location, we sum revenues up to the firm/state level, which
is the most detailed level at which we can combine data on firms and their employees.

Employee data
Our data on employees come from Census’s Longitudinal Employer-Household
Dynamics (LEHD) database, which draws much of its data from complete sets of unemployment
insurance (UI) earnings records for U.S. states. Workers' quarterly UI earnings records have been
matched to characteristics of their employers drawn from quarterly administrative UI reports and
to demographic and employer information from other Census data sources. Earnings covered by
UI reporting include wage and salary income, commissions, tips, and bonuses.

8

We also use prior year revenue information, where available, to provide a 6 th year of data.

9

While all states provided data for the LEHD program, the availability of data from earlier
years varies by state. Our primary analysis sample of workers is selected based on their
employment by the firms in our business samples, as detailed in the next section. To provide
some context for the variation captured in our primary analysis, we also draw a 1% sample of all
UI-covered workers in 39 states for years 2000-2011, and use that sample to estimate overall
levels of earnings volatility.

Linked data
To construct our linked data set, we first take all of the firms (or, in some cases, industry
segments of firms) in the business samples that have non-missing and non-zero sales measures.
Firms with multiple locations (“multi-unit”) firms may file information using more than one
federal Employer Identification Number (EIN), so we pull all EINs used by the firm from
Census’s Business Register.9 The UI employer records also include EINs, so we then use the set
of EINs from the business surveys to select UI employer records for sampled firms, finding EIN
match rates of 84-90 percent for the industries we use.
Once we have a list of UI employer identifiers, we select all employees aged 25-59 who
are employed by a sample firm in at least one year during the period that the firm is in sample,
and having at least one “full-quarter” of employment in that year. In tables below, we refer to

9

The Business Register (BR) contains information on essentially all businesses with employees who are subject to
federal withholding. It serves as the sampling frame for all three surveys we use here. Firms do not always use the
same tax identifiers in filing federal payroll taxes (the primary source of EINs for the BR) and state UI taxes (the
source of EINs for the LEHD files). As a consequence, it is likely that our sample of employees is incomplete for
some of the firms included in our analysis.

10

this set of workers as our cross-sectional sample. As is standard in using the LEHD earnings
data, we treat quarter t as a full quarter if that worker has earnings reported in quarters t-1, t, and
t+1 at that employer. This definition is based on the notion that the individual was likely
employed for the full 13 weeks of the quarter if they had earnings with the same employer both
right before and right after the quarter. We use only full-quarter observations in measuring
earnings. This restriction serves to eliminate variation in earnings due to the number of weeks
worked, but note that we cannot eliminate variation due to changes in hours an individual works,
as we do not have data on worker hours. We do have establishment-level measures of hours in
manufacturing, which we use in a robustness check discussed later in the paper.
Our regression analysis requires that we further restrict our sample of workers to those
with two consecutive full years of earnings with a sample employer (“stayers”) so that we can
measure the relationship between changes in worker annual earnings and the annual firm
outcomes from the business data. In the least restrictive sample we use for our primary analysis,
we define stayers in year t as those having positive earnings with the same employer for each
quarter in two adjacent calendar years (t and t+1), plus two quarters on either end of that spell
(the fourth quarter of year t-1 and the first quarter of year t+2). When we examine longer
changes, we must further restrict our sample—for example, using those who are in the data for
six adjacent calendar years when looking at five-year differences. Results presented here are
primarily based on samples of jobs lasting long enough to use for either three-year or five-year

11

changes, which we will refer to as our 3-year and 5-year samples (though they require 4 and 6
years of data, respectively).10
The length of the panel datasets we analyze depend on the availability of both LEHD and
firm data. Our linked retail and manufacturing samples span years 1998-2011.11 For finance,
our sample includes years 2002-2011, and for professional services it includes years 1992-2011.
Because more states are included in the LEHD data in more recent years, our samples are larger
for more recent years, and so our estimates weight recent years more heavily. We should also
note that the fact that samples are refreshed every 5 years means that the 5-year samples are
particularly large for intervals starting with the first year of data for a new panel.

Summary statistics
Table 1 shows summary statistics for our analysis sample for the long-run stayers that are
included in our regression analyses, alongside two other comparison samples (appendix table 1
gives additional detail). One comparison sample—the cross-sectional sample described above—
includes all workers aged 25-59 linked to our sample of firms in that industry group with at least
one full quarter of earnings. We include these statistics to serve as a point of comparison for the
more restrictive samples we use for our primary analysis. The age restriction and the requirement
of one full quarter of earnings eliminates many transient and low earnings jobs. Annual average

10

Note that it is possible for an individual to be employed by more than one sample employer in the same time
period, but the restriction to stayers generally eliminates most such cases. In samples restricted to those who stay for
at least one full year, 0.1 percent of individuals are in our sample more than once.
11
We have manufacturing data for all of the years with LEHD data, but have only used 1998 forward; including
earlier data becomes computationally burdensome and limits comparability with other industry sectors.

12

earnings for these cross-sectional samples range from $51,300 in retail to over $200,000 in
finance.12 The ranking of pay by industries probably conforms with most readers’ expectations,
but the levels may seem surprisingly high. Part of the high average is explainable by the sample
restrictions—for example, staying with the same retailer for many years is probably much more
common among store managers than cashiers. But in addition, these means are based on the full
distribution of UI-covered earnings and are not topcoded, and so will be influenced by workers
with very high earnings such as executives. Because the statistics are worker-weighted, averages
for firm-side variables such as revenues reflect the characteristics of larger firms.13
The rows labeled “1-year difference” further restrict the samples to observations on
stayers at firms in-sample for adjacent match years.14 Restricting to stayers raises the average age
by approximately 2 years, and raises average annual earnings substantially. Further restricting
our samples to allow estimation based on longer-run changes of course reduces observation
counts, and further raises average earnings in all sectors except finance. The 5-year samples are
also more affected by the cycle of sample refreshment, which for our retail and finance samples
means that a large portion of the 5-year sample observations fall in the interval 2005-2010, and
so reflect variation during the great recession.15

12

Amounts are expressed in $2012, and are rounded to the nearest 100.
More precisely, they are weighted by matched employment for jobs that meet sample exclusion requirements, and
so are informative only about the characteristics of our sample.
14
Mean levels for the 1-year, 3-year, and 5-year change samples are respectively based on values for years 1, 2, and
3 of those intervals, so each in-sample change contributes a single observation to calculation of mean levels.
15
The professional services sample is on the same sampling schedule, but covers a longer period of years.
13

13

IV. Earnings Volatility of Stayers and Non-stayers
In estimating the effects of firm shocks on worker earnings in annual data, we end up
with selective samples based on stayers, and in some instances only quite long-term stayers.
From a broader perspective, while shocks to firm outcomes potentially affect earnings volatility
through their effects on earnings changes among continuing employees, they also affect volatility
by changing the likelihood that employees stay on their current job. Even for continuing
employees, it may be that shared industry or local area shocks have more substantial effects than
shocks that are idiosyncratic to the firm. But volatility among stayers provides an upper bound
on how much individual firm outcomes could plausibly contribute to volatility. A
straightforward accounting approximation gives the variance of earnings changes as the
weighted average of variances for the stayer and non-stayer sets, with the weights equal to the
relevant employment shares, as in

where Vt is the variance of earnings growth for the relevant set and St is the stayer share. In
forming this decomposition we use residualized earnings (net of age effects) and base our
estimates on a separate one percent sample of workers drawn from the LEHD data without
regard to industry, but satisfying our basic inclusion requirements. We plot trends separately for
younger workers (ages 25-34) and older workers (ages 35-59).
Our stayer definition is based on having 10 quarters in a row with a single employer. For
stayers in this sample who work for more than one job, we also require that their highest earnings
job in year t and t+1 are with the same employer. We term other workers meeting our basic

14

inclusion restrictions and having positive earnings “non-stayers,” as “movers” would be
inaccurate given that that set includes many different possible employment patterns. We
summarize the results of two decompositions meant to give a sense of the bounds on the relative
importance of earnings variation among stayers versus non-stayers, holding our stayers definition
constant. In both sets we use the standard deviation of the change in log earnings as our measure
of volatility, and so include only workers with earnings in both t and t+1. In the first set, we
compute the difference in log average full-quarter earnings on the individual’s highest paying job
between year t and year t+1, and then calculate the variance of that log difference for groups
defined by year, two age groups, and whether they are a stayer. By dropping any quarters with
zero earnings, and any in which someone worked less than a full quarter, we exclude much of the
effects of non-employment from our volatility measure, and also increase the share of stayers by
treating some non-stayers as out of scope because they have no full quarters of earnings. Time
series graphs of the volatility components are shown in Figure 1.
As shown in Table 2, volatility among stayers averages about 14 percent of overall
earnings volatility for those aged 25-34, and about 19 percent of overall earnings volatility for
those aged 35-59 (columns 2-4). These are substantial shares, even if they are considerably less
than half. Unsurprisingly, stayers account for a larger share of volatility among older workers,
primarily because older workers are more likely to be stayers. Age differences in the volatility
of earnings are small when conditioned on whether or not the individual changes jobs. In
contrast, if we include any workers with positive earnings in both t and t+1, adding in the full
effects of non-employment spells among those with some labor force activity in both years,
stayers account for only two or three percent of overall volatility (columns 5-7). While the
15

relationship between firm shocks and job losses or job changes is clearly important, we leave it
as the topic of future research. In this paper we focus on firm shock transmissions to stayers as
an interesting topic in its own right.

V. Empirical Framework for Regression Models
Our basic empirical approach is to regress innovations in worker earnings on innovations
in a measure of firm performance. We motivate this regression using a simplified version of
Guiso et al. (2005), adapted to include measurement error in revenues.

Firm shocks
Revenues are presumed to act as firm-side drivers affecting worker earnings. Letting j
index firms and t index time, log revenues Rjt follow
(1)
The

term captures time-varying observable factors, the

term captures unobserved firm

fixed effects, and the error term captures other factors (including measurement error in
revenues). First differencing eliminates the fixed effects,
(2)
Since our conceptual framework stresses wage insurance, we include industry, state and year
controls in our specifications. The aim is to net out aggregate and industry-level shocks to isolate
idiosyncratic shocks which are more likely to be insurable. For instance, industry and year
controls help net out the effects of common input Tcost shocks.
16

Permanent versus temporary shocks
It is useful to specify permanent and temporary components to the innovations
to distinguish true from measured values. True error shocks

, and

incorporate a random walk to

capture a permanent component and a moving average process to capture transitory effects,
(3)
(4)
where L denotes the lag operator. Together these imply a permanent-transitory distinction for the
true shocks

,
(5)

Adding measurement error mjt to the true

implies
(6)

Unless noted, error components are uncorrelated with each other and are serially uncorrelated,
and we denote variances in obvious ways, so that

,

,

, and so forth.

Worker earnings
Log earnings for worker i are presumed to depend on time-varying observable factors,
permanent and temporary firm-side shocks, worker fixed effects

, and a shock

,
(7)

17

Here the Pjt and Tjt reflect the idiosyncratic permanent and temporary firm outcomes, and are
implicitly defined to difference down to the components of (5). First differencing eliminates the
worker fixed effects,
(8)
where the composite error term

includes terms related to the permanent and temporary

firm shocks and the idiosyncratic wage shock,
(9)
Estimation
Estimating (9) directly is difficult since firm side revenue growth includes measurement
error and both temporary and permanent innovations. Earnings growth does not depend on the
measurement error part of firm revenue growth, but even with no measurement error we would
have difficulty distinguishing the α and β responses as we do not directly observe the separate
components of

. We adopt two complementary approaches which we think offer sensible

information, particularly about α. In this section we relate our proposed OLS and IV model
estimates to the parameters in the stochastic setup above.
One approach involves estimating OLS regressions of wage growth on firm sales growth,
for various lengths of change (we estimate models for 1-, 3-, and 5-year changes). The idea is
that correlations among longer differences should more heavily reflect the impact of permanent
shocks rather than transitory shocks or measurement error. Consider an OLS regression on 5year changes from (t-3) to (t+2), an interval that spans the one-period changes above. The
stochastic setup implies
18

(10)
(11)
The OLS coefficient is a ratio of the relevant covariances
(12)
(13)
Shorter changes look similar, but with fewer accumulated

permanent terms in (10)-(11),

and smaller leading terms in (12)-(13). In particular, coefficients on the leading terms in (12)(13) equal the difference length, in this case 5.16
If there were no measurement error, the OLS coefficients would reflect a weighted
average of α and β, with α more heavily weighted for longer changes. If there were no
measurement error, and α equaled β, the ratio of (12) to (13) would give the common parameter
α=β. Measurement error biases coefficients toward zero, but less so as the difference length
increases. Generally speaking, there is a difficulty in distinguishing between the effects of
measurement error and different responses to permanent and transitory firm shocks (
α>β could look the same in the data as

=0 and

>0 and α=β). This seems intuitive since measurement

error is transitory in the setup.
In our second approach, we follow Card, Cardoso, and Kline (2016) and use revenue
growth at different dates as instruments, in particular choosing instrument dating that overlaps

16

The 1-period changes also have an additional component θ to the

19

term.

the independent variable but without common endpoints. For instance, the IV coefficient in a 1period change model using the 5-period change

as an instrument is
=

= α.

(14)

If the instrument spans a long enough horizon and overlaps with but does not share endpoints
with the independent variable, then the instrumentation filters out any variation having to do with
the transitory terms, true or mismeasured, and the IV coefficient measures the earnings response
to permanent shocks. One gets the same outcome from a 5-period change model when
instrumenting with the one-period change

, since

.17
Instrumenting with a just-barely-overlapping change would return α if θ=0, but not
otherwise. For example, a 3-period earnings growth model instrumented using a 5-period change
in firm revenues returns
(15)

Instrumenting with a just-barely-overlapping change filters out the measurement error and the
part of the transitory shock that disappears in one period, but not the part of the transitory shock
with a lingering effect into a second period. If α=β this would return the common parameter.
To summarize, we expect OLS coefficients to rise with difference length, and to give a
better measure of the earnings response to permanent shocks for longer changes. However, we
17

This is a general symmetry result from this setup. For instance, the model suggests that estimating a 3-period
growth model with a 1-period change as instrument would return the same parameter as running a 1-period growth
model with a 3-period instrument (provided changes are dated so as to overlap but not share endpoints).

20

cannot determine how much of any observed pattern in OLS coefficients to attribute to
measurement error versus different responses to transitory and permanent shocks. We expect the
IV strategies identifying α to return larger coefficients because they avoid the variation
associated with measurement error and the transitory shocks (assuming

). Higher IV

coefficients are consistent with both measurement error in firm revenues and with a greater
response to permanent than transitory shocks. Finally, we would take similar OLS and IV
coefficients as some evidence in favor of small measurement error along with

, meaning

earnings responses to transitory and permanent shocks are similar.

VI. Results
As described above, our basic framework for analyzing the effect of firm shocks on
worker earnings growth is a simple set of regressions of the form
(16)
where j indexes firms, i indexes workers, and t indexes time. The dependent variable is the
change in log annual worker earnings and the independent variable of interest is

, the change

in log firm revenues.18 Taking differences nets out worker-firm fixed effects. Other controls
include separate dummies for worker age for men and for women, 4-digit industry dummies,
year and state dummies, and 3-digit industry dummies interacted with year dummies.19

18

Various firm performance measures are possible. Value added is an attractive measure because it approximates
the relevant pool of funds that is subject to rent capture or bargaining by labor. But revenues are likely to be better
measured, as value added is typically derived from revenues by subtracting costs.
19
Our manufacturing and retail samples span multiple 3-digit industries but the other samples do not.

21

a. Baseline Results
Table 3 presents OLS regression results for four industries—manufacturing, retail,
professional services and finance (as defined in section III). The table shows estimates for 1year, 3-year, and 5-year changes. In order to compare shorter and longer-run changes on the
same sample of workers and firms, we restrict our sample to firms and workers who remain in
the sample long enough to be included in 5-year changes. The OLS estimates indicate that very
little of the firm-level shocks in revenue are passed to worker earnings. In manufacturing, shown
in the top left panel, the estimate is a highly significant 0.007 for 1-year changes. The estimates
for 3-year and 5-year changes are larger (0.012 and 0.013) but still quite small. Estimates for
professional services and retail are generally a bit larger than those for manufacturing, but still
small. While we expected to find larger effects for finance because that is where we thought
variable pay should be most important, there is little evidence that firm-level performance is
transmitted to worker earnings in the finance sector.
Table 4 reports results for instrumental variables models where the change in firm
revenues is instrumented with non-overlapping shorter or longer changes. The columns refer to
changes in worker log earnings (the dependent variables) while the rows refer to the changes in
firm log revenues (the instruments). For example, the coefficient 0.023 reported for
manufacturing is the estimate obtained from regressing 1-year changes in log worker earnings on
1-year changes in firm log revenues, with the 3-year change in log revenues used as an
instrument. The IV estimates for manufacturing are generally larger than the OLS estimates
shown in Table 3, and are now generally roughly 0.02. The IV estimates are also larger for
22

professional services where some of the estimates are now close to 0.05. There is no clear
pattern for retail although one of the estimates (the 1-year change instrumented with the 5-year
change) exhibits the largest coefficient yet obtained: 0.073. Again, we find little evidence of
transmission of firm level shocks to worker earnings in finance.
It is useful to compare our results for the U.S. to others in the literature. Our estimates
are in the neighborhood of those found by Arai (2003) for Sweden, Margolis and Salvanes
(2001) for Norwegian manufacturing, and Martins (2009) for Portuguese manufacturing; these
form the lower end of the range of estimates identified by Card et al. (this volume). There are
many reasons related to both data and measurement that could account for the lower rates we
estimate in the U.S. compared to those from European countries. But issues of measurement
aside, lower pass-through of firm-level shocks to workers is somewhat unexpected given the
existence of greater labor market flexibility in the U.S. For example, the U.S. has the lowest
rates of unionization and collective bargaining agreements among OECD countries (Freeman
(2007)).
One explanation is that while unionization and collective bargaining may reduce wage
flexibility at a more aggregate level, the presence of such institutions may not necessarily
preclude wage adjustments at the firm level (Cardoso and Portugal (2005), Teulings (1997)).
Another possibility is crowd-out of private insurance by public insurance (Ellul, Pagano and
Schivardi (2014)). The U.S. offers less generous unemployment and disability insurance
benefits compared to most OECD countries (OECD (2010), OECD (2016)). This type of crowd
out is unlikely, however, since these benefits are tied to non-employment rather than to wage

23

cuts. Another possible explanation is that U.S. firms provide less employment insurance and are
more likely to lay off workers in the event of a negative productivity shock.
In our paper as well as in Guiso et al. (2005), the focus has been on earnings changes
among workers who are continuing with the firm. We show that stayers are a select sample
when compared to a broader sample of employees working at least one full quarter. Thus a focus
on earnings risk, conditional on employment, leaves open the important question of whether
firms readily transfer employment risk by laying off workers even as they reduce wage risk for
the workers who are retained. Lamadon (2014) finds that a significant fraction of earnings risk is
due to unemployment and job mobility. We view exploring employment risk in conjunction with
wage insurance parameters as important topic for future research.
In the results reported above, we have restricted our sample to the 5-year change sample
in order to compare shorter and longer-run changes holding sample composition constant. In
doing so, however, we lose a large share of our original sample, particularly in the retail sector
where the average tenure of workers is shorter. One concern is that our 5-year change sample is
not very representative of typical workers or firms in the industry. We have examined how
much this restriction affects our results by repeating our analysis of 1- and 3-year changes on a
sample that requires staying in our data for 4 consecutive years (our 3-year change sample)
rather than 6 consecutive years. These results are reported in Appendix Tables 2 and 3. The
results using this more robust sample are qualitatively similar to those reported in Table 3 and
Table 4. One difference is that in retail, the IV estimates for 3-year changes (0.035 and 0.029)
are now larger than the corresponding 3-year OLS estimate which is now zero.

24

a. Heterogeneity by Size and Direction of Shocks
While we find small effects overall, it is possible that our estimates of mean effects
obscure different patterns at other parts of the distribution of firm-level shocks. In particular, it
seems relevant to ask whether firms insure workers from particularly large shocks or are more
likely to insure workers against negative shocks but allow earnings to vary with positive shocks.
We explore this possibility in Figure 4 by graphing mean changes in log worker earnings against
changes in log firm-revenues.20 We utilize the more robust 3-year change sample for this
exercise. We order the firm revenue changes and divide them into 50 bins with approximately
equal numbers of firm/year observations, and then average the changes in log revenues and
changes in worker earnings within each bin. We have omitted the lowest and highest bins from
the figure.
The figure shows suggestive evidence that firms insure workers against very large shocks
in manufacturing and professional services. This seems to be true for both large positive shocks
and for large negative shocks. The slope relating firm revenue shocks to changes in worker
earnings is flatter at the extremes than in the middle. The pattern is less clear for retail and for
finance; those figures do not point to obvious asymmetric effects of positive and negative
shocks. We verify this by running regressions for the 3-year changes allowing the coefficients to
differ for positive and negative shocks, which we report in Table 5. The coefficients are slightly
larger for negative shocks although in the case of manufacturing, the difference is minimal (and

20

We first residualize changes in both firm revenues and worker earnings by regressing out the set of controls used
in our regressions: age dummies separately for men and women, year and state dummies, 4-digit industry dummies,
and 3-digit industry dummies interacted with year dummies (for those sectors spanning multiple 3-digit industries).

25

in finance, none of the coefficients are significant). While we do not interpret our estimates as
rent-sharing parameters, this type of asymmetry would be hard to reconcile with a rent-sharing
story alone. The expectation is that firms do not cut wages in the case of negative shocks
because workers may leave while they are likely to share the rents generated by positive shocks.
One caveat is that we cannot separately identify hours variation in our data.21 It is possible at
least in the retail sector where part-time employment is common that firms cut hours for stayers
in the case of negative demand shocks.

b. Heterogeneity by Worker Characteristics
Wage insurance and incentive pay are likely to be more relevant motives for structuring
pay for some jobs than others. Given what can be measured in our data, grouping workers by
relative position in their firm’s earnings distribution seems the most useful way to try to
distinguish groups that might be more or less affected. To do this, we pool information on all
workers (stayers or not) who work at least one full quarter for a firm in the sample. We then
regress log quarterly earnings on dummies for single years of age and a full set of year*quarter
dummies to adjust for differences in the age and time periods in which earnings are observed.
We take residuals from this regression and average them across all quarters that an individual is
in sample. We use these average residuals to rank workers within each firm. While our analysis
sample is again based on the 5-year change sample, we assign workers in the sample to quantiles

21

Unfortunately we do not have hours data for the retail, finance, or professional services. We do have total hours
worked by production workers in manufacturing. We present results controlling for hours in manufacturing in a
later robustness section.

26

based on order statistics calculated including any non-stayers that worked one or more full
quarters. Therefore our quantiles do not split the sample of stayers into equal fractions, but they
do preserve a reasonable ordering of our in-sample observations.
Table 6 shows the results for quintile 1, quintile 3 and for the top 5% of the distribution.
The table reports OLS estimates based on 5-year changes and IV estimates that instrument 5-year
changes in log revenues with 3-year changes in log revenues. There is clear evidence that the
coefficients are larger for higher wage workers in manufacturing and professional services. This
is only mildly true in the manufacturing sector where the IV coefficient increases from being
close to zero and insignificant for quintile 1 workers to 0.029 for the top 5% workers. The
pattern is much more pronounced in professional services where the IV coefficient goes from
being insignificant and close to zero for quintile 1 workers to 0.091 for the top 5%. The near
10% elasticity is the largest coefficient estimate we find in any of our specifications. Given
shifting employment from manufacturing to professional services and from less-skilled jobs to
higher skilled jobs, these patterns suggest that volatility of worker earnings attributable to firmlevel shocks could be expected to rise. The result for the retail sector is puzzling in that the size
of the OLS coefficient is uniform across the wage categories while the IV coefficient (0.041) is
the largest for quintile 1 workers. One possibility is that low-wage workers in the retail industry
are more likely to work on commission. Another possibility is that in retail where part-time
employment is common, hours adjustments play a bigger role.
While we generally find small estimates and interpret this as evidence of partial wage
insurance, a competing explanation is that labor markets are effectively competitive and firms
have little leeway in setting wages. This is more likely to be true for workers who have just been
27

hired and have no accumulated firm-specific human capital. We examine whether workers with
greater tenure in the firm (and presumably more firm-specific human capital) experience larger
transmission of firm-level shocks compared to the just hired. To the extent that the coefficients
differ greatly across these worker types, we might conclude that mobility of workers across firms
is more important than any considerations of wage insurance.
We explore these differences in Table 7. We use our 3-year change sample here because
requiring the longer 5-year interval is likely to have particularly large effects on the number of
new hires who remain in sample. We distinguish between just-hired employees and longer-term
employees, where the latter category is defined as workers who have 4+ quarters of tenure in the
first year of the 3-year change. Table 7 shows that in retail and professional services, workers
with more tenure experience larger changes in their earnings in response to firm shocks than do
the just hired, but in both cases the differences are small (roughly .01). Estimated differences for
both manufacturing and finance are small and insignificant. It thus appears that even for workers
with greater tenure, there is little transmission of firm-level shocks to worker earnings suggesting
that wage insurance is still a compelling explanation for the small size of the elasticities.

c. Robustness to Adding Controls for Employment and Hours
We have focused on revenues as our measure of firm performance, presuming that
revenue changes are driven by demand shocks or productivity changes so that the prospect of
profits to be shared with workers grows. However, mergers or acquisitions could also lead to
revenue increases without necessarily reflecting improved firm performance. To examine
whether this is an important concern, we use an alternative measure of firm performance for
28

manufacturing—revenue per worker—that should be less sensitive to such reorganizations.22
We run the same regressions shown in Tables 3 and 4, now using revenue per worker as our firm
performance measure. We also include specifications that add a control for hours: log
differences of the ratio of total production worker hours to production worker employment. We
do this to see whether adding hours reduces our estimates, which would suggest that part of the
adjustment is due to changes in hours rather than wages. The top panel of Table 8 reports OLS
results while the bottom panel reports instrumental variables results. We find that most of our
estimates increase by about .01 using this alternative firm performance measure. Although this
is not a large difference, it does suggest some future lines of inquiry, for example with respect to
the effects or measurement surrounding mergers and consolidations. We find that adding hours
has very little effect on our estimates. This suggests that the interpretation of our estimates as
referring to wage insurance is still valid and that, at least in manufacturing, the elasticity
parameters do not simply reflect an hours adjustment.

VII. Conclusions and Future Work
U.S. evidence on the extent to which changing firm conditions affect the earnings of
continuing employees is scant, largely because data to address this question has only recently
become available. In this paper, we use firm level data in manufacturing, retail and selected

22

Unfortunately, the ARTS and SAS surveys do not collect employment data. While it is possible to obtain
employment measures from Census’s Business Register, uncertainty about the relationship between the sampling
units used for these surveys and the units on the BR mean that using such a measure as a denominator for sales per
worker would add considerable measurement error.

29

service industries to examine this question. IV estimates which isolate persistent shocks and
correct for measurement error are small and positive—ranging from 0.02 in manufacturing to
0.05 in professional services. We find that in professional services the relatively large number
masks significant heterogeneity, with the coefficient being essentially zero among the lowest
wage workers in the first quintile of the firm earnings distribution while the coefficient is 0.09
among those in the top 5%. The highest paid workers in professional services, however, are
likely to be in precisely the sort of jobs in which we would expect performance pay objectives to
override insurance concerns. While our finding of non-zero estimates is technically a rejection of
the notion of full insurance, these coefficients are economically small enough that it seems
sensible to conclude that the transmission of firm-level shocks to earnings of stayers is minimal
in the U.S. labor market.
To what extent have firms contributed to the recent increases in financial risk
experienced by American families? Our evidence here, based on workers who remain with the
firm, suggests that firms had a relatively limited role. Even if firms offer less wage insurance to
workers than in the past, our estimates suggest that even in the 2000s, very little of the volatility
in firm performance is passed through to workers. However, there is an important caveat, in that
our paper focuses on earnings changes among workers who are continuing with the firm. It is
possible that firms are more likely to lay-off workers in adverse circumstances and employment
risk has increased for American workers. We view this as an important topic for future research.

30

References
Abowd, John M. and Thomas Lemieux. 1993. “The Effects of Product Market Competition on
Collective Bargaining Agreements: The Case of Foreign Competition in Canada.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 108(4): 983-1014.
Arai, Mahmood. 2003. “Wages, Profits and Capital Intensity: Evidence from Matched WorkerFirm Data.” Journal of Labor Economics 21(3), 593-618.
Azariadis, Costas. 1975. “Implicit Contracts and Underemployment Equilibria.” The Journal of
Political Economy 83(6): 1183-1202.
Baily, Martin Neil. 1974. “Wages and Employment under Uncertain Demand.” The Review of
Economic Studies 41(1): 37-50.
Barth, Erling, Alex Bryson, James C. Davis, and Richard Freeman. 2016. “It's Where You Work:
Increases in Earnings Dispersion Across Establishments and Individuals in the United States.”
Journal of Labor Economics 34(S2): S67-S97.
Blanchflower, David G., Andrew J. Oswald, Peter Sanfey. 1996. “Wages, Profits and Rent
Sharing.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 111(1): 227-252.
Card, David, Ana Rute Cardoso, and Patrick Kline. 2016. “Bargaining, Sorting, and the Gender
Wage Gap: Quantifying the Impact of Firms on the Relative Pay of Women.” The Quarterly
Journal of Economics 131(2): 633-686.
Card, David, Jörg Heining, and Patrick Kline. 2013. “Workplace Heterogeneity and the Rise of
West German Wage Inequality. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 128(3): 967-1015.
Card, David, Ana Rute Cardoso, Jörg Heining, and Patrick Kline. 2016b. “Firms and Labor
Market Inequality: Evidence and Some Theory.” NBER Working Paper w22850.
Cardoso, Ana and Miguel Portela. 2009. “Micro Foundations for Wage Flexibility: Wage
Insurance at the Firm Level.” Scandinavian Journal of Economics 111(1): 29-50.
Cardoso, Ana and Pedro Portugal. 2005. “Contractual Wages and the Wage Cushion under
Different Bargaining Settings.” Journal of Labor Economics 23(4):875-902.
Celik, Sule, Chinhui Juhn, Kristin McCue and Jesse Thompson. 2012. "Recent Trends in
Earnings Volatility: Evidence from Survey and Administrative Data." The BE Journal of
Economic Analysis & Policy 12(2).

31

Comin, Diego, Erica L. Groshen, and Bess Rabin. 2009. “Turbulent Firms, Turbulent Wages?”
Journal of Monetary Economics 56(1): 109-133.
Dahl, Molly W., Thomas C. DeLeire, and Jonathan A. Schwabish. 2007. “Trends in Earnings
Variability over the Past 20 Years.” Congressional Budget Office, Washington, D.C.
Ellul, Andrew, Marco Pagano, Fabiano Schivardi. 2014. “Employment and Wage Insurance
within Firms: Worldwide Evidence,” working paper.
Fagereng, Andreas, Luigi Guiso, and Luigi Pistaferri. 2016. “Back to Background Risk?” CEPR
Discussion Paper No. 11051.
Freeman, Richard. 2007. “Labor Market Institutions Around the World.” NBER Working Paper
w13242.
Gathright, Graton, and Holly Monti. 2013. “Measuring Earnings Instability Using Survey and
Administrative Data.” SIPP Working Paper No. 260.
Guertzgen, Nicole. 2014. “Wage insurance within German Firms: Do Institutions Matter?”
Journal of the Royal Statistical Society 177(2), 345-369.
Gottschalk, Peter, and Robert Moffitt. 1994. “The Growth of Earnings Instability in the U.S.
Labor Market.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2: 217-54.
Guiso, Luigi, Luigi Pistaferri, and Fabiano Schivardi. 2005. “Insurance within the Firm.” Journal
of Political Economy 113(5): 1054-1087.
Hacker, Jacob S. 2006. The Great Risk Shift: The Assault on American Jobs, Families, Health
Care, and Retirement—And How You Can Fight Back. New York: Oxford University Press.
Hildreth, Andrew K.G., Andrew Oswald. 1997. “Rent Sharing and Wages: Evidence from
Company and Establishment Panels.” Journal of Labor Economics 15(2): 318-337.
Katay, Gabor. 2009. “Do Firms Provide Wage Insurance against Shocks? Evidence from
Hungary.” Working paper European Central Bank #964.
Lamadon, Thibaut. 2014. “Productivity Shocks, Dynamic Contracts and Income Uncertainty.”
Working paper.
Lazear, Edward P. 1986. “Salaries and Piece Rates.” Journal of Business 59(3): 405-431.
Lazear, Edward P. 1999. “Output-Based Pay: Incentives or Sorting?” NBER Working Paper
w7419.
32

Lazear, Edward P. 2000. “Performance Pay and Productivity.” American Economic Review
90(5): 1346-1361.
Le Barbanchon, Thomas, and Linas Tarasonis. 2011. “Wage Responsiveness within the Firm:
Evidence from France.” Working paper.
Lemieux, Thomas, W. Bentley MacLeod and Daniel Parent. 2009. “Performance Pay and Wage
Inequality.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 124(1): 1-49.
Margolis David, Kjell G. Salvanes. 2001. “Do Firms Really Share Rents with Their Workers?”
IZA Discussion Paper 330.
Martins, Pedro S. 2009. “Rent Sharing Before and After the Wage Bill.” Applied Economics
41(17), 2133-2151.
OECD, 2010. Sickness, Disability, and Work. Breaking the Barriers. Paris, OECD.
OECD, 2016. Benefits and Wages Statistics. http://www.oecd.org/els/benefits-and-wagesstatistics.htm
Oyer, Paul, and Scott Schaefer. 2005. “Why Do Some Firms Give Stock Options to All
Employees?: An Empirical Examination of Alternative Theories.” Journal of Financial
Economics 76(1): 99-133.
Rosen, Sherwin. 1985. “Implicit Contracts: A Survey.” Journal of Economic Literature 23(3):
1144-1175.
Shin, Donggyun, and Gary Solon. 2011. Trends in Men's Earnings Volatility: What Does the
Panel Study of Income Dynamics Show?" Journal of Public Economics 95(7): 973-982.
Strain, Michael. 2013. “Do Volatile Firms Pay Volatile Earnings? Evidence Using Linked
Worker-Firm Data,” AEI Economic Policy Working Paper No. 2013-01.
Teulings, C. N. 1997. “A New Theory of Corporatism and Wage Setting,” European Economic
Review 41: 659–669.
Van Reenen, John. 1996. “The Creation and Capture of Rents: Wages and Innovation in a Panel
of U.K. Companies.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 111(1): 195-226.

33

Table 1. Summary Statistics
Change in Change in
log
log
revenue, earnings,
per year per year

Annual
Unique
earnings
Sector
Sample
N
firms
($2012)
Manufacturing
Cross-section
65,192,500 213,700
56,100
1-year difference
41,349,200
64,100
0.010
0.019
65,500
3-year difference
22,706,400
39,100
0.010
0.014
67,200
5-year difference
12,479,700
20,800
0.023
0.015
68,500
Retail
Cross-section
18,129,900
63,000
51,300
1-year difference
5,326,000
29,300
0.020
0.022
68,800
3-year difference
1,981,800
19,400
0.030
0.019
72,200
5-year difference
496,000
12,300
0.091
0.019
72,500
Finance
Cross-section
2,568,100
3,600
207,300
1-year difference
840,400
1,600
0.065
0.057
264,600
3-year difference
315,600
700
0.070
0.045
256,900
5-year difference
128,700
500
0.059
0.046
240,300
Professional Services
Cross-section
17,113,700
26,700
78,700
1-year difference
5,024,600
12,100
0.061
0.038
102,900
3-year difference
2,250,600
7,200
0.053
0.035
107,100
5-year difference
1,021,600
4,700
0.048
0.035
108,300
Notes. Manufacturing includes NAICS industries 31-33; source is Annual Survey of Manufactures. Retail data
includes NAICS industries 44-45 (retail trade) and 72 (accomodation and food services); source is the Annual
Retail Trade Survey. Finance includes NAICS 523 and Professional Services includes NAICS 541; source is
Services Annual Survey. Samples are for workers aged 25-59. Averages are worker-weighted averages.

34

Table 2. Earnings volatility of stayers and non-stayers, by age group
Stayers

Non-stayers, full-quarter earnings

Non-stayers, any earnings

Age group

standard
deviation of
log earnings

standard
deviation of
log earnings

fraction
stayer

stayer share
of volatility

standard
deviation of
log earnings

fraction
stayer

stayer share
of volatility

25-34
35-59

.191
.174

.467
.456

.486
.620

.137
.193

1.10
1.06

.394
.539

.019
.031

Notes. Columns labeled “Non-stayers, any earnings” are based on samples keeping workers with earnings in both periods t
and t+1. Columns labeled “Non-stayers, full-quarter earnings” are based on samples keeping workers with full-quarter
earnings in both periods t and t+1, and calculate standard deviations using quarterly averages of (full quarter) earnings. The
full quarter definition for non-stayers is meant to abstract from quarters with zero or partial earnings.

35

Table 3. OLS Models for Changes in Log Worker Earnings
Change in log
revenues over:

1-year
3-year

Dependent variable = Change in log earnings over:

1-year
0.007***
(0.001)

Manufacturing
3-year

3-year

1-year
0.013**
(0.004)

0.012***
(0.002)

5-year

0.038***
(0.009)

5-year

1-year

5-year

Retail
3-year

0.013***
(0.003)
Professional Services
1-year
3-year
5-year
0.015***
(0.004)
0.019***
(0.005)

0.023***
(0.004)

1-year
-0.003
(0.008)

Finance
3-year

5-year

-0.004
(0.009)

5-year

0.010
0.006
(0.007)
(0.010)
Notes. Samples are for workers aged 25-59 who stayed with the same employer for 6 years. Samples are
consistent across specifications. Statistics are OLS coefficients from regressions of log earnings growth on firm log
revenue growth. Column and row headings indicate whether growth is calculated as 1-, 3- or 5-year changes.
Additional controls include single year of age indicators for men and for women; state, year, and four-digit industry
indicators; and, in Manufacturing and Retail, interactions between year and three-digit industry indicators. Standard
errors are clustered at the firm level and reported in parentheses (** p<0.01 *** p<0.001).

36

Table 4. Instrumental Variables Models for Changes in Log Worker Earnings
Dependent variable = Change in log earnings over:
Manufacturing
Retail
Instrument:
1-year

3-year
0.020***
(0.004)

1-yr change in
log(revenues)
3-yr change in
log(revenues)

0.023***
(0.004)

5-yr change in
log(revenues)

0.024***
(0.006)

1-yr change in
log(revenues)
3-yr change in
log(revenues)

5-year
0.012*
(0.005)

1-year

0.016***
(0.004)

0.005
(0.006)

0.020***
(0.004)

0.073**
(0.027)

Professional Services
0.041***
0.020
(0.011)
(0.013)
0.048***
(0.008)

0.022**
(0.008)

3-year
0.002
(0.008)

0.011
(0.007)
0.037***
(0.008)
Finance
-0.002
(0.013)

-0.010
(0.009)

5-year
0.002
(0.007)

-0.003
(0.015)
0.011
(0.023)

5-yr change in
0.051*
0.041**
0.003
0.009
log(revenues)
(0.020)
(0.015)
(0.015)
(0.024)
Notes. Samples are for workers aged 25-59 who stayed with the same employer for 6 years. Samples are
consistent across specifications. Statistics are IV coefficients from regressions of log earnings growth on firm log
revenue growth over the same interval. Column headings indicate whether growth is calculated as 1-, 3- or 5year changes. The length of the change in the instrument varies across rows; instrument dating is chosen so that
the midpoint of the instrument change coincides with the midpoint of the independent variable change. Additional
controls include single year of age indicators for men and for women; state, year, and four-digit industry
indicators; and, in Manufacturing and Retail, interactions between year and three-digit industry indicators.
Standard errors are clustered at the firm level and reported in parentheses (** p<0.01 *** p<0.001).

37

Table 5. OLS Models with Asymmetric Effects
Dependent variable = 3-year change in log
earnings
Manufacturing
Retail

Change in log revenue
3-yr change * (indicator for positive change)

0.009***

0.020***

(0.002)

(0.006)

0.013***
(0.002)

0.038***
(0.010)

Professional Services
0.016**
(0.005)

Finance
-0.002
(0.009)

3-yr change * (indicator for negative change)

3-yr change * (indicator for positive change)
3-yr change * (indicator for negative change)

0.031***
0.013
(0.007)
(0.011)
Notes. Samples are for workers aged 25-59 who stayed with the same employer for 4 years.
Statistics are OLS coefficients from regressions of log earnings growth on firm log revenue growth,
interacted with indicators for whether the change in firm revenues is positive or negative. Growth is
calculated as a 3-year change. Additional controls include single year of age indicators for men and
for women; state, year, and four-digit industry indicators; and, in Manufacturing and Retail,
interactions between year and three-digit industry indicators. Standard errors are clustered at the
firm level and reported in parentheses (** p<0.01 *** p<0.001).

38

Table 6. Changes in Log Worker Earnings, by Earnings Rank
Manufacturing
OLS
IV

Retail
OLS

IV

Quintile 1

0.007
(0.006)

0.008
(0.010)

0.018*
(0.008)

0.041**
(0.014)

Quintile 3

0.015***
(0.002)

0.018***
(0.003)

0.022***
(0.004)

0.004
(0.005)

Top 5%

0.019***

0.029***

0.020***

0.011

(0.005)

(0.006)

(0.004)

(0.007)

Professional Services

Finance

Quintile 1

0.005
(0.004)

0.008
(0.007)

-0.008
(0.009)

-0.006
(0.015)

Quintile 3

0.011**
(0.004)

0.017**
(0.006)

0.002
(0.007)

0.004
(0.013)

Top 5%

0.042**
(0.015)

0.091***
(0.015)

-0.010
(0.033)

-0.039
(0.030)

Notes: Results are for workers aged 25-59 who stayed with the same employer for 6 years;
samples are split by workers' earnings rank within the firm, determined after controlling for age and
time. The dependent variable is the 5-year change in log worker earnings. Statistics are estimated
coefficients on the log change in revenues over a 5-year interval. The IV results instrument using
the 3-year change in log sales. Additional controls include single year of age indicators for men and
for women; state, year, and four-digit industry indicators; and, in Manufacturing and Retail,
interactions between year and three-digit industry indicators. Standard errors are clustered at the
firm level and reported in parentheses (** p<0.01 *** p<0.001).

39

Table 7. Recent Hires versus Longer Term Employees

3-yr change in log(revenues)

3-yr change in log(revenues)
* Longer term worker

Longer term worker

Manufacturing

Retail

Finance

Professional
Services

0.010***
(0.002)

0.020***
(0.005)

-0.000
(0.005)

0.013***
(0.004)

0.003
(0.003)

0.010***
(0.002)

0.005
(0.008)

0.009***
(0.002)

-0.040***
(0.002)

-0.049***
(0.003)

-0.067***
(0.006)

-0.029***
(0.002)

Notes. Statistics are IV regression coefficients from 3-year log earnings growth models. Longer
term workers are defined as those with 4+ quarters of tenure at beginning of the 3-year interval.
Instruments are the 1-year change in log revenues and the 1-year change in log revenues
interacted with the longer term worker indicator. Additional controls include single year of age
indicators for men and for women; state, year, and four-digit industry indicators; and, in
Manufacturing and Retail, interactions between year and three-digit industry indicators. Standard
errors are clustered at the firm level and reported in parentheses (** p<0.01 *** p<0.001).

40

Table 8. Models Using Revenues per Worker, Manufacturing
Dependent variable = Change in log earnings
Base controls
Base controls plus hours
A. OLS Models
Change in log revenues
per worker interval:
1-year

1-year
0.019***
(0.002)

3-year

5-year

1-year
0.016***
(0.002)

0.022***
(0.003)

3-year

3-year

0.020***
(0.003)
0.023***
(0.003)

5-year
B. IV Models
Instrument:
1-yr change in
log(revenues/worker)

0.025***
(0.006)

5-year

0.011
(0.009)
0.020***
(0.005)

0.022***
(0.003)

0.023***
(0.006)

3-yr change in
log(revenues/worker)

0.032***
(0.005)

5-yr change in
log(revenues/worker)

0.035***

0.027***

0.035***

0.027***

(0.007)

(0.004)

(0.007)

(0.004)

0.029***
(0.005)

0.011
(0.009)
0.020***
(0.005)

Notes. Samples are for workers aged 25-59 who stayed with the same employer for 6 years. Samples are
consistent across specifications. Statistics are coefficients from regressions of log earnings growth on firm log
revenue growth over the same interval. Column headings indicate whether growth is calculated as 1-, 3- or 5year changes. For instrumental variables models instrument dating is chosen so that the midpoint of the
instrument change coincides with the midpoint of the independent variable change. Base controls include single
year of age indicators for men and for women; state, year, and four-digit industry indicators; and, in
Manufacturing and Retail, interactions between year and three-digit industry indicators. The hours control is the
firm level change in the log of hours per worker. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level and reported in
parentheses (** p<0.01 *** p<0.001).

41

42

43

.7
.6
.5
.4

Fraction stayers

Figure 3. Fraction stayers, by age group

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

year
Ages 25-34
44

Ages 35-59

2010

Figure 4. Earnings Growth and Revenues Growth, by Industry

Notes. Plots show binned averages (scatter points) and local polynomial regression smoothed values (red lines) for 3-year
changes in worker log earnings as related to 3-year changes in firm log revenues. Samples are for 4-year stayers. Each
point represents 2 percent of the relevant sample; the smallest and largest revenue change values are not plotted. The
(rounded) number of firm/year observations per bin for these figures are 5,900 for manufacturing, 2,500 for retail, 1,300
for professional services, and 140 for finance. Rounded worker/year observations are 437,100 for manufacturing, 39,800
for retail, 45,300 for professional services, and 6,300 for finance.
45

Appendix Table 1. Summary Statistics

Sector
Manufacturing

Retail

Finance

Professional Services

Sample
Cross-section
1-year difference
3-year difference
5-year difference
Cross-section
1-year difference
3-year difference
5-year difference
Cross-section
1-year difference
3-year difference
5-year difference
Cross-section
1-year difference
3-year difference
5-year difference

N
65,192,500
41,349,200
22,706,400
12,479,700
18,129,900
5,326,000
1,981,800
496,000
2,568,100
840,400
315,600
128,700
17,113,700
5,024,600
2,250,600
1,021,600

Unique
firms
213,700
64,100
39,100
20,800
63,000
29,300
19,400
12,300
3,600
1,600
700
500
26,700
12,100
7,200
4,700

Change in Change in
log
log
revenue, earnings,
per year per year
0.010
0.010
0.023

0.019
0.014
0.015

0.020
0.030
0.091

0.022
0.019
0.019

0.065
0.070
0.059

0.057
0.045
0.046

0.061
0.053
0.048

0.038
0.035
0.035

Annual
earnings
($2012)
56,100
65,500
67,200
68,500
51,300
68,800
72,200
72,500
207,300
264,600
256,900
240,300
78,700
102,900
107,100
108,300

Change in
log sales
Revenues
Share
per
(M $2012) Age female worker
788 42
32
1,045 44
29
0.025
1,166 44
29
0.078
1,259 44
28
0.166
119 41
45
139 43
44
123 43
45
111 44
46
6,165 39
42
4,856 41
43
3,031 42
45
2,816 42
47
1,687 39
46
1,789 42
47
1,724 42
49
1,687 43
50

Notes. Manufacturing includes NAICS industries 31-33; source is Annual Survey of Manufactures. Retail data includes NAICS industries 44-45
(retail trade) and 72 (accomodation and food services); source is the Annual Retail Trade Survey. Finance includes NAICS 523 and Professional
Services includes NAICS 541; source is Services Annual Survey. Samples are for workers aged 25-59. Averages are worker-weighted averages.

46

Appendix Table 2: OLS Models for Changes in Log Worker Earnings
Independent variable
Change in log
revenues over:
1-year

Dependent variable = Change in log earnings over:
Manufacturing
1-year
3-year
0.009***
(0.002)

1-year

3-year

0.015**
(0.005)

3-year

1-year

Retail

0.022***
(0.004)
Professional Services
1-year
3-year
0.012***
(0.003)

3-year

0.034***
(0.009)

0.000
(0.008)
Finance
1-year
-0.005
(0.008)

3-year

0.015
(0.015)

Notes. Samples are for workers aged 25-59 who stayed with the same employer for 4 years.
Samples are consistent across specifications. Statistics are OLS coefficients from regressions of log
earnings growth on firm log revenue growth. Column and row headings indicate whether growth is
calculated as 1- or 3-year changes. Additional controls include single year of age indicators for
men and for women; state, year, and four-digit industry indicators; and, in Manufacturing and
Retail, interactions between year and three-digit industry indicators. Standard errors are clustered
at the firm level and reported in parentheses (** p<0.01 *** p<0.001).

47

Appendix Table 3: IV Models for Changes in Log Worker Earnings
Instrument
Change in log
revenues over:

Dependent variable = Change in log earnings over:
Manufacturing
Retail
1-year
3-year
1-year
3-year

1-year

3-year

1-year

3-year

0.021***
(0.004)
0.011***
(0.002)

0.029***
(0.004)
0.035***
(0.007)

Professional Services
1-year
3-year
0.021***
(0.003)
0.047**
(0.017)

Finance
1-year

3-year
0.004
(0.008)

0.013
(0.015)

Notes. Samples are for workers aged 25-59 who stayed with the same employer for 4 years.
Samples are consistent across specifications. Statistics are IV coefficients from regressions of log
earnings growth on firm log revenue growth over the same interval. Column headings indicate
whether growth is calculated as 1- or 3-year changes. The length of the change in the instrument
varies across rows; instrument dating is chosen so that the midpoint of the instrument change
coincides with the midpoint of the independent variable change. Additional controls include single
year of age indicators for men and for women; state, year, and four-digit industry indicators; and, in
Manufacturing and Retail, interactions between year and three-digit industry indicators. Standard
errors are clustered at the firm level and reported in parentheses (** p<0.01 *** p<0.001).

48

