                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                CONCENTRATING ON THE FALL OF THE LABOR SHARE

                                         David Autor
                                          David Dorn
                                       Lawrence F. Katz
                                       Christina Patterson
                                       John Van Reenen

                                      Working Paper 23108
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23108


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2017




This is a companion paper to Autor et al. (2017). We thank Daron Acemoglu and Jason Furman
for helpful discussions. This research was funded by the National Science Foundation, the
European Research Council, the Economic and Social Research Council, the MIT Initiative on
the Digital Economy, and the Swiss National Science Foundation. Any opinions and conclusions
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the U.S.
Census Bureau. All results have been reviewed to ensure that no confidential information is
disclosed. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by David Autor, David Dorn, Lawrence F. Katz, Christina Patterson, and John Van
Reenen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Concentrating on the Fall of the Labor Share
David Autor, David Dorn, Lawrence F. Katz, Christina Patterson, and John Van Reenen
NBER Working Paper No. 23108
January 2017
JEL No. J3,L11

                                         ABSTRACT

The recent fall of labor’s share of GDP in numerous countries is well-documented, but its causes
are poorly understood. We sketch a “superstar firm” model where industries are increasingly
characterized by “winner take most” competition, leading a small number of highly profitable
(and low labor share) firms to command growing market share. Building on Autor et al. (2017),
we evaluate and confirm two core claims of the superstar firm hypothesis: the concentration of
sales among firms within industries has risen across much of the private sector; and industries
with larger increases in concentration exhibit a larger decline in labor’s share.


David Autor                                    Christina Patterson
Department of Economics, E52-438               Department of Economics
MIT                                            MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue                        77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139                            Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER                                       cpatt@mit.edu
dautor@mit.edu
                                               John Van Reenen
David Dorn                                     MIT Sloan School of Management
University of Zurich                           100 Main Street, E62-427
Department of Economics                        Cambridge, MA 02142
Schoenberggasse 1                              and NBER
CH-8001 Zurich - Switzerland                   vanreene@mit.edu
and CEPR
david.dorn@econ.uzh.ch

Lawrence F. Katz
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
lkatz@harvard.edu
I. Introduction

There has been an upswing of interest in economics and the media over the decline in the share
of GDP going to labor. The stability of the labor share of GDP was one of the famous Kaldor
(1961) “stylized facts” of growth. The macro stability of labor’s share was always, as Keynes
remarked, “something of a miracle” and disguised instability at the industry level (Elsby et al.
2013). Karabarbounis and Neiman (2013) emphasize that the decline in the labor share is not
confined to the U.S. and occurs primarily within rather than between industries. Although there
is controversy over the degree to which the fall in the labor share is due to measurement issues
such as the treatment of housing (Rognlie 2015) and intangible capital (Koh et al. 2016), there is
consensus that there has been a decline in the U.S. labor share since the 1980s particularly in the
2000s.

Nevertheless, little consensus exits on the causes of the decline in the labor share. Elsby et al.
(2013) argue for the importance of international trade and find that the labor share declines the
most in U.S. industries strongly affected by import shocks. However, labor shares have also
declined in most non-traded sectors such as wholesale, retail and utilities, a pattern not readily
explained by rising trade.

Karabarbounis and Neiman (2013) instead emphasize that the cost of capital has fallen relative to
the cost of labor, driven especially by rapid declines in quality-adjusted equipment prices of
information and communication technologies. A decline in the relative price of capital will lead
to a decline in the labor share under CES production functions if the capital-labor elasticity of
substitution is greater than unity. Although Karabarbounis and Neiman present evidence that the
elasticity exceeds unity, the bulk of the empirical literature suggests a much lower elasticity (e.g.
Lawrence 2015). Since changes in relative factor prices tend to be similar across firms, lower
relative equipment prices should lead to greater capital adoption and falling labor shares in all
firms. In Autor et al. (2017) we find the opposite: the unweighted mean labor share across firms
has not increased much since 1982. Thus, the average firm shows little decline in its labor share.
To explain the decline in the aggregate labor share, one must study the reallocation of activity
among heterogeneous firms toward firms with low and declining labor shares.

In Autor et al. (2017) we propose a new “superstar firm” model that emphasizes the role of firm


                                                                                                   1
heterogeneity in the dynamics of the aggregate labor share. We hypothesize that industries are
increasingly characterized by a “winner take most” feature where one firm (or a small number of
firms) can gain a very large share of the market. Large firms have lower labor shares if
production requires a fixed amount of overhead labor in addition to a size-dependent variable
labor input, or if markups in the product market correlate positively with firm size. Possible
explanations for the growth of winner take most includes the diffusion of new competitive
platforms (e.g. easier price/quality comparisons on the Internet), the proliferation of information-
intensive goods that have high fixed and low-marginal costs (e.g., software platforms and online
services), or increasing competition due to the rising international integration of product markets.
New technologies may also have strengthened network effects and favored firms that are more
adept at adopting and exploiting new modes of production.

This paper exposits and evaluates two core claims of the superstar firm explanation: (1) the
concentration of sales among firms within an industry has risen across much of the U.S. private
economy; and (2) industries with larger increases in concentration should experience a larger
decline in labor’s share.

II. Model

To see the intuition for a link between the rise of superstar firms and a decline in the labor share,
consider a production function 𝑌 = 𝐴𝑉 %& 𝐾 ()%& where 𝑌 is value-added, 𝑉 is variable labor, 𝐾 is
capital and 𝐴 is Hicks-neutral efficiency (“TFPQ”), which we assume is heterogeneous across
firms. There is a fixed amount of overhead labor 𝐹 needed for production, so total labor is 𝐿 =
𝑉 + 𝐹. We assume that factor markets are competitive with wage 𝑤 and cost of capital 𝑟 being
equal to the input factors’ marginal revenue products, while there is imperfect competition in the
product market. From the static first order condition for labor, we can write the share of labor
costs (𝑤𝐿) in nominal value added (𝑃𝑌) as:

                                                 45         %&       4:
                                  (1)     𝑆3 =          =        +
                                                 67 3       89       67 9


where 𝜇 is the mark-up, the ratio of product price (𝑃) to marginal cost (𝑐), and 𝐹 is fixed
overhead labor costs. The firm subscripts 𝑖 indicate that for given economy-wide values of
(𝛼5 , 𝑤, 𝐹) a firm will have a lower labor share if (i) its share of fixed costs in total revenues are


                                                                                                    2
lower or (ii) its mark-up is higher. Superstar firms (firms with high 𝐴𝑖 ) will be larger because
they produce more efficiently and capture a higher share of industry output. Superstar firms
therefore will have a lower share of fixed costs in total revenues, and thus a lower labor share. In
monopolistically competitive models, the mark-up is the same across firms in an industry: 𝜇 =
𝜌 𝜌 − 1 , where 𝜌 is the price elasticity of demand. However, in other models of imperfect
competition, firms with larger market shares will be able to set higher mark-ups (e.g. Cournot
competition), also leading to a negative relationship between firm size and labor shares. In either
case, when there is an exogenous change that allocates more market share to a small number of
large superstar firms, the aggregate labor share will fall as the economy shifts towards these low
labor share firms. Autor et al (2017) formalize this idea in a simple superstar firm model for a
monopolistically competitive setting. Distinct from the prior literature, the superstar firm model
emphasizes the heterogeneity of firms within industries as being critical for understanding the
fall in the labor share. We next show that, in line with the model’s mechanism, the concentration
of sales across firms within industries has grown in most U.S. sectors.

III. Data and Empirical Findings

We use data from the U.S. Economic Census, conducted every five years to enumerate all
establishments in select sectors on current economic activity. We focus on the Economic Census
from 1982 to 2012 for six large sectors: manufacturing, retail trade, wholesale trade, services,
finance, and utilities and transportation. The covered establishments in these six sectors account
for four-fifths of total private sector employment.

For the six sectors, the Census reports each establishment’s annual payroll, output, employment,
and an identifier for the firm to which the establishment belongs. To measure the concentration
of sales within an industry, we use an output measure capturing total sales by the establishment
during the survey year. To measure sales at the firm level, we aggregate the sales of all
establishments that belong to the same firm and the same industry. If a firm operates
establishments in several industries, each combination of firm and industry is counted as a
separate firm, capturing the firm’s separate contributions to sales concentration in several
industries.

To implement our industry-level analysis, we assign each establishment in a given year to a 1987


                                                                                                  3
SIC-based time-consistent industry code as described in Autor et al. (2017). Our methodology
yields 676 industries, 388 of which are in manufacturing. All of our measures use these time-
consistent industry definitions leading to measures of industry concentration that differ slightly
from published statistics. The correlation between our calculated measures and those based on
the published data is close to one, however, for periods without changes in industry definitions.

We measure the concentration of sales within an industry as either the fraction of total sales
accruing to its four largest firms (denoted CR4) or the fraction of sales accruing to its twenty
largest firms (denoted CR20). Figure 1 plots the average CR4 and CR20 across four-digit
industries for our six sectors from 1982 to 2012. The level of sales concentration varies
considerably across sectors. In each year, the top four firms in an average manufacturing industry
capture more than a third of the industry’s total sales, while the top four firms in the average
service industry combine for less than a sixth of total sales.

There is a remarkably consistent upward trend in concentration in each sector. In manufacturing,
the sales concentration ratio among the top 4 increases from 38% to 43%; in finance, it rises
from 24% to 35%; in services from 11% to 15%; in utilities from 29% to 37%; in retail trade
from 15% to 30% and in wholesale trade from 22% to 28%. Over the same period, there were
similar or larger increases in CR20 for sales.

To further characterize the emergence of superstar firms, Figure 1 also plots CR4 and CR20
concentration measures based on firm employment rather than sales. Again, we observe a rising
concentration in all six sectors for 1982 to 2012, although employment concentration has grown
notably more slowly than sales concentration in finance, services, and especially in
manufacturing. The pattern suggests that firms may attain large market shares with a relatively
small workforce, as exemplified by Facebook and Google.

In Autor et al. (2017) we show that the two main qualitative findings of Figure 1 are robust to the
use of an industry’s Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI). Sales have become more concentrated
in each of the six broad sectors of the U.S. economy.

A measurement challenge for our conclusion of rising concentration for broad U.S. sectors is that
our concentration measures are calculated exclusively using U.S. based establishments. Thus,



                                                                                                    4
our measures include production by foreign multinationals operating in the U.S., but they
exclude imports. A measure only for the market shares of U.S. producers may mischaracterize
concentration trends given rising import shares, particularly for manufacturing.

We assess the importance of trade in the competitive structure of manufacturing by calculating
import-adjusted concentration ratios that treat imports from major country groups as if they
belong to a single firm. Figure 2 plots the import-adjusted CR4 and CR20 measures along with
the original measures only for U.S.-based establishments. The series with and without trade
adjustment track each other closely, reaffirming our main finding of rising sales concentration.
The slightly higher level of the adjusted concentration ratios implies that foreign producers (such
as China) account for a sizable fraction of sales in some manufacturing industries. Imports in
such industries likely originate from a small number of major foreign firms, but our data do not
permit a firm-level breakdown of imports.

A further implication of our superstar firm model is that the labor share should fall differentially
in industries that are experiencing larger increases in concentration. Intuitively, the causal force
in our model is the shift in competitive conditions (fall in 𝜌), which reallocates market share to
larger and more productive firms. Indeed, Autor et al. (2017) document a strong negative
relationship in the cross section between a firm’s market share and its labor share. Thus, rising
concentration and falling labor shares should move in tandem, both in aggregate and between
industries.

Autor et al. (2017) test this implication by estimating bivariate regressions of five-year changes
in the payroll share of value-added on the contemporaneous change in concentration for the 388
manufacturing industries for the years 1987 – 2012. Figure 3, sourced from Autor et al. (2017),
summarizes these regressions. In the initial five years of our sample, we detect no significant
cross-industry relationship between rising concentration and falling labor share. But the cross-
industry relationship between rising concentration and falling labor share becomes negative and
significant in the next five-year interval, and grows in absolute magnitude across each
subsequent interval. In the final period from 2007 to 2012, we estimate that each percentage
point rise in an industry’s CR20 concentration index predicts a 0.4 percentage point fall in its
labor share. We also observe a similar negative relationship between changes in the share of



                                                                                                  5
labor in sales and concentration in all six sectors.

Why has industry sales concentration increased? One set of explanations involves a
technological change that has made markets increasingly “winner take most” so that superstar
firms with higher productivity increasingly capture a larger slice of the market. Or if incumbents
are more likely to innovate and the persistence of incumbent’s innovative advantage has risen
(Acemoglu and Hildebrand 2017), the incumbent advantage would increase and so would
incumbents’ market shares.

An alternative set of explanations posits that higher concentration could arise from anti-
competitive forces whereby dominant firms are increasingly able to prevent actual and potential
rivals from entering and expanding (Barkai 2016). For instance, firms may lobby for regulatory
barriers that complicate market entry/expansion for new and small firms. Higher entry barriers
would enable incumbents to have higher monopolistic rents and therefore lower the labor share.

In the first set of explanations, the industries becoming increasingly concentrated will tend to be
more dynamic with higher productivity and technical change. By contrast in the second set of
explanations, the concentrating industries are likely to be dominated by less productive and less
dynamic incumbents.

To shed light on these alternatives, we explored the relationship between changes in
concentration and changes in other industry characteristics. Data limitations restrict this analysis
to manufacturing. We find that the industries that became more concentrated over our sample
period were also the industries in which productivity—measured by either output per worker,
value-added per worker, TFP, or patents per worker—increased the most. Interestingly, there is
no strong relationship between the change in concentration and the change in average wages.
The findings suggest that a positive productivity-concentration relationship will most likely
feature in any plausible explanation of rising industry concentration.

IV. Conclusions

We have considered a “superstar firm” explanation for the much-discussed fall in labor share of
GDP. Our hypothesis is that technology or market conditions—or their interaction—have
evolved to increasingly concentrate sales among firms with superior products or higher


                                                                                                  6
productivity thereby enabling the most successful firms to control a larger market share. Because
these superstar firms are more profitable, they will have a smaller share of their labor in total
sales or value added. Consequently, the aggregate share of labor falls as the weight of superstar
firms in the economy grows. The model yields many predictions that are elaborated and tested in
Autor et al. (2017). A key underpinning of the superstar firm explanation for declining labor
share is that sales should become increasingly concentrated in a small number of firms across a
wide range of industries. Consistent with the model, we find that the concentration of sales (and
of employment) has indeed risen from 1982 to 2012 in each of the six major sectors covered by
U.S. Economic Census. In Autor et al. (2017), we further show that those industries where
concentration rises the most have the sharpest falls in the labor share, and that the fall in the
labor share is mainly due to a reallocation of labor towards firms with lower (and declining)
labor shares, rather than due to declining labor shares within most firms.




                                                                                               7
REFERENCES

Acemoglu, Daron and Nikolaus Hildebrand. 2017. “Increasing Concentration and Persistence of
 Innovation: Facts and Theory.” Working Paper, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Autor, David, David Dorn, Lawrence F. Katz, Christina Patterson, and John Van Reenen. 2017.
 “The Fall of the Labor Share and the Rise of Superstar Firms.” Working Paper, Massachusetts
 Institute of Technology.
Barkai, Simcha. 2016. “Declining Labor and Capital Shares.” Working Paper, University of
  Chicago.
Elsby, Mike., Bart Hobijn, and Aysegul Sahin. 2013. “The Decline of the U.S. Labor Share.”
  Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1-42

Kaldor, Nicholas. 1961. “Capital Accumulation and Economic Growth” in The Theory of
 Capital, ed. F. A. Lutz and D. C. Hague, New York: St. Martin's Press: 177-222.
Karabarbounis, Loukas and Brent Neiman. 2013. “The Global Decline of the Labor Share.”
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(1), 61-103.
Koh, Dongya, Raul Santaeulalia-Lopis, and Yu Zheng. 2016. “Labor Share Decline and the
 Capitalization of Intellectual Property Products.” Barcelona Graduate School of Economics
 Working Papers No. 927.
Lawrence, Robert. 2015. “Recent Declines in Labor's Share in Us Income: A Preliminary
  Neoclassical Account” NBER Working Paper No. 21296.
Rognlie, Matthew. 2015. “Deciphering the Fall and Rise in the Net Capital Share: Accumulation
 or Scarcity?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1-69.




                                                                                           8
FIGURE 1. AVERAGE TOP-4 INDUSTRY CONCENTRATION BY MAJOR INDUSTRY GROUP
This figure plots the average concentration ratio in six major sectors of the U.S. economy. Industry concentration is
calculated for each time-consistent 4-digit industry code as described in Autor et al. (2017), and then averaged
across all industries within each of the six sectors. The solid blue line (circles), plotted on the left axis, shows the
average fraction of total industry sales that is accounted for by the largest 4 firms in that industry, and the solid red
line (triangles), also plotted on the left axis, shows the average fraction of industry employment utilized in the 4
largest firms in the industry. Similarly, the dashed green line (circles), plotted on the right axis, shows the average
fraction of total industry sales that is accounted for by the largest 20 firms in that industry, and the dashed orange
line (triangles), also plotted on the right axis, shows the average fraction of industry employment utilized in the 20
largest firms in the industry.



                                                                                                                       9
FIGURE 2. INDUSTRY CONCENTRATION ADDING IMPORTS
This figure plots the average sales concentration in U.S. 4-digit manufacturing industries from 1992 to 2012. The
red line (triangles) plots the average fraction of total sales by domestic firms that is accounted for by an industry’s 4
largest firms (corresponding to the CR-4 Sales data series in the top left panel of Figure 1). The green line (squares)
plots the fraction of the total U.S. market, defined as sales by domestic firms plus industry imports, which is
produced by an industry’s 4 largest “firms”, where each group of exporting countries is counted as an individual
firm. Imports are based on UN Comtrade data as described in Autor et al. (2017), and the 6 country groups are:
Canada, Mexico/CAFTA, China, low income countries except China, 8 developed countries (Australia, Denmark,
Finland, Germany, Japan, New Zealand, Spain, and Switzerland), and rest of the world. On average, 0.94 country
groups are among the top 4 “firms” in the left panel, and 2.7 country groups are among the top 20 “firms” in the
right panel of the figure.




                                                                                                                     10
FIGURE 3. CORRELATION BETWEEN CHANGES IN LABOR SHARE AND CHANGES IN INDUSTRY
CONCENTRATION IN THE U.S. MANUFACTURING SECTOR AT FIVE-YEAR INTERVALS, 1982/87 –
2007/12
This figure plots point estimates and 95% confidence intervals from Autor et al. (2017) for OLS bivariate
regressions of the change in the payroll to value-added share on the change in the CR20 index and a constant,,
estimated at the level of 4-digit U.S. manufacturing industries and separately for each of the indicated five-year
intervals. Regressions are weighted by industries’ shares of value-added in 1982.




                                                                                                               11
