NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FIRM HETEROGENEITY IN CONSUMPTION BASKETS:
EVIDENCE FROM HOME AND STORE SCANNER DATA
Benjamin Faber
Thibault Fally
Working Paper 23101
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23101

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2017, Revised January 2020

We would like to thank Mary Amiti, Costas Arkolakis, David Atkin, Kirill Borusyak, Pablo
Fajgelbaum, Cecile Gaubert, Jessie Handbury, James Harrigan, Xavier Jaravel, Thierry Mayer,
Volker Nocke, Steve Redding, Andres Rodriguez-Clare, Nicolas Schultz, Eric Verhoogen,
Jonathan Vogel and participants at multiple seminars and conferences for helpful comments and
discussions. Dmitri Koustas and May-Lyn Cheah provided outstanding research assistance. The
analysis is based on data from The Nielsen Company (US), LLC and marketing databases
provided by the Kilts Center for Marketing Data Center at The University of Chicago Booth
School of Business. The conclusions drawn from the Nielsen data are those of the researchers and
do not reflect the views of Nielsen, nor of the National Bureau of Economic Research. Nielsen is
not responsible for, had no role in, and was not involved in analyzing and preparing the results
reported herein.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Benjamin Faber and Thibault Fally. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Firm Heterogeneity in Consumption Baskets: Evidence from Home and Store Scanner Data
Benjamin Faber and Thibault Fally
NBER Working Paper No. 23101
January 2017, Revised January 2020
JEL No. E31,F61,O51
ABSTRACT
A growing literature has documented the role of firm heterogeneity within sectors for nominal
income inequality. This paper explores the implications for household price indices across the
income distribution. Using detailed matched US home and store scanner microdata, we present
evidence that rich and poor households source their consumption from different parts of the firm
size distribution within disaggregated product groups. We use the data to examine alternative
explanations, propose a tractable quantitative model with two-sided heterogeneity that
rationalizes the observed moments, and calibrate it to explore general-equilibrium
counterfactuals. We find that larger, more productive firms endogenously sort into catering to the
taste of richer households, and that this gives rise to asymmetric effects on household price
indices. We quantify these effects in the context of policy counterfactuals that affect the
distribution of disposable incomes on the demand side or profits across firms on the supply side.

Benjamin Faber
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
697A Evans Hall
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
benfaber@econ.berkeley.edu
Thibault Fally
Department of Agricultural and Resource Economics
University of California, Berkeley
University Hall, 7th Floor
Berkeley, CA 94720-3310
and NBER
fally@berkeley.edu

1

Introduction

Income inequality has been on the rise in the US and many other countries, attracting the sustained attention of policy makers and the general public. In this context, a growing literature has
documented the role of Melitz-type firm heterogeneity within sectors in accounting for nominal
income inequality.1 In this paper, we explore the implications of firm heterogeneity for household
price indices across the income distribution. We aim to answer three central questions: i) to what
extent do rich and poor households source their consumption baskets from different parts of the
firm size distribution?; ii) what forces explain these differences?; and iii) what are the implications
of the answers to i) and ii) for the impact of policies or economic shocks on real income inequality?
In answering these questions, the paper makes three main contributions. First, using detailed
matched home and store scanner consumption microdata, we document significant differences
in the weighted average firm sizes that rich and poor US households source their consumption
from, and explore alternative explanations.2 Second, to rationalize these moments we develop a
tractable quantitative model of product quality choice with two-sided heterogeneity across firms
and households, and use the microdata to calibrate it and quantify the forces underlying the stylized
facts. Third, we explore general-equilibrium (GE) policy counterfactuals to illustrate how, in a
setting where rich and poor households source their consumption from heterogeneous firms, policies
and economic shocks give rise to asymmetric price index effects across the income distribution.
At the center of the analysis lies a detailed collection of microdata that allow us to trace the
firm size distribution into the consumption baskets of households across the income distribution.
We combine a dataset of 345 million consumer transactions when aggregated to the householdby-retailer-by-barcode-by-half-year level from the AC Nielsen US Home Scanner data over the
period 2006-2014, with a dataset of 12.2 billion store transactions when aggregated to the store-bybarcode-by-half-year level from the AC Nielsen US Retail Scanner data covering the same period.
The combination of home and store-level scanner data allows us to trace the size distribution
of producers of brands—measured in terms of national sales that we aggregate across on average
27,000 retail establishments each half year in the store scanner data—into the consumption baskets
of on average 59,000 individual households per half year in the home scanner data within more
than 1000 disaggregated retail product modules, such as carbonated drinks, shampoos, pain killers,
desktop printers or microwaves.
The analysis proceeds in four steps. In step 1, we use the data to document a new set of
stylized facts. We find that the richest 20 (resp. 10) percent of US households source their consumption from on average 20 (resp. 27) percent larger producers of brands within disaggregated
product groups compared to the poorest 20 (resp. 10) percent of US households. We also document that these differences in weighted-average firm sizes arise in a setting where the rank order
of household budget shares on different producers within a product group is preserved across income groups—i.e. the largest firms command the highest budget shares for all income groups.
We interpret these stylized facts as equilibrium outcomes in a setting where both consumers and
firms optimally choose their product attributes. We also use the microdata to explore a number
of alternative explanations, and find that differential coverage of retail consumption or differences
1
2

e.g. Card et al. (2013); Helpman et al. (2017); Song et al. (2018). See related literature at the end of this section.
We refer to firm size in terms of relative firm sales within product groups.

1

in product supply and pricing across the income distribution are unlikely driving these results.
We also document that the relationship between incomes and firm sizes holds within each of the
product departments in the data, and explore whether consumption categories not fully represented in the Nielsen data, such as consumer durables, health expenditures or digital media, show
similar patterns. Focusing on subsets of these categories that are covered in the data—household
appliances, pharmaceuticals and video, audio and software purchases respectively—we find similar
or more pronounced differences in firm sizes across incomes.
In step 2 we write down a tractable model that rationalizes the stylized facts in the data.
On the consumption side, we specify non-homothetic preferences allowing households across the
income distribution to differ both in terms of their price elasticities as well as in their evaluations
of product quality attributes. On the production side, we introduce quality choice into a model
of heterogeneous firms within sectors. Both marginal and fixed costs can be functions of output
quality, allowing for economies of scale in production. Markups can vary across firms due to
both oligopolistic competition and selling to heterogeneous consumers. Firms now operate in
a setting where their pricing and quality choices affect the composition of market demand that
they face. Modeling product choices with two-sided heterogeneity implies that shocks that affect
producers differently, such as trade integration, corporate taxes and regulations, can feed into
the consumption baskets of rich and poor households asymmetrically. In turn, changes in the
distribution of disposable incomes, due to e.g. income tax reform, affect firms differently across
the size distribution with GE knock-on effects on household price indices.
In step 3, we use the microdata to estimate the preference and technology parameters. On the
demand side, we find that rich and poor households differ both in terms of price elasticities and
their valuation of product quality attributes. We find that poorer households have higher price
elasticities relative to richer households, but that these differences, while statistically significant,
are relatively minor. We also find that, while households on average agree on the ranking of
quality evaluations across producers, richer households value higher quality significantly more. On
the production side, we estimate that producing higher quality increases both the marginal and
the fixed costs of production, giving rise to economies of scale in quality production. To estimate
these technology parameters, we follow two different estimation strategies. The first follows existing
work, and is based on cross-sectional variation in firm scale and output quality. The second exploits
within-firm changes in brand quality and scale over time. To identify the effect of firm scale on
output quality in the panel estimation, we use state-level measures of changes in brand quality on
the left-hand side, and construct an instrument (IV) for national brand scale on the right-hand
side. The IV exploits pre-existing differences in the geography of brand sales across other US states
interacted with state-level variation in average sales growth observed in other product groups.
The parameter estimates from step 3 reveal two opposing forces that in equilibrium determine
both firm sizes across consumption baskets and the sorting of firms across product quality attributes. On the one hand, larger firms offer lower quality-adjusted prices, which increases the
share of their sales coming from more price-sensitive lower-income consumers. Since these consumers value quality relatively less, this channel, ceteris paribus, leads poorer households to source
their consumption from on average larger firms, which in turn pushes these firms to produce at
lower output quality. On the other hand, the estimated economies of scale in quality production
2

give larger firms incentives to sort into higher product quality, catering to the taste of wealthier
households. Empirically, we find that this second channel dominates the first, giving rise to the endogenous sorting of larger, more productive firms into products that are valued relatively more by
richer households. Armed with these estimates, we find that the observed stylized facts from step 1
translate into significant differences in the weighted-average product quality and quality-adjusted
prices embodied in consumption baskets across the income distribution. The richest 20 percent
of US households source their consumption from on average 22 percent higher-quality producers
compared to the poorest quintile of households. At the same time, we find that the richest income
quintile source their consumption at on average 10 percent lower quality-adjusted prices. Overall,
we find that the calibrated model based on the estimates from step 3 fits the observed differences
in firm sizes across consumption baskets from step 1 both qualitatively and quantitatively.
In the final step 4, we use the calibrated model to quantify a new set of price index implications
in the context of two policy counterfactuals. The first counterfactual affects the distribution of
disposable incomes on the demand side, and is motivated by the recent debate about progressive
income taxation in the US and elsewhere. We evaluate the price index effects of returning from
current US tax rates to a more progressive post-WWII US tax schedule, increasing the effective
rate on the richest household group in our calibration from currently around 30 to 50 percent.
This policy also closely corresponds to the counterfactual of moving the US to the current average
effective rate on this group among Northern European countries, and it is in line with the proposed tax reforms of two leading presidential candidates for the 2020 US elections (Sanders and
Warren). We find that the resulting compression of disposable incomes gives rise to GE knock-on
effects—through changes in firm scale, output quality, variable markups and exit/entry across the
firm size distribution—that affect rich and poor households differently, amplifying the progressivity of the reform. As a result, the poorest 20 percent of US households experience a 3 percentage
point lower cost of living inflation for retail consumption compared the richest 20 percent.3
The second policy counterfactual affects the profits of firms across the size distribution on
the supply side. The counterfactual is motivated by the ongoing debate about closing loopholes
in corporate taxation. A growing literature in public finance has documented larger possibilities
for tax avoidance or evasion among large US corporations (e.g. Bao & Romeo (2013), Guvenen
et al. (2017), Wright & Zucman (2018)). We use these findings to evaluate the implications of
eliminating the kink that has been documented at the 95th percentile of the firm size distribution
in the otherwise smoothly increasing relationship between firm size and effective corporate tax
rates. This policy would lead to an increase of on average 5 percent in corporate taxes paid by
the largest 5 percent of producers, ranging between on average 1 percent at the 95th percentile
to 11 percent at the 99th. We find that even such a relatively modest adjustment in corporate
taxation leads to a meaningful GE effect on differences in cost of living inflation between rich and
poor households. This is in the order of a 2 percentage point lower inflation for retail consumption
among the bottom 20 percent of US households compared to the top 20 percent. We document that
the direct incidence of this policy—holding initial household and firm decisions fixed—accounts for
about 40 percent of the inflation difference, with the remainder due to endogenous firm adjustments
3
Given the data allow us to calibrate the model at the level of five broad income groups, while both tax changes
and taste for quality increase with incomes within these groups, these results provide conservative estimates.

3

that affect consumption baskets differently.
We also explore the implications for the distribution of the gains from trade, extending a textbook Melitz model with two symmetric countries to quality choice with two-sided heterogeneity
within countries, and calibrating it to the US microdata. We find that allowing for firm heterogeneity across consumption baskets makes the gains from trade more unequal: increasing bilateral
import penetration by 10 percentage points leads to a 1.5-2.5 percentage point lower cost of living
inflation in retail consumption for the richest 20 percent of households compared to the poorest
20 percent. Taken together, these findings illustrate that firm heterogeneity affects inequality in
more complex ways than through the nominal earnings of workers, that have been the focus of the
existing literature. These insights arise after introducing a basic set of features that we observe in
the microdata—allowing for product attribute choice by heterogeneous firms and households—into
an otherwise standard economic environment.
This paper is related to the growing literature on the extent, causes and consequences of firm
heterogeneity within sectors that has spanned different fields in economics, including international
trade (Bernard et al., 2007; Melitz, 2003), industrial organization (Bartelsman et al., 2013), macroeconomics (Hsieh & Klenow, 2009), development (Peters, 2013), labor economics (Card et al., 2013)
and management (Bloom & Van Reenen, 2007). Within this literature, this paper is most closely
related to existing work on the implications of firm heterogeneity for nominal income inequality
(Burstein & Vogel, 2017; Card et al., 2013; Davis & Harrigan, 2011; Frias et al., 2009; Helpman et
al., 2017; Sampson, 2014; Song et al., 2018).
Our theoretical framework builds on existing work, both on quality choice across the domestic
income distribution with non-homothetic preferences on the demand side (Fajgelbaum et al., 2011;
Handbury, 2019) and on quality choice across heterogeneous firms on the supply side (e.g. Bastos
et al. (2018); Feenstra & Romalis (2014); Fieler et al. (2018); Johnson (2012); Kugler & Verhoogen
(2012)). While these building blocks have been used separately—i.e. heterogeneous firms facing a
representative agent in each country or non-homothetic preferences facing homogeneous firms—this
paper combines them in a quantitative GE model. This two-sided heterogeneity within countries
allows us to rationalize the observed differences in firm sizes across consumption baskets, and gives
rise to new price index implications across the income distribution in the light of economic shocks
or policy changes.4
The paper is also related to a growing empirical literature using the Nielsen data (Broda &
Weinstein, 2010; Handbury, 2019; Handbury & Weinstein, 2014; Hottman et al., 2016). Most of
this literature has been based on the home scanner data. More recently, Argente & Lee (2016) and
Jaravel (2019) use the home and store scanner data to document that lower-income households have
experienced higher cost of living inflation over the past decade and beyond. Argente & Lee (2016)
relate this finding to a higher possibility for quality-downgrading among higher-income households
4

A notable exception is Feenstra & Romalis (2014) who combine quality choice by heterogeneous firms under
monopolistic competition with non-homothetic preferences on the demand side. Since their objective is to infer
quality from observed unit values in international trade flows, their model features a representative agent within
countries on the demand side. On the supply side, they follow e.g. Baldwin & Harrigan (2011); Kugler & Verhoogen
(2012) modeling quality choice as a deterministic function of a firm’s productivity draw. To be able to rationalize
our empirical results on the effect of firm scale on quality upgrading in firm-level panel data, we instead allow fixed
costs to be a function of output quality, following earlier work by Sutton (1998), Hallak & Sivadasan (2013) and the
second model variant in Kugler & Verhoogen (2012).

4

during the Great Recession, and Jaravel (2019) to more innovation and competition in product
groups consumed more by richer households. In this paper, we present new empirical evidence
suggesting that the widely documented presence of firm heterogeneity within sectors translates
asymmetrically into the consumption baskets of rich and poor households, quantify the underlying
forces and explore the GE implications in the context of policy counterfactuals.
The remainder proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the data. Section 3 documents stylized
facts and explores alternative explanations. Section 4 presents the model. Section 5 presents parameter estimation and model calibration. Section 6 presents the counterfactual analysis. Section
7 concludes.

2

Data

Retail Scanner Data The Nielsen retail scanner data consist of weekly price and quantity
information generated by point-of-sale systems for more than 100 participating retail chains across
all US markets between January 2006 and December 2014. When a retail chain agrees to share
their data, all of their stores enter the database. As a result, the database includes more than
50,000 retail establishments. The stores in the database vary widely in terms of formats and
product types: e.g. grocery, drug, mass merchandising, appliances, liquor, or convenience stores.
Data entries can be linked to a store identifier and a chain identifier so a given store can be
tracked over time and can be linked to a specific chain. While each chain has a unique identifier, no
information is provided that directly links the chain identifier to the name of the chain. This also
holds for the home scanner dataset described below. The implication of this is that the product
descriptions and barcodes for generic store brands within product modules have been anonymized.
However, both numeric barcode and brand identifiers are still uniquely identified, which allows us
to observe sales for individual barcodes of generic store brands within each product module in the
same way we observe sales for non-generic products.
In appendix Table A.1 we aggregate the raw microdata to the store-by-barcode-by-half-year
level. On average each half year covers $113 billion worth of retail sales across 27,000 individual
stores in more than 1000 disaggregated product modules, 2500 US counties and across more than
730,000 barcodes belonging to 175,000 producers of brands.5 As described in more detail in the
following section, we use these data in combination with the home scanner data described below in
order to trace the distribution of firm sizes (measured in terms of national sales measured across
on average 27,000 stores per half year) into the consumption baskets of individual households.
Home Scanner Data The Nielsen home scanner data is collected through hand-held scanner
devices that households use at home after their shopping in order to scan each individual transaction they have made. Importantly, the home and store level scanner datasets can be linked: they
use the same codes to identify retailers, product modules, product brands as well as barcodes. As
described in more detail in the following section, we use this feature of the database to estimate
weighted average differences in firm sizes across consumption baskets.
In Table A.1 we aggregate the raw microdata to the household-by-barcode-by-half-year level.
5

We do not make use of Nielsen’s “Magnet” database that covers non-barcoded products, such as fresh produce.

5

On average each six-month period covers $109 million worth of retail sales across 59,000 individual
households in more than 1000 product modules, 2600 US counties and close to 600,000 barcodes
belonging to 185,000 producers of brands. One shortcoming of the home scanner dataset is that
nominal household incomes are measured imprecisely. First, incomes are reported only across
discrete income ranges. And those income bins are measured with a two-year lag relative to the
observed shopping transactions in the dataset. To address this issue, we divide households in
any given half year into percentiles of total retail expenditure per capita.6 To address potential
concerns about a non-monotonic (or decreasing) relationship between total retail outlays and
incomes, we also confirm in appendix Figure A.1 that our measure of total retail expenditure per
capita is monotonically increasing in reported nominal incomes two years prior (confirming existing
evidence that retail expenditure has a positive income elasticity).
Table A.1 also clarifies the relative strengths and weaknesses of the two Nielsen datasets. The
strength of the home scanner database is the detailed level of budget share information that it
provides alongside household characteristics. Its relative weakness in comparison to the store-level
retail scanner data is that the home scanner sample of households only covers a small fraction
of the US retail market in any given period. Relative to the home scanner data, the store-level
retail scanner data cover more than 1000 times the retail sales in each half year. This paper takes
advantage of both datasets for the empirical analysis, by combining national sales by product from
the store scanner data with the detailed information on individual household consumption shares
in the home scanner data.

3

Stylized Facts

This section draws on the combination of the home scanner and retail scanner data to document a
set of stylized facts about firm heterogeneity embodied in the consumption baskets of households
across the income distribution.

3.1

Definition of Firms

We begin in appendix Figure A.2 to show, using both datasets, what has been shown many times
in manufacturing establishment microdata (Bartelsman et al., 2013; Bernard et al., 2007): firm
sizes (measured in terms of sales) differ substantially within disaggregated product groups. In this
and the subsequent figures and tables, we define a firm as a producer of a brand within product
modules in the Nielsen data. This leads to an average of about 150 active firms within a given
product module. Two possible alternatives would be to define a firm as a barcode product (leading
to on average 700 firms per module), or as a holding company (leading to on average less than
40 firms per module). To fix ideas, an example for the product module Shampoo would be the
barcode product Ultimate Hydration Shampoo (22 oz bottle) belonging to brand TRESemmé that
6

Per capita expenditure can be misleading due to non-linearities in per capita outlays with respect to household
size (e.g. Subramanian & Deaton (1996)). To address this concern, we non-parametrically adjust for household size
by first regressing log total expenditure on dummies for each household size with a household size of 1 being the
reference category and a full set of household socio-economic controls. We then deflate observed household total
expenditure to per capita equivalent expenditure by subtracting the point estimate of the household size dummy
(which is non-zero and positive for all households with more than one member).

6

is owned by the holding company Unilever.
We choose the definition of firms as brands within product modules for two main reasons,
and then check the robustness of our findings to alternative definitions. First, our objective is to
define a producer within a given module as closely as possible to an establishment in commonly
used manufacturing microdata, following the literature on firm heterogeneity (Melitz, 2003). The
definition of firms as holding companies (e.g. Procter&Gamble) would be problematic as these
conglomerates operate across hundreds of brands produced in different establishments. The definition of firms at the barcode level would be problematic for the opposite reason, because the
same establishment produces different pack sizes of the same product that are marked by different
barcodes. In this light, defining producers of brands within disaggregated product modules as firms
is likely the closest equivalent to observing several different establishments operating in the same
disaggregated product group. Second, our theoretical framework features endogenous investments
in product quality across firms, and it is at the level of brands within product groups that these
decisions appear to be most plausible.7
Figure A.2 also points to an interesting difference between the home and store scanner datasets:
the distribution of national market shares measured using the home scanner data (on average
59,000 households per half year) appears to be compressed relative to that measured using the
store scanner data (on average 27,000 thousand stores per half year). This compression is stronger
before applying the Nielsen household sampling weights, but still clearly visible after applying the
weights. It also holds when restricting attention to producers of brands observed in both datasets.
In the following, we report the main new stylized fact using the firm size distributions computed
from both datasets. Given that the retail scanner data capture more than 1000 times the amount
of transactions compared to the home scanner data, we then choose the store scanner data as our
preferred measure of brand-level national market shares.

3.2

Firm Heterogeneity Across Consumption Baskets

Figure 1 depicts the main stylized fact of the paper. Pooling repeated cross-sections across 18
half-year periods, we depict percentiles of household per capita expenditure on the x-axis and
weighted average deviations of log firm sales from the product module-by-half-year means on
the y-axis.8 The weights correspond to each household’s retail consumption shares across all
brands in all product modules consumed during the six-month period. When collapsed to five per
capita expenditure quintiles on the right panel of Figure 1, we find that the richest 20 percent of
US households source their consumption from on average 20 percent larger producers of brands
within disaggregated product modules compared to the poorest 20 percent. These figures are
our preferred measure of the national firm size distribution using the store scanner data. But,
as the figure shows, a very similar relationship holds when using the firm size distribution from
7

To corroborate this, we confirm in the data that 95 percent of variation in the average unit value paid for
barcodes within product modules is accounted by for by brand-by-pack-size fixed effects. Similarly, on average 80
percent of the sum of absolute differences in expenditure shares between the richest and poorest household quintiles
across all barcodes within product modules are accounted for by differences in budget shares across brands (leaving
20 percent to be explained by differences within brands).
8
To avoid measurement error from exiting or entering households in the consumer panel, we restrict attention to
households for each half-year period that we observe to make purchases in both the first and the final month of the
half year.

7

the home scanner data instead. This relationship is monotonic across the income distribution,
and the firm size difference increases to 27 percent when comparing the richest and poorest 10
percent of households. As discussed above, Figure 1 is also robust to alternative definitions of
firms in the Nielsen data: appendix Figure A.3 shows close to identical results when defining firms
instead as holding companies within product groups. In Figure A.5, we also show an alternative
representation plotting sales shares from different quintiles of the income distribution on the y-axis
across firm sizes on the x-axis.9
What types of shopping decisions are driving these differences in weighted average firm sizes
across the income distribution? In appendix Table A.2, we present the brands with the most
positive and most negative differences in consumption shares between rich and poor household
quintiles across three popular product modules for each of the eight product departments in our
consumption microdata. Alongside the two brand names, we also list the difference in their log
average unit values (price per physical unit) as well as the difference in their national market shares
within that product module. Two features stand out. First, the brand that is most disproportionately consumed by the rich has a higher unit value and a larger market share relative to the brand
that is most disproportionately consumed by the poor.10 Second, looking at the brand names
it appears to be the case that richer households have a tendency to consume from the leading
premium brands whereas the poorest quintile of households have a higher tendency to pick either
generic store brands, or cheaper second and third-tier brands in the product group (e.g. Tropicana
vs generic OJ, Pepsi vs generic Cola, Duracell vs Rayovac, Tide vs Purex, Dove vs Dial, Heinz vs
Hunt’s).
Finally, we investigate whether these observed differences in product choices are driven by a
fundamental disagreement about relative product appeal across rich and poor households. Do we
see rich households consuming a large share of their expenditure from the largest producers while
poor households spend close to none of their budget on those same producers? Or do households
from different income groups agree on their relative evaluations of value-for-money across producers, such that the rank order of their budget shares is preserved across the income distribution?
Appendix Figure A.6 documents that the latter appears to be the case in the data. The figure
depicts—separately for each income group—non-parametric estimates of the relationship between
income group-specific deviations in log expenditures across brands within product modules on the
y-axis and deviations in log total market sales of those same producers in the store scanner data on
the x-axis. The fact that expenditure shares within each income group increase monotonically with
total firm size suggests that households on average agree on their evaluation of product quality
attributes given prices, and that the rank order of budget shares across producers is preserved to a
striking extent across all income groups. To express this in a single statistic, we find that the rank
order correlation between the richest income quintile and the poorest for rankings of brand market
shares within product modules is .89 when pooled across all product modules in the data. However,
it is also apparent from the difference in slopes depicted in Figure A.6 that while all households
spend most of their budget on the largest firms within product modules, richer households spend
relatively more of their total budget on these largest producers relative to poorer households.
9

Figure A.4 also shows the relationship in Figure 1 after computing firm sizes in terms of quantities (units sold).
The scanner data allow the comparison of prices per unit (unit values) for identically measured units across
products within product module (e.g. liters of milk, units of microwaves, grams of cereal, etc).
10

8

Related to this, we also investigate the role of the extensive margin in product choice underlying
Figure 1. As depicted in Figure A.7, we find that while the average number of both UPCs and
brands consumed within a module increase with incomes, the fraction of total retail expenditure
accounted for by products consumed across all 5 income groups is very large (> 95 percent) and
close to constant across the income distribution. Consistent with the rank order correlations above,
this suggests that the extensive margin, while visible in the data, is unlikely to play a significant
role in accounting for differences in average firm sizes across groups of rich and poor households.11

3.3

Interpretation and Alternative Explanations

One natural interpretation of these stylized facts is that they arise as equilibrium outcomes in a
setting where both heterogeneous firms and households choose the product attributes they produce
or consume. However, there are a number of alternative and somewhat more mechanical explanations that we explore using the microdata before moving on to the model. Another question is
how representative these findings are for consumption categories that are not well represented in
the Nielsen data.
Representativeness and Data-Driven Explanations One concern is that the relationship
documented in Figure 1 could in part be driven by shortcomings of the data. First, we explore
the representativeness of the stylized fact in Figure 1. To this end, we estimate the relationship
separately for each of the 18 half-year periods and for each of eight broad product categories in the
Nielsen data: beverages, dairy products, dry grocery, frozen foods, general merchandise, non-food
grocery, health and beauty, and packaged meat.12 As depicted in appendix Figure A.9, we find
that the pattern of firm size differences across consumption baskets holds across these different
product segments and is not driven by one particular type of consumer products. We also find
that the stylized fact in Figure 1 holds in each of the 18 half-year periods in our data.
As reported by e.g. Broda & Weinstein (2010) and more recently in Jaravel (2019), the product
groups covered in the Nielsen data can be matched to product groups in the US CEX expenditure surveys that acount for about 40 percent of goods consumption, which in turn accounts for
about one third of total household outlays. To further explore to what extent the stylized fact
in Figure 1 holds among consumption categories not fully represented in the Nielsen data, such
as durables consumption, health expenditures or digital media, we use parts of these categories
that are covered in the data. In particular, appendix Figure A.10 estimates Figure 1 separately
for household appliances (e.g. air conditioners, refrigerators, kitchen appliances, desktop printers),
pharmaceuticals purchases and audio, video and software purchases. Reassuringly, we find that
the relationship holds similarly or is more pronounced.13
11
In support of this, Figure A.8 confirms that we find close to identical results after limiting the product space to
only products consumed by all income quintiles in a given period (or across all periods).
12
We combine observations for alcoholic and non-alcoholic beverages as one department in these graphs. Our
reported findings above hold separately for both of these departments. We pool them here to be consistent with
Section 5, where having one combined group for Beverages addresses sparsity in the parameter estimation.
13
The Nielsen data unfortunately do not cover services consumption. For future research, newly available credit
card microdata could potentially be used to investigate the relationship between card holder incomes and the firm
size of service providers they source their consumption from.

9

Second, it could be the case that generic store brands are produced by the same (large) producers and sold under different labels across retail chains. If poorer households source more of
their consumption from generics, then we could under-estimate their weighted average producer
size due to this labeling issue. To address this concern, appendix Figure A.11 re-estimates Figure
1 after restricting consumption to sum to 100% for all non-generic product consumption for each
household. We find close to identical results compared to the baseline in Figure 1.
Third, it could be the case that we are missing systematically different shares of retail consumption across rich and poor households due to the exclusion of products sold by retail chains
that are not participating in the store-level retail scanner data (that we use to compute national
market sales across producers). For example, it could be the case that richer households purchase
a larger share of their retail consumption from independent boutique retailers selling small specialized brands, in which case we would be over-stating the weighted average firm sizes among richer
households. Conversely, it could be true that richer households spend on average more on retail
chains (compared to e.g. corner stores). To address such concerns, we make use of the fact that
the home scanner data do not restrict reporting to participating retail chains in the store scanner
data.14 In appendix Figure A.12, we then re-estimate Figure 1 after only including households
for which we observe more than 90, 95 or 97.5 percent of their total reported retail expenditure
on brands that are matched across both data sets, and find that the relationship holds close to
identically in all specifications. Figure A.13 further corroborates this finding by showing that the
fraction of total expenditure on brands in both datasets differs by less then 3 percent across the
income groups.15
Another data-related concern is that the Nielsen data do not allow us to observe firm sales outside the US market. For both US-based exporters and imported brands, we are thus mismeasuring
total firm sales relative to domestic-only US producers. Given existing evidence on the selection of
firms into trade, it is likely that the resulting measurement error in firm sizes is positively related to
the observed US market shares in the Nielsen data (understating true differences in firm sizes). To
corroborate this, we report differences in weighted-average firm sizes across incomes separately for
product groups both below and above-median import penetration or export shares.16 As depicted
in appendix Figures A.14 and A.15, we find that the differences in firm sizes across rich and poor
households are indeed slightly more pronounced in the below-median sectors for both import or
export shares.
Differences in Supply and Pricing Across Incomes Another explanation could be that rich
and poor households live in geographically segmented markets and/or shop across segmented store
formats, so that differential access to producers, rather than heterogeneous household preferences,
could be driving the results. In appendix Figure A.16 we explore to what extent differences
in household geographical location as well as differences in retail formats within locations play in
accounting for Figure 1. We first re-estimate the same relationship after conditioning on county-by14

Since retail chain participation in the store scanner data is not made public by Nielsen, home scanner participants
are not made aware of this either.
15
Further reassurance against the “missing retailers” concern is also apparent in Figure 1 that depicts very similar
patterns when using 100 percent of household retail consumption as reported in the home scanner data.
16
To this end, we match the Nielsen product groups to 4-digit SIC codes in 2005 US trade data. See appendix
Table A.3. Below median is equivalent to less than 10 percent for both import penetration and export shares.

10

half-year fixed effects when plotting the firm size deviations on the y-axis. Second, we additionally
condition on individual household consumption shares across 79 different retail store formats (e.g.
supermarkets, price clubs, convenience stores, pharmacies, liquor stores).17 We find a very similar
relationship compared to Figure 1 in both cases, suggesting that differential access to producers is
unlikely to be the driver.
Related to differential access to producers, differential pricing across income groups could be
another potential explanation. For this to matter in our context, it would have to be the case that
larger and smaller producers differ in their extent of price discrimination across income groups,
such that larger firms become relatively more attractive for richer households. To explore this in
the data, appendix Figure A.17 plots the relationship between unit values and firm sizes separately
for prices paid by the poorest and the richest income quintiles. If it were true that larger firms offer
differentially lower or higher prices compared to smaller firms across high and low-income groups,
we would expect the slope of these relationships to differ between the income groups. Using unit
values and firm sizes defined either at the UPC or at the brand-level, we find that this relationship
is close to identical for both rich and poor consumers, providing some reassurance that richer
households do not pick larger firms because of differential pricing.
Fixed Product Attributes Finally, we explore the notion that large firms are large because
they sell to richer households. If firms were born with fixed product attributes and/or brand
perceptions, and some firms got lucky to appeal to the rich, while other producers cannot respond
over time by altering their own product attributes or brand perceptions, this would mechanically
lead to richer households sourcing from larger firms (as the rich account for a larger share of total
sales).18
Here, we document that in the medium or long run this notion seems hard to reconcile with
either the data or the existing literature on endogenous quality choice by firms. First, a body
of empirical work has documented that firms endogenously choose their product attributes as a
function of market demand in a variety of different empirical settings (e.g. Bastos et al. (2018),
Dingel (2016)).19 Second, the scanner data suggest that producers of brands frequently alter
the physical characteristics and/or presentation of their products over time. Appendix Table A.4
documents that each half year close to 10 percent of producers of brands replace their products with
changed product characteristics (e.g. packaging or product improvements) that have the identical
pack sizes to the previous replaced varieties on offer by the same brand—suggesting that producers
are indeed capable of choosing their product attributes as a function of market conditions.20 In
17
We condition on 79 store formats within the same county to capture potential differences in access across innercity vs. suburbs or due to car ownership. Conditioning on individual stores would give rise to the concern that
households choose to shop at different retailers precisely due to the product mix on offer, rather than capturing
differences in access.
18
This also relates to the original note in Melitz (2003) that the heterogeneity parameter can either be thought of
as a marginal cost draw in a setting with horizontal differentiation, or as a quality draw in a setting with vertical
differentiation.
19
Another literature in support of this is the marketing literature on firm strategies using advertising to affect
brand perceptions over time (e.g. Keller et al. (2011)).
20
It could still be the case that our 18 repeated cross-sections (half years) depicted in Figure 1 are partly capturing
the result of short-term taste shocks across products that differ between rich and poor households while hitting a
fixed number of producers with fixed product attributes. To further investigate this possibility, we re-estimate the
relationship in Figure 1 after replacing contemporary differences in firm sales by either sales three years before or

11

support of these descriptive moments, we also provide more direct empirical evidence in Section
5 as part of our technology parameter estimation, documenting that an exogenous increase in the
scale of production leads to brand-level quality upgrading over time (see Tables 2 and 3).

4

Theoretical Framework

This section develops a tractable quantitative GE model that rationalizes the observed moments
in the microdata. We introduce two basic features into an otherwise standard Melitz model of heterogeneous firms. On the demand side, we allow for non-homothetic preferences so that consumers
across the income distribution can differ in both their price elasticities and in their product quality
evaluations. On the producer side, firms with different productivities face the observed distribution
of consumer preferences and optimally choose their product attributes and markups. Reflecting the
asymmetry of market shares within sectors we document above, we also depart from the assumption of monopolistic competition, and allow for variable markups under oligopolistic competition.
The exposition below abstracts from time subscripts. Appendices 2-5 provide additional details
on the model and its extensions.

4.1

Model Setup

Consumption The economy consists of two broad sectors: retail consumption (goods available
in stores and supermarkets) and an outside sector. As in Handbury (2019), we consider a two-tier
utility where the upper-tier depends on utility from retail shopping UG and the consumption of an
outside good z:
U = U (UG (z), z)
(1)
For the sake of exposition, we do not explicitly specify the allocation of expenditures in retail
vs. non-retail items, but assume that the outside good is normal.21 We denote by H(z) the
cumulative distribution of z across households in equilibrium, and normalize to one the population
of consumers. Utility from retail consumption is then defined by:
αn (z).



UG (z) =

Y

X


n

(qni ϕni (z))

σn (z)−1
σn (z)



σn (z)
σn (z)−1

(2)

i∈Gn

where n refers to a product module in the Nielsen data and i refers to a brand producer within
the product module.22 ϕni (z) is the perceived quality (product appeal) of brand i at income
level z, and σn (z) is the elasticity of substitution between brands in module n at income level z.
Allowing demand parameters for retail consumption to be functions of outside good consumption
three years in the future of the current period. If the distribution of firm sizes was subject to significant temporary
swings over time, then we would expect the two counterfactual relationships to slope quite differently from our
baseline estimate in Figure 1. Instead, appendix Figure A.18 suggests that the estimated differences in producer
sizes are practically identical.
21
Appendix 3 provides an envelope theorem result that holding z fixed yields a first-order approximation of the
compensating variation from retail price shocks under any arbitrary (unspecified) upper-tier utility function. In the
counterfactual analysis in Section 6, we report results both holding z fixed and allowing for endogenous changes in
z after specifying (1).
22
We show in Appendix 3.D that these preferences can be derived from the aggregation of discrete-choice preferences across many individual agents within group z.

12

z introduces non-homotheticities in a very flexible manner.23 As we focus most of our attention
on within-product module allocations, we model the choice over product modules with a CobbDouglas upper-tier, where αn (z) refers to the fraction of expenditures spent on product module n
P
at income level z (assuming n αn (z) = 1 for all z).24 Comparing two goods i and j within the
same module n, relative expenditures by consumers of income level z are then given by:
"

ϕni (z)
pni
xni (z)
= (σn (z) − 1) log
− log
log
xnj (z)
ϕnj (z)
pnj

#

(3)

Motivated by the evidence discussed in Figure A.6 above, we let household quality evaluations
log ϕni (z) depend on an intrinsic quality term log φni associated with brand i and a multiplicative
term γn (z) depending on income level z:
Intrinsic Quality Assumption:

log ϕni (z) = γn (z) log φni

(4)

´
With the normalization Ωz γn (z)dz = 1 (where Ωz is a set of z household types),25 this intrinsic
quality term also corresponds to the democratic average quality evaluation across households:
ˆ
log φni =
log ϕni (z)dz
(5)
Ωz

In the empirical estimation below, we estimate perceived quality ϕni (z) separately for each income
group to verify whether relative quality evaluations are indeed preserved across income levels
before imposing the above restriction. Finally, the retail price index is income-specific and given
Q
by PG (z) = n Pn (z)αn (z) , where the price index Pn (z) for each product module n is defined as:




Pn (z) = 

X

1−σ (z)
pni n ϕni (z)σn (z)−1 

1
1−σn (z)

.

(6)

i∈Gn

Production For each product group n, entrepreneurs draw their productivity a from a cumulative distribution Gn (a) upon paying a sunk entry cost FnE , as in Melitz (2003). For the remainder
of this section, we index firms by a instead of i, since all relevant firm-level decisions are uniquely
determined by firm productivity a. The timing of events is as follows. First, entrepreneurs pay
the entry cost FnE and discover their productivity a. Second, each entrepreneur decides at which
level of quality to produce or exit. Third, production occurs and markets clear. Firms compete in
23

For instance, demand systems with a choke price can generate price elasticities that depend on income (Arkolakis
et al., 2018), but offer significantly less flexibility in that relationship. Related work by Feenstra & Romalis (2014)
features a single demand elasticity across incomes. Handbury (2019) derives conditions under which such preferences
are rational and well-defined, and Appendix 3.C provides an equivalent demand structure, based on results in Fally
(2018), in which non-homotheticities do not rely on outside good consumption z.
24
We abstract from within-brand product substitution by summing up sales across potentially multiple barcodes.
Appendix 4.A presents an extension of our model to multi-product firms following Hottman et al. (2016). In our
setting, we show that as long as the ratio of between to within-brand elasticities of substitution does not significantly
differ across income groups z, firm variation in within-brand product variety does not play a role for differences in
firm sizes across z (Figure 1). In Section 5.1 we find minor differences in the cross-brand elasticities across income
groups, and in Table A.5 we find no evidence of significant differences in the between-to-within ratios.
25
This normalization sets the simple mean of preference parameters γn (z) equal to unity across a fixed set of
household types z. As shown in Appendix 3.E, this normalization to unity across household types z is without loss
of generality.

13

prices, allowing for oligopolistic interactions as in Hottman et al. (2016).26
We normalize the cost of labor (wage w) to unity. There are two cost components: a variable
and a fixed cost (in terms of labor). We allow for the possibility that both the marginal and the
fixed cost of production are a function of output quality. The latter captures potential overhead
costs such as design, R&D and marketing which do not directly depend on the quantities being
produced but affect the quality of the product. In turn, variable costs depend on the level of
quality of the production as well as the entrepreneur’s productivity, as in Melitz (2003). Hence,
the total cost associated with the production of a quantity q with quality φ and productivity a is:
cn (φ)q/a + fn (φ) + f0n

(7)

where fn (φ) is the part of fixed costs that directly depend on output quality. For tractability, we
adopt a simple log-linear parameterization for fixed costs as in Hallak & Sivadasan (2013) and the
second model variant of Kugler & Verhoogen (2012):
1

fn (φ) = bn βn φ βn

(8)

For instance, fixed costs increase with quality (βn > 0) if higher quality entails higher expenditures
on research and development or marketing, for which the cost is not directly dependent of the scale
of production. On the contrary, it could be the case that fixed costs are decreasing in quality if
such fixed investments are most suitable for mass-producing low-quality output at lower marginal
costs.27 Similarly, we assume that variable costs depend log-linearly on quality, with parameter ξn
to capture the elasticity of the cost increase to the level of output quality:28
cn (φ) = φξn

(9)

As long as ξn is smaller than the minimum quality evaluation γn (z), firms choose positive levels of
quality in equilibrium, as we further discuss below.

4.2

Equilibrium and Counterfactuals

In equilibrium, consumers maximize their utility, expected profits upon entry equal the sunk entry
cost, and firms choose their price, quality and quantity to maximize profits. There are two sources
for variable markups across firms in our setting. They are determined by both their market power
in oligopoly as well as the composition of the consumers that each firm sells to (i.e. the salesweighted average price elasticity they face across consumer groups z). To see this, prices are given
by:
φ(a)ξn µn (a)
pn (a) =
(10)
a
26
We also consider a generalized version of Cournot quantity competition following Atkeson and Burstein (2008),
whereby firms compete in quantity. This yields very similar results, both for the cross-section of implied markups
as well as for the counterfactual analysis.
27
In Appendix 4.B, we also present a model extension allowing for heterogeneous fixed costs that may be correlated
with productivity, as in Hallak & Sivadasan (2013).
28
There is no need for a constant term as it would be isomorphic to a common productivity shifter after redefining
Gn (a).

14

where µn is the markup over marginal cost:
´
pn (a)
z xn (z, a) dH(z)
µn (a) ≡
=1+ ´
cn (a)
z (σn (z) − 1) (1 − sn (z, a)) xn (z, a) dH(z)

(11)

xn (z, a) denotes sales of firm with productivity a to consumers of income level z. sn (z, a) are
market shares in product module n. Due to oligopolistic competition, this markup is larger than
σ̃n (a)
σ̃n (a)−1 , the markup under monopolistic competition, where σ̃n (a) is the weighted average elasticity
of substitution across consumers that the firm sells to:
´
σn (z) xn (z, a)dH(z)
σ̃n (a) = z ´
z xn (z, a)dH(z)
The first-order condition in φ characterizes optimal quality φn (a) for firms with productivity a.
Existence of a non-degenerate equilibrium choice for quality requires that we fit in either of two
cases.29 In the first case, higher quality entails higher fixed costs (βn > 0 and bn > 0) and
the increase in marginal costs does not exceed consumer valuation for quality (ξn < γn (z) for
all z). In this case, large firms sort into producing higher quality. In the second case, marginal
costs increase more strongly with higher quality output (ξn > γn (z) for all z), and fixed costs
are decreasing (βn < 0 and bn < 0). In this case, relatively small “boutique” producers sort into
producing higher quality products while mass producers produce low-cost, low-quality products.
In both cases, optimal quality satisfies:


φn (a) =

βn

γ̃n (a) − ξn
. Xn (a)
bn µn (a)

(12)

´
where Xn (a) = z x(a, z)dH(z) denotes total sales of firm a in product module n and γ̃n (a) is the
weighted average quality valuation γn (z) for firm with productivity a, weighted by sales and price
elasticities across its customer base:
´
γn (z) (σn (z)−1) (1 − sn (z, a)) xn (z, a) dH(z)
(13)
γ̃n (a) = z ´
z (σn (z)−1) (1 − sn (z, a)) xn (z, a) dH(z)
Optimal quality is determined by several forces that are apparent in equation (12). First, when
βn > 0, larger sales induce higher optimal quality, as reflected in the term Xn (a)βn . This is the
scale effect due to the higher fixed costs of producing at higher quality. If we compare two firms
with the same customer base, the larger one would more profitably invest in upgrading quality
if βn > 0. Second, optimal quality depends on how much the firm-specific customer base value
quality, captured by γ̃n (a). Firms that tend to sell to consumers with high γn (z) also tend to have
higher returns to quality upgrading. Third, optimal quality depends on technology and the cost
structure. A higher elasticity of marginal costs to quality, ξn , induces lower optimal quality. If
instead βn < 0, higher quality is associated with smaller firm scale Xn (a), a higher average quality
valuation γ̃n (a) and a lower elasticity of marginal costs to quality ξn .
29

If βn > 0, bn > 0 and ξn > γn (z) optimal quality is zero. If βn < 0, bn < 0 and ξn < γn (z) optimal quality is
infinite.

15

Finally, when firms chose prices and quality to maximize profits, those profits are given by:

 ˆ

1
πn (a) = 1−
(1 − βn (γn (z) − ξn )(σn (z) − 1)(1 − sn (z, a))) xn (a, z) dH(z) − f0n
µn (a)
z
(14)
where βn (γn (z) − ξn )(σn (z) − 1)(1 − sn (z, a)) is the share of operating profits that are invested in
the fixed costs of quality upgrading.30 In equilibrium, average profits (assuming equality between
averages and expectations) across all entrants equal sunk entry costs, and surviving firms are those
with positive profits.
An equilibrium is defined as a set of sales, quality choices and markups that satisfy equations
(3), (10), (12) and (11) for each firm, such that price indices are given by (6) and such that profits
are given by (14). Additional details are provided in Appendix 2.31
Firm Heterogeneity across Consumption Baskets To rationalize the observed stylized facts
through the lens of the model, we examine the weighted average of log firm size Xn (a) for each
income group z, which corresponds to what we plot on the y-axis of Figure 1:
´
a xn´(z, a) log Xn (a) dGn (a)
g
log X
n (z) =
a xn (z, a) dGn (a)
g
How X
n (z) varies with income (i.e. the slope of the estimated relationship in Figure 1) reflects how
xni (z, a) varies across firms i and consumer income z. For the sake of exposition, let us assume
for now that quality valuation γn (z) and price elasticities σn (z) are continuous and differentiable
Xn (z)
w.r.t income z. We can then express the derivative ∂ log∂z
as a function of two covariance terms
(where Covz denotes a covariance weighted by sales to consumers z):

f

g
∂ log X
n (z)
∂z

=

∂γn (z)
(σn (z) − 1) Covz (log Xn (a), log φn (a))
∂z


∂σn (z)
−
Covz log Xn (a), log(pn (a)/φn (a)γn (z) )
∂z

(15)

From this expression, we see that the difference in weighted-average firm size in consumption
baskets across the income distribution is driven by how preference parameters depend on income
∂σn
n
( ∂γ
∂z and ∂z ), and by how firm size correlates with quality and quality-adjusted prices. The first
line in equation (15) reflects a quality channel. It is positive if firm size increases with quality and if
n
richer households care relatively more about intrinsic product quality ( ∂γ
∂z > 0). The second term
captures a price effect, which would work in the same direction as the quality channel if, and only
if, richer households were more price elastic compared to poorer households, as the final covariance
term between firm size and quality-adjusted prices is negative (lower quality-adjust prices lead to
larger sales when σn (z) > 1). If, instead, higher income consumers were less price elastic, but
attached greater value to product quality, the two channels in (15) would be opposing one another
30

This term must be smaller than unity. Second-order conditions require βn (γn (z) − ξn )(σn (z) − 1) < 1 to ensure
a well-defined equilibrium for all firms.
31
Appendix 2 also examines second-order conditions, discusses conditions for uniqueness, and describes a special
case with closed-form solutions.

16

in generating the observed heterogeneity in firm sizes across income groups in Figure 1.
The decomposition in equation (15) relies primarily on our demand-side structure and does
not yet impose assumptions on the production side. In turn, the supply-side structure can shed
light on the potential sources of the covariance terms. Prices are given by equation (10) while
equilibrium product quality satisfies equation (12). In particular, the correlation between firm size
and quality appearing in the first term can be expressed as:
Covz (log Xn (a), log φn (a)) = βn V arz (log Xn (a)) + βn Covz (log Xn (a), log((γ̃n (a) − ξn )/µn (a)))
(16)
As part of the estimation that follows, we can quantify each of these terms and decompose the
observed firm heterogeneity across the consumption baskets in Figure 1 into the underlying channels.
Counterfactual Analysis Our framework naturally lends itself to quantifying GE counterfactuals. In Appendix 5.A, we write the equilibrium equations in terms of counterfactual changes that
govern adjustments in firm sales, quality, variable markups, entry, exit and price indices. Solving
for counterfactual equilibria requires data on initial sales xn0 (z, a) for each firm across different
consumer groups, in addition to estimates of demand and supply parameters: σn (z), γn (z), βn
xn1 (z,a)
n1 (a)
and ξn . With these moments in hand, we can solve for changes in quality φφn0
(a) , sales xn0 (z,a) ,
Pn1 (z)
Nn1
n1 (a)
markups µµn0
(a) , the mass of firms Nn0 , firm survival δnD (a) and consumer price indices Pn0 (z) . In
particular, equilibrium changes in quality can be derived by taking ratios of equation (12), changes
in sales are derived from equations (3) and (10), changes in markups from equation (11), changes
in profits from equation (14), and changes in cost of living from equation (6). As described in
Appendix 5.A, we do not require estimates of firm productivity a or initial firm quality φ(a) to
conduct our counterfactual exercise.32 Appendix 5.B also derives a six-fold decomposition of the
counterfactual price index effects that we use and further discuss as part of the counterfactual
anlysis in Section 6.
In our baseline counterfactual analysis, we hold initial household types z fixed, without specifying the upper-tier utility function in (1).33 As shown in Appendix 3, this provides a first-order
approximation of the compensating variation due to retail price changes for any arbitrary upper-tier
utility. To investigate potential second-order effects on price indices (through changes in demand
parameters αn (z), σn (z) and γn (z)), we then also examine counterfactuals allowing for endogenous
changes in z after specifying the upper-tier in (1).

5

Estimation

This section presents parameter estimation and model calibration. To bring the model to the data,
we define five consumer income groups z in terms of quintiles of the US income distribution, and
introduce time subscripts to reflect 18 half-year cross-sections of data. We begin by estimating the
preference parameters, σnz and γnz , that combined with detailed data on sales and unit values,
32

This approach follows Dekle et al. (2007) among others.
This is similar to e.g. Handbury (2019), Atkin et al. (2018) and Redding & Weinstein (2020) and follows earlier
work by McFadden & Train (2000).
33

17

allow us to quantify the distribution of product quality, quality-adjusted prices and markups across
producers of brands and household consumption baskets. With these estimates in hand, we then
proceed to estimate the technology parameters, βn and ξn . As well as being of interest in their
own right, these estimates allow us to quantify the forces underlying Figure 1 at the end of this
section, and to explore policy counterfactuals in the final section.

5.1

Price Elasticities

We begin by estimating the demand elasticity (1 − σnz ) that we allow to vary across household
income groups and product groups. From equation (3) we get the following estimation equation:
4 log (snzict ) = (1 − σnz ) 4 log (pnict ) + ηnzct + nzict

(17)

where as before z, n and i denote household groups, product modules and brands. c and t indicate
US counties and 18 half years (17 changes), and snzict are budget shares within product module n.
ηnzct are household group-by-product module-by-county-by-half-year fixed effects that capture the
local CES price index. Consistent with our specification of preferences at the level of household
groups, we estimate (17) after aggregating consumption shares in the home scanner data for the
period 2006-2014 to the level of household quintile-by-county-by-module-by-half-year bins.34 To
address concerns about autocorrelation in the error term nzict , we cluster standard errors at the
county level.35
To address the standard simultaneity concern that taste shocks in the error term are correlated with observed price changes, we follow the empirical literature in industrial organization (e.g.
Hausman (1999), Nevo (2000) and Hausman & Leibtag (2007)) and make the identifying assumption that consumer taste shocks are idiosyncratic across counties whereas supply-side cost shocks
are correlated across space. For the supply-side variation needed to identify σnz , we exploit the
fact that store chains frequently price nationally or regionally without taking into consideration
changes in local demand conditions (DellaVigna & Gentzkow, 2019). In particular, we instrument
for local consumer price changes across brands 4 log (pnict ) with either national or state-level
P
leave-out mean price changes: N 1−1 j6=c 4 log (pnijt ). These two instruments identify potentially
different local average treatment effects. The national leave-out means IV estimates σnz off retail
chains that price their products nationally, whereas the state-level leave-out means may extend
the complier group to regional and local retailers.
A potentially remaining concern that this IV strategy would not be able to address are demand
shocks at the national or state-level that are correlated with observed product price changes.
Advertisement campaigns would be a natural candidate for this concern. For this to lead to a
downward bias in the σnz estimates, it would have to be the case that the advertisement campaign
34
We aggregate household purchases to income groups using sampling weights (“projection factor” in Nielsen) to
compute 4 log (snzict ), and limit the sample to income group-by-county-by-half-year cells with at least 25 households.
To compute brand-level log price changes we first compute projection-factor-weighted price means for each barcodeby-county-by-half-year cell, and then compute 4 log (pnict ) as a brand-level Tornqvist price index across all barcodes
belonging to the same brand. As reported in Appendix Table A.6, point estimates are not sensitive to either the
decision to take mean prices (rather than medians) or the decision to take a Tornqvist price index (rather than
Laspeyres or a simple average).
35
Clustering at this level yields slightly more conservative standard errors than sensible alternatives (clustering at
the level of brands, product modules, county-by-income groups, county-by-half-years or county-by-product modules).

18

first affects demand, but then also leads to higher prices. We would argue that this is not likely to
be the case for most national or state-level advertisement campaigns. For example, an “informative”
advertisement campaign containing price information would not lead to a bias in our estimation
of σnz , as the variation is driven by consumers reacting to a change in prices (promotions etc.).
A second type of “persuasive” campaign could be aimed at improving the brand’s perception
instead, which would be more problematic for the exogeneity of the IV. For identification, we
require that it is not the case that firms on average launch persuasive advertisement campaigns
and simultaneously increase their prices. Given the longer-term objective of most image-oriented
advertisement campaigns (e.g. Keller et al. (2011)), and the fact that we use half-yearly variation
in prices and consumption decisions in our estimations, we believe this to be a plausible baseline
assumption.
To document sensitivity, we also report counterfactual results in Section 6 across alternative
parameter assumptions. Finally, the key empirical moment in our welfare quantification does not
rely on the levels of σnz , but on the observed heterogeneity across different income groups. And
while it is possible that some of the discussed endogeneity concerns may affect rich and poor
households differently, such concerns would require somewhat more elaborate stories compared to
the traditional simultaneity bias in demand estimation.36
Estimation Results Panel A of Table 1 shows the pooled estimation results across all household
and product groups. In support of the IV strategy, we find that the point estimates change
from slightly positive in the OLS specification to negative and statistically significant in both IV
estimations as well as the joint IV column. The estimates from the two different instruments are
very similar and suggest a pooled elasticity of substitution of about 2.2. Panel B presents IV
estimates separately across product departments that range between 1.5 and 3.5. These estimates
fall at the center of a large existing literature in IO and Marketing using brand-level consumption
data to estimate the sales-to-price elasticity of demand.37 They are, however, somewhat lower
than empirical work based on moment conditions of the double-differenced residuals in demand
and supply using the GMM estimation approach pioneered by Feenstra (1994) (e.g. Broda &
Weinstein (2010), Hottman et al. (2016)).38 As a robustness exercise, we report counterfactuals in
the final section for both our baseline estimates and assuming larger values of the price elasticity.
In the final column of Panel A, we take the pooled sample, but interact the log price changes
with household income group identifiers to estimate to what extent there are statistically significant
differences between household quintiles. The most convincing way to estimate such household
differences in σnz is to additionally include brand-by-period-by-county fixed effects, so that we
identify differences in the elasticity of substitution by comparing how different households react to
the identical price change. We choose the richest income group as the reference category absorbed
by the additional fixed effects. We find that poorer households have significantly higher price
36

Also note that in the absence of additional linked household data on times spent shopping, it would be impossible
to disentangle the potential for differences in the opportunity cost of search/shopping time across rich and poor
households (e.g. (Aguiar & Hurst, 2007)).
37
See e.g. a meta-analysis by Bijmolt et al. (2005). Reviewing close to 2000 estimates, they find a median elasticity
of -2.2, with one half of the estimates falling in the range between -1 and -3.
38
See also Soderbery (2015) and more recent work by Ray (2019) addressing potential upward bias due to many
weak instruments in this setting.

19

elasticities compared to richer households. In terms of magnitude, however, these differences are
relatively minor. We estimate that the price elasticity for the poorest two quintiles is about 0.4
larger than that for the richest quintile.
Panel C reports results for each of the product departments across two income groups: the
bottom two quintiles and the top 3 quintiles. These sixteen σnz estimates reported in Panel C
are the point estimates that we use as our baseline parameter values in the analysis that follows.
This is motivated by the income group heterogeneity reported in the final column of Panel A,
and due to the fact that statistical power starts to become an issue when estimating these parameters separately across individual product departments. The trade-off that we face here is one
between relatively precisely estimated point estimates relative to allowing for richer patterns of
heterogeneity. For completeness, appendix Table A.7 reports the results when estimating forty
σnz parameters (5 across each of the 8 product departments). As becomes clear from that table,
a larger number of parameters start having large standard errors and lack statistical significance
compared to our preferred set of estimates in Panel C of Table 1. An alternative approach is
to estimate the heterogeneity parametrically by interacting changes in log prices with either the
average of log household total expenditure per capita in a given zct bin or the average percentile of
total per capita expenditure in that bin. We report those results in appendix Table A.8, and use
these alternative estimates as part of the sensitivity analysis in the counterfactual analysis below.

5.2

Brand Quality, Quality-Adjusted Prices and Markups

Armed with estimates of σnz , we can use the scanner data following equations (3) and (5) to
P
estimate product quality evaluations logϕnzi , log φni = N1z z log ϕnzi and quality-adjusted prices,




log φpni
, across producers of brands and household consumption baskets. To do this, we use an
ni
additional empirical moment from the data, product unit values, in combination with observed
product sales and the estimated σnz .
Appendix Figure A.19 depicts the distribution of mean deviations in log product unit values
within product module-by-half-year cells across the income distribution (aggregated as expenditureweighted averages for each household.)39 As shown in the figure, the richest quintile of US households source their consumption from firms that have on average 12 percent higher unit values within
product modules compared to the poorest quintile. In turn, Figure A.20 depicts the relationship
between firm sizes and unit values.
The left panel of Figure 2 proceeds to present the distribution of the estimated weighted average
product quality deviations across household consumption baskets. We find that the documented
differences in terms of firm sizes translate into significant differences in the weighted average product quality as well as quality-adjusted prices embodied in consumption baskets across the income
distribution. The richest 20 percent of US households source their consumption from on average
22 percent higher quality producers compared to the poorest 20 percent of households. Using
the estimates of income-group-specific product quality shifters, appendix Figure A.21 confirms the
motivating evidence from Figure A.6 above: rich and poor households agree that product quality
increases across the firm size distribution, but this relationship is steeper among richer households.
39

We compute brand-level unit values as sales-weighted means across barcode transactions at the level of brandsby-half-year cells.

20

Moving from differences in product quality to quality-adjusted prices, the right panel of Figure
2 documents that the richest quintile source their consumption at on average 10 percent lower
quality-adjusted prices.
The parameter estimates for σnz in combination with data on firm sales by income group also
allow us to compute the distribution
of P
the effective

 (weighted average) elasticities of substitution
faced by individual producers,

σ̃ni =

σ x
z nz nzi
P
. Following equation (11), this together with
x
z

nzi

firm market shares under oligopolistic competition determines the distribution of markups across
firms. The left panel of Figure 3 presents the estimation results for variation in µni as a function
of firm size deviations within product modules. Larger firms charge significantly higher markups
due to both their market power within product modules and the fact that they face lower price
elasticities due to selling a higher share of their output to higher-income households (who, in turn,
have lower parameter values for σnz ).
With estimates of ϕnzi in hand, we proceed to estimate the final set of preference parameters,
γnz , that govern the valuation of product quality characteristics across the household income
distribution. Following expression (4), the estimation equation is:
log (ϕnzit ) = γnz log (φnit ) + ηnzt + nzit

(18)

where ηnzt are income group-by-product module-by-half-year fixed effects. To address the concern
of correlated measurement errors when moving from model to data, that appear both on the left
hand side (the income group specific product quality evaluations) and the right hand side (the
democratic average product quality evaluation), we instrument for log (φnit ) with two half-year
lagged values of product quality. To address autocorrelation in the error term nzit , we cluster
standard errors at the level of product modules.
Appendix Table A.9 presents the estimation results across bins of household groups and product
departments. In accordance with the documented stylized facts, richer household groups value
increases in product quality relatively more across each of the product departments. However, there
we also find differences in the extent of this heterogeneity across different product departments.
For example, beverages, dairy products and packaged meat are among the departments with the
highest difference in the taste for quality, whereas general merchandise and health and beauty care
have the lowest differences in household taste for quality across income groups.
As we do above for the firm-level parameter σ̃ni , we can use these estimates in combination
with the sales data to compute the weighted average product quality evaluations faced by each
brand producer, following expression (13). The right panel of Figure 3 reports these results across
the firm size distribution within product groups. We find that larger producers of brands face a
composition of market demand with significantly higher marginal valuations for product quality.

5.3

Technology Parameters

In this subsection, we propose two approaches to estimate the technology parameters.
Estimation in the Cross-Section Armed with estimates of µni and γ̃ni , we proceed to estimate the technology parameters βn and ξn : the first determines the presence and size of economies
21

of scale in the production of product quality. The second determines the extent to which marginal
costs increase with higher product quality. An intuitive way to estimate βn is through the relationship between unit values and market shares within product modules. If we imposed the
assumptions of monopolistic competition and homogeneous consumer preferences (representative
agent), we would get the following estimation equation from (3) and (12) above:
1
log (Xnit ) + ηnt + nit
σn − 1




log (pnit ) = βn −

(19)

where ηnt are product module-by-half-year fixed effects. Intuitively, if brands were of the same
quality then the relationship between unit values (that would be identical to prices in this case)
and market shares would be governed by the slope of the demand curve − σn1−1 . The extent to
which firms of larger scale sort into producing higher product quality would then be captured by
the production function parameter βn . To see this more clearly, we can re-write (19) with product
quality on the left hand side: log (φnit ) = βn log (Xnit ) + ηnt + nit , where following (3) and (5)
log (φnit ) = log (pnit ) + σn1−1 log (Xnit ). This same logic and estimation equation have been used in
the existing literature on quality choice across heterogeneous firms under the representative agent
assumption (e.g. Kugler & Verhoogen (2012)).
When allowing for variable markups in oligopolistic competition and heterogeneity in tastes for
quality and price elasticities across consumers—giving rise to firm-specific demand compositions
for γ̃ni and σ̃ni —this estimation equation requires two additional correction terms. From (5) and
(12) we get:



1
1 X
Xnzit
1
log (Xnit ) −
log
log (pnit ) = βn −
σn − 1
Nz z σnz − 1
Xnit


(20)

+βn log ((γ̃nit − ξn ) /µnit ) + ηnt + nit
where Nz is the number of consumer groups (5 in our application), σn1−1 = N1z z σnz1−1 .
The
first additional

 term on the right generalizes the downward-sloping demand relationship
1
− σn −1 log (Xnit ) in equation (19), to allow for the fact that different producers face different
market demand elasticities due to differences in the composition of their customers. The second
additional term captures the fact that different producers may sort into higher or lower product
quality due to variable markups and differences in the composition of their customer base (valuing
quality more or less given prices).
As above, following (3) and (5), we can re-write equation (20) for estimation as: log (φnit )=
βn log (Xnit (γ̃nit − ξn ) /µnit ) + ηnt + nit . Conditional on ηnt fixed effects, this allows us to jointly
estimate the technology parameters βn and ξn for each product department by estimating βn using
IV regressions across iterations of ξn , and selecting the best-fitting parameter combination. We
use iterations of ξn in steps of 0.01 in the range between 0 and twice the maximum estimated γnz ,
and do not impose an ex ante assumption about the existence of economies of scale in quality
production (βn > 0).
Two identification concerns in (20) are correlated measurement errors on the left and right
hand sides, and temporary consumer taste shocks: deviations around φni over time that would
P

22

mechanically lead to a biased estimate βn = σn1−1 if unit values and firm quality (but not sales)
remain unchanged in response to the temporary taste shock. To address both of these concerns,
we instrument for markup and composition-adjusted firm scale log (Xnit (γ̃nit − ξn ) /µnit ) with
two half-year lags. To address concerns about autocorrelation in the error term, we cluster the
standard errors at the level of product modules as before. A deeper concern with the cross-sectional
estimation is that omitted factors, such as firm-specific quality upgrading costs discussed in Section
4 and Appendix 4.B, that affect both firm scale and product quality choices are difficult to rule
out.
Finally, cross-sectional variation would be insufficient to distinguish between alternative microfoundations to rationalize the observed sorting of larger firms into higher output quality. In our
model we follow earlier work by e.g. Sutton (1998) allowing fixed costs to increase with output
quality. Alternatively, e.g. Baldwin & Harrigan (2011) and Feenstra & Romalis (2014) model
quality choices as a direct function of a firm’s productivity draw. While both model variants give
rise to a cross-sectional relationship between firm scale and product quality, only the former would
be consistent with changes in output quality as a function of exogenous changes in firm scale in
firm-level panel data.
Panel Estimation Estimation equation (20) extends the existing literature on quality choice
across firms to a setting that also allows for heterogeneity on the consumption side. But it also
follows the existing literature in that it is based on cross-sectional variation across firms. An
alternative approach is to use within-brand variation over time. The natural panel data approach
would be to write (20) in log changes instead of log levels on both the left and right hand sides.
However, the estimation of βn would still likely be biased, even when assuming that changes in firm
scale on the right-hand side were perfectly exogenous. To see this, imagine we helicopter-dropped
a random sales shock onto a firm that does not adjust either product quality or prices: even though
product attributes stay unchanged, we would mechanically conclude that there are economies of
scale in quality production (βcn = σn1−1 > 0). The reason is that demand shocks that one would
usually want to exploit as IV for firm sales to estimate economies of scale in production, would in
our setting, holding firm prices and quality constant, be mechanically interpreted as an increase
in product quality.
To address this concern, we propose the following panel estimation strategy. Re-writing expression (3) for state-level demand instead of national-level, and again substituting for product
quality from the optimal quality choice equation (12), we get:
4 log (pnist ) = βn 4 log (Xnit ) −

1
1 X
4 log (Xnizst )
Nz z σnz − 1

(21)

+βn 4 log ((γ̃nit − ξn ) /µnit ) + ηnst + nit
where subscript s indexes US states, ηnst are state-by-product module-by-half-year fixed effects,
and 4 indicates a two-year change (4 changes in our database starting from the first half year in
2006 until the end of 2014). As before, the second term on the right captures the demand-side
relationship between sales and product unit values conditional on product quality, but this time
23

at the state level. For instance, changes in firm productivity (and thus unit values on the left)
conditional on product quality are captured by this term. The first and third terms capture the
relationship between unit values and sales that is driven by changes in product quality. Following
(12), firm changes in product quality are a function of national firm scale and the firm’s composition
of consumer taste parameters (where σ̃nit is part of µnit ).
The advantage of writing the estimation equation in terms of state-level unit values on the
left is that a helicopter drop of sales on a brand producer in another region of the US does not
lead to a mechanical bias in βn , unlike in the example above. The reason is that unless the
firm changes its product quality in response, shocks to firm scale in other states have no effect
on local unit values. The estimation also does not confound conventional economies of scale in
production with economies of scale in product quality: if marginal costs fell with larger scale
–holding quality constant–, this would be accounted for by the conventional demand relationship
(second term on the right) discussed above. As above, we can re-write (21) for estimation as:
4 log (φnist ) =βn 4 log (Xnit (γ̃nit − ξn ) /µnit ) + ηnst + nit .
The first remaining identification concern in (21) is correlated measurement errors between the
left and right hand sides. A second concern is that firm changes in national sales are partly driven
by taste shocks that could be correlated across states, which—holding constant product quality
and unit values but not sales—would bias the estimate of βn . To exploit plausibly exogenous
variation in shocks to firm-level scale (21), we use leave-out mean changes in log firm sales across
other states (s0 6= s), and using other product modules (n0 6= n). We then construct a weighted
average of these leave-out mean changes in log firm sales using each firm’s pre-existing share of
total sales across different states.
This shift-share instrument for markup and composition-adjusted firm scale
(4 log (Xnit (γ̃nit − ξn ) /µnit )) is thus based on average changes in firm scale over time that exclude
both the product group of the firm and the state in which 4 log (φnist ) on the left-hand side is
observed. The identifying assumption of this strategy is that plausibly exogenous shocks to firm
scale from other regions of the US do not affect changes in state-level brand quality through other
channels but firm scale.
Estimation Results We start in Table 2 by presenting reduced-form estimation results of the
relationship between unit values or product quality on the left hand side and national firm sales
on the right hand side. The raw empirical moment that is most directly informative of the degree
of quality sorting across firm sizes is the fact that product unit values increase with national brand
sales. This holds for both the cross-section of firms and for within-firm changes over time. It
also holds in both OLS and IV estimations. In the cross-section, the IV addresses concerns about
correlated measurement errors between unit values and firm scale and temporary taste shocks that
could drive both left and right hand sides. In the panel data estimation, we have two-year changes
in state-level log unit values on the left hand side, and we instrument the right hand side using
plausibly exogenous changes in national firm sales (computed using the shift-share instrument
described above). The IV point estimate of this panel IV specification in column 6 of Table 2
suggests that a 10 percent increase in a firm’s national sales leads to a 0.7 percent increase in its
unit value.
24

The same pattern of results holds when we replace unit values with our model-based measure
of product quality on the left hand side. In both the cross-section and the within-brand estimation
product quality increases with national firm scale, and again this holds before and after addressing
identification concerns using our instruments. In the panel IV specification in column 8 we find
that a 10 percent increase in national firm sales leads to a 5.7 percent change in brand quality.
Table 3 proceeds to the estimation of βn and ξn . To estimate these, the main difference to the
previous reduced-form table lies in the additional inclusion of brand-level consumer compositions
and firm markups on the right-hand side, as shown above in equations (20) and (21). The first
panel reports the results when pooling all product groups, and the IV point estimates of the bestfitting parameter combination of βn and ξn are not far from the reduced form results reported in
Table 2. The second panel reports the technology parameter estimates separately for grocery and
non-grocery product groups, and Appendix Table A.10 reports the estimation results separately
for each product department. An interesting pattern emerges from the parameter estimates: in
both the cross-sectional specification and the panel data approach, the IV point estimates of the
economies of scale parameter in quality production are significantly larger for non-grocery product
groups (e.g. health & beauty, merchandise) compared to grocery product groups. As indicated by
the first stage F-statistics in the appendix table, the panel data estimation does not have sufficient
power to precisely estimate βn and ξn separately for each product department. For this reason,
we use the precisely estimated parameters for grocery and non-grocery product groups reported in
Table 3 for the counterfactual quantification in the following section. Following the discussion of
identification concerns in the cross-section above, we use the IV panel estimation as our preferred
parameter estimates, and report counterfactuals using the cross-section IV estimates as part of the
robustness checks.

5.4

Quantification of Forces

Armed with the preference and technology parameter estimates, we can check whether the calibrated model quantitatively replicates the main stylized fact documented in Figure 1. We can also
use the calibrated model to quantify the forces underlying this observed relationship. Following
expressions (15) and (16), we can decompose the observed differences in weighted average firm
sizes across consumption baskets into different forces on the demand and supply sides. In Figure
4, we depict different calibrated distributions of weighted average firm sizes across the aggregate
consumption baskets of the five income groups alongside the observed moments in the data. We
do this 18 times for each of the half-year periods in our dataset, and plot the mean outcomes for
both the actual and calibrated moments.
In the first calibration, we only make use of the first part of expression (15) to predict the
consumption choices of rich and poor income groups in a model world where the only source of
heterogeneity between them is that they are subject to different estimated demand elasticities.
That is, we predict the consumption shares of rich and poor income groups within product groups
taking the quality and quality-adjusted prices of brands as given on the supply side in the data,
assigning all households the same average taste-for-quality parameters γn , but making use of the
observed differences in their σn (z) estimates. As depicted in Figure 4, household heterogeneity
in price elasticities would, ceteris paribus, push poor households to consume from significantly
25

larger firms compared to rich households—the opposite direction to what we observe in the data
in Figure 1 across individual households and in Figure 4 across the aggregate demand of different
income groups in the data.
In the next calibration, we predict household consumption shares across the 5 income groups
after also taking into account the second source of heterogeneity on the consumption side in
expression (15): the fact that rich and poor households are estimated to value product quality
differently. Again, we take as given the product quality and quality-adjusted prices on the supply
side across brands in the data, and predict income group-specific consumption shares that are now
taking into account both heterogeneity in σnz and in γnz . As shown in Figure 4, the fact that
higher-income households are estimated to have significantly stronger tastes for product quality
pushes in the opposite direction to the heterogeneity due to price elasticities, and dominates that
first effect. The sum of the two effects in expression (15) closely replicates the differences in firm
sizes across income quintiles documented in Figure 1.
In the final calibration, we fully endogenize both product choices on the consumer side and
product choices on the firm side. That is, rather than predicting the consumption shares of income
groups within product groups conditional on the available mix of product quality and qualityadjusted prices on offer across producers, we first predict the product quality choice across the
firm size distribution using the equilibrium expression (16), and then let consumers optimally
allocate budget shares on the demand side based on these predicted firm product choices. The
only raw moments we use in these calibrations from the data is the observed distribution of firm
sales across income groups for each of the 18 half years that we combine with the structure of the
model and the estimated parameters to make predictions about the equilibrium differences in firm
sizes across consumption baskets.
In addition to quantifying the (opposing) forces underlying the observed stylized fact in Figure
1, this exercise is useful to validate to what extent the calibrated model can capture the observed
moments in the data, before proceeding to the counterfactual quantifications in the following
section. Reassuringly, as depicted in Figure 4, the calibrated model is able to closely replicate the
observed differences in weighted-average firm sizes across the income distribution.

6

Counterfactuals

In this section, we use the calibrated model to quantify a new set of GE effects on household
price indices in two policy counterfactuals. The first policy directly affects the distribution of
disposable incomes on the demand side. The second policy directly affects profits across the firm
size distribution on the supply side. In our framework, these policies can affect household price
indices differently across the income distribution—both through direct effects and endogenous GE
adjustments in firm scale, product quality choices, variable markups and exit/entry across the firm
size distribution that affect rich and poor households differently. In the final section, we investigate
the sensitivity of these counterfactual results across a number of alternative model and parameter
assumptions. We also discuss the implications for the distribution of the gains from trade relative
to a conventional Melitz (2003) model of heterogeneous firms.

26

6.1

Counterfactual 1: Progressive Income Tax Reform

One implication of the stylized fact in Figure 1 and the model we use to rationalize it in Section 4 is
that changes to the distribution of disposable nominal incomes lead to GE effects on consumer price
indices that tend to amplify the observed change in nominal inequality. To make this theoretical
result concrete and put numbers on the mechanisms, we evaluate the implications of increasing
the effective tax rate on the richest household group in our calibration (incomes above the 80th
percentile) by 20 percentage points (from currently around 30 to 50 percent).
Through the lens of our model, this counterfactual allows us to relate to current policy debates
in three main respects. First, this policy captures the historical change in US effective rates on
incomes of the top 20 percent moving back to previous levels in the 1950s and 60s (Saez & Zucman,
2019).40 Second, this policy closely corresponds to the counterfactual of moving the US from the
current effective rate on the top 20 percent to the average effective rate on this group among
Northern European countries.41 Third, this policy change is also in line with the proposed tax
reforms by two leading presidential candidates for the 2020 US elections (Sanders and Warren).42
The direct effect of this policy is a compression of the distribution of disposable nominal
incomes. In line with the motivation behind this policy, we redistribute the tax revenues to the
poorest 20 percent of US households in our baseline counterfactual. Alternatively, we report
results without redistributing the tax revenues to household disposable incomes. We solve for
counterfactual changes 18 times, based on the observed brand sales to the five income groups for
each half-year cross-section in the scanner data and our estimates for the parameters σn (z), γn (z),
βn and ξn .43
We solve for the counterfactual equilibrium as described in Section 4.2, and decompose the
mechanisms as derived in Appendix 5. To compute confidence intervals that account for both
sampling variation in the sales data across the 18 cross-sections and in the parameter estimates,
we bootstrap the quantification 200 times for each half year of data. In each bootstrap, we draw
the parameters σn (z), γn (z), βn and ξn from a normal distribution with a mean equal to the point
estimate and a standard deviation equal to the standard error of the estimate.44
Figure 5 presents the counterfactual results. The left panel depicts the difference in the retail
price index effect of the policy reform across the five US income groups. As a result of the GE forces,
we find that progressive income taxes gives rise to a meaningful amplification of the policy’s direct
40
While effective rates vary at a more granular level than the income quintiles we calibrate the model to, the
counterfactual captures the historical change in effective rates on the sum of incomes above the 80th percentile (the
income-weighted average change). Given both tax changes and taste for quality increase with incomes within this
group, the results provide conservative estimates in this respect.
41
The average effective rate on incomes above the 80th percentile reported in the Luxembourg Income Study for
Austria, Denmark, Finland, Germany, the Netherlands, Norway and Sweden is 52 percent.
42
See the tax sections of their campaign webpages (https://berniesanders.com, https://elizabethwarren.com) and
effective tax calculator of their proposals at TaxJusticeNow.org. The Sanders proposal is close to the 20 percentage
point increase above. The Warren proposal is closer to a 15 percentage point increase. We do not count health
reform as part of taxation here, which would reinforce the progressivity.
43
For each of the 18 half-year periods, we verify that the moments in the data and estimated parameter values
satisfy the uniqueness conditions discussed in Section 4.2, Appendix 2 and Appendix 5. Our fitted model cannot
perfectly match sales and quality valuations for each brand and each quintile. We can, however, perfectly fit the data
by adding a multiplicative adjustment term niz to quality valuations specific to each income quintile in expression
(4). We then obtain the exact same counterfactual equations for changes in quality, sales and price indices as long
as we hold these adjustment terms constant.
44
This is a parametric bootstrap (Horowitz, 2001). See e.g. Atkin et al. (2018) for a recent application.

27

effect, increasing its progressivity through price index effects. In particular, the bottom income
quintile experience a slightly more than 3 percentage point lower cost of living inflation for retail
consumption compared to the richest quintile (point estimate 3.14 with bootstrapped standard
error of 0.63).
Table A.11 presents the decomposition of the inflation difference between the richest and the
poorest quintiles. The main drivers are related to both average and differential changes in firm scale
and product quality across the distribution of initial firm sizes. As the policy leads to a reduction
in the share of total sales to richer households in the economy, who value product quality the
most, firms on average have incentives to downgrade product quality so that initial sales-weighted
average product quality decreases. Since rich households value quality more, this average effect
increases retail cost of living inflation among the rich relative to lower incomes, accounting for
about 10 percent of the total difference in inflation.
The main effect is that initial sales to rich households are particularly concentrated among
initially large firms producing at higher product quality. The tax reform thus also leads to a compression of the firm size distribution. With economies of scale in quality production (βn > 0), this
translates into asymmetric effects on quality and quality-adjusted prices across the consumption
basektes of rich and poor households. The right panel of 5 depicts this asymmetric effect on quality
downgrading across the initial firm size distribution within product groups (with positive changes
indicating reductions in product quality on the y-axis). On average, firms above the median size
within product groups downgrade their product quality and vice-versa for firms below the median
size. As shown in Table A.11, this effect accounts for about 80 percent of the overall inflation
differential.
There is also a smaller effect operating through firm exit and love of variety. Since richer
households have slightly higher estimated elasticities of substitution, firm exit increases their retail
price index relative to poorer consumers (accounting for 6 percent of the overall difference). Figure
A.23 also breaks up the price index effects across the different departments in the scanner data.
In appendix Figure A.22 we quantify the implications of the same policy change, but without
redistribution of the tax proceeds to household disposable incomes. Reassuringly, we find that the
effect on household inflation differences is quite similar, with about a 2.5 percentage point inflation
differential between the richest and poorest quintiles. In Section A.22, we tend to find similar or
slightly stronger results when revisiting the counterfactual across a number of alternative model
or parameter assumptions.

6.2

Counterfactual 2: Closing Loopholes in Corporate Taxation

A second implication of our framework is that regulations that affect the profits of large and small
firms differently give rise to differential price index effects (even in absence of GE adjustments),
as these firms enter consumption baskets across the income distribution asymmetrically. To make
this theoretical result concrete and put numbers on the mechanisms, we relate to the ongoing
debate about closing loopholes in corporate taxation. A growing literature in public finance has
documented larger possibilities for tax evasion among large US corporations (e.g. Guvenen et
al. (2017), Wright & Zucman (2018)). A study by Bao & Romeo (2013) documents that the
relationship between firm sales and effective corporate tax rates in the US—which is monotonically
28

and smoothly increasing up to the 95th percentile of firm sales—shows a sharp kink with a switch
in the sign of the slope for the largest 5 percent of producers.
We use these findings to evaluate the impact of eliminating the kink in the otherwise smooth
relationship between effective tax rates and firm size.45 This policy change would lead to an
increase of on average 5 percent in corporate taxes paid by the largest 5 percent of producers.
This increase ranges from on average 1 percent at the 95th percentile to 11 percent at the 99th
percentile of firm sizes. In our baseline counterfactual we follow the definition of firms as brands
from Section 3 to define tax entities. Alternatively, we report results after using holding companies
as the unit of taxation.
Figure 6 presents the counterfactual results. The left panel depicts the difference in the retail
price index effect of the policy across the five US income groups. We find that even this relatively
modest adjustment in corporate taxation leads to a meaningful GE effect on differences in price
indices between rich and poor households. This is in the order of a 2 percentage point lower
inflation for retail consumption among the bottom 20 percent of US households compared to the
top 20 percent (point estimate of 1.9, bootstrapped standard error of 0.23).
The right panel of Table A.11 presents the decomposition of this differential impact. The first
channel is the direct incidence of the policy, holding fixed initial product choices by firms and
consumers. Since the largest firms sort into producing higher product quality, they represent a
larger fraction of retail consumption sourced by the richest quintile compared to the poorest. This
direct effect accounts for 40 percent of the overall difference in consumer inflation.
The second channel is again related to changes in firm scale and product quality across the firm
size distribution. The largest firms are faced with a decrease in effective revenues and experience
a reduction in their sales relative to firms not subject to the tax increase. Figure A.24 depicts
this compression of the firm size distribution, plotting counterfactual changes in log firm sales as
a function of initial percentiles of the firm size distribution. Given economies of scale in quality
production, and the large share of sales that the right tail of the size distribution represents,
this shows up in the reduction of both the sales-weighted average product quality as well as the
covariance of quality downgrading and initial firm size. The resulting changes in quality and
quality-adjusted prices for consumption increases cost of living inflation relatively more among
richer households, accounting for another 40 percent of the overall difference in price indices. As in
the previous counterfactual, slight differences in love of variety imply that firm exit increases the
retail price index more among richer households (accounting for 8 percent of the overall difference).
Figure A.26 also breaks up the price index effect across the different departments in the scanner
data. Finally, in the context of corporate taxation, tax entities may be holding companies rather
than establishments producing brands. Reassuringly, in Figure A.25 we find that the counterfactual
results are very similar (slightly stronger at 2.2 percentage points) when using holding companies
instead of brands in the data to assign counterfactual tax changes.

6.3

Robustness and Additional Results

In the final section, we explore the sensitivity of these findings to alternative model and parameter
assumptions. First, as discussed in Section 5, we use alternative values for the demand elasiticities
45

To do so, we use estimates documented in Table 2 of Bao & Romeo (2013).

29

and technology parameters compared to our baseline estimates for σn (z), βn and ξn . Second, we
re-estimate counterfactual outcomes after allowing household types (z) to endogenously change as
a result of the counterfactual shocks. Third, we report counterfactuals under the more common
assumption on market structure of monopolistic competition. Finally, we investigate the implications for the distribution of the gains from trade relative to a conventional Melitz (2003) model
with two symmetric countries.
Alternative Parameter Values In line with the empirical literature in Industrial Organization
and Quantitative Marketing, we find somewhat lower sales-to-price elasticities compared to the recent trade literature. To explore the sensitivity of our counterfactuals, we thus re-estimate each of
them after multiplying our preferred estimates in Table 1 by a factor of 1.5 or 2 (keeping relative
elasticities unchanged between income groups), or after assuming σn (z)+1 and σn (z)+2. Reassuringly, we tend to find somewhat stronger effects compared to our baseline counterfactuals. Instead
of using separate σn (z) estimates by income group, we can also use the parametric specification
in Section 5.1 as a function of income percentiles, shown in Panel C of Table A.8. This yields
more continuous variation in σn (z) across income groups compared to the baseline estimation for
below and above median income groups. We find very similar counterfactual results as in our
baseline specification. On the production side, we also report results after using the cross-sectional
technology parameter estimates, instead of our preferred panel IV estimates in Section 5.3. We
find similar though somewhat larger effects for both counterfactuals (3.5 vs 3.1 and 2.3 vs 1.9
respectively).
Endogenous Changes in Outside Good Consumption (z) As discussed in Section 4, we
hold household income types z fixed in our baseline counterfactuals, ignoring that changes in
real incomes may push some households across z group boundaries and thereby affecting demand
parameters αn (z), σn (z) and γn (z) (see envelope theorem result in Appendix 3). While appealing
for not having to take a stance on the upper-tier utility function (1), this shuts down potential
second-order effects on price indices changes in these parameters. In our theoretical framework,
the change in consumer type is captured by changes in the consumption of the outside good
(z). In Appendix 3, we specify the upper-tier between retail consumption and the outside good,
and quantify the change in outside good consumption induced by price index changes in the two
counterfactuals above. Reassuringly, we find that the second-order adjustment channel has a
negligible effect on outside good consumption (< 0.3 percent), and thus a negligible effect on the
counterfactual results. This may not be surprising, as the price index differentials we quantify
above are in the order of a 3 percentage point difference for retail consumption between rich
and poor households. The fact that such a shock does not give rise to meaningful second-order
effects through changes in household taste-for-quality or price elasticities—through pushing some
households across quintiles—appears reasonable.
Monopolistic Competition Our model allows for large firms to take into account their market
power through oligopolistic competition. A more common case with heterogeneous firms following
Melitz (2003) features a continuum of firms interacting under monopolistic competition. Even in
this case, our framework with two-sided heterogeneity allows for variable markups across firms
30

as a function of differences in their composition of consumer types. For completeness, we compute the two counterfactual equilibria in a model extension with monopolistic competition instead.
Appendix 5.A derives the system of counterfactual equations and appendix Figure A.27 presents
the counterfactual results. The point estimates are similar compared to the baseline results (allowing for oligopoly), and slightly stronger in the first counterfactual (3.5 vs 3.1 and 1.9 vs 1.9
respectively).
Implications for the Distribution of the Gains from Trade Finally, we investigate the
implications for the distribution of the gains from trade. To do so, we introduce quality choice under
two-sided heterogeneity into an otherwise standard Melitz model with monopolistic competition
and two symmetric countries, and calibrate the model to the US data we use above (see Appendix
5.C).46 As in Melitz (2003), a decrease in trade costs induces a reallocation in which the largest
firms expand through trade while less productive firms either shrink or exit. In our framework,
better access to imported varieties and exit of domestic producers affect the price indices of rich and
poor households asymmetrically. In addition, lower trade costs lead to heterogeneous changes in
product quality and markups across firms. As a result, we find that a 10 percentage point bilateral
increase in import penetration leads to a 1.7-2.6 percentage point lower retail price inflation for the
richest 20 percent of households compared to the poorest 20 percent. Relative to the conventional
case—where heterogeneous firms are evenly represented across consumption baskets—we find that
the stylized fact in Figure 1 and model we use to rationalize it imply a more unequal distribution
of the gains from trade.

7

Conclusion

This paper presents empirical evidence that the widely documented presence of Melitz-type firm
heterogeneity within sectors translates asymmetrically into the consumption baskets of households
across the income distribution. To do so, we bring to bear detailed home and store scanner
microdata that allow us to trace the national firm size distribution into the consumption baskets of
individual households. We use the data to explore the underlying forces, and propose a quantitative
GE model of quality choice under two-sided heterogeneity to rationalize the observed moments and
explore policy counterfactuals.
The analysis provides several insights. We document large and statistically significant differences in the weighted average firm sizes that rich and poor households source their consumption
from. After quantifying a set of opposing forces, we find that this pattern is mainly explained by
two features of household preferences and firm technology. On the demand side, rich and poor
households on average agree on their ranking of product quality evaluations within product groups.
However, richer households value higher quality attributes significantly more compared to poorer
households. On the production side, we estimate that producing higher output quality increases
both the marginal and the fixed costs of production. Combined, these forces give rise to the en46

We calibrate fixed trade costs such that half of of output is produced by exporting firms. We calibrate variable
trade costs such that export sales of exporters equal 20 percent of their output. Combining these two statistics, about
10 percent of aggregate output is traded. The counterfactual is to reduce variable trade costs from an equilibrium
with no trade to this new trade equilibrium.

31

dogenous sorting of larger, more productive firms into products that are valued relatively more by
wealthier households.
These results have implications for the effect of policies and economic shocks on real income
inequality. We find that the direct effect of progressive income taxation on inequality is amplified
through asymmetric GE effects on household price indices, and that business regulations or trade
liberalization that affect large and small firms differently give rise to new distributional implications. Underlying these findings is a rich interplay of firm adjustments in scale, product quality,
variable markups, exit and entry that vary across the firm size distribution and thus affect rich
and poor households differently.
Overall, our findings suggest that firm heterogeneity affects real income inequality in more
complex ways than through the nominal earnings of workers, which have been the focus of the
existing literature. These findings arise after introducing a basic set of features that we observe in
the microdata—allowing for choice in product attributes by heterogeneous firms and households
with non-homothetic preferences—into an otherwise standard economic environment. Empirically,
these findings emphasize the importance of capturing changes in price indices at a granular level
of product aggregation for both the measurement of changes in real income inequality over time
and for studying the effects of policies and economic shocks.

References
Aguiar, M., & Hurst, E. (2007). Measuring trends in leisure: the allocation of time over five
decades. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122 (3), 969–1006.
Argente, D., & Lee, M. (2016). Cost of living inequality during the great recession.
Arkolakis, C., Costinot, A., Donaldson, D., & Rodrı́guez-Clare, A. (2018). The elusive procompetitive effects of trade. The Review of Economic Studies, 86 (1), 46–80.
Atkin, D., Faber, B., & Gonzalez-Navarro, M. (2018). Retail globalization and household welfare:
Evidence from mexico. Journal of Political Economy, 126 (1), 1–73.
Baldwin, R., & Harrigan, J. (2011). Zeros, quality, and space: Trade theory and trade evidence.
American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 3 (2), 60–88.
Bao, D.-H., & Romeo, G. C. (2013). Tax avoidance and corporations in the united state – the
effective tax rate abnormality for the top five percent by corporate size. Journal of Applied
Business and Economics, 14 (4), 88–100.
Bartelsman, E., Haltiwanger, J., & Scarpetta, S. (2013). Cross-country differences in productivity:
The role of allocation and selection. The American Economic Review , 103 (1), 305–334.
Bastos, P., Silva, J., & Verhoogen, E. (2018). Export destinations and input prices. American
Economic Review , 108 (2), 353–92.
Bernard, A. B., Jensen, J. B., Redding, S. J., & Schott, P. K. (2007). Firms in international trade.
The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 105–130.
Bijmolt, T. H., Van Heerde, H. J., & Pieters, R. G. (2005). New empirical generalizations on the
determinants of price elasticity. Journal of marketing research, 42 (2), 141–156.

32

Bloom, N., & Van Reenen, J. (2007). Measuring and explaining management practices across
firms and countries. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1351–1408.
Broda, C., & Weinstein, D. (2010). Product creation and destruction: Evidence and price implications. American Economic Review , 100 , 691–723.
Burstein, A., & Vogel, J. (2017). International trade, technology, and the skill premium. Journal
of Political Economy, 125 (5), 1356–1412.
Card, D., Heining, J., & Kline, P. (2013). Workplace heterogeneity and the rise of West German
wage inequality. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128 (3), 967–1015.
Davis, D. R., & Harrigan, J. (2011). Good jobs, bad jobs, and trade liberalization. Journal of
International Economics, 84 (1), 26–36.
Dekle, R., Eaton, J., & Kortum, S. (2007). Unbalanced trade. The American Economic Review .
DellaVigna, S., & Gentzkow, M. (2019). Uniform pricing in us retail chains. The Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 134 (4), 2011–2084.
Dingel, J. I. (2016). The determinants of quality specialization. The Review of Economic Studies,
84 (4), 1551–1582.
Fajgelbaum, P., Grossman, G., & Helpman, E. (2011). Income distribution, product quality, and
international trade. Journal of Political Economy, 119 (4), 721–765.
Fally, T. (2018). Integrability and generalized separability. NBER Working Paper 25025 .
Feenstra, R. C. (1994). New product varieties and the measurement of international prices. The
American Economic Review , 157–177.
Feenstra, R. C., & Romalis, J. (2014). International prices and endogenous quality. The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 129 (2), 477–527.
Fieler, A. C., Eslava, M., & Xu, D. Y. (2018). Trade, quality upgrading, and input linkages:
Theory and evidence from colombia. American Economic Review , 108 (1), 109–46.
Frias, J. A., Kaplan, D. S., & Verhoogen, E. A. (2009). Exports and wage premia: Evidence from
mexican employer-employee data. Working Paper, Columbia University.
Guvenen, F., Mataloni Jr, R. J., Rassier, D. G., & Ruhl, K. J. (2017). Offshore profit shifting and
domestic productivity measurement. NBER Working Paper 23324 .
Hallak, J. C., & Sivadasan, J. (2013). Product and process productivity: Implications for quality
choice and conditional exporter premia. Journal of International Economics, 91 (1), 53–67.
Handbury, J. (2019). Are poor cities cheap for everyone? Non-homotheticity and the cost of living
across US cities. NBER Working Paper 26574 .
Handbury, J., & Weinstein, D. E. (2014). Goods prices and availability in cities. The Review of
Economic Studies, 82 (1), 258–296.
Hausman, J. (1999). Cellular telephone, new products, and the CPI. Journal of business &
economic statistics, 17 (2), 188–194.
Hausman, J., & Leibtag, E. (2007). Consumer benefits from increased competition in shopping
outlets: Measuring the effect of wal-mart. Journal of Applied Econometrics, 22 (7), 1157–1177.
33

Helpman, E., Itskhoki, O., Muendler, M.-A., & Redding, S. J. (2017). Trade and inequality: From
theory to estimation. The Review of Economic Studies, 84 (1), 357–405.
Horowitz, J. L. (2001). The bootstrap. In J. J. Heckman & E. Leamer (Eds.), Handbook of
econometrics (Vol. 5, p. 3159 - 3228).
Hottman, C. J., Redding, S. J., & Weinstein, D. E. (2016). Quantifying the sources of firm
heterogeneity. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131 (3), 1291–1364.
Hsieh, C.-T., & Klenow, P. J. (2009). Misallocation and manufacturing TFP in China and India.
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124 (4).
Jaravel, X. (2019). The unequal gains from product innovations: Evidence from the us retail
sector. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 134 (2), 715–783.
Johnson, R. (2012). Trade and prices with heterogeneous firms. Journal of International Economics.
Keller, K. L., Parameswaran, M., & Jacob, I. (2011). Strategic brand management: Building,
measuring, and managing brand equity. Pearson Education India.
Kugler, M., & Verhoogen, E. (2012). Prices, plant size, and product quality. The Review of
Economic Studies, 79 (1), 307–339.
McFadden, D., & Train, K. (2000). Mixed MNL models for discrete response. Journal of applied
Econometrics, 447–470.
Melitz, M. (2003). The impact of trade on intra-industry reallocations and aggregate industry
productivity. Econometrica, 71 (6), 1695–1725.
Nevo, A. (2000). Mergers with differentiated products: The case of the ready-to-eat cereal industry.
The RAND Journal of Economics, 395–421.
Peters, M. (2013). Heterogeneous mark-ups, growth and endogenous misallocation.
Ray, W. (2019). Cyclicality of markups: Evidence from heteroskedasticity-identified estimation.
Working Paper, London School of Economics.
Redding, S. J., & Weinstein, D. E. (2020). A unified approach to estimating demand and welfare
changes. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 135 (1), 503–560.
Saez, E., & Zucman, G. (2019). The triumph of injustice: How the rich dodge taxes and how to
make them pay. New York: WW Norton & Co.
Sampson, T. (2014). Selection into trade and wage inequality. American Economic Journal:
Microeconomics, 6 (3), 157–202.
Soderbery, A. (2015). Estimating import supply and demand elasticities: Analysis and implications. Journal of International Economics, 96 (1), 1–17.
Song, J., Price, D. J., Guvenen, F., Bloom, N., & Von Wachter, T. (2018). Firming up inequality.
The Quarterly journal of economics, 134 (1), 1–50.
Subramanian, S., & Deaton, A. (1996). The demand for food and calories. Journal of political
economy, 133–162.
Sutton, J. (1998). Technology and market structure: Theory and history. The MIT Press.
Wright, T., & Zucman, G. (2018). The exorbitant tax privilege. NBER Working Paper 24983 .
34

Figures and Tables
Figures

-.2

35

Weighted Average Log
Producer Sales Deviations
-.15 -.1 -.05 0
.05

.1

Weighted Average Log
Producer Sales Deviations
-.125 -.1 -.075 -.05 -.025 0 .025 .05 .075 .1

.15

Figure 1: Richer Households Source Their Consumption from Larger Firms

0

20
40
60
80
Percentiles of Household Per Capita Expenditure
Store Scanner Data

Home Scanner Data

100

Poorest

Richest
Quintiles of Per Capita Expenditure
Store Scanner Data

Home Scanner Data

Notes: The figure depicts deviations in weighted average log firm sales embodied in the consumption baskets of on average 59,000 US households during 18 half-year periods
between 2006-14. The y-axis in both graphs displays weighted average deviations in log producer sales within more than 1000 product modules where the weights are
household expenditure shares across producers of brands. In the first step, we compute brand-level deviations from mean log national sales within product module-by-halfyear cells from either the home or the store-level scanner data. In the second step, these deviations are then matched to brand-level half-yearly household expenditure
weights in the home scanner data. The final step is to collapse these data to weighted average log firm size deviations embodied in household consumption baskets. The
x-axis displays national percentiles of per capita total household retail expenditure per half year period (see Section 2). The fitted relationships in the left graph correspond
to local polynomial regressions. Standard errors in both graphs are clustered at the county level, and the displayed confidence intervals are at the 95% level. Table A.1
provides descriptive statistics. See Section 3 for discussion.

36

-.2

-.05

Weighted Average Log Quality
Adjusted Price Deviations
0
.05
.1

Weighted Average Log Quality Deviations
-.1
0
.1

.2

.15

Figure 2: Distribution of Weighted Average Product Quality and Quality-Adjusted Prices across Consumption Baskets

0

20
40
60
80
Percentiles of Household Per Capita Expenditure

100

0

20
40
60
80
Percentiles of Household Per Capita Expenditure

100

Notes: The figure depicts deviations in weighted average log brand quality embodied in the consumption baskets of on average 59,000 US households during 18 half-year
periods between 2006-14. The y-axis on the left (right) displays weighted average deviations in log brand quality (quality-adjusted prices) within more than 1000 product
modules where the weights are household expenditure shares across producers of brands. The x-axis in both graphs displays national percentiles of per capita total household
retail expenditure per half-year period (see Section 2). The fitted relationships correspond to local polynomial regressions. Standard errors in both graphs are clustered at
the county level, and the displayed confidence intervals are at the 95% level. See Section 5 for discussion.

-.05

37

-.015

Deviations in Gamma Tilde
-.01
-.005
0

Percent Deviations in Markups
0
.05
.1

.15

.005

Figure 3: Producers Charge Variable Markups and Face Different Tastes for Quality

-12

-10

-8

-6

-4
-2
0
2
4
Deviations in Log Total Firm Sales

6

8

10

-12

-10

-8

-6

-4
-2
0
2
4
Deviations in Log Total Firm Sales

6

8

10

Notes: The figure depicts deviations in the markup (µni ) and taste-for-quality parameters (γ̃ni ) across the firm size distribution for 18 half-yearly cross-sections between
2006-2014. The y-axis displays deviations in µni and γ̃ni relative to product module-by-half-year means. The x-axis displays deviations of log firm sales at the same level.
The fitted relationships correspond to local polynomial regressions. Standard errors in both graphs are clustered at the level of product modules, and the displayed confidence
intervals are at the 95% level. See Section 5 for discussion.

-.125

Weighted Average Log
Producer Sales Deviations
-.075 -.025 .025
.075

.125

Figure 4: Decomposition of the Underlying Forces

Poorest

Quintiles of Per Capita Expenditure

Predicted Only Using Heterog Sigmas
Predicted Using Demand + Supply

Richest

Predicted Using Full Demand Side
Observed in Data

Notes: The figure depicts predicted (model-based) and observed deviations in firm sizes across consumption baskets.
See Section 5.4 for discussion.

38

39

-.02

-.015

Difference in Price Index Changes
-.01
-.005
0
.005
.01

Mean Deviations of Log Quality Downgrading
-.01
0
.01

.02

.015

Figure 5: Counterfactual 1: Inflation Differences and Quality Downgrading Due to More Progressive Income Taxes

Poorest

Quintiles of Per Capita Expenditure

Richest

0

.2

.4
.6
Percentile of Initial Log Sales

.8

1

Notes: Both graphs display counterfactual changes averaged across 18 half-year cross-sections of data. 95% confidence intervals are based on robust standard errors. The
left panel displays counterfactual differences in cost of living inflation for retail consumption across income groups. The right panel displays deviations of output quality
downgrading across percentiles of initial firm sales within product-module-by-period cells.. See Section 6 for discussion.

40

-.01

Difference in Price Index Changes
-.005
0
.005

Mean Deviations of Log Quality Downgrading
-.01
0
.01
.02
.03
.04

.01

Figure 6: Counterfactual 2: Inflation Differences and Quality Downgrading Due to Closing Loopholes in Corporate Taxation

Poorest

Quintiles of Per Capita Expenditure

Richest

0

.2

.4
.6
Percentile of Initial Log Sales

.8

1

Notes: Both graphs display counterfactual changes averaged across 18 half-year cross-sections of data. 95% confidence intervals are based on robust standard errors. The
left panel displays counterfactual differences in cost of living inflation for retail consumption across income groups. The right panel displays deviations of output quality
downgrading across percentiles of initial firm sales within product-module-by-period cells.. See Section 6 for discussion.

Tables
Table 1: Price Elasticities
Panel A: Pooled Estimates
Dependent Variable: Change in Log Budget Shares
(1-σ) All Households

OLS

National IV

State IV

Both IVs

0.257***
(0.0288)

-1.184***
(0.0356)

-1.090***
(0.0415)

-1.181***
(0.0316)

Quintile-by-Module-by-County-by-Period FX
Brand-by-County-by-Period FX
Observations
First Stage F-Stat



9,989,508



9,989,508
718.6



9,283,699
314.7



9,283,699
420.0

Panel B: By Product Department

Beverages

Dairy

Dependent Variable: Change in Log Budget Shares
(1-σ) All Households
Quintile-by-Module-by-County-by-Period FX
Observations
First Stage F-Stat

Both IVs
-1.091***
(0.149)

755,648
542.2

Both IVs
-0.716***
(0.0559)

775,238
253.0

Panel C: By Department and Household Group

Beverages

Dairy

(1-σ) Poorest Quintile (Relative to Richest)
(1-σ) 2nd Poorest Quintile (Relative to Richest)
(1-σ) Median Quintile (Relative to Richest)
(1-σ) 2nd Richest Quintile (Relative to Richest)

41

Dependent Variable: Change in Log Budget Shares
(1-σ) Below Median Quintiles

Dry Grocery Frozen Foods
Both IVs
-1.324***
(0.0405)

4,570,372
407.8

Both IVs
-1.336***
(0.0672)

945,956
126.7

Dry Grocery Frozen Foods

Both IVs
Both IVs
Both IVs
-1.272***
-0.809***
-1.481***
(0.252)
(0.142)
(0.105)
-1.041***
-0.689***
-1.288***
(1-σ) Median and Above Quintiles
(0.147)
(0.0569)
(0.0462)



Quintile-by-Module-by-County-by-Period FX
755,648
775,238
4,570,372
Observations
139.0
347.5
254.1
First Stage F-Stat
Notes: See Section 5 for discussion. Standard errors are in parentheses below point estimates and
confidence levels.

Both IVs
-1.341***
(0.148)
-1.336***
(0.0721)

945,956
50.17
clustered at

Both IVs

-0.375***
(0.131)
-0.391***
(0.116)
-0.163**
(0.0674)
-0.271**
(0.104)


9,283,699
84.33
General
Merchandise

Health and
Beauty

Non-Food
Grocery

Packaged
Meat

Both IVs
-2.353***
(0.222)

205,830
169.2

Both IVs
-0.504***
(0.0878)

778,667
217.0

Both IVs
-1.100***
(0.0911)

982,261
731.7

Both IVs
-1.318***
(0.151)

269,726
56.63

General
Merchandise

Health and
Beauty

Non-Food
Grocery

Packaged
Meat

Both IVs
Both IVs
-2.436***
-0.506*
(0.368)
(0.272)
-2.339***
-0.501***
(0.249)
(0.107)


205,830
778,667
131.4
109.4
the level of counties. ***,

Both IVs
Both IVs
-1.383***
-1.329***
(0.239)
(0.261)
-1.048***
-1.316***
(0.0757)
(0.155)


982,261
269,726
298.0
37.68
**, * indicate 1, 5 and 10 percent

Table 2: Product Quality and Firm Scale: Reduced-Form Evidence

ALL PRODUCT GROUPS

Dependent Variables:
Log National Firm Sales
∆ Log National Firm Sales

Cross-Section
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Log Unit Value
Log Quality
OLS
IV
OLS
IV
0.0280***
(0.00339)

42

Product Module-by-Period

FX
State-by-Product Module-by
Period FX
Observations
1,330,976
Number of Product Module
1031
Clusters
First Stage F-Stat

0.0253***
(0.00390)

1.128***
(0.0312)

1.142***
(0.0309)







Panel Data
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
∆ Log Unit Value
∆ Log Quality
OLS
IV
OLS
IV

0.0365***
(0.00320)

0.0705***
(0.0138)

1.131***
(0.0415)

0.569***
(0.0589)























1,330,976

1,330,976

1,330,976

1,789,078

1,789,078

1,789,078

1,789,078

1031

1031

1031

1004

1004

1004

1004

322552

322552

251.1

251.1

Notes: See Section 5 for discussion. Standard errors are in parentheses below point estimates and clustered at the level of product modules. ***, **, * indicate 1, 5 and 10
percent confidence levels.

Table 3: Technology Parameter Estimates

43

Dependent Variable:
Log Product Quality or
Changes in Log Quality
Log Firm Scale or Changes
in Log Firm Scale (β)
ξ Parameter
Observations
Number of Clusters
First Stage F-Stat

ALL PRODUCT GROUPS
Cross-Section
Panel Data
OLS
IV
OLS
IV
1.1132*** 1.1352*** 1.1638*** 0.4887***
(0.0309)
(0.0307)
(0.0466)
(0.0653)
0.82
0.82
0.32
0.32
1,330,976 1,330,976 1,422,244 1,422,244
1,031
1,031
994
994
311103.21
247.6

Dependent Variable:
Log Product Quality or
Changes in Log Quality
Log Firm Scale or Changes
in Log Firm Scale (β)
ξ Parameter
Observations
Number of Clusters
First Stage F-Stat

GROCERY
NON-GROCERY
Cross-Section
Panel Data
Cross-Section
Panel Data
OLS
IV
OLS
IV
OLS
IV
OLS
IV
0.9462*** 0.958*** 0.9387*** 0.2898*** 1.5357*** 1.5785*** 1.525*** 0.9485***
(0.0124)
(0.0129)
(0.0113)
(0.0745)
(0.0851)
(0.084)
(0.1006)
(0.1345)
0.45
0.45
0.45
0.45
0.79
0.79
0.85
0.85
1,002,542 1,002,542 1,031,295 1,031,295 328,434
328,434
390,949
390,949
719
719
696
696
312
312
298
298
279437.12
181.31
66343.15
103.65

Notes: See Section 5 for discussion. Standard errors are in parentheses below point estimates and clustered at the level of product modules. ***, **, * indicate 1, 5 and 10
percent confidence levels.

Appendix
Appendix 1: Additional Figures and Tables
Table A.1: Descriptive Statistics

Home Scanner Data
Number of Half Year Periods 2006-14
Number of Observations (Summed up to
Household-Period-Barcode-Retailer)

Retail Scanner Data
18
344,533,688

Number of Half Year Periods 2006-14
Number of Observations (Summed up to
Store-Period-Barcode)

18
12,206,598,912

Number of Households per Period

58,769

Number of Stores per Period

27,290

Number of Product Modules per Period

1,090

Number of Product Modules per Period

1,092

1

Number of Brands per Period

185,286

Number of Brands per Period

175,095

Number of Barcodes per Period

594,504

Number of Barcodes per Period

727,932

Number of Retailers per Period

774

Number of Retailers per Period

102

Number of Counties per Period

2,671

Number of Counties per Period

2,500

Total Sales per Period
(Using Projection Weights)

108,580,633
(211,447,813,471)

Total Sales per Period

113,315,047,442

-.2

2

-.15

Deviations in Log Reported Household
Nominal Income (2 Years Lagged)
-.1
0
.1

Deviations in Log Reported Household
Nominal Income (2 Years Lagged)
-.1
-.05
0
.05
.1
.15

.2

Figure A.1: Observed Expenditure Per Capita and Reported Income Brackets

0

20
40
60
80
Percentiles of Household Per Capita Expenditure

100

Poorest

Richest
Quintiles of Per Capita Expenditure

Notes: The figure depicts the relationship between our measure of log expenditure per capita and reported nominal income brackets two years before across 18 half-yearly
cross-sections between 2006-2014. The y-axis displays within-half-year deviations in log reported incomes after assigning households the mid-point of their reported income
bracket. The x-axis displays percentiles of per-capita expenditure within a given half year (see Section 2). Standard errors in both graphs are clustered at the county level,
and the displayed confidence intervals are at the 95% level. See Section 2 for discussion.

Figure A.2: Firm Heterogeneity in the Home and Retail Scanner Data

Overlapping Brands

0

0

.05

.05

.1

.1

.15

.15

.2

.2

All Brands

-12

-10

-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
Mean Deviations of Log National Sales across Producers
of Brands within Product Module-by-Semester Cells

3

Store Scanner Data
Home Scanner Data - Weighted
Home Scanner Data - Unweighted

10

-12

-10

-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
Mean Deviations of Log National Sales across Producers
of Brands within Product Module-by-Semester Cells

10

Store Scanner Data
Home Scanner Data - Weighted
Home Scanner Data - Unweighted

Notes: The figure on the left depicts the firm size distribution for all brands present in either the home or store scanner data. The figure on the right restricts attention to
producers of brands that are present in both datasets. Table A.1 provides descriptive statistics. See Section 3 for discussion.

Weighted Average Log
Producer Sales Deviations
-.2 -.15 -.1 -.05 0 .05

.1

Weighted Average Log
Producer Sales Deviations
-.125 -.1 -.075-.05-.025 0 .025 .05 .075 .1

.15

Figure A.3: Firm Heterogeneity Across Consumption Baskets - Robustness to Alternative Firm Definition

Poorest
0

4

20
40
60
80
Percentiles of Household Per Capita Expenditure
Firms as Brands

Firms as Holding Companies

100

Richest
Quintiles of Per Capita Expenditure
Firms as Brands
Firms as Holding Companies

Notes: The figure depicts deviations in weighted average log firm sales embodied in the consumption baskets of on average 59,000 US households during 18 half-year periods
between 2006-14. The y-axis in both graphs displays weighted average deviations in log producer sales within product modules (“firms as brands”) or product groups (“firms
as holding companies”) where the weights are household expenditure shares across firms. Firms are defined either as brands (232 k in the dataset) or holding companies
(145 k in the dataset). To define holding companies in the data, we follow Broda and Weinstein (2010) and take the first 6 digits of the EAN barcode. Following Hottman et
al. (2016), this correctly identidies holding companies in about 80 percent of the cases. For the remainder, this method will tend to over-aggregate the brands into holding
companies, so that this robustness check should be seen as conservative. National firm size deviations are based on the store scanner data. These firm size deviations are
depicted across consumption baskets conditional on half-year fixed effects. The x-axis displays national percentiles of per capita total household retail expenditure per half
year (see Section 2). The fitted relationship in the left graph corresponds to a local polynomial regression. Standard errors in both graphs are clustered at the county level,
and the displayed confidence intervals are at the 95% level. Table A.1 provides descriptive statistics. See Section 3 for discussion.

-.1

Weighted Average Log
Producer Quantity Deviations
-.075
-.05
-.025
0
.025

.05

Figure A.4: Firm Heterogeneity Across Consumption Baskets - Firm Size in Terms of Quantities

Poorest

Quintiles of Per Capita Expenditure

Richest

Notes: The graph replicates the right panel of Figure 1 in the text after replacing firm size deviations in terms of log
revenues by log quantities (units sold). Units of output are measured identically across products within a product
module (e.g. liters of milk, units of microwaves, grams of cereal, etc). Standard errors are clustered at the county
level, and the displayed confidence intervals are at the 95% level. See Section 3 for discussion.

5

.1

.1

Shares of Total Sales
to Different Income Quintiles
.2
.3
.4

Shares of Total Sales
to Different Income Quintiles
.15
.2
.25
.3

.35

.5

Figure A.5: Firm Heterogeneity Across Consumption Baskets - Flipped Axes

-12

-10

-8

-6

-4
-2
0
2
Deviations of Firm Size

6

Richest Quintile
Median Quintile
Poorest Quintile

4

6

Second Richtest
Second Poorest

8

10

Small
Firms

Quintiles of Firm Sales
Sales Share to Richest
Sales Share to Median
Sales Share to Poorest

Large
Firms

Sales Share to 2nd Richest
Sales Share to 2nd Poorest

Notes: The figure depicts the share of firm sales to each of the 5 income quintiles across the firm size distribution within product modules averaged across 18 half-year
periods and product modules. The x-axis in the left panel are deviations in log firm total sales relative to product module-by-half-year bins. The x-axis in the right panel
are quintiles of the firm size distribution within product modules. The fitted relationship in the left graph corresponds to a local polynomial regression. Standard errors in
both graphs are clustered at the product module level, and the displayed confidence intervals are at the 95% level. See Section 3 for discussion.

Table A.2: Examples for Popular Product Modules across Different Departments

7

Product Department

Product Module

Brand with Highest Budget Share Difference
(Rich Minus Poor)

ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
DAIRY
DAIRY
DAIRY
DRY GROCERY
DRY GROCERY
DRY GROCERY
FROZEN FOODS
FROZEN FOODS
FROZEN FOODS
GENERAL MERCHANDISE
GENERAL MERCHANDISE
GENERAL MERCHANDISE
HEALTH & BEAUTY CARE
HEALTH & BEAUTY CARE
HEALTH & BEAUTY CARE
NON-FOOD GROCERY
NON-FOOD GROCERY
NON-FOOD GROCERY
PACKAGED MEAT
PACKAGED MEAT
PACKAGED MEAT

BEER
BOURBON-STRAIGHT/BONDED
SCOTCH
CHEESE-PROCESSED SLICES-AMERICAN
DAIRY-FLAVORED MILK-REFRIGERATED
YOGURT-REFRIGERATED
CATSUP
FRUIT JUICE - ORANGE - OTHER CONTAINER
SOFT DRINKS - CARBONATED
FROZEN NOVELTIES
FROZEN WAFFLES & PANCAKES & FRENCH TOAST
PIZZA-FROZEN
BATTERIES
PRINTERS
VACUUM AND CARPET CLEANER APPLIANCE
PAIN REMEDIES - HEADACHE
SANITARY NAPKINS
SHAMPOO-AEROSOL/ LIQUID/ LOTION/ POWDER
CIGARS
DETERGENTS - HEAVY DUTY - LIQUID
SOAP - BAR
BACON-REFRIGERATED
BRATWURST & KNOCKWURST
FRANKS-COCKTAIL-REFRIGERATED

BUDWEISER
MAKER'S MARK
DEWAR'S WHITE LABEL
KRAFT DELI DELUXE
NESTLE NESQUIK
DANNON
HEINZ
TROPICANA
PEPSI R
WEIGHT WATCHERS
KELLOGG'S EGGO
DIGIORNO
DURACELL
HEWLETT PACKARD OFFICEJET
DYSON
ADVIL
ALWAYS MX PD/WG ULTR THN OVRNT
PANTENE PRO-V
HAV-A-TAMPA
TIDE - H-D LIQ
DOVE
OSCAR MAYER
JOHNSONVILLE
HILLSHIRE FARM

Notes: See Section 3 for discussion.

Brand with Lowest Budget
Share Difference
(Rich Minus Poor)
MILLER HIGH LIFE
TEN HIGH
GLENFIDDICH
BORDEN
GENERIC STORE BRAND
GENERIC STORE BRAND
HUNT'S
GENERIC STORE BRAND
GENERIC STORE BRAND
GENERIC STORE BRAND
AUNT JEMIMA
TOTINO'S
RAYOVAC
CANON PIXMA
BISSELL POWER FORCE
GENERIC STORE BRAND
GENERIC STORE BRAND
ALBERTO VO5
POM POM OPERAS
PUREX - H-D LIQ
DIAL
BAR S
KLEMENT'S
CAROLINA PRIDE

Brands' Difference in Brands' Difference in Log
Market Shares (Highest Unit Values (Highest
Minus Lowest)
Minus Lowest)
0.129
0.302
0.055
0.246
0.111
2.832
0.042
0.452
0.078
1.117
0.225
0.469
0.513
0.307
0.314
0.590
0.069
0.362
0.025
0.986
0.491
0.129
0.147
0.607
0.321
0.350
0.062
0.338
0.065
2.084
0.078
0.086
0.030
1.591
0.109
1.444
0.023
0.375
0.283
0.779
0.221
0.772
0.214
0.961
0.678
0.141
0.388
0.243

-15

Deviations in Log Sales
Within Income Group
-2
-1
0
1

Deviations in Log Sales
Within Income Group
-10
-5
0
5
10

2

Figure A.6: Households on Average Agree on Relative Product Quality Evaluations

-12

-10

-8

-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
Deviations in Log Total Firm Sales

6

8

Richest Quintile's Log Sales Deviation
2nd Richest Quintile's Log Sales Deviation
Median Quintile's Log Sales Deviation
2nd Poorest Quintile's Log Sales Deviation
Poorest Quintile's Log Sales Deviation

8

10

-2

-1

0
1
Deviations in Log Total Firm Sales

2

Richest Quintile's Log Sales Deviation
2nd Richest Quintile's Log Sales Deviation
Median Quintile's Log Sales Deviation
2nd Poorest Quintile's Log Sales Deviation
Poorest Quintile's Log Sales Deviation

Notes: The figure depicts the relationship between income group-specific deviations in log expenditures spent across producers within more than 1000 product modules
(y-axis), and deviations in log total market sales of those same producers in the store scanner data (x-axis) for on average 59,000 US households during 18 half-year periods
between 2006-14. The left panel shows the full sample, and the right panel restricts attention to firm size deviations on the x-axis between -2 to 2 log points. The fitted
relationships in both graphs correspond to local polynomial regressions. See Section 3 for discussion.

.95

1.5

Number of Products Per Module
2
2.5

Expenditure Share on Common Brands
.96
.97
.98
.99

3

1

Figure A.7: Firm Heterogeneity Across Consumption Baskets - Role of Extensive Margin (1)

0

9

20
40
60
80
Percentiles of Household Per Capita Expenditure
Common Brands (Within Half-Year)

100

Common Brands (Overall)

0

20
40
60
80
Percentiles of Household Per Capita Expenditure
Number of UPCs

100

Number of Brands

Notes: The left panel depicts average expenditure shares on brands consumed by all income quintiles in a given half-year period or ever across the per-capita expenditure
distribution. The right panel depicts the average number of brands or UPCs consumed per household per product module in a given half-year period across the income
distribution. The fitted relationships in both graphs correspond to local polynomial regressions. Standard errors in both graphs are clustered at the county level, and the
displayed confidence intervals are at the 95% level. See Section 3 for discussion.

-.15

Weighted Average Log
Producer Sales Deviations
-.1
-.05
0

Weighted Average Log
Producer Sales Deviations
-.2 -.15 -.1 -.05 0 .05

.1

.05

.15

Figure A.8: Firm Heterogeneity Across Consumption Baskets - Role of Extensive Margin (2)

0

20
40
60
80
Percentiles of Household Per Capita Expenditure

10

Baseline (All)
Only Common Brands (Overall)

100

Only Common Brands (Half-Year)

Poorest

Quintiles of Per Capita Expenditure

Baseline (All)
Only Common Brands (Overall)

Richest

Only Common Brands (Half-Year)

Notes: The figures replicate the relationships estimated in Figure 1 after restricting retail consumption to only those brands that are consumed by all income quintiles in a
given period or ever. The fitted relationship in the left panel corresponds to a local polynomial regression. Standard errors in both graphs are clustered at the county level,
and the displayed confidence intervals are at the 95% level. See Section 3 for discussion.

-.4

Weighted Average Log
Producer Sales Deviations
-.3 -.2 -.1 0
.1 .2

.3

Figure A.9: Heterogeneity across Product Departments

0

20
40
60
80
Percentiles of Household Per Capita Expenditure
Health&Beauty
Frozen
Meat
Beverages

100

Grocery
Dairy
Non-Food Grocery
General Merchandise

Notes: The fitted relationships correspond to local polynomial regressions. See Section 3 for discussion.

11

Weighted Average Log
Producer Sales Deviations
-.25 -.2 -.15 -.1 -.05 0 .05

.1

.15

Weighted Average Log
Producer Sales Deviations
-.35 -.3 -.25 -.2 -.15 -.1 -.05 0 .05 .1 .15 .2

Figure A.10: Replicating Figure 1 for Product Categories Not Fully Represented in Nielsen

0

12

20
40
60
80
Percentiles of Household Per Capita Expenditure
Baseline (All)

Durables

Health

100

Media & Software

Poorest
Baseline (All Products)

Quintiles of Per Capita Expenditure
Durables

Health

Richest

Media & Software

Notes: The figure computes the same relationship as in Figure 1, but separately for household consumption of appliances, pharmaceuticals and audio, video and software
purchases respectively. The fitted relationship in the left graph corresponds to a local polynomial regression. Standard errors in both graphs are clustered at the county
level, and the displayed confidence intervals are at the 95% level. See Section 3 for discussion.

-.125

Weighted Average Log
Producer Sales Deviations
-.075
-.025
.025

Weighted Average Log
Producer Sales Deviations
-.2 -.15 -.1 -.05 0 .05 .1

.075

.15

.2

Figure A.11: The Role of Generic Retailer Brands

0

13

20
40
60
80
Percentiles of Household Per Capita Expenditure
Baseline (All Products)

No Generics

100

Poorest

Quintiles of Per Capita Expenditure
Baseline (All Products)

Richest

No Generics

Notes: The figure depicts deviations in weighted average log firm sales embodied in the consumption baskets of on average 59,000 US households during 18 half-year periods
between 2006-14. The y-axis in both graphs displays weighted average deviations in log producer sales within more than 1000 product modules where the weights are
household expenditure shares across producers of brands. National firm size deviations are based on the store scanner data. These firm size deviations are depicted across
consumption baskets conditional on half-year fixed effects for i) the full sample of households and products, ii) only for households with matched firm size deviations for
more than 90% of total consumption, and iii) only for consumption spent on brands that are not generic store brands. The x-axis displays national percentiles of per capita
total household retail expenditure per half year period (see Section 2). The fitted relationship in the left graph corresponds to a local polynomial regression. Standard errors
in both graphs are clustered at the county level, and the displayed confidence intervals are at the 95% level. See Section 3 for discussion.

-.125

Weighted Average Log
Producer Sales Deviations
-.075 -.025 .025 .075

.125

Weighted Average Log
Producer Sales Deviations
-.2 -.15 -.1 -.05 0 .05 .1 .15 .2

Figure A.12: The Role of Retail Coverage Across Incomes (1)

0

20
40
60
80
Percentiles of Household Per Capita Expenditure

14

>90% of Consumption
>97.5% of Consumption

>95% of Consumption
Baseline

100

Poorest

Quintiles of Per Capita Expenditure
Baseline
>95% of Consumption

Richest

>90% of Consumption
>97.5% of Consumption

Notes: The figure depicts deviations in weighted average log firm sales embodied in the consumption baskets of on average 59,000 US households during 18 half-year
periods between 2006-14. The y-axis in both graphs displays weighted average deviations in log producer sales within more than 1000 product modules where the weights
are household expenditure shares across producers of brands. National firm size deviations are based on the store scanner data. These firm size deviations are depicted
across consumption baskets conditional on half-year fixed effects for i) the full sample of households, ii) only households with more than 90% of their total reported retail
consumption matched to national firm size deviations, iii) more than 95% and iv) more than 97.5%. The x-axis displays national percentiles of per capita total household
retail expenditure per half year period (see Section 2). The fitted relationship in the left graph corresponds to a local polynomial regression. Standard errors in both graphs
are clustered at the county level, and the displayed confidence intervals are at the 95% level. See Section 3 for discussion.

.85

Share of Matched Retail Consumption
.86
.87

.88

Figure A.13: The Role of Retail Coverage Across Incomes (2)

Poorest

Quintiles of Per Capita Expenditure

Richest

Notes: The graph depicts the average share of total reported retail consumption that is matched to the national
firm size distribution (i.e. brands in the store scanner data) for each income quintile. See Section 3 for discussion.

15

Table A.3: Import Penetration and Export Shares across Nielsen Product Groups

16

Product Group
AUTOMOTIVE
BABY FOOD

Import Penetration
0.3617847
0.1118066

Export Share
0.2486256
0.0966579

Product Group
GLASSWARE, TABLEWARE
GROOMING AIDS

Import Penetration
0.2245018
0.1167166

Export Share
0.1524106
0.1128873

Product Group
SOFT DRINKS‐NON‐CARBONATED
SOFT GOODS

Import Penetration
0.0336043
0.7952904

Export Share
0.0086848
0.2435451

BABY NEEDS
BAKED GOODS‐FROZEN
BAKING MIXES
BAKING SUPPLIES
BATTERIES AND FLASHLIGHTS
BEER
BREAD AND BAKED GOODS
BREAKFAST FOOD
BREAKFAST FOODS‐FROZEN
BUTTER AND MARGARINE
CANDY
CANNING, FREEZING SUPPLIES
CARBONATED BEVERAGES
CEREAL
CHARCOAL, LOGS, ACCESSORIES
CHEESE
COFFEE
CONDIMENTS, GRAVIES, AND SAUCES

0.1784844

0.1161126

GUM

0.1388452

0.0668655

SOUP

0.1121759

0.1031848

0.0670658
0.0468524
0.0468524
0.2123691
0.1441532
0.0670658
0.0257685
0.0861109
0.0680775
0.0710144
0.0132684
0.0336043
0.0257685
0.1214207
0.0380319
0.0857798
0.0915703

0.0171679
0.0408634
0.0408634
0.2624945
0.0169751
0.0171679
0.0564193
0.0842245
0.0123938
0.0077201
0.0114468
0.0086848
0.0564193
0.1521547
0.0075332
0.069193
0.0452809

HAIR CARE
HARDWARE, TOOLS
HOUSEHOLD CLEANERS
HOUSEHOLD SUPPLIES
HOUSEWARES, APPLIANCES
ICE
ICE CREAM, NOVELTIES
INSECTICDS/PESTICDS/RODENTICDS
JAMS, JELLIES, SPREADS
JUICE, DRINKS ‐ CANNED, BOTTLED
JUICES, DRINKS‐FROZEN
KITCHEN GADGETS
LAUNDRY SUPPLIES
LIGHT BULBS, ELECTRIC GOODS
LIQUOR
MEDICATIONS/REMEDIES/HEALTH AIDS
MEN'S TOILETRIES

0.1167166
0.3464647
0.0433067
0.4019963
0.2362423
0.0351416
0.0052825
0.104745
0.1309384
0.0336043
0.2088982
0.3589703
0.0562014
0.4504395
0.4521224
0.2935742
0.1167166

0.1128873
0.1938586
0.0643612
0.1488679
0.1303144
0.0361945
0.0069596
0.1432804
0.0582835
0.0086848
0.1062177
0.1280043
0.0770468
0.2750829
0.1505386
0.0980508
0.1128873

SPICES, SEASONING, EXTRACTS
STATIONERY, SCHOOL SUPPLIES
SUGAR, SWEETENERS
TABLE SYRUPS, MOLASSES
TEA
TOBACCO & ACCESSORIES
TOYS & SPORTING GOODS
UNPREP MEAT/POULTRY/SEAFOOD‐FRZN
VEGETABLES ‐ CANNED
VEGETABLES AND GRAINS ‐ DRIED
VEGETABLES‐FROZEN
VITAMINS
WINE
WRAPPING MATERIALS AND BAGS
YEAST
YOGURT

0.1891926
0.2941211
0.273909
0.1118066
0.1118066
0.013934
0.6588651
0.0913397
0.0960721
0.133023
0.2088982
0.2337178
0.3268787
0.1692727
0.0468524
0.1191513

0.0300319
0.0844581
0.0688637
0.0966579
0.0966579
0.0312302
0.2392575
0.0872797
0.0443963
0.2293571
0.1062177
0.0619368
0.0572849
0.0573695
0.0408634
0.1491615

COOKIES
COOKWARE
COSMETICS
COT CHEESE, SOUR CREAM, TOPPINGS
COUGH AND COLD REMEDIES
CRACKERS
DEODORANT
DESSERTS, GELATINS, SYRUP
DESSERTS/FRUITS/TOPPINGS‐FROZEN
DETERGENTS
DIET AIDS
DISPOSABLE DIAPERS
DOUGH PRODUCTS
DRESSINGS/SALADS/PREP FOODS‐DELI
EGGS
ELECTRONICS, RECORDS, TAPES
ELECTRONICS, RECORDS, TAPES
ETHNIC HABA
FEMININE HYGIENE
FIRST AID
FLORAL, GARDENING
FLOUR
FRAGRANCES ‐ WOMEN
FRESH MEAT
FRESHENERS AND DEODORIZERS
FRUIT ‐ CANNED
FRUIT ‐ DRIED

0.0710144
0.6298456
0.1167166
0.0380319
0.2337178
0.0128479
0.1167166
0.120178
0.1184343
0.0562014
0.2337178
0.0991881
0.0468524
0.1118066
0.1191513
0.7363864
0.4504395
0.1167166
0.1167166
0.2337178
0.4937129
0.0224125
0.1167166
0.0641855
0.1167166
0.0960721
0.1142222

0.0077201
0.1369722
0.1128873
0.0075332
0.0619368
0.0210505
0.1128873
0.0163943
0.0590694
0.0770468
0.0619368
0.076225
0.0408634
0.0966579
0.1491615
0.5216842
0.2750829
0.1128873
0.1128873
0.0619368
0.3243936
0.0223004
0.1128873
0.0614173
0.1128873
0.0443963
0.1378016

MILK
NUTS
ORAL HYGIENE
PACKAGED MEATS‐DELI
PACKAGED MILK AND MODIFIERS
PAPER PRODUCTS
PASTA
PERSONAL SOAP AND BATH ADDITIVES
PET CARE
PET FOOD
PHOTOGRAPHIC SUPPLIES
PICKLES, OLIVES, AND RELISH
PIZZA/SNACKS/HORS DOEURVES‐FRZN
PREPARED FOOD‐DRY MIXES
PREPARED FOOD‐READY‐TO‐SERVE
PREPARED FOODS‐FROZEN
PUDDING, DESSERTS‐DAIRY
SALAD DRESSINGS, MAYO, TOPPINGS
SANITARY PROTECTION
SEAFOOD ‐ CANNED
SEASONAL
SEWING NOTIONS
SHAVING NEEDS
SHOE CARE
SHORTENING, OIL
SKIN CARE PREPARATIONS
SNACKS
SNACKS, SPREADS, DIPS‐DAIRY

0.001964
0.1585044
0.1167166
0.0641855
0.1191513
0.0799848
0.1622465
0.0562014
0.4042157
0.0159851
0.3283408
0.0915703
0.0128479
0.1142222
0.1118066
0.1151989
0.1191513
0.0915703
0.1167166
0.6691664
0.1641153
0.3320014
0.1167166
0.9280522
0.0996696
0.1167166
0.0128479
0.0548211

0.0016345
0.4884069
0.1128873
0.0614173
0.1491615
0.0817885
0.0441698
0.0770468
0.4886733
0.0612656
0.3013209
0.0452809
0.0210505
0.1378016
0.0966579
0.0849323
0.1491615
0.0452809
0.1128873
0.3021904
0.2400124
0.3418083
0.1128873
0.2199842
0.1159477
0.1128873
0.0210505
0.0724421

Notes: See Section 3 for discussion. Based on US trade data for 2005 at the 4-digit SIC product level. Export shares and import penetration are the shares of exports or
imports in total production.

-.2

Weighted Average Log
Producer Sales Deviations
-.15 -.1 -.05 0
.05 .1

Weighted Average Log
Producer Sales Deviations
-.125 -.1 -.075-.05-.025 0 .025 .05 .075 .1

.15

Figure A.14: Firm Heterogeneity Across Consumption Baskets - Robustness to Export Shares

0

17

20
40
60
80
Percentiles of Household Per Capita Expenditure
Below Median Export Share

100

Above Median Export Share

Poorest

Richest
Quintiles of Per Capita Expenditure
Low Export Share

High Export Share

Notes: The fitted relationship in the left graph corresponds to a local polynomial regression. Standard errors in both graphs are clustered at the county level, and the
displayed confidence intervals are at the 95% level. See Section 3 for discussion.

Weighted Average Log
Producer Sales Deviations
-.2 -.15 -.1 -.05 0 .05 .1

Weighted Average Log
Producer Sales Deviations
-.125 -.1 -.075-.05-.025 0 .025 .05 .075 .1

.15

Figure A.15: Firm Heterogeneity Across Consumption Baskets - Robustness to Import Penetration

0

18

20
40
60
80
Percentiles of Household Per Capita Expenditure
Below Median Import Penetration

100

Above Median Import Penetration

Poorest

Richest
Quintiles of Per Capita Expenditure
Low Import Penetration

High Import Penetration

Notes: The fitted relationship in the left graph corresponds to a local polynomial regression. Standard errors in both graphs are clustered at the county level, and the
displayed confidence intervals are at the 95% level. See Section 3 for discussion.

Weighted Average Log
Producer Sales Deviations
-.125 -.1 -.075-.05-.025 0 .025 .05 .075 .1

Weighted Average Log
Producer Sales Deviations
-.2 -.15 -.1 -.05 0 .05 .1 .15 .2

Figure A.16: The Role of Differential Access to Producers

0

20
40
60
80
Percentiles of Household Per Capita Expenditure

19

Within-Semester National
Within-Semester-County
Within-Semester-County & Within-Store Types

100

Poorest

Richest
Quintiles of Per Capita Expenditure
Within-Semester National
Within-Semester-County
Within-Semester-County & Within-Store Type

Notes: The figure depicts deviations in weighted average log firm sales embodied in the consumption baskets of on average 59,000 US households during 18 half-year periods
between 2006-14. The y-axis in both graphs displays weighted average deviations in log producer sales within more than 1000 product modules where the weights are
household expenditure shares across producers of brands. National firm size deviations are based on the store scanner data. These firm size deviations are depicted across
consumption baskets i) conditional on half-year fixed effects, ii) conditional on half-year-by-county fixed effects, and iii) conditional on half-year-by-county fixed effects and
household consumption shares across 79 different store formats. The x-axis displays national percentiles of per capita total household retail expenditure per half year period
(see Section 2). The fitted relationship in the left graph corresponds to a local polynomial regression. Standard errors in both graphs are clustered at the county level, and
the displayed confidence intervals are at the 95% level. See Section 3 for discussion.

Figure A.17: The Role of Differential Pricing

UPCs

Deviations in Unit Values (Group-Specific)
-.4
-.2
0
.2
.4

Deviations in Unit Values (Group-Specific)
-.4
-.2
0
.2
.4

Brands

-12

-10

-8

-6

20

-4
-2
0
2
4
Deviations in Log Total Firm Sales

Prices Paid By Richest Quintile

6

8

10

Prices Paid By Poorest Quintile

-12

-10

-8

-6

-4
-2
0
2
4
Deviations in Log Total Firm Sales

Prices Paid By Richest Quintile

6

8

10

Prices Paid By Poorest Quintile

Notes: The figure depicts deviations in log prices per unit paid across deviations in log brand sales (left) or UPC sales (right) relative to product module-by-half-year means.
The figures plot this relationship separately for the average prices per unit paid for brands or UPCs as reported by the poorest and richest income quintiles respectively.
The fitted relationships in both graph correspond to local polynomial regression. Standard errors are clustered at the product module level, and the displayed confidence
intervals are at the 95% level. See Section 3 for discussion.

Weighted Average Log
Producer Sales Deviations
-.125-.1-.075-.05-.025 0 .025.05.075 .1

Weighted Average Log
Producer Sales Deviations
-.2 -.15 -.1 -.05 0 .05 .1 .15 .2

Figure A.18: The Role of Temporary Taste Shocks that Differ across Rich and Poor Households

0

20
40
60
80
Percentiles of Household Per Capita Expenditure

21

Within-Semester National
Within-Semester National, Lagged Sales (3 Years)
Within-Semester National, Future Sales (3 Years)

100

Poorest

Richest
Quintiles of Per Capita Expenditure
Within-Semester National
Within-Semester National, Lagged Sales (3 Years)
Within-Semester National, Future Sales (3 Years)

Notes: The figure depicts deviations in weighted average log firm sales embodied in the consumption baskets of on average 59,000 US households during 18 half-year periods
between 2006-14. The y-axis in both graphs displays weighted average deviations in log producer sales within more than 1000 product modules where the weights are
household expenditure shares across producers of brands. National firm size deviations are based on the store scanner data. These firm size deviations are depicted across
consumption baskets conditional on half-year fixed effects for i) same period firm size differences, ii) three-year lagged firm size differences, and iii) three-year future firm
size differences. The x-axis displays national percentiles of per capita total household retail expenditure per half year period (see Section 2). The fitted relationship in the
left graph corresponds to a local polynomial regression. Standard errors in both graphs are clustered at the county level, and the displayed confidence intervals are at the
95% level. Table A.1 provides descriptive statistics. See Section 3 for discussion.

Table A.4: Firms Alter Their Product Attributes

Fraction of Barcodes Replaced with New Barcodes
with Identical Pack Sizes of Same Brand
1st Half 2006

-

2nd Half 2006

0.108

1st Half 2007

0.077

2nd Half 2007

0.076

1st Half 2008

0.068

2nd Half 2008

0.064

1st Half 2009

0.052

2nd Half 2009

0.057

1st Half 2010

0.049

2nd Half 2010

0.067

1st Half 2011

0.053

2nd Half 2011

0.070

1st Half 2012

0.074

2nd Half 2012

-

Notes: See Section 3 for discussion.

Table A.5: Income Group Ratios of Within and Cross-Brand Price Elasticities

Dependent Variable: Change in Log Budget Shares
(1-σ) All Households
(1-σ) Below Median Quintiles
(1-σ) Median and Above Quintiles
Quintile-by-Module-by-County-by-Period FX
Quintile-by-Module-by-Brand-by-County-by-Period FX
Observations
First Stage F-Stat
Estimate of Ratio of σ's (Poor/Rich)
95% Confidence Interval of Ratio

Cross-Brand
Both IVs

Within-Brand
Both IVs

-1.288***
(0.0624)
-1.151***
(0.0325)


9,285,679
312.5
1.063
(0.0303)
[1.0044, 1.123]

-0.945***
(0.0804)
-1.019***
(0.0631)


16,582,717
410.8
0.963
(0.0417)
[0.882, 1.045]

Notes: See Section 4 for discussion. Standard errors are in parentheses below point estimates and clustered at the
county level. ***, **, * indicate 1, 5 and 10 percent confidence levels.

22

Table A.6: Alternative Specifications for Estimating Price Elasticities
Panel A: Pooled Estimates - Tornqvist Price Index
Dependent Variable: Change in Log Budget Shares
(1-σ) All Households
Quintile-by-Module-by-County-by-Period FX
Observations
First Stage F-Stat

Based on Mean Price (Baseline Estimate)
OLS

National IV

State IV

Both IVs

OLS

National IV

State IV

Both IVs

0.257***
(0.0288)

9,989,508

-1.184***
(0.0356)

9,989,508
718.6

-1.090***
(0.0415)

9,283,699
314.7

-1.181***
(0.0316)

9,283,699
420.0

0.165***
(0.0241)

9,989,508

-1.153***
(0.0359)

9,989,508
761.9

-1.045***
(0.0379)

9,283,699
328.5

-1.145***
(0.0312)

9,283,699
451.8

Based on Mean Price

Panel B: Pooled Estimates - Laspeyres Price Index
Dependent Variable: Change in Log Budget Shares
(1-σ) All Households

23

Quintile-by-Module-by-County-by-Period FX
Observations
First Stage F-Stat

(1-σ) All Households
Quintile-by-Module-by-County-by-Period FX
Observations
First Stage F-Stat

Based on Median Price

OLS

National IV

State IV

Both IVs

OLS

National IV

State IV

Both IVs

0.259***
(0.0276)

9,989,508

-1.093***
(0.0366)

9,989,508
659.4

-1.016***
(0.0443)

9,283,699
307.7

-1.096***
(0.0334)

9,283,699
396.0

0.163***
(0.0232)

9,989,508

-1.079***
(0.0366)

9,989,508
735.5

-0.987***
(0.0404)

9,283,699
319.5

-1.075***
(0.0325)

9,283,699
451.1

Based on Mean Price

Panel C: Pooled Estimates - Simple Mean Price Index
Dependent Variable: Change in Log Budget Shares

Based on Median Price

Based on Median Price

OLS

National IV

State IV

Both IVs

OLS

National IV

State IV

Both IVs

0.259***
(0.0275)

9,989,508

-1.218***
(0.0397)

9,989,508
601.3

-1.118***
(0.0471)

9,283,699
288.6

-1.215***
(0.0365)

9,283,699
343.2

0.172***
(0.0234)

9,989,508

-1.190***
(0.0394)

9,989,508
642.1

-1.080***
(0.0432)

9,283,699
301.9

-1.183***
(0.0355)

9,283,699
374.0

Notes: See Section 5 for discussion. Standard errors are in parentheses below point estimates and clustered at the county level. ***, **, * indicate 1, 5 and 10 percent
confidence levels.

Table A.7: Full Cross of Price Elasticity Estimates by Household and Product Groups
By Department and Household Group
Dependent Variable: Change in Log Budget Shares
(1-σ) Poorest Quintile

Beverages

24

Both IVs
-1.137***
(0.320)
(1-σ) 2nd Poorest Quintile
-1.348***
(0.296)
(1-σ) Median Quintile
-0.821**
(0.336)
-1.112***
(1-σ) 2nd Richest Quintile
(0.209)
-1.101***
(1-σ) Richest Quintile
(0.145)

Quintile-by-Module-by-County-by-Period FX
755,648
Observations
139.0
First Stage F-Stat
Notes: See Section 5 for discussion. Standard errors are in parentheses
confidence levels.

Dairy

Dry Grocery Frozen Foods

Both IVs
Both IVs
-0.753***
-1.520***
(0.155)
(0.165)
-0.845***
-1.463***
(0.236)
(0.104)
-0.667***
-1.322***
(0.103)
(0.0888)
-0.901***
-1.377***
(0.0912)
(0.0759)
-0.544***
-1.211***
(0.0924)
(0.0641)


775,238
4,570,372
347.5
254.1
below point estimates and

General
Merchandise

Health and
Beauty

Non-Food
Grocery

Packaged
Meat

Both IVs
Both IVs
Both IVs
Both IVs
Both IVs
-1.426***
-1.126
-0.817**
-1.168***
-1.486***
(0.302)
(0.832)
(0.326)
(0.356)
(0.489)
-1.308***
-2.818***
-0.173
-1.504***
-1.233***
(0.147)
(0.413)
(0.324)
(0.250)
(0.296)
-1.171***
-2.011***
-0.341
-0.819***
-1.293***
(0.162)
(0.445)
(0.207)
(0.168)
(0.404)
-1.306***
-2.943***
-0.274
-1.170***
-1.401***
(0.190)
(0.512)
(0.208)
(0.163)
(0.244)
-1.424***
-2.126***
-0.650***
-1.064***
-1.274***
(0.136)
(0.227)
(0.166)
(0.116)
(0.209)





945,956
205,830
778,667
982,261
269,726
50.17
131.4
109.4
298.0
37.68
clustered at the county level. ***, **, * indicate 1, 5 and 10 percent

Table A.8: Parametric Specification of Heterogeneity in Price Elasticities
Panel A: Pooled Estimates
Dependent Variable: Change in Log Budget Shares
Change in Log Price

Both IVs

Both IVs

Both IVs

-1.181***
(0.0316)

-1.940***
(0.439)
0.105*
(0.0600)

-1.314***
(0.0796)

Change in Log Price X Log Per Capita Expenditure
Change in Log Price X Percentile of Per Capita Expenditure

25

Quintile-by-Module-by-County-by-Period FX
Brand-by-County-by-Period FX
Observations
First Stage F-Stat



9,283,699
420



9,283,699
311.4

Panel B: By Department Across Log Expenditure

Beverages

Dairy

Dependent Variable: Change in Log Budget Shares
Change in Log Price

Quintile-by-Module-by-County-by-Period FX
Observations
First Stage F-Stat

Both IVs
-1.457
(1.552)
0.0512
(0.206)

755,648
331.8

Both IVs
-1.774**
(0.697)
0.148
(0.0973)

775,238
136.8

Panel C: By Department Across Percentiles

Beverages

Dairy

Dependent Variable: Change in Log Budget Shares
Change in Log Price

Both IVs
-1.158***
(0.341)
0.00105
(0.00387)

755,648
319.9

Both IVs
-0.888***
(0.140)
0.00275
(0.00196)

775,238
135.2

Change in Log Price X Log Per Capita Expenditure

Change in Log Price X Percentile of Per Capita Expenditure
Quintile-by-Module-by-County-by-Period FX
Observations
First Stage F-Stat

0.00203**
(0.00102)


9,283,699
317.9

Both IVs

0.278***
(0.0595)



9,283,699
207.2

Dry Grocery Frozen Foods
Both IVs
-2.732***
(0.841)
0.195*
(0.116)

4,570,372
235.4

Both IVs
-0.220
(0.882)
-0.154
(0.123)

945,956
64.55

Dry Grocery Frozen Foods
Both IVs
-1.565***
(0.145)
0.00366*
(0.00205)

4,570,372
235.9

Both IVs
-1.181***
(0.154)
-0.00228
(0.00221)

945,956
74.18

Both IVs

0.00490***
(0.00103)


9,283,699
211.8
General
Merchandise

Health and
Beauty

Non-Food
Grocery

Packaged
Meat

Both IVs
-3.451
(2.851)
0.151
(0.386)

205,830
79.21

Both IVs
0.420
(1.797)
-0.127
(0.248)

778,667
142

Both IVs
-1.605
(1.440)
0.0698
(0.193)

982,261
404.4

Both IVs
-1.911
(1.838)
0.0821
(0.248)

269,726
61.54

General
Merchandise

Health and
Beauty

Non-Food
Grocery

Packaged
Meat

Both IVs
-2.468***
(0.550)
0.00165
(0.00676)

205,830
75.59

Both IVs
-0.369
(0.316)
-0.00196
(0.00460)

778,667
137.9

Both IVs
-1.246***
(0.283)
0.00214
(0.00340)

982,261
416.5

Both IVs
-1.372***
(0.377)
0.000795
(0.00466)

269,726
69.86

Notes: See Section 5 for discussion. Standard errors are in parentheses below point estimates and clustered at the level of counties. ***, **, * indicate 1, 5 and 10 percent
confidence levels.

-.05

-.05

Weighted Average Log
Unit Value Deviations
0
.05
.1

Weighted Average Log
Unit Value Deviations
-.025
0
.025
.05

.15

.075

Figure A.19: Distribution of Weighted Average Unit Values across Consumption Baskets

0

26

20
40
60
80
Percentiles of Household Per Capita Expenditure
Store Scanner Data

Home Scanner Data

100

Poorest

Richest
Quintiles of Per Capita Expenditure
Store Scanner Data

Home Scanner Data

Notes: The figure depicts deviations in weighted average log firm unit values embodied in the consumption baskets of on average 59,000 US households during 18 half-year
periods between 2006-14. The y-axis in both graphs displays weighted average deviations in log producer unit values within more than 1000 product modules where the
weights are household expenditure shares across producers of brands. In the first step, we calculate brand-level deviations from mean log national unit values within product
module-by-half-year cells from the store-level scanner data, where brand-level unit values are expenditure weighted means across multiple barcodes within the brand. In the
second step, these are then matched to brand-level half yearly household expenditure weights in the home scanner data. The final step is to collapse these data to weighted
average log unit value deviations embodied in household consumption baskets. The x-axis displays national percentiles of per capita total household retail expenditure per
half year period (see Section 2). The fitted relationship in the left graph corresponds to a local polynomial regression. Standard errors in both graphs are clustered at the
county level, and the displayed confidence intervals are at the 95% level. See Section 5 for discussion.

Deviations in Log Unit Values
-.5 -.4 -.3 -.2 -.1 0 .1 .2 .3

.4

.5

Figure A.20: Unit Values and Firm Size

-12

-10

-8

-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
Deviations in Log Total Firm Sales

6

8

10

Notes: The figure depicts deviations in log firm unit values across the firm size distribution for 18 half-yearly crosssections between 2006-2014. The y-axis displays deviations of log unit values relative to product module-by-half-year
means. The x-axis displays deviations of log firm sales at the same level. The fitted relationships correspond to
local polynomial regressions. Standard errors in both graphs are clustered at the level of product modules, and the
displayed confidence intervals are at the 95% level. See Section 5 for discussion.

27

-2

Deviations in Log Quality
-1
0
1

2

Deviations in Quality Adjusted Prices
-2
-1
0
1
2

Figure A.21: Households Agree on Product Quality Evaluations (But Rich Households Value Quality Relatively More)

-2

-1

0
Deviations in Log Firm Sales

1

28

Richest Quintile's Quality Evaluation
2nd Richest Quintile's Quality Evaluation
Median Quintile's Quality Evaluation
2nd Poorest Quintile's Quality Evaluation
Poorest Quintile's Quality Evaluation

2

-2

-1

0
Deviations in Log Firm Sales

1

2

Richest Quintile's Quality Evaluation
2nd Richest Quintile's Quality Evaluation
Median Quintile's Quality Evaluation
2nd Poorest Quintile's Quality Evaluation
Poorest Quintile's Quality Evaluation

Notes: The figure depicts the relationship between deviations in log brand quality or quality-adjusted prices and deviations in log firm total sales for on average more than
150,000 producers of brands during 18 half-year periods between 2006-14. We estimate brand-level quality and quality-adjusted prices as evaluated by each quintile of total
household per capita expenditure as discussed in Sections 4 and 5.

Table A.9: Heterogeneous Quality Evaluations
Dependent Variable:

Log Brand Sales by Household Group
Log Average Brand Sales

29

ALL PRODUCT MODULES

Product Module-by-Period FX
Observations
Number of Product Module Clusters
Log Average Brand Sales

BEVERAGES

Product Module-by-Period FX
Observations
Number of Product Module Clusters
Log Average Brand Sales

DAIRY

Product Module-by-Period FX
Observations
Number of Product Module Clusters
Log Average Brand Sales

DRY GROCERY

Product Module-by-Period FX
Observations
Number of Product Module Clusters
Log Average Brand Sales

FROZEN FOODS

Product Module-by-Period FX
Observations
Number of Product Module Clusters
Log Average Brand Sales

GENERAL MERCHANDISE

Product Module-by-Period FX
Observations
Number of Product Module Clusters
Log Average Brand Sales

HEALTH & BEAUTY CARE

Product Module-by-Period FX
Observations
Number of Product Module Clusters
Log Average Brand Sales

NON-FOOD GROCERY

Product Module-by-Period FX
Observations
Number of Product Module Clusters
Log Average Brand Sales

PACKAGED MEAT

Product Module-by-Period FX
Observations
Number of Product Module Clusters

Poorest Quintile
OLS
IV
0.923***
0.923***
(0.00359)
(0.00391)


1,854,522
1,330,947
1046
1030
0.840***
0.836***
(0.00423)
(0.00495)


182,279
123,506
69
68
0.886***
0.888***
(0.00420)
(0.00490)


116,853
90,097
46
45
0.883***
0.883***
(0.00225)
(0.00235)


718,629
530,010
398
392
0.969***
0.966***
(0.00411)
(0.00584)


126,928
93,633
78
76
0.942***
0.941***
(0.00243)
(0.00312)


197,828
132,375
143
140
0.959***
0.960***
(0.00248)
(0.00282)


284,425
196,046
173
172
0.816***
0.820***
(0.00186)
(0.00228)


190,086
136,350
128
126
0.978***
0.978***
(0.00510)
(0.00499)


37,494
28,930
11
11

2nd Poorest Quintile
OLS
IV
0.957***
0.959***
(0.00412)
(0.00433)


1,854,522
1,330,947
1046
1030
0.892***
0.902***
(0.00402)
(0.00383)


182,279
123,506
69
68
0.905***
0.907***
(0.00247)
(0.00300)


116,853
90,097
46
45
0.913***
0.917***
(0.00126)
(0.00131)


718,629
530,010
398
392
1.000***
0.999***
(0.00259)
(0.00284)


126,928
93,633
78
76
0.976***
0.978***
(0.00180)
(0.00215)


197,828
132,375
143
140
0.996***
0.998***
(0.00260)
(0.00326)


284,425
196,046
173
172
0.840***
0.846***
(0.00244)
(0.00297)


190,086
136,350
128
126
0.990***
0.991***
(0.00392)
(0.00315)


37,494
28,930
11
11

Median Quintile
OLS
IV
1.037***
1.036***
(0.00261)
(0.00230)


1,854,522
1,330,947
1046
1030
1.082***
1.078***
(0.00478)
(0.00500)


182,279
123,506
69
68
1.067***
1.062***
(0.00218)
(0.00262)


116,853
90,097
46
45
1.061***
1.056***
(0.00106)
(0.00107)


718,629
530,010
398
392
1.006***
1.003***
(0.00225)
(0.00275)


126,928
93,633
78
76
1.021***
1.018***
(0.00139)
(0.00136)


197,828
132,375
143
140
1.015***
1.014***
(0.00400)
(0.00335)


284,425
196,046
173
172
1.109***
1.105***
(0.00275)
(0.00276)


190,086
136,350
128
126
1.003***
1.002***
(0.00526)
(0.00573)


37,494
28,930
11
11

2nd Richest Quintile
OLS
IV
1.044***
1.042***
(0.00281)
(0.00277)


1,854,522
1,330,947
1046
1030
1.102***
1.097***
(0.00548)
(0.00470)


182,279
123,506
69
68
1.071***
1.067***
(0.00247)
(0.00245)


116,853
90,097
46
45
1.069***
1.067***
(0.00121)
(0.00119)


718,629
530,010
398
392
1.011***
1.012***
(0.00230)
(0.00280)


126,928
93,633
78
76
1.027***
1.027***
(0.00167)
(0.00201)


197,828
132,375
143
140
1.020***
1.018***
(0.00211)
(0.00214)


284,425
196,046
173
172
1.121***
1.117***
(0.00162)
(0.00209)


190,086
136,350
128
126
1.013***
1.010***
(0.00316)
(0.00400)


37,494
28,930
11
11

Richest Quintile
OLS
IV
1.037***
1.040***
(0.00410)
(0.00469)


1,854,522
1,330,947
1046
1030
1.084***
1.087***
(0.00380)
(0.00438)


182,279
123,506
69
68
1.072***
1.076***
(0.00430)
(0.00494)


116,853
90,097
46
45
1.074***
1.077***
(0.00187)
(0.00229)


718,629
530,010
398
392
1.014***
1.020***
(0.00362)
(0.00471)


126,928
93,633
78
76
1.034***
1.036***
(0.00248)
(0.00274)


197,828
132,375
143
140
1.009***
1.010***
(0.00453)
(0.00549)


284,425
196,046
173
172
1.113***
1.113***
(0.00372)
(0.00426)


190,086
136,350
128
126
1.016***
1.020***
(0.00578)
(0.00736)


37,494
28,930
11
11

Notes: See Section 5 for discussion. Standard errors are in parentheses below point estimates and clustered at the level of product modules. ***, **, * indicate 1, 5 and 10
percent confidence levels.

Table A.10: Technology Parameter Estimates

30

Dependent Variable:
Log Product Quality or
Changes in Log Quality
Log Firm Scale or Changes
in Log Firm Scale (β)
ξ Parameter
Observations
Number of Clusters
First Stage F-Stat

ALL PRODUCT GROUPS
Cross-Section
Panel Data
OLS
IV
OLS
IV
1.1132***
1.1352***
1.1588***
0.4805***
(0.0309)
(0.0307)
(0.0461)
(0.0643)
0.82
0.82
0.31
0.31
1,330,976
1,330,976
1,422,244
1,422,244
1,031
1,031
994
994
311103.21
253.09

Dependent Variable:
Log Product Quality or
Changes in Log Quality
Log Firm Scale or Changes
in Log Firm Scale (β)
ξ Parameter
Observations
Number of Clusters
First Stage F-Stat

BEVERAGES
Cross-Section
Panel Data
OLS
IV
OLS
IV
1.0374***
1.0612***
1.0609***
-0.6287
(0.0212)
(0.0261)
(0.0288)
(1.0353)
0.77
0.77
0.01
0.01
123,509
123,509
102,141
102,141
68
68
66
66
48927.91
4.39

DAIRY
Cross-Section
Panel Data
OLS
IV
OLS
IV
1.487*** 1.5221*** 1.3815*** 0.3034
(0.0054)
(0.008)
(0.0547)
(0.3499)
0.88
0.88
0.88
0.88
90,097
90,097
67,235
67,235
45
45
44
44
29611.79
20.18

Dependent Variable:
Log Product Quality or
Changes in Log Quality
Log Firm Scale or Changes
in Log Firm Scale (β)
ξ Parameter
Observations
Number of Clusters
First Stage F-Stat

GENERAL MERCHANDISE
Cross-Section
Panel Data
OLS
IV
OLS
IV
0.5275***
0.5367***
0.5204***
0.2098***
(0.005)
(0.0057)
(0.0096)
(0.0798)
0.94
0.94
0.94
0.94
132,383
132,383
129,686
129,686
140
140
130
130
29222.36
46.75

HEALTH & BEAUTY CARE
NON-FOOD GROCERY
Panel Data
Cross-Section
Panel Data
Cross-Section
OLS
IV
OLS
IV
OLS
IV
OLS
IV
2.2156*** 2.2666*** 2.1702*** 1.6298*** 0.976*** 0.9783*** 1.0201*** 0.2347
(0.0069)
(0.0078)
(0.0153)
(0.1428)
(0.0069)
(0.0071)
(0.0123)
(0.3613)
0.96
0.96
0.96
0.96
0.42
0.42
0.05
0.05
196,051
196,051
261,263
261,263
136,351
136,351
171,067
171,067
172
172
168
168
126
126
121
121
36443.05
56.72
39746
9.74

DRY GROCERY
FROZEN FOODS
Cross-Section
Panel Data
Cross-Section
Panel Data
OLS
IV
OLS
IV
OLS
IV
OLS
IV
0.8012*** 0.8248*** 0.863*** 0.4053*** 0.8412*** 0.8517*** 0.8183*** 0.1563
(0.0026)
(0.0031)
(0.0072)
(0.0655)
(0.0034)
(0.0044)
(0.0121)
(0.1676)
0.88
0.88
0.01
0.01
0.19
0.19
0.96
0.96
530,020
530,020
573,503
573,503
93,635
93,635
92,038
92,038
393
393
381
381
76
76
74
74
134277.8
140.98
21249.68
26.77
PACKAGED MEAT
Cross-Section
Panel Data
OLS
IV
OLS
IV
0.8584*** 0.8736*** 0.7816*** -0.0258
(0.0062)
(0.0059)
(0.0294)
(0.367)
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
28,930
28,930
25,311
25,311
11
11
10
10
40138.38
12.38

Notes: See Section 5 for discussion. Standard errors are in parentheses below point estimates and clustered at the level of product modules. ***, **, * indicate 1, 5 and 10
percent confidence levels.

Table A.11: Decomposition of Counterfactuals
Difference in Retail Inflation
(Richest - Poorest Quintile)
(0) Direct Incidence of Corporate
Taxes
(1) Change in Weighted Average
Product Quality
(2) Asymmetric Scale Effect

31

(3) Asymmetric Changes in
Markups
(4) Love of Variety

(5) Asymmetric Effect of Exit

(6) Between-Group Effect

Total Effect

Counterfactual 1: Progressive Income Taxes Counterfactual 2: Closing Corporate Tax Loopholes
0.000
(0)
[0]
0.311
(0.021)
[0.086]
2.474
(0.158)
[0.223]
-0.027
(0.01)
[0.101]
0.183
(0.007)
[0.622]
0.000
(0)
[0]
0.195
(0.036)
[0.046]
3.136
(0.174)
[0.632]

(0%)

(10%)

(79%)

(-1%)

(6%)

(0%)

(6%)

(100%)

0.764
(0.107)
[0]
0.566
(0.024)
[0.119]
0.209
(0.022)
[0.047]
-0.099
(0.01)
[0.013]
0.144
(0.006)
[0.068]
0.000
(0)
[0]
0.320
(0.031)
[0.035]
1.903
(0.11)
[0.23]

(40%)

(30%)

(11%)

(-5%)

(8%)

(0%)

(17%)

(100%)

Notes: See Section 6 for discussion and Appendix 5 for details on decomposition. Robust standard errors across 18 six-month periods are in parentheses below point
estimates. Bootstrapped standard errors are in square brackets.

Table A.12: Robustness to Alternative Parameters
Difference in Inflation
(Richest - Poorest Quintiles)

Baseline

Tech Parameter
Price
Price
Price
Price
Parametric
Estimates from Elasticities Elasticities Elasticities Elasticities
Specification of
Cross-Section
x 1.5
x2
-1
-2
Heterogeneity in σn(z)

Counterfactual 1:
Progressive Income Taxes

3.136
(0.174)

3.485
(0.120)

3.536
(0.188)

3.792
(0.195)

4.056
(0.212)

6.682
(0.268)

3.245
(0.164)

Counterfactual 2:
Closing Corporate Tax

1.903
(0.110)

2.336
(0.188)

2.097
(0.118)

2.150
(0.133)

2.127
(0.123)

1.788
(0.156)

1.776
(0.112)

Notes: See Section 6 for discussion. Robust standard errors across 18 six-month periods are in parentheses below point estimates.

32

-.01

Difference in Price Index Changes
-.005
0
.005
.01

Figure A.22: Counterfactual 1: Alternative Use of Tax Proceeds

Poorest

Richest

Quintiles of Per Capita Expenditure

Notes: Graph displays counterfactual differences in retail inflation averaged across 18 half-year cross-sections of data.
95% confidence intervals are based on robust standard errors. See Section 6 for discussion.

Packaged Meat

Non-Food Grocery

Health&Beauty

General Merchandise

Frozen Foods

Dry Grocery

Dairy

Beverages

Difference in Price Index Changes
(Rich Minus Poor)
0
.025 .05 .075
.1
.125

Figure A.23: Counterfactual 1: Inflation Differences across Product Departments

Notes: Graph displays counterfactual differences in retail inflation averaged across 18 half-year cross-sections of data.
95% confidence intervals are based on robust standard errors. See Section 6 for discussion.

33

-.125

Mean Deviations of Changes in Log Sales
-.1
-.075
-.05
-.025
0

.025

Figure A.24: Counterfactual 2: Compression of Firm Size Distribution

0

.2

.4
.6
Percentile of Initial Log Sales

.8

1

Notes: The graph plots mean deviations in sales growth as a function of initial firm sales within product modules,
averaged across 18 half year periods. 95% confidence intervals based on standard errors that are clustered at the
level of product modules. Section 6 for discussion.

-.01

Difference in Price Index Changes
-.005
0
.005

.01

Figure A.25: Counterfactual 2: Alternative Definition of Tax Entities

Poorest

Quintiles of Per Capita Expenditure

Richest

Notes: Graph displays counterfactual differences in retail inflation averaged across 18 half-year cross-sections of data.
95% confidence intervals are based on robust standard errors. See Section 6 for discussion.

34

Packaged Meat

Non-Food Grocery

Health&Beauty

General Merchandise

Frozen Foods

Dry Grocery

Dairy

Beverages

Difference in Price Index Changes
(Rich Minus Poor)
0
.01
.02
.03
.04

Figure A.26: Counterfactual 2: Inflation Differences across Product Departments

Notes: Graph displays counterfactual differences in retail inflation averaged across 18 half-year cross-sections of data.
95% confidence intervals are based on robust standard errors. See Section 6 for discussion.

35

36

-.005

-.015

Difference in Price Index Changes
-.0025
0
.0025
.005

Difference in Price Index Changes
-.01 -.005
0
.005
.01

.015

.0075

Figure A.27: Counterfactuals Under Monopolistic Competition

Poorest

Quintiles of Per Capita Expenditure

Richest

Poorest

Quintiles of Per Capita Expenditure

Richest

Notes: The left panel displays differences in retail inflation in the first counterfactual (progressive taxes). The right panel displays differences in retail inflation in the second
counterfactual (corporate taxes). 95% confidence intervals are based on robust standard errors across 18 half-year periods. See Section 6 for discussion.

-.01

Mean Deviations of Changes in Log Quality
0
.05
.1
.15
.2
.25

Difference in Price Index Changes
-.005
0
.005
.01
.015

Figure A.28: Inflation Differences and Quality Upgrading Due to Bilateral Trade Liberalization

Poorest

Richest

37

Quintiles of Per Capita Expenditure
Panel Data Tech Estimates

Cross-Section Tech Estimates

0

.2

.4
.6
Percentile of Initial Log Sales

Panel Data Tech Estimates

.8

1

Cross-Section Tech Estimates

Notes: 95% confidence intervals in the left panel are based on robust standard errors across 18 half-year periods. The right panel is based on counterfactual changes across
producers of brands within product modules and within 18 six-month periods, and the confidence intervals are based on standard errors that are clustered at the level of
product modules. See Section 6 and Appendix 5.C for discussion.

Appendix 2: Mathematical Appendix
2.A) First-Order Conditions in Markups and Quality
For a given firm with productivity a, we can write profits as a function of markups µ (ratio of
price p to marginal cost c) and quality φ as follows:
ˆ

1
xn (a, z, µ, φ)dH(z) − fn (φ) − fn0
πn (a, µ, φ) = 1 −
µ
z
where fixed costs depend on quality such that:
1

fn (φ) = βn bn φ βn
and sales to income group z satisfy:
xn (a, z, µ, φ) = αn (z)E(z)Pn (z)σn (z)−1 aσn (z)−1 µ1−σn (z) φ(σn (z)−1)(γn (z)−ξn )
Pn
with E(z) referring to total retail expenditure by consumer of income group z. Note that ∂∂log
log µ =
xn
1 − sn , i.e. decreases with market share sn (a, z, µ, φ) = αn E of the firm within income group z.

Markups: For markups µ, the first-order condition yields:
ˆ

ˆ
∂πn
1
1
0=
= − 1−
(σn (z) − 1)(1 − sn )xn dH(z) +
xn dH(z)
∂ log µ
µ
µ z
z

(22)

Hence optimal markups satisfy:
´

µn (a) = 1 + ´

xn (a, z)dH(z)
z (σn (z) − 1)(1 − sn (a, z))xn (a, z)dH(z)
z

where xn (a, z) and sn (a, z) refer to sales and market share of firm a among consumers z.
Quality: For quality φ, we obtain the following first-order condition:
∂πn
∂ log φ

ˆ
1
1
(σn (z)−1)(γn (z)−ξn )(1−sn (z, a))xn (z, a)dH(z) − bn φ βn
= 1−
µ
z
0 =

With µ as above and with γ̃n (a) defined as:
´
γn (z) (σn (z)−1)(1−sn )xn dH(z)
γ̃n (a) = z ´
z (σn (z)−1)(1−sn )xn dH(z)
we obtain the expression in the text for optimal quality:


φn (a) =

βn

γ̃n (a) − ξn
. Xn (a)
bn µn (a)

where Xn (a) denotes total sales of firm with productivity a.

38

(23)
(24)

2.B) Second-Order Conditions in Markups and Quality
To ensure the uniqueness of equilibrium in prices and quality, we need to verify that the Hessian is
definite negative in markups and quality. The Hessian is definite negative if these two conditions
are satisfied:
∂ 2 πn
<0
∂ log µ2
and
∂ 2 πn ∂ 2 πn
>
∂ log µ2 ∂ log φ2

∂ 2 πn
∂ log φ ∂ log µ

!2

We first examine the first inequality, which is ensures that the first-order condition for markup µ
leads to a unique solution for a given level of quality φ.
Second-Order Condition in Markups: For markups µ, the derivative of 22 yields:

ˆ
∂2π
1
=
1−
(σn (z) − 1)2 (1 − sn )(1 − 2sn )xn dH(z)
∂ log µ2
µ
z
ˆ
1
−
[1 + 2(σn (z) − 1)(1 − sn )]xn dH(z)
µ z
The second order condition in markups is satisfied if:
ˆ

ˆ
1
1
2
1−
(σn (z) − 1) (1 − sn )(1 − 2sn )xn dH(z) <
[1 + 2(σn (z) − 1)(1 − sn )]xn dH(z)
µ
µ z
z
where µ satisfies the first-order condition:
ˆ
ˆ

1
1
(σn (z) − 1)(1 − sn )xn dH(z) =
xn dH(z)
1−
µ
µ z
z
Hence, the second-order condition in µ holds if:
´
´
2 (1 − s )(1 − 2s )x dH(z)
(σn (z) − 1)(1 − sn )xn dH(z)
(σ
(z)
−
1)
n
n
n
n
z
´
´
<1+2 z
z (σn (z) − 1)(1 − sn )xn dH(z)
z xn dH(z)
A sufficient condition is:
´
´
2 (1 − s )2 x dH(z)
(σn (z) − 1)(1 − sn )xn dH(z)
(σ
(z)
−
1)
n
n
n
´z
´
<1+2 z
(σ
(z)
−
1)(1
−
s
)x
dH(z)
n n
z n
z xn dH(z)
In this last inequality, the left-hand side is smaller than maxz (σn (z) − 1)(1 − sn ) while the righthand side is not smaller than 1 + 2 minz (σn (z) − 1)(1 − sn ). With maxz (σn (z) − 1)(1 − sn ) <
1 + 2 minz (σn (z) − 1)(1 − sn ), the inequality above is satisfied. We verify empirically that this
inequality holds given our estimates. More generally, this holds when σn (z) is not too heterogeneous
across consumers. Note also that this inequality is always satisfied under monopolistic competition
when σn is identical across income groups.
xn
∂ log sn
Second-Order Condition in Quality: Using equation (24) and ∂∂log
log φ = ∂ log φ = (σn (z) −
1)(γn (z) − ξn )(1 − sn ), the second derivative in quality φ is:

ˆ
∂ 2 πn
1
bn β1
=
1
−
(σn (z) − 1)2 (γn (z) − ξn )2 [(1 − sn )2 − (1 − sn )sn ]xn dH(z) −
φ n
2
∂ log φ
µ
βn
z

39



=

1
1−
µ

ˆ

(σn (z) − 1)2 (γn (z) − ξn )2 (1 − sn )(1 − 2sn )xn dH(z) −

z

bn β1
φ n
βn

This second derivative is negative when βn is small enough. More specifically, when quality satisfies
the first order condition (24), this second derivative is negative if and only if:
´
(σn (z) − 1)2 (γn (z) − ξn )2 (1 − sn )(1 − 2sn )xn (z, a)dH(z)
´
βn . z
<1
z (σn (z) − 1)(γn (z) − ξn )(1 − sn )xn (z, a)dH(z)
A sufficient condition is that βn (σn (z) − 1)(γn (z) − ξn ) < 1 for all income groups z. Condition
βn (σn (z) − 1)(γn (z) − ξn ) < 1 (for all z) is also a necessary condition to ensure that the second
derivative in quality is negative irrespective of the patterns of sales and market shares across income
groups.
Joint Second-Order Condition in Quality and Markups:
The cross derivative in quality
and markups is:

ˆ
1
∂ 2 πn
(σn (z)−1)2 (γn (z)−ξn )(1 − sn )(1 − 2sn )xn dH(z)
= − 1−
∂ log φ ∂ log µ
µ
z
ˆ
1
+
(σn (z)−1)(γn (z)−ξn )(1 − sn )xn dH(z)
µ z
When µ satisfied the first order condition, this yields:
!
´
´

(z)−ξn )(1 − sn )xn dH(z)
∂ 2 πn
z (σn (z)−1)(γn
z xn dH(z)
´
=
∂ log φ ∂ log µ
µ
z xn dH(z)
!
´
2
(γn (z)−ξn )(1 − sn )(1 − 2sn )xn dH(z)
z (σn (z)−1)
´
−
z (σn (z) − 1)(1 − sn )xn dH(z)
2
∂ 2 πn
< 0 and ∂∂logπnφ2 < 0, the
∂ log µ2

2
2
2
2
its determinant is positive, i.e. if ∂∂logπnµ2 ∂∂logπnφ2 > ∂ log∂φπ∂nlog µ .
´
(σ (z)−1)(1−sn )xn dH(z)
1
and cross derivative, using µ−1
= z n ´ xn dH(z)
and
z

In addition to the second-order conditions in markups and quality,
Hessian is definite negative only if
Using the expressions for second

multiplying each side by βn2 (µ − 1), this inequality is equivalent to:

2
´
´
θn (z)(1−sn )xn dH(z)) ( z (σn (z)−1)(1−sn )xn dH(z))
n )(1−2sn )xn dH(z)
z θn (z)(σn (z)−1)(1−s
´
´
´
−
z xn dH(z)
z xn dH(z)
z xn dH(z)
´


´
´
2
2
)(1−2sn )xn dH(z)
n )xn dH(z)
µ+1
z θn (z)(1−s
z (σn (z)−1) ´(1−sn )(1−2sn )xn dH(z)
z θn (z) (1−s
´
´ n
−
−
(µ−1)2
z xn dH(z)
z xn dH(z)
z xn dH(z)


<

´

(

z

where we denote θn (z) = βn (σn (z)−1)(γn (z)−ξn ).
We check numerically that this condition holds for all brands given our parameter estimates.
Again, this inequality holds when βn is not too large (i.e. θn (z) is not too large) or when there is
a small covariance between σn (z) and θn (z) = βn (σn (z)−1)(γn (z)−ξn ) (the left-hand side of this
inequality is similar to a covariance term). Under monopolistic competition, this inequality can be
more explicitly rewritten as an upper bound on the covariance between σn (z) − 1 and θn (z):


<

(

´

2
´
´
θn (z)xn dH(z)) z (σn (z)−1)xn dH(z)
(z)−1)xn dH(z)
z θn (z)(σ
´
´
´ n
−
z xn dH(z)
z xn dH(z)
z xn dH(z)

´
´

2
n (z))xn dH(z)
µ+1
z (σn´(z)−1) xn dH(z)
z θn (z)(1−θ
´
−
(µ−1)2
z xn dH(z)
z xn dH(z)

z

40

2.C) A Simple Case with Closed-Form Solutions
A simple and tractable case with closed-form solution assumes two groups z0 and z1 with homogeneous price elasticity σ(z1 ) = σ(z0 ) under monopolistic competition, and a minimal taste for
quality among income group z0 (e.g. poorest income group): γn (z0 ) = ξn . Another case with
closed-form solution is one with homogeneous consumers (single z1 ) is a special subcase of this
two-group case.
Denote by Hn (z) the fraction of total expenditures corresponding to consumers z within product module n, and by En total expenditures (normalizing the mass of consumers to one in each
category). In that case, we have:
γ̃n (a) = ξn +

(γn (z1 ) − ξn ) xn (z1 , a)
Xn (a)

where Xn (a) = xn (z1 , a) + xn (z0 , a) denotes total sales of firm a. Let µn =
We get quality:
φn (a)

σn
σn −1

denote markups.

βn



γn (z1 ) − ξn
xn (z1 , a)
bn µn



γn (z1 ) − ξn σn−1
a
φn1 (a)(σn−1)(γn (z1 )−ξn ) Hn (z1 )En Pn (z1 )σn−1
bn µn



γn (z1 ) − ξn σn−1
a
Hn (z1 )En Pn (z1 )σn−1
bn µn

=
=
=



βn

βn
1−βn (σn−1)(γn (z1 )−ξn )

Sales to income group z1 are then:


xn (z1 , a)

=

a Pn (z1 )
µn



σn −1
1−βn (σn−1)(γn (z1 )−ξn )



γn (z1 ) − ξn
Hn (z1 )En
bn µn



βn (σn−1)(γn (z1 )−ξn )
1−βn (σn−1)(γn (z1 )−ξn )

Hn (z1 )En

while sales to income group z0 are:
xn (z0 , a)

= (a Pn (z0 )/µn )σn −1 Hn (z0 )En

We can see for instance that sales to groups z1 (consumers who care about quality) are more elastic
to productivity than for group z0 :
d log xn (a, z1 )
σn − 1
d log xn (a, z0 )
=
> σn − 1 =
d log a
1 − βn (σn − 1) (γn (z1 ) − ξn )
d log a
hence larger firms (more productive firms) tend to sell relatively more to group z1 :
0, though more productive firms sell more to each group z than other firms.
For group z1 , the price index is then:
ˆ
1−σn
1−σn
Pn (z1 )
= N n µn
aσn−1 φn1 (a)(σn−1)(γn (z1 )−ξn ) dGn (a)

d log(xn (a,z1 )/xn (a,z0 ))
d log a

>

a

ˆ
n
Nn µ1−σ
n

=

a

σn−1
1−βn (σn−1)(γn (z1 )−ξn )



dGn (a)

a



=

ˆ

Nn µn1−σn

σn−1

γn (z1 ) − ξn
Hn (z1 )En Pn (z1 )σn−1
bn µn

1−βn (σn−1)(γn (z1 )−ξn ) 

a 1−βn (σn−1)(γn (z1 )−ξn ) dGn (a)
a

γn (z1 ) − ξn
Hn (z1 )En
bn µn



βn (σn−1)(γn (z1 )−ξn )
1−βn (σn−1)(γn (z1 )−ξn )

βn (σn−1)(γn (z1 )−ξn )

This expression highlights a key feedback effect that is quantified in our counterfactuals: a higher
41

share Hn (z1 ) of expenditures by richer households z1 (with higher taste for quality) leads to a
lower price index for this income group. For
other income group z0 with γn (z0 ) = ξn , there is
´ the
1−σ
1−σ
σ
−1
n
n
n
no feedback effect: Pn (z0 )
= Nn µn
dGn (a).
aa

2.D) Other Expressions for Sales and Profits in the General Case
Profits (Equation 14):
As shown above:


φn (a) =

γ̃n (a) − ξn
. Xn (a)
bn µn (a)

βn

where γ̃n (a) is a weighted average quality valuation γn (z) for firm with productivity a
´
γn (z) (σn (z)−1)(1−sn (z, a))xn (z, a) dH(z)
γ̃n (a) = z ´
z (σn (z)−1)(1−sn (z, a))xn (z, a) dH(z)
and where Xn denotes total sales
We obtain that fixed costs spent on quality upgrading equal:
1

fn (φn (a)) = βn bn φn (a) βn = βn (γ̃n (a) − ξn ) Xn (a) /µn (a)
Given that variable costs correspond to a share 1 − 1/µn (a) of total sales, we obtain that profits
equal:
h
i
πn (a) = 1 − 1/µn (a) − βn (γ̃n (a) − ξn )/µn (a) Xn (a) − f0n
where f0n corresponds to fixed costs are independent of quality. Equivalently, using the expressions
for µn (a) and γ̃n (a), we can obtain profits more directly as a function of consumer taste for quality
γn (z):
 ˆ


1
πn (a) = 1 −
(1 − βn (γn (z) − ξn )(σn (z) − 1)(1 − sn (a, z))) xn (a, z) dH(z) − f0n
µn (a)
z
Decomposition of Average Firm Size Differences Across Baskets (Equation 15): The
weighted average of firm size for each income group z is defined as:
´
xn (z, a) log Xn (a) dGn (a)
g
log Xn (z) = a ´
a xn (z, a) dGn (a)
Hence the slope in Figure 1 corresponds to:
! ´
!
´
´
xn
xn
g
Xn (a)) ∂ log
dGn (a)
xn (z, a) log Xn (a)dGn (a)
xn (z, a) ∂ log
dGn (a)
∂ log X
n (z)
∂z
∂z
a xn (z, a)(log
a
a
´
´
´
=
−
∂z
a xn (z, a) dGn (a)
a xn (z, a) dGn (a)
a xn (z, a) dGn (a)
In turn, the derivatives of sales to each income group w.r.t z equal:
∂ log xn (z, a)
∂γn (z)
∂σn (z)
pn (a)
=
(σn (z) − 1) log φn (a) −
log
∂z
∂z
∂z
φn (a)γn (z)




+ cst(z)

where cst(z) denotes a term that is common across all firms (only depends on price elasticities and
price indices) and cancels out in the next expression.
If we plug this into the expression above for
g
∂ log X
∂γn
n (z)
=
(σn (z) − 1)
∂z
∂z

"´

en
∂ log X
,
∂z

we obtain:

(log Xn (a))(log φn (a))dGn (a)
a xn (z, a) ´
a

xn (z, a) dGn (a)

42

´
−

(z, a)
a xn´
a

∂σz
−
.
∂z

"´

−

log Xn (a) dGn (a)
xn (z, a) dGn (a)

!

´

a xn´(z, a)
a

log φn (a)dGn (a)
xn (z, a) dGn (a)

!#

(log Xn (a))(log(pn (a)/φn (a)γn (z) ))
´
a xn (z, a) dGn (a)
! ´
!#
´
γn (z) )) dG (a)
n (a)/φn (a)
n
a xn´(z, a) log Xn (a) dGn (a)
a xn (z, a) log(p
´
a xn (z, a) dGn (a)
a xn (z, a) dGn (a)

a xn (z, a)

which can be rewritten as two covariance terms as described in the main text.
Estimation Equation for βn and ξn (Equation 20): Here we work with discrete consumer
groups, indexing z as a subscript, and we index firms (brands or holding companies) by subscript
i.
Starting from the following equality that we use to estimate ϕbz :
log Xniz = (1 − σnz ) log pni + (σnz − 1) log ϕniz
and using the definition of democratic quality log φni = 51 z log ϕniz (again, by construction), we
get:


1
1
1X
Xniz
log pni = −
log Xni + log φni −
log
σ̄n − 1
5 z σnz − 1
Xni
P

where we define

1
σ̄n −1

as an arithmetic average:
1
1
1X
=
σ̄n − 1
5 z σnz − 1

Next, we can use our expression for optimal quality which gives, up to some error εni :
log φni = βn log Xni + βn log ((γ̃ni − ξn ) /µni ) − βn log bn + εni
which can be incorporated into the above expression in order to obtain the estimation equation:


log pni = βn −

1
1
1X
Xniz
log Xni + βn log ((γ̃ni − ξn ) /µni ) −
log
σ̄n − 1
5 z σnz − 1
Xni




where εni is the error in predicting quality and ηn is an industry constant.

43



+ ηn + εni

Appendix 3: On Consumer Preferences and Outside Consumption (z)
3.A) Compensating Variations with Unspecified Upper-Tier Utility for Outside Consumption
Lemma For an individual of initial outside consumption z, the compensating variation (as a
first-order approximation) is given by:
∆p PG (z, p)
CV
=−
EG
PG (z, p)

z

where dPG (z, p) reflects the change in prices index PG , holding z constant.
Proof: This can be seen as a consequence of Shephard’s Lemma. Consider the expenditure
function: e(PG , U ). The compensating variation (CV) is defined implicitly such that:
e(p0 , ϕ0 , U ) − CV = w = e(p, ϕ, U )
Using Shephard’s Lemma, we obtain a first-order approximation:
d log e =

X pni qni
i

w

d log pni −

X pni qni
i

w

d log ϕniz

since quality ϕniz for each brand i (valued by income group z) is defined as a price-equivalent
demand shifter. Hence, with d log e = CV /w, we have:
X pni qni
CV
=
(d log pni − d log ϕniz )
w
w
i

One can also verify that, holding z constant, the change in the retail price corresponds to:
d log PG (z) =

X pni qni
i

EG

(d log pni − d log ϕniz )

where EG denotes expenditures in retail shopping. We obtain the result in the lemma above by
combining this equality with the first-order approximation of CV.

3.B) Changes in Outside Consumption with Multiplicative Upper-Tier Utility
In this appendix section, we examine how the change in price indices across households in our
counterfactuals may have induced a meaningful change in the consumption of the outside good
z, holding nominal income constant. Such a change could give rise to second-order effects on
household price indices in the counterfactuals—since demand parameters α, γ and σ are allowed
to vary with consumer types z. In our main counterfactuals, retail prices tend to increase faster for
rich relative to poor households, which may affect the consumption of outside goods z differentially.
Here we quantify the magnitude of such potential endogenous changes in z, and find that they are
negligible relative to the counterfactual changes holding z constant.
In this exercise, we assume that upper-tier utility in (1) takes the form:
U = A(z)UG (z)αG

(25)

for some constant αG and a function A(z) of the outside good z, and with UG (z) defined as in
the main text. This includes the special case where A(z) = z 1−αG . This utility function is flexible
enough to yield various patterns of income elasticities for grocery and outside good consumption,
as we show below.
44

With such utility, consumers choose z to maximize:
log U = max[αG log(w − z) − αG log PG (z) + log A(z)]
z

given their income w and price indices PG (z). With this specification, one can see that the overall
level of prices PG (z) does not affect the share of income spent on z: multiplying all prices by the
same constant does not affect z. In fact, any preferences that have this property can be written as
in equation 25. Yet, a change in the patterns of prices across z’s still influences the consumption of
the outside good z. Moreover, equation 25 does not impose any constraint on the income elasticity
of the outside good z.
In what follows, we first examine the income elasticity of z and then express the changes in z
induced by the change in prices as a function of our counterfactual results, the share of expenditures
in retail shopping and the income elasticity of the outside good.
Income Elasticity of the Outside Good The first-order condition in z can be written:
εA (z) = αG εP (z) +
where we define εA (z) =
imposes:

zA0 (z)
A(z)

and εP (z) =

αG

0 (z)
zPG
PG (z) .

z αG
w−z

(26)

Moreover, the second-order condition in z

dεP
zwαG
dεA
+
−
>0
2
d log z (w − z)
d log z

We will assume that the second-order condition is satisfied, which holds as long as the retail price
A
index either increases or does not decrease too fast with z. Note that ddε
log z = 0 in the case where
1−α
G.
A(z) = z
Suppose that log income (log w) increases by small amount d log w. Differentiating the condition
26, we obtain:
dεA
dεP
zwαG
zwαG
d log z = αG
d log z +
d log z −
d log w
d log z
d log z
(w − z)2
(w − z)2
Hence the income elasticity of z is:
d log z
=
ηw (z) ≡
d log w

zwαG
(w−z)2

+

zwαG
(w−z)2
P
αG ddε
log z

−

dεA
d log z

As described in the main text, we assume throughout the paper that the income elasticity of z
is positive. Under the preferences above, this condition is satisfied as long as the second-order
condition above is satisfied.

Effect of Counterfactual Change in Prices on z While an uniform change d log PG does
not
the consumption of the outside good z, a differential change in price indices dεP (z) =
 affect
0 (z) 
zPG
d PG (z) , like the one resulting from our counterfactual exercise, will affect z.
zP 0 (z)

Suppose that εP (z) = PGG(z) increases by dεCF
P uniformly. As a first-order approximation,
taking the derivative of 26, we obtain:
dεA
dεP
zwαG
d log z = αG dεCF
d log z +
d log z
P + αG
d log z
d log z
(w − z)2

45

Hence, solving for the change in z, we obtain:
αG
d log z
= − zwα
CF
G
P
dεP
+ αG ddε
log z −
(w−z)2

dεA
d log z

Note that this term is negative, which implies that, in this framework, retail consumption and
outside consumption are complements: if retail shopping becomes relatively more expensive for
higher z’s (as we obtain in our main counterfactual exercises), the optimal z is lower. We can further
re-write this term using the income elasticity of z to obtain a much more simple expression:
d log z
dεP

=
=


w−z 2
w
− z
zwαG
w
(w−z)2
s2
− G ηw
1 − sG

+

zwαG
(w−z)2
P
αG ddε
log z

−

dεA
d log z

where sG = w−z
w denotes the share of retail in consumer expenditures. As both sG and ηw can be
readily observed or estimated, we can use this expression to quantity how a change in the slope of
the retail price index with respect to z will induce a change in z.

Quantifying the Change in Price Schedule In our counterfactual, we estimate a doubledifference:
∆∆ log P = [log Pt1 (z1 ) − log Pt1 (z0 )] − [ log Pt0 (z1 ) − log Pt0 (z0 )]
comparing different quintiles of consumers, z1 and z0 , across different sets of prices, Pt1 (.) and
Pt0 (.) (new and initial prices). For the purpose of estimation, we have not estimated the price
changes over a continuum of z, but our counterfactual results are not too far from a log-linear
relationship between price changes and income across quintiles. Hence, a good approximation of
the change in price schedule is to compute the straight slope of the change in log prices between
the two quintiles (slopes in Figures 6a, 7a and 8a):
εP (z1 ) − εP (z0 ) =

0 (z)
0 (z)
zPt1
zPt0
∆t ∆z log P
−
≈
Pt1 (z)
Pt0 (z)
log z0 − log z1

for any two quintiles of consumers, z1 and z0 .
Plugging it into the induced change in z, we obtain how a change in the price schedule affects
outside good consumption z:
d log z ≈ −
Numerical Application:

ηw s2G ∆t ∆z log P
1 − sG log z0 − log z1

Using the following estimates:

• ηw ≈ 2 (upper bound to be conservative)
• ∆t ∆z log P ≈ −0.03 (larger differential effect of two counterfactuals)
• log z0 − log z1 ≈ log 75, 000 − log 15, 000 ≈ 1.6 (small to be conservative)
• Share of retail shopping sG ≈ 0.25 (large to be conservative)
we obtain the following change in z that would be caused by the changes in prices in the counterfactuals:
d log z ≈ 2 × 0.08 × 0.03 / 1.6 ≈ 0.003
46

Hence, quantitatively, the changes in z induced by the price changes in our counterfactuals are
very small and negligible relative to existing differences in outside good consumption between rich
and poor income groups. Such changes in z would also have negligible GE impacts on sales, quality
and prices on the supply side relative to the changes obtained in our counterfactual shocks.

3.C) Non-Homotheticity without Outside Consumption
Here we lay out a very similar way to flexibily model non-homotheticity in consumer preferences
for retail shopping, but without relying on an outside good z, drawing on recent work by Fally
(2018). Suppose that utility is defined implicitly by:
! σ(U )−1
σ(U )

qi

X

=1

γ(U )

i

(27)

f (U )φi

With such utility, the share of good i in expenditures is given by:


pi qi
=
P 
j p j qj

P

j


γ(U ) 1−σ(U )

pi /φi


γ(U ) 1−σ(U )

pj /φj

which is identical to the expression for market share in the baseline equilibrium with price elasticity
σ(U ) and quality valuation elasticity γ(U ) varying with utility U instead of outside consumption
z. Suppose that σ(U ) decreases with utility (empirically-relevant case) and that quality taste
parameter γ(U ) increases with utility. As shown in Fally (2018), such implicitly-defined utility is
well-defined if:
!
X γ 0 (U )/η(U ) η(U )
f 0 (U )
> log
φi
f (U )
i




0

σ (U )
∂
1
with η(U ) ≡ ∂U
σ(U )−1 = − (σ(U )−1)2 > 0 (see Proposition 4 and condition 13 in Fally, 2018).
Intuitively, this condition is satisfied if there is not too much heterogeneity in quality valuations
and price elasticities, i.e. if γ 0 (u) and η(U ) are not too large relative to f 0 (U ). Conditional on φ,
γ(U ) and σ(U ),we can always choose f (U ) to satisfy this condition for all levels of utility.
Note that a price index is given by:


 1
1−σ(U ) 1−σ(U )
X
γ(U )

P (p, U ) = 
pj /φj
j

This can also be extended to multiple product groups n, defining the expenditure function as:


P (p, U ) =


X 

Y

n

γ (U )

pj /φj n

1−σn (U )

αn (U )
1−σn (U )



j∈Gn

which is identical to the expression in the text with U instead of outside consumption z. The
change in the price index as a function of utility U would then be observationally identical to
the change in the price index in the baseline model expressed as a function of z. As a first-order
approximation, the welfare implications of changes in prices and quality are also identical to those
in the baseline model, conditional on simulated changes in quality and price:
CV
≈ −∆ log P (U, p) .
E

47

3.D) Equivalent Discrete-Choice Model for Grocery Shopping
In this appendix section, we describe a discrete choice model as in Anderson et al. (1987) to
describe how aggregation of heterogeneous consumers buying only one good by product module
can be equivalent to utility in Equation 1 in the main text:
αn (z).



UG (z) = max

Y

q

X

(qni ϕni (z))


n

σn (z)−1
σn (z)

σn (z)
σn (z)−1

(28)



i∈Gn

The proof follows Handbury (2019), except that the Cobb-Douglas upper tier simplifies the equivalence result.
So, Instead of preferences 28, suppose that individual j from income group z has utility:
Uj (z) =

X

αn (z)

n

max

i∈Gn , qjni

[log qjni + log ϕni (z) + µn (z)jni ]

(29)

maximizing over the vector {yjn } of income allocated to each module n and goods i in module n,
the chosen good i and its quantity qjni for each product module n, under the budget constraints:
X

yjn ≤ E(z)

n

X

qjni pni ≤ yjzn

i∈Gn

where E(z) refers to total income allocated to grocery shopping for consumers of income group z.
In expression 29 above, log ϕni (z) is a quality shifter associated with product z in module n that
is specific to income group z. In turn, the last term µn (z)jni is a specific taste shock for each
individual j and good i.
With these preferences, each consumer j consumes a unique good i∗ in product module n.
Given the vector {yjn }n of expenditures in each module n, the good i∗ being chosen maximizes:
i∗ = argmax [log yjn − log pni + log ϕni (z) + µn (z)jni ]
i∈Gn

Hence we can see that the choice of the good i by consumer j in income group z does not depend
on income yjn that is allocated to a specific product module n. The good that is consumed simply
maximizes:
i∗ = argmax [− log pni + log ϕni (z) + µz (z)jni ]
(30)
i∈Gn

If, within income group z, the choice of good i∗ does not depend on the allocation of income yjn ,
a key implication is that the allocation of income across product modules n does not depend on
the specific draws jni :
Uj (z) = max

{yjn }

= max

{yjn }

(
X
n

(
X
n

)

αn (z) max [log yjn − log pni + log ϕni (z) + µn (z)jni ]
i∈Gn

)

αn (z) log yjn

+

X

αn (z) max [− log pni + log ϕni (z) + µn (z)jni ]
i∈Gn

n

which leads to yjn being equal to a fraction αn (z) of income E(z) spent on grocery shopping (for
consumers j belonging to income group z):
yjn = αn (z) E(z)
48

Using this property and additional assumptions on the distribution of shocks jni , we can now
examine aggregate consumption patterns, aggregating across individuals j within each income
group z. Suppose that we have a large number of consumers and that jni is i.i.d. and drawn
from a Gumbel distribution (type-II extreme value distribution) as in Anderson et al. (1987).
Equation 30 implies that a share:


sni (z) =

ϕni (z)
pni



P

i0 ∈G

n



1
µn (z)

ϕni0 (z)
pni0



1
µn (z)

of consumers will choose good i among all goods in Gn . Given that all consumers within income
group z spend an amount yjn = αn (z) E(z) on module n, we obtain the following expenditures for
income group z on good i:

ϕni (z) σn (z)−1
pni


P
ϕni0 (z) σn (z)−1
i0 ∈Gn
pni0


xzni =

αn (z) E(z)

where σn (z) = 1 + µn1(z) denotes the elasticity of substitution between goods i on aggregate for
consumers of income group z. This shows that utility described in equation 29 is exactly equivalent
to the consumption patterns obtained with the preferences described in equation 28 above and
equation 2 in the main text.

3.E) Normalization of

´
Ωz

γn (z)dz = 1

Equation (4) in the main text specifies:
log ϕni (z) = γn (z) log φni
´
We adopt the normalization Ωz γn (z)dz = 1 where Ωz is a given set of z’s. In our empirical
application, we work with 5 household groups indexed by z, which we define as quintiles in total
retail per capita expenditure. In our current specification, we define these quintiles in each halfyear period, because this brings greatest clarity when talking about quintiles of US households in
any given period. In the following, we describe how to interpret our parameter values, equilibrium
conditions and
´ estimation equations with an alternative normalization (other than unity). Suppose
instead that Ωz γn (z)dz is normalized to λ. With this normalization, φni satisfies:
log φni =

1
λ

ˆ
log ϕni (z)dz

(31)

Ωz

Other equations characterizing sales, price indices and optimal quality remain the same:
xni (z)
xnj (z)

φni
φnj

=

!γn (z)(σn (z)−1)

pni
pnj



Pn (z) = 

!1−σn (z)

(32)


X

1
1−σn (z)

1−σ (z) γ (z)(σn (z)−1) 
pni n φnin

(33)

i∈Gn



φn (a) =

βn

γ̃n (a) − ξn
. Xn (a)
bn µn (a)

where γ̃n (a) equals the sales-weighted average of γn (z) across consumers (see text).
49

(34)

Does that model lead to different estimation equations and counterfactual simulations? The
answer is no: while the interpretation of some parameters depends on the normalization, the
quantitative implications for sales, price indices and welfare do not depend on this normalization.
To be more precise, the model is isomorphic to an alternative normalization where the new model
parameters are:
γn0 (z) = γn (z)/λ
βn0
b0n
ξn0
φ0ni

(35)

= βn λ

(36)

= bn /λ

(37)

= ξn /λ

(38)
λ

= (φni )

(39)

while other parameters and variables remain identical. With these, we can check that:
´
• Average firm quality can now be defined as a simple average: log φ0ni = Ωz log ϕni (z)dz
• The above equilibrium equations 32-34 hold. For instance, quality satisfies:
φ0n (a)

λ

= φn (a) =



λβn

γ̃n (a) − ξn
. Xn (a)
bn µn (a)



=

γ̃n0 (a) − ξn0
. Xn (a)
b0n µn (a)

βn0

(40)

• Profits do not depend on the normalization. Equation (14) for profits yields:
 ˆ


1
(1 − βn (γn (z) − ξn )(σn (z) − 1)(1 − sn (a, z)))xn (a, z)dH(z) − f0n
πn (a) =
1−
µn (a)
 ˆz


1
(1 − βn0 (γn0 (z) − ξn0 )(σn (z) − 1)(1 − sn (a, z)))xn (a, z)dH(z) − f0n
=
1−
µn (a)
z
• The estimation of supply side parameters also remains the same since they are directly
obtained from equation 40.
• Counterfactual equilibrium conditions (see below) also remain the same. For instance, for
quality upgrading and sales, we have:
φ0n1 (a)
=
φ0n0 (a)



φn1 (a)
φn0 (a)

λ

"´

#λβn

− ξn )(σn (z) − 1)(1 − sn1 (a, z))xn1 (z, a)µn0 (a)dH(z)
=
z (γn (z) − ξn )(σn (z) − 1)(1 − sn0 (a, z))xn0 (z, a)µn1 (a)dH(z)
"´
# 0
0 (z) − ξ 0 )(σ (z) − 1)(1 − s (a, z))x (z, a)µ (a)dH(z) βn
(γ
n
n1
n1
n0
n
n
´z
=
0
0
z (γn (z) − ξn )(σn (z) − 1)(1 − sn0 (a, z))xn0 (z, a)µn1 (a)dH(z)
(γ (z)
´z n

Finally, we could have also defined the 5 quintile groups across all years, instead of defining them
in terms of quintiles within each period (after converting nominal expenditures across semesters
into real expenditure). The same normalization to unity across these five groups could have been
applied without loss of generality, as we show below in the remainder of this appendix. The slight
difference between these two approaches (quintiles by semester vs quintiles across semesters) is that
a small number of households would have been assigned to different z groups across semesters. To
ensure the robustness of our preferred approach to defining z groups globally instead (across the
full distribution of observed per-semester expenditures), we have re-run the parameter estimation
and all four counterfactuals under this alternative classification. Reassuringly, the point estimates
are virtually identical in all cases. This is due to the fact that i) the US did not experience strong
real income growth across the semesters over this period, and ii) relative household expenditure
positions are relatively stable across semesters.
50

Appendix 4: Supply-Side Model Extensions
4.A) Model Extension with Multi-Product Firms
Sales Across Brands and Products
Let us index each product by subscript i and each brand by subscript b. We denote by ϕTnbot (z) the
P
average quality of a brand, while we denote by ϕM
nbi (z) additional idiosyncratic quality shocks at
the product level, so that product quality of each product i of brand b corresponds to the product
P
T ot (z). As in Hottman et al. (2016), we normalize the average idiosyncratic quality shock
ϕM
nbi (z)ϕP
nb
P
to zero: i log ϕM
nbi (z) = 0. Here we assume monopolistic competition.
Using this definition, total sales by brand b can be expressed as:
xTnbot (z)

ϕTnbot (z)
brand (z)
Pnb

=

!σn (z)−1

αn (z)E(z)Pn (z)σn (z)−1

(41)

brand
xTnbot (z)Pnb
(z)ηn (z)−1

(42)

while sales by product can be written as:
P
ϕM
nbi (z)
pni

P
xM
nbi (z) =

!ηn (z)−1

In these equations, the price index by product group is defined as:




Pn (z) = 

X

1
1−σn (z)

brand
Pnb
(z)1−σn (z) ϕTniot (z)σn (z)−1 

(43)

i∈Gn

while the price index by brands (across products belonging to the brand) is defined as:

brand
Pnb
(z) = 



1
1−ηn (z)

1−η (z)
P
ηn (z)−1 
pni n ϕM
nbi (z)

X

(44)

i∈Gn

When price elasticities ηn (z) and σn (z) (within and across brands) differ, this new definition of
a brand’s price index differs from traditional sales weighted price indices (e.g. Tornqvist) as they
also directly depend on the number of product varieties. Let us define a price index P̄nb (z) as a
weighted average:




1

1−ηn (z)
1 X 1−ηn (z) M P ηn (z)−1 

p
ϕnbi (z)
P̄nb (z) =
Nnb i∈G ni
n

where Nnb corresponds to the number of product varieties. This index only depends on a average
of prices and quality, and does not directly depend on the number of product varieties, conditional
brand (z) depends on N
on average prices and quality. On the contrary, price index Pnb
nb even if prices
and quality are identical across all products. Conditional on average quality and prices P̄nb (z),
total sales by brand can be written:
xTnbot (z)

σn (z)−1
ηn (z)−1

= Nnb

ϕTnbot (z)
P̄nb (z)

!σn (z)−1

αn (z)E(z)Pn (z)σn (z)−1

(45)

As shown in this equation, the number of product varieties affects whether firms sell relatively more
(z)−1
(z)−1
to richer households only when σηnn(z)−1
varies with income z. If σηnn(z)−1
increases with income z,
richer consumers tend to consume relatively more from brands with a larger number of products.

51

Markups and Prices for Multi-Product Firms
Markups are now determined cannibalization effects and interaction between products within the
brand.
After noticing that the elasticity of the brand-level price w.r.t. product-level prices equals its
market share among consumers of income z:
log Pnb (z)
xnbi (z)
=P
log pnbi
j xnbj (z)
and that the elasticity of the product-level sales w.r.t. brand level price index equals ηn (z) − σn (z),
we obtain that profit maximization leads to the following first-order condition associated with
markups for each product i:
#

"
X

xnbi (z) − µnbi

X

z

X

ηn (z)xnbi (z) +

z

where µnbi ≡

pnbi −cnbi
pnbi

j,z

xnbi (z)
=0
(ηn (z)−σn (z))µnbj xnbj (z) P
j 0 xnbj 0 (z)

denotes markup for product i and cnbi refers to the marginal cost of pro-

P
µ x (z)
j nbj nbj
ducing good i. Let us also define µ̄nb (z) = P
the average markup charged by brand b
x (z)
j

nbj

on consumers of income z. Rearranging the above expression, we obtain:
P

µnbi

xnbi (z)
=P
z ηn (z)xnbi (z)
z

P



z (ηn (z)−σn (z))µ̄nb (z)xnbi (z)

1+

P

z



(46)

xnbi (z)

or equivalently:
P

µnbi

xnbi (z)
=P
σ
(z)x
nbi (z)
z n
z

P

z (ηn (z)−σn (z))(µ̄nb (z)



1+

P

z

− µnbi )xnbi (z)

xnbi (z)



(47)

P
x (z)
z nbi
P
reflects the markup that would be charged if each product
In equation 46, the term
η (z)x (z)
z

n

nbi

was competing on its own, i.e. without internalizing the effect
P of its price on the other prices of
x (z)
z nbi
σ
(z)x
n
nbi (z)
z

the products of the same brand. In equation 47, the term P

reflects the markup that

the brand would be charging if it had only one product variety.
Two special cases are worth mentioning. First, if all products have the same share of consumers
in P
each income group, markups would be the same as in the single-product case, i.e. µnbi =
P
z

x (z)
z nbi
.
σn (z)xnbi (z)

Second, if the difference ηn (z) − σn (z) does not depend on income z, markups are

again the same as in the single-product case. Hence, in this model, cannibalization effects arise
only when the consumer base varies among products of the same brand and when the difference
between the two elasticities (within and across brands) varies across consumers.
On a side note, notice that in all cases we obtain:
P

z,i µnbi σn (z)xnbi (z)

P

z,i xnbi (z)

=1

once we take a weighted average across products. This shows that average markups are governed
by the elasticity of substitution across brands rather than within brands (since brands internalize
the price of each product on other products of the brand). Moreover, if σn (z) = σn is homogeneous
across consumers, then markups µnbi are homogeneous and equal σ1n across all products.

52

Optimal Quality for Multi-Product Firms
Suppose, as in the main text, that quality ϕTnbot (z) is a function of a fundamental product quality
φnb and income-group taste for quality γn (z) such that:
log ϕTnbot (z) = γn (z) log φnb
Assuming that multi-product firms choose φnb to maximize aggregate profits:
Π=

"
X 
i


cnbi (φnb ) X
xnbi (z)
1−
pnbi
i

#

− fn (φnb )

1
βn
are the fixed costs of quality upgrading) we obtain the following first-order
(where fn (φnb ) = bn φbn
condition in brand-level quality φnb :
1
βn
bn φbn
=

X

[µnbi (σn (z) − 1)γn (z)xnbi (z)] − ξn

i,z

X

(1 − µnbi )xnbi (z)

i

(σn (z) − 1)γn (z) reflects the effect of quality upgrading on demand, while ξn is the effect on costs.
Using our expression above for average markups (equation 47), we obtain the following expression
for optimal quality that generalizes expression 12 for multi-product brands:
1
βn
MP
bn φbn
= (γ̃nb
− ξn )

X

(1 − µnbi )xnbi (z)

i,z

where γ̃nb is now defined at the brand level by:
P
MP
γ̃nb

=

i,z

γn (z)(σn (z) − 1)µnbi xnbi (z)
i,z (σn (z) − 1)µnbi xnbi (z)

P

Note that markups appear in this equation but, as described above, markups are no longer simply determined by an average of σn (z) across households because of cannibalization effects and
interaction between products within the brand.

4.B) Model Extension with Firm-Specific Quality Upgrading Costs
In this model extension, we allow firms upon entry to discover both an idiosyncratic productivity
term a and a quality shifter ψ. This quality shifter ψ can be modeled as a cost shifter or a demand
shifter: both approaches are isomorphic. Moreover, a and ψ could be correlated, or ψ could be
viewed as a deterministic function of productivity a.
Here, let us model ψ as a cost shifter. More specifically, we assume that the fixed cost of quality
upgrading is given by:
  1
φ βn
− 1
ψ βn fn (φ) = bn βn
ψ
For a given firm, one can see that all the previous expressions hold if we replace bn by ψ
− 1
First, using expression 12 and substituting bn by ψ βn , optimal quality is now:
φ(a, ψ) = ψ . (Xn (a, ψ)(γ̃n (a, ψ) − ξn )/µn (a, ψ))βn

− β1

n

.

(48)

In this expression, it is clear that ψ can alternatively be interpreted as a taste shifter (i.e. assuming
that perceived quality is multiplied by ψ for firms associated with a draw ψ).
53

Next, one can see that the first-order expression for prices remains the same, conditional on
optimal quality ϕ and firm productivity a. Third, since each firm takes its productivity a and
quality shifter ψ as given, all results on the uniqueness of prices and optimal quality hold, taking the
distribution of a and ψ as given. Finally, econometric specifications and counterfactual simulations
remain very similar in this case, given that ψ is held constant for each firm, as described below.
Estimation with Heterogeneous Quality Shifters As we estimate this new quality upgrading equation in the cross-seciton, one needs to account for a producer-specific term ψni :



1 X
1
1
Xnzit
log (pnit ) = βn −
log (Xnit ) −
log
σn − 1
Nz z σnz − 1
Xnit


+βn log ((γ̃nit − ξn ) /µnit ) + ψni + ηnt + nit
Such term is not directly observed and be positively correlated with size, log (Xnit ), leading to
a an upward bias in our estimated coefficient βn in the cross section. However, this additional
term ψni disappears when we estimate these relationships in panel, as long as these firm-specific
fixed costs shifters do not vary over time (or as long as the changes are not correlated with
our demographic instruments for changes in scale). Given these concerns, we choose the panel
specification as our baseline specification.
Counterfactuals in Model Extension with Heterogeneous Quality Shifters Here we
briefly describe counterfactual equilibrium equations for the model extension with heterogeneous
quality terms ψ (see next Appendix 5 for counterfactuals with the baseline model). In this extension, each firm faces an idiosyncratic quality shifter ψ (e.g. as a quality upgrading cost shifter) in
addition to the firm-level productivity term a.
Quality: Quality is now determined by equation 48. However, the term ψ is held constant
over time in all counterfactuals. Hence, taking ratios, we obtain exactly the same counterfactual
equation as previously as a function of sales and demand parameters:
"

φn1 (a, ψ)
(γ̃n1 (a, ψ) − ξn ) µn1 (a, ψ)−1 Xn1 (a, ψ)
=
φn0 (a, ψ)
(γ̃n0 (a, ψ) − ξn ) µn0 (a, ψ)−1 Xn0 (a, ψ)

#βn

Sales and prices: Sales and prices depend on on the quality shifter ψ only through quality.
Hence, conditional on quality, the previous equations hold. For instance, sales are given by:
xn (a, ψ, z) = φn (a, ψ)γn (z)(σn (z)−1) pn (a, ψ)1−σn (z) αn (z)E(z)Pnσn (z)−1
Hence, the change in sales of surviving firms equal:
xn1 (a, ψ, z)
=
xn0 (a, ψ, z)



Pn1 (z)
Pn0 (z)

σn (z)−1 

µn1 (a, ψ)
µn0 (a, ψ)

1−σn (z) 

φn1 (a, ψ)
φn0 (a, ψ)

(σn (z)−1)(γn (z)−ξn )

where µn (a, ψ) is the markup of a firm with productivity a and quality shifter ψ.
Entry and exit: Conditioning on sales, profits, exit and entry are given by the same expressions
as in the baseline case.

54

Appendix 5: Counterfactuals and Decompositions
We use our theoretical framework to explore two types of counterfactuals. The first counterfactual
changes the income tax schedule, thereby altering disposable expenditures across income groups
z. The second counterfactual changes business taxes across firms.
These counterfactuals illustrate how these changes affect the demand and supply of product
quality, and how they feed back into consumer inflation and real income inequality. The first
part of this section describes the equilibrium conditions to solve for counterfactual outcomes. The
remaining parts provide additional details on uniqueness and the decompositions of the price index
changes.

5.A) Characterization of Counterfactual Equilibria
In both setups, we denote by φn0 (a) and φn1 (a) initial and counterfactual quality respectively, and
by xn0 (z, a) and xn1 (z, a) initial and final sales for firm a and income group z. We denote by Nn0
and Nn1 the measure of firms in the baseline and counterfactual equilibrium, and we denote by
δnD (a) a dummy equal to 1 if firm a survives in the counterfactual equilibrium. Finally, we denote
by Pn0 (z) and Pn1 (z) the initial and counterfactual price index in product group n for income z.
In the first set of counterfactuals, changes in income taxation across consumers lead to changes
in expenditures across income groups z, which we model as changes hn (z) in total sales to income
group z. In the second set of counterfactuals, changes in business taxation are modeled as a
change in a firm-specific sales tax τn (a) which depend on the rank of the firm in terms of total
sales. Comparing the initial and counterfactual equilibria, we derive that the changes in firm sales,
quality, entry, exit and price indices must satisfy the following five equilibrium conditions.
First, the evolution of firm sales for a given income group z depends on quality upgrading,
markup and price index changes for each consumer group as well as the shocks in terms of groupspecific expenditures hn (z) and shocks in sales taxes τn (a):
xn1 (z, a)
= δnD (a) hn (z) τn (a)1−σn
xn0 (z, a)



Pn1 (z)
Pn0 (z)

σn (z)−1 

µn1 (a)
µn0 (a)

1−σn (z) 

φn1 (a)
φn0 (a)

(σn (z)−1)(γn (z)−ξn )

(49)
In these equations, the effect of quality depends on its valuation γn (z) by income group z net
of the effect on the marginal cost, parameterized by ξn . This equation is obtained by combining
equations 3 and 4:
xn1 (a, z)
= hn (z)
xn0 (a, z)



Pn1 (z)
Pn0 (z)

σn (z)−1 

φn1 (a)
φn0 (a)

γn (z)(σn (z)−1) 

pn1 (a)
pn0 (a)

1−σn (z)

ξn

accounting for changes in prices: pn (a) = φn (a) a µn (a) and survival δnD (a). Based´on new sales
xn1 (z, a), total sales of firm a in the counterfactual equilibrium are given by Xn1 (a) = z xn1 (z, a) dH(z).
Next, equation 12 implies that quality upgrading is determined by:
"

(γ̃n1 (a) − ξn ) µn1 (a)−1 Xn1 (a)
φn1 (a)
=
φn0 (a)
(γ̃n0 (a) − ξn ) µn0 (a)−1 Xn0 (a)

#βn

(50)

where γ̃n0 (a) and γ̃n1 (a) correspond to the weighted averages of γn (z) among firm a’s consumers,
weighting either sales in the baseline and counterfactual equilibrium respectively (see equation
13). This equation reflects how a change in the income distribution impacts firms’ product quality
choices, given the differences in quality valuations γn (z) across consumers. It also reflects a scale
effect: firms that expand the most also tend to upgrade their quality. This equation is the same

55

in both types of counterfactuals. In turn, new markups are determined by sales growth:
´
z (xn1 /xn0 ) xn0 (z, a) dH(z)
´
µn1 (a) − 1 =
z (σn (z) − 1) (1 − (xn1 /xn0 ) sn0 (z, a)) (xn1 /xn0 ) xn0 (z, a) dH(z)
´

which we obtain by combining µn1 (a) = 1+ ´

z

xn1 (z,a) dH(z)

z (σn (z)−1) (1−sn1 (z,a)) xn1 (z,a) dH(z)

and

sn1 (z,a)
sn0 (z,a)

(51)

=

xn1 (z,a)
xn0 (z,a) .

Thirdly, we need to describe change in the price index Pn (z) for each module n and income
group z. Taking ratios of equation 6, and adjusting for the exit of firms in the counterfactual
equilibrium, we obtain:
"

´

#

1

1−σn p (a)1−σn (z) φ (a)γn (z)(σn (z)−1) dG(a) 1−σn (z)
n1
n1
a δnD (a)´τn (a)
Nn0 a pn0 (a)1−σn (z) φn0 (a)γn (z)(σn (z)−1) dG(a)
 1

´
1−σn (z)
σ (z)−1
Nn1 a δnD (a)τn (a)1−σn pn1 (a)1−σn (z) φn1 (a)γn (z)(σn (z)−1) αn (z)E(z)Pn0n
dG(a)


=
´
σ (z)−1
Nn0 a pn0 (a)1−σn (z) φn0 (a)γn (z)(σn (z)−1) αn (z)E(z)Pn0n
dG(a)

Pn1 (z)
=
Pn0 (z)

Nn1

´



1−σn (z) 



1−σn pn1 (a)
a xn0 (z, a) δnD (a) τn (a)
´ pn0 (a)
Nn0 a xn0 (z, a)dG(a)

 Nn1

= 

1


1−σn (z)
φn1 (a) γn (z)(σn (z)−1)
dG(a) 
φn0 (a)



σ (z)−1

where the second line is obtained by multiplying each line by αn (z)E(z)Pn0n
and the third
σn (z)−1
1−σ
(z)
γ
(z)(σ
(z)−1)
n
n
n
line by noticing that pn0 (a)
φn0 (a)
αn (z)E(z)Pn0
= xn0 (a, z). Using the
φn (a)ξn µn (a)
expression pn (a) =
for prices, we obtain our main equation describing the change in
a
price indices in our counterfactual equilibrium:


Pn1 (z)  Nn1
=
Pn0 (z)

´

1

a xn0 (z, a) δnD (a) τn

(a)1−σn
Nn0



´




1−σn (z)
µn1 (a) 1−σn (z) φn1 (a) (σn (z)−1)(γn (z)−ξn )
dG(a) 
µn0 (a)
φn0 (a)


a xn0 (z, a)dG(a)



(52)
This ratio is determined by the change in quality weighted by initial sales of each firm. It also
depends on the availability of product varieties, the extent to which is a function of the price
elasticity σn (z). Increases in the measure of firms Nn1 lead to a reduction in the price index, while
firm exit (δnD (a) = 0) leads to an increase.
The entry and exit decisions are determined in a standard way. In a Melitz-type model, free
entry is such that expected profits are equal to the sunk cost of entry FnE . Upon entry, firms do
not know their productivity and are ex ante homogeneous. Firms realize their production after
paying the sunk cost of entry. Here, looking at long-term outcomes, free entry implies that average
profits πn1 (adjusting for exit) remain unchanged in the counterfactual equilibrium:
ˆ
ˆ
FnE = πn0 (a)dG(a) = δnD (a)πn1 (a)dG(a)
a

a

Using expression 14 for profits, this is equivalent to the following condition:
ˆ 

1
βn (γ̃n0 (a) − ξn )
1−
−
Xn0 (a)dGn (a) =
µn0 (a)
µn0 (a)
a
ˆ
ˆ


1
βn (γ̃n1 (a) − ξn )
δnD (a) 1−
−
Xn1 (a)dGn (a) + (1−δnD (a)) fn0 dGn (a) (53)
µn1 (a)
µn1 (a)
a
a
The number of firms Nn1 adjusts such that this equality holds (e.g. an increase in Nn1 leads to a
56

decrease in the price index and a decrease in sales Xn1 (a), and thus a decrease in the right-hand
side of the equation above).
In turn, survival (δnD (a) dummy) requires that profits are positive:


1−

1
βn (γ̃n1 (a) − ξn )
Xn1 (a) − fn0 > 0
−
µn1 (a)
µn1 (a)


⇔

δnD (a) = 1

(54)

Definition of Counterfactual Equilibrium A counterfactual equilibrium is defined by sales
xn1 (z, a), quality φn1 (a), markups µn1 (a), exit δn1 (a), entry Nn1 and price indices Pn (z) that
jointly satisfy equations 49, 50, 51, 52, 53 and 54.
Monopolistic competition Under monopolistic competition, all equilibrium conditions remain
identical except equation 51. Equation 51 becomes:
´
z (xn1 /xn0 ) xn0 (z, a) dH(z)
µn1 (a) − 1 = ´
z (σn (z) − 1) (xn1 /xn0 ) xn0 (z, a) dH(z)
Uniqueness Is the counterfactual equilibrium unique? Appendix 2 examines second-order conditions but this only shows that firms decisions are local maxima and this does not prove global
uniqueness for joint decisions.We show here that, conditional on entry, exit and markups under
monopolistic competition, the changes in quality, sales and price indices are uniquely determined
by equations 49, 50 and 52, under the condition:
βn (σn (z)−1)(γn (z)−ξn ) < 1 for all z
Below, we further argue informally that other margins are not likely to threaten uniqueness.
The proof of (conditional) uniqueness in sales and quality is inspired by Kehoe, Levine and
Romer (1992) and Kucheryavyy, Lyn and Rodriguez-Clare (2018). We consider a convex function
of quality choices φn1 (a) whose first order conditions coincide with our counterfactual equilibrium
conditions. Specifically, taking markups µn1 (a), exit δn1 (a) and entry Nn1 as given, consider the
1
βn
function Fn of the vector of adjusted quality choices φen1 = φn1
across surviving firms:

ˆ
Fn (φen1 ) =

a

−

Nn0
Nn1

ˆ
z

−

X
z

1

βn (γn (z) − ξ)µn1 (a)φn0βn (a)
xn0 (z, a)φen1 (a)dH(z)
µn0 (a)



αn (z)E(z)hn (z)
µn1 (a)
X
log  xn0 (a, z)τn (a)1−σn (z)
σn (z)−1
µn0 (a)
a


1−σn (z)




φen1 (a)
1
βn
(a)
φn0

βn (σn (z)−1)(γn (z)−ξn ) 


 dH(z)

(55)
This function is convex in the vector of quality choices φen1 under the assumption βn (σn (z) −


1)(γn (z)−ξn ) < 1. To see this, notice that each term φen1 /φen0

βn (σn (z)−1)(γn (z)−ξn )

is concave in

φen1 /φen0 , and that these functions are combined with the log function, which is itself increasing
and concave. The second term is therefore concave in the vector of φen1 /φen0 while the first term is
linear, from which we can conclude that function Fn is convex. Hence, a minimum in Fn is unique.
What remains to be shown is that the derivatives are zero (first-order conditions) precisely for
firm-level quality φn1 (a) that satisfy the counterfactual equilibrium conditions above.

57

The derivatives can be expressed as:
∂Fn



∂ log φen1 (a)

=

φn1 (a)
φn0 (a)

ˆ
z



µn1 (a)
µn0 (a)

1
βn

ˆ
βn (σn (z)−1)(γn (z)−ξn )xn0 (z, a)dH(z))
z

βn (γn (z)−ξn )
xn0 (a, z)hn (z)τn (a)1−σn (z)
µn1 (a)

−

×



1−σn (z) 

φn1 (a)
φn0 (a)

1
βn
where we replace φen1 by φn1
, noticing that

Nn1

´

1−σn (z)
a xn0 (z, a) δnD (a) τn (a)

Nn0



´

(σn (z)−1)(γn (z)−ξn ) 

Pn1 (z)
Pn0 (z)

Pn1 (z)
Pn0 (z)

σn (z)−1

dH(z)

coincides with the price index change:




µn1 (a) 1−σn (z) φn1 (a) (σn (z)−1)(γn (z)−ξn )
dG(a)
µn0 (a)
φn0 (a)

a xn0 (z, a)dG(a)



=

Pn1 (z)
Pn0 (z)

1−σn (z)

The derivatives are zero when the following condition is satisfied for all firms:


´

φn1 (a)
φn0 (a)



1
βn

=


1−σn (z) 



φn1 (a) (σn (z)−1)(γn (z)−ξn ) Pn1 (z) σn (z)−1
βn (γn (z)−ξn )
1−σn (z) µn1 (a)
x
(a,
z)h
(z)τ
(a)
dH(z)
n0
n
n
z
µn1 (a)
µn0 (a)
φn0 (a)
Pn0 (z)
´ βn (γn (z)−ξn )
xn0 (z, a)dH(z))
z
µn0 (a)

The same expression can be obtained by combining equilibrium conditions 49 and 50, after noticing
that equation 50 can be rewritten as:


φn1 (a)
φn0 (a)



1
βn

´
βn (γn (z)−ξ)µn1 (a)−1 xn1 (z, a)dH(z))
= ´z
−1
z βn (γn (z)−ξ)µn0 (a) xn0 (z, a)dH(z)

This proves uniqueness in the vector of quality choices across firms, conditional on their markups,
entry, survival, etc. and assuming monopolistic competition. Unfortunately, this approach does
not generalize to oligopoly where markups also depend on market power because the derivatives
of the first order conditions are not symmetric in this case (a requirement for the existence of a
maximizing function such as the function Fn above).
However, computationally we never encountered any instances of multiplicity of equilibria (or
issues with convergence) within our range of parameter estimates. The simulations always converge
to the same solutions and do so quickly, providing reassurance against the concern of multiplicity in
our applications. This also makes sense in theory, since i) price elasticities do not vary greatly across
income groups in our calibration in Section 5.1, thus avoiding interactions between quality and
markup choices as discussed in Appendix 2.B; and ii) market power under oligopolistic competition
acts as a negative feedback: for firms with larger market shares, choosing larger markups induces
lower quality upgrading and consequently smaller market shares in our framework.

58

5.B) Decomposition of the Price Index Effect
The differential change in the price index for rich vs. poor households depends on a variety of
channels that we can illustrate through a decomposition, taking a first-order approximation. For
a given income group z, the price index change equals:


Pn1 (z)
Pn0 (z)

 Nn1

= 

´

1

a xn0 (z, a) δnD (a)τn

(a)1−σn



Nn0

"ˆ

´




1−σn (z)
µn1 (a) 1−σn (z) φn1 (a) (σn (z)−1)(γn (z)−ξn )
dGn (a) 
µn0 (a)
φn0 (a)


a xn0 (z, a)dGn (a)



µn1 (a) 1−σn (z) φn1 (a) (σn (z)−1)(γn (z)−ξn )
sn1 (a,z)
=
dGn (a)
µn0 (a)
φn0 (a)
a
ˆ

 1
1−σn (z)
Nn1
1−σn
×
sn0 (a,z)δnD (a)τn (a)
dGn (a)
Nn0 a








n0 (z,a)
where we denote sn0 (a,z) = ´ xn0x(z,a
0 )dG (a0 ) and sn1 (a,z) =
n
a0
Taking logs and a first-order approximation leads to:

Pn1 (z)
log
Pn0 (z)

´
a0

#

1
1−σn (z)

δnD (a)τn (a)1−σn ) xn0 (z,a)
.
δnD (a0 )τn (a)1−σn xn0 (z,a0 )dGn (a0 )

"ˆ
#




µn1 (a) 1−σn (z) φn1 (a) (σn (z)−1)(γn (z)−ξn )
1
sn1 (a,z)
= −
log
dGn (a)
σn (z) − 1
µn0 (a)
φn0 (a)
a
ˆ


Nn1
1
1−σn
−
log
sn0 (a,z)δnD (a)τn (a)
dGn (a)
σn (z) − 1
Nn0 a

ˆ

φn1 (a)
dGn (a) +
sn1 (a,z) log τn (a) dGn (a)
≈ −(γn (z)−ξn ) sn1 (a,z) log
φn0 (a)
a
a
ˆ
ˆ




µn1 (a)
1
Nn1
+
sn1 (a,z) log
dGn (a) −
log
sn0 (a,z)δnD (a)dGn (a)
µn0 (a)
σn (z) − 1
Nn0 a
a
ˆ



Next, by comparing income groups z and z0 , we have:
ˆ


Pn1 (z)
Pn1 (z0 )
φn1 (a)
− log
≈ −(γn (z)−ξn ) sn1 (a,z) log
dGn (a)
log
Pn0 (z)
Pn0 (z0 )
φn0 (a)
a
ˆ


φn1 (a)
+(γn (z0 )−ξn ) sn1 (a,z0 ) log
dGn (a)
φn0 (a)
a
ˆ
+ (sn1 (a,z) − sn1 (a,z0 )) log τn (a) dGn (a)
ˆa


µn1 (a)
+ (sn1 (a,z) − sn1 (a,z0 )) log
dGn (a)
µn0 (a)
a




1
Nn1
1
−
−
log
σn (z) − 1 σn (z0 ) − 1
Nn0
ˆ

1
−
sn0 (a,z)δnD (a)dGn (a)
σn (z) − 1 a
ˆ

1
+
log
sn0 (a,z0 )δnD (a)dGn (a)
σn (z0 ) − 1
a


0





0



Using the equality AB − A0 B 0 = (A − A0 ) B+B
+ (B − B 0 ) A+A
that holds for any four
2
2
0
0
numbers A, A , B and B , we can rewrite the first two lines and the last two lines of the previous
59

sum:
Pn1 (z)
Pn1 (z0 )
log
− log
Pn0 (z)
Pn0 (z0 )

ˆ
(sn1 (a,z) − sn1 (a,z0 )) log τn (a) dGn (a)
ˆ


φn1 (a)
−(γn (z)−γn (z0 )) s̄n1 (a) log
dGn (a)
φn0 (a)
a
ˆ


φn1 (a)
−(γ̄n −ξn ) (sn1 (a,z) − sn1 (a,z0 )) log
dGn (a)
φn0 (a)
a
ˆ


µn1 (a)
+ (sn1 (a,z) − sn1 (a,z0 )) log
dGn (a)
µn0 (a)
a




1
Nn1
1
−
log
−
σn (z) − 1 σn (z0 ) − 1
Nn0



ˆ
1
1
s̄n0 (a)δnD (a)dGn (a)
−
log
−
σn (z) − 1 σn (z0 ) − 1
a
#
"´
s
(a,z)δ
(a)dG
(a)
1
n0
n
nD
−
log ´ a
σ̄n − 1
a sn0 (a,z0 )δnD (a)dGn (a)

≈

a

1
where s̄n1 (a,z) is the average of sn1 (a,z) and sn1 (a,z0 ), and σ̄n1−1 is the average of σn (z)−1
and
1
σn (z0 )−1 .
´
Combining lines 4 and 5 together, denoting δ̄nD = a δnD (a)s̄n0 (a)dG(a), we obtain a six-term
decomposition of the price index change:
ˆ
Pn1 (z)
Pn1 (z0 )
(sn1 (a,z)−sn1 (a,z0 )) log τn (a) dG(a)
log
− log
=
(56)
Pn0 (z)
Pn0 (z0 )
a

|

{z

}

(0) Direct business tax effect
ˆ
− (γn (z)−γn (z0 ))



s̄n1 (a) log
a

|

φn1 (a)
dG(a) − (γ̄n −ξn )
φn0 (a)


{z

ˆ



{z

|

}

|


|

(3) Asymmetric markup changes
1
−
log
σ̄n −1

a

φn1 (a)
dG(a)
φn0 (a)


{z

}

(2) Asymmetric quality-adjusted cost changes

µn1 (a)
+ (sn1 (a,z)−sn1 (a,z0 )) log
dG(a) −
µn0 (a)
a




(sn1 (a,z)−sn1 (a,z0 )) log

|

}

(1) Average quality effect

ˆ

1
1
−
log
σn (z)−1 σn (z0 )−1


{z

Nn1 δ̄nD
Nn0

!

}

(4) Love of variety

!
´
s
(a,z)δ
(a)dG
(a)
n0
n
nD
´a
a sn0 (a,z0 )δnD (a)dGn (a)
{z

}

(5) Asymmetric exit effects
The first line actually only appears in the second counterfactual. It directly reflects the asymmetric effect of a business tax on consumers, holding constant all allocations on the firm or consumer side. It is non-zero if firms’ market shares vary across the income distribution in a way that
also covaries with the direct incidence of the tax across firms.
In both counterfactuals, the effect in term (1) is that firms on average have incentives to
downgrade their product quality, which has heterogeneous effects across households depending on
their preference parameters γn (z) (quality upgrading benefits households with the highest γn (z)
relatively more).
60

The effect in term (2) is that the scale of production changes asymmetrically across higher and
lower quality producers in both counterfactuals. With economies of scale in quality production
(βn > 0), this translates into asymmetric effects on quality and quality-adjusted prices. In turn, this
second effect hurts richer households if they spend relatively more on firms with the largest decrease
in scale and quality. As seen in the second term, this channel can be expressed as a covariance
term between
budget shares sn (a, z) and firms’ incentives to downgrade product
 consumer-specific

φn1 (a)
quality log φn0 (a) .
The effect in term (3) captures the change in markups, which in our framework differ endogenously across firms as a function of their market power and the composition of consumers that they
sell to. These markups can be affected asymmetrically across higher and lower quality producers.
Firms who experience the largest change in scale or in the composition of their consumer base have
incentives to adjust their markups the most, which can give rise to asymmetric changes in markups
across consumption baskets due to uneven consumption shares of rich and poor households across
the firm size distribution.
Term (4) shows that the change in the overall number of product varieties can have asymmetric
impacts across households depending on their elasticity of substitution across products σn (z). More
product entry benefits households with higher estimated love of variety, i.e. lower σn (z), and viceversa for product exit.
In addition to differences in the love of variety, the last channel reflects the unequal effects of
exit as a function of differences in consumption shares across household groups. Exiting firms tend
to be the smallest firms. Since small firms tend to sell relatively more to poor consumers, exit
tends to hurt poorer consumers relatively more than richer consumers (abstracting from differences
in σn (z)). This is reflected in the sign of term (5), which depends on whether the sales-weighted
survival rate is lower for income group z compared to the average.
Finally, we aggregate these terms across product modules to obtain a decomposition of the
aggregate price index change for retail consumption. A standard within-between decomposition
yields:

log

PG1 (z)
PG1 (z0 )
− log
PG0 (z)
PG0 (z0 )

=

X  αn (z) + αn (z0 )  

log

2

n

Pn1 (z)
Pn1 (z0 )
− log
Pn0 (z)
Pn0 (z0 )

{z

|



(57)
}

(0+1+2+3+4+5) Within-module changes


+

X

(αn (z) − αn (z0 )) 

(z)
(z0 )
log PPn1
+ log PPn1
n0 (z)
n0 (z0 )



2



n

|

{z

}

(6) Between-module changes
The within term can be decomposed into the five terms described in equation 56. The between
term reflects the covariance between product module-level relative price changes and the crossmodule differences in consumption shares between rich and poor: this term is positive if prices
tend to increase faster in product modules where households from income group z tend to spend
a larger fraction of their retail expenditures relative to income group z0 . As our analysis follows
the literature on firm heterogeneity within sectors, our theory is focused on relative price changes
across producers and consumers within product groups, and has little to say about price changes
across sectors. Nevertheless, rich and poor households have different consumption shares across
product groups (the upper-tier αn (z)), and even within our framework the firm size distributions
and preference and technology parameters can differ across the n dimension in arbitrary ways, so
that the between-module term need not be zero.
61

5.C) International Trade Counterfactual
Our third counterfactual illustrates the role of reducing trade costs in a setting with heterogeneous
firms, as in Melitz (2003), in addition to heterogeneous households who source their consumption
differently across the firm size distribution as observed in the scanner data. The documented
empirical findings and our quantitative framework have clear implications for the distribution of
the gains from trade. As in Melitz (2003), a decrease in trade costs induces a reallocation in
which the largest firms expand through trade while less productive firms either shrink or exit. In
our framework, better access to imported varieties and exit of domestic producers affect the price
indices of rich and poor households asymmetrically. In addition, lower trade costs also lead to
heterogeneous changes in product quality and markups across firms. Armed with our parameter
estimates, we can quantify these effects on the cost of living across the income distribution.
To illustrate and quantify these forces, we introduce quality choice under two-sided heterogeneity into an otherwise standard Melitz (2003) model with monopolistic competition and with two
symmetric countries. We simulate an increase in the openness to trade where, as is typically the
case, only a fraction of the firms start exporting, and where exporters sell only a small share of
their output abroad. We calibrate fixed trade costs fX such that half of of output is produced
by exporting firms. We calibrate variable trade costs τ such that export sales of exporters equal
20 percent of their output. Combining these two statistics, about 10 percent of aggregate output
is traded. The counterfactual is to reduce variable trade costs from an equilibrium with no trade
to the new trade equilibrium. This overall increase in trade shares is moderate. In comparison,
trade over GDP has increased from 20 percent to 30 percent in the US since 1990, and other countries have seen much larger increases (since 1990, the trade-to-GDP ratios have increased from on
average 40 to 60 percent across countries according to the World Development Indicators).
As for other counterfactuals, we derive that the changes in firm sales, quality, entry, exit and
price indices must satisfy five equilibrium conditions respectively, and there is here an additional
condition reflecting the decision to export. Equilibrium conditions describing quality and exit
are identical to those in the main counterfactuals (but with markups now under monopolistic
competition), whereas sales, price indices and entry have to explicitly account for trade and trade
costs.
First, the evolution of firm sales for a given income group z now also depends on the export
decision (in addition to quality upgrading and the price index change for each consumer group):
  P (z) σn (z)−1  µ (a) 1−σn (z)  φ (a) (σn (z)−1)(γn (z)−ξn )

xn1 (z, a)
n1
n1
n1
X
1−σn
= δnD (a) 1 + δn (a)τn
xn0 (z, a)
Pn0 (z)
µn0 (a)
φn0 (a)

where we denote by δnX (a) an export dummy equal to one if firm a exports in the counterfactual
equilibrium. Other terms are identical to those in the main counterfactuals.
Changes in the price index Pn (z) for each module n and income group z now need to account
for trade costs and new varieties of imported goods. Assuming symmetry between the domestic
1−σ (z)
and foreign economies, this additional margin is captured by the term (1 + δnX (a)τn n ):


Pn1 (z)  Nn1
=
Pn0 (z)

´

a xn0 (z, a) δnD (a)

1



1−σ (z)
1+δnX (a)τn n

Nn0

´






1−σn (z)
µn1 (a) 1−σn (z) φn1 (a) (σn (z)−1)(γn (z)−ξn )
dG(a) 
µn0 (a)
φn0 (a)

a xn0 (z, a)dG(a)

The decision to export is as in Melitz (2003) except that the firm also has to account for its
choice of quality which is itself endogenous to its export decision. Firm a decides to export if
and only if its revenue gains on both the export and domestic market, exceed the fixed cost of

62




exporting, net of quality upgrading costs:
D
X
X
D
D
D
rnX (a, φX
n1 (a)) + rn1 (a, φn1 (a)) − fn (φn1 (a)) − fnX > rn (a, φn1 (a)) − fn (φn1 (a))

where rnX (a, φX
n1 (a)) denotes revenues net of variable costs on the export market (exports times
1
X
D
σ̃n ) where its quality φn1 (a) is the optimal quality if the firm exports. The terms rn (a, φ) denote
revenues net of variable costs on the domestic market where its quality is the optimal quality if
the firm exports (left-hand side) or if the firm does not export (right-hand side). As before, fn (φ)
denotes the fixed costs of upgrading to quality φ which itself depends on whether the firm exports
or not.
Finally, the entry decision has to also account for profits made on the export market, as in
Melitz (2003).
Decomposition of the Price Index Effect Having simulated the price index change, we
can again decompose the overall change in various terms that reflect different channels that can
potentially affect consumers differentially in this counterfactual. These differential effects rely
essentially on the fact that richer households tend to purchase from larger producers.
As in the main counterfactuals, quality may change across firms. This quality increase is
primarily due to a scale effect: export opportunities lead firms to expand and thus invest in
quality upgrading due to economies of scale in quality production. An average increase in quality
tends to benefit richer households who have the highest preferences for quality, γn (z). In addition,
the largest firms are the ones who become exporters and thus have the highest incentives for quality
upgrading due to the larger scale of their operation. They are also the ones whose initial sales
are more concentrated among richer consumers. The heterogeneity of this scale effect reinforces
the effect of the average increase in product quality. Our decomposition results of the trade
counterfactual (see NBER working paper version) indicate that quality upgrading account for
about half of the overall effect on inflation differences.
Another effect captures the change in the overall number of product varieties, which has asymmetric impacts across households depending on their love for variety. This can be captured by a
new term in the decomposition:


1
1
Nn1
−
−
log
δ̄nD 1 + δ̄X τn1−σ̄n
σn (z) − 1 σn (z0 ) − 1
Nn0








1−σ (z )

where δ̄nD (1 + δ̄X τn1−σ̄n ) denotes the average of δnD (a)(1 + δX (a)τn n 0 ) across consumers and
firms. This term now combines the number of varieties that are available on the domestic market
as well as new imported varieties. Quantitatively, we find that this channel account for about a
quarter of the overall effect.
While the previous channel is driven by differences in σn (z), finally another channel takes into
account differences in consumption shares spent on new imported varieties or exiting domestic
firms across rich and poor households:
 ´

1−σn (z)
s
(a,z)δ
(a)(1
+
δ
(a)τ
)dG
(a)
1
n
n0
n
nD
X

log  ´ a
−
1−σn (z0 )
σ̄n − 1
sn0 (a,z0 )δnD (a)(1 + δX (a)τn
)dGn (a)
a

Due to selection into exporting, the products that are traded tend to be those consumed to a
higher extent by the richest households. Access to imported varieties thus benefits richer households relatively more compared to the poor. In addition, domestic exit due to import competition
is concentrated among producers whose sales are concentrated among poorer households. Quantitatively, we find that this channel account for about a quarter of the overall effect. In contrast,
differential changes in markups, exit and between effects account for a small share.
63

