NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EXCHANGE RATE POLICY RECONSIDERED

Richard C. Marston

Working Paper No. 2310

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 1987

Presented at the Conference on International Economic Cooperation, April 1987.
Support from the Ford Foundation project on International Coordination of
Economic Policy is gratefully acknowledged. The research reported here is part
of the NBER's research program in International Studies. Any opinions expressed
are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2310
July 1987

Exchange Rate Policy Reconsidered

ABSTRACT
The Bretton Woods Conference of 191414

which fixed exchange rates for over

twenty-five years is often cited as a model of economic cooperation among

countries.

Yet over fifteen years have elapsed since the breakdown of the

Bretton Woods System without any serious efforts to restore fixed exchange

rates among the currencies of the major industrial countries. This paper
considers why governments may have refrained from "reforming" the exchange
rate system.

The first section of the paper examines the principal problem which

exchange rate policy is designed to address, exchange rate variability. The
paper distinguishes between the short run volatility of exchange rates, which
firms can hedge against in the financial markets, and longer term swings in
real exchange rates, which can lead to costly resource reallocation.

The paper reviews evidence concerning the effectiveness of exchange
market intervention, evidence which suggests that intervention may not be

effective unless it is monetized. The paper goes on to analyze arguments
concerning fixed exchange rates, and to assess the experience of two fixed

rate systems, Bretton Woods and the European Monetary System. Finally, the
paper examines the target zone system which has been proposed as an
alternative to freely floating and fixed exchange rates.

Richard C. Marston
The Wharton School
2300 Steinberg-Dietrich Hall
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 1910)4
Telephone: 215-898—7626

EXCHANGE RATE POLICY RECONSIDERED

I

would regard it as a catastrophe amounting to a world
tragedy if [this Conference should] . . . allow itself to be
diverted by the proposal of a purely artificial and temporary
experiment affecting the monetary exchange of a few nations
only. . . . The sound internal economic system of a nation
is a greater factor in its well being than the price of its
currency in changing terms of the currencies of other nations
[from President Franklin D. Roosevelt's message to the London
Economic Conference of 1933].
It has been our task to find a common measure, a common
standard, a common rule applicable to each and not irksome to
any. . . .
[W}e have perhaps accomplished here in Bretton
Woods something more than what is embodied in this Final
Act. We have shown that a concourse of 1414 nations are
actually able to work together at a constructive task in
amity and unbroken accord [J.M. Keynes at the conclusion of
the Bretton Woods Conference in 1914)4].1
The Bretton Woods Conference of 191414 which fixed exchange rates for over

twenty-five years is often cited as a model of economic cooperation among

countries. Indeed the Bretton Woods Agreement on exchange rates was a
remarkable accomplishment, particularly when measured against the failures of

earlier conferences such as the London Economic Conference of 1933. Yet over
fifteen years have elapsed since the breakdown of the Bretton Woods System
without any serious efforts to restore fixed exchange rates among the

currencies of the major industrial countries. The last attempt to reconstruct
the exchange rate system, the Smithsonian Agreement of December 1971, broke

down almost immediately. Recent economic summits have agreed on ad hoc
policies to counter exchange rate movements and have considered modest
proposals to modify the existing system, but these summits have made no

progress on more systemic changes in exchange rate arrangements. Governments
may have refrained from "reforming" the system for good reasons. This paper
will consider arguments for and against more far-reaching international
agreements on exchange rate policy.

27.18.2

—2-

When considering possible reforms of' the exchange rate system, it is

natural to compare experience since 1973 with that of the Bretton Woods

period. The difference in economic performance between the two periods would
be startling if it were not so well known. Table 1 updates a table presented
in Goldstein (19814, p. 10) that compares recent inflation rates, growth rates,

and other economic variables with those of the Bretton Woods period. The
period since 1973 is divided in two parts to highlight more recent
developments in the 1980s.
Regardless of which indicator is chosen, the decade of the 1960s was a
time of' much superior economic performance. During the 1960s, inflation was
markedly lower in all major industrial countries, with the notable exception

of Japan where inflation in the 1980s is half what it was in the 1960s. A
more recent trend toward lower inflation rates, however, is observed by

comparing the 1981-85 and 1973—80 periods. Figure 1, illustrating the annual
inflation rates for the three largest industrial economies, confirms this
downward trend and also suggests that inflation rates for these countries may

be converging. But these recent favorable trends in inflation are not matched
by similar trends in output and other variables. Real growth in GNP was
higher during the 1960s in all countries. Productivity growth was higher in
all countries during the 1960s than during the 1973-85 period as a whole,
although in the United States and United Kingdom productivity growth during

the 1980s has exceeded that of the 1960s.2 Finally, unemployment rates were
in an entirely different range during the 1960s. In Germany, for example,
unemployment averaged only 0.8% in the 1960s, but 2.9% in the 1970s and a

depressingly high 7.1% in the 1980s. In the United Kingdom, a 2.6%
unemployment rate during the 1960s has turned into an 11.9% rate in the

27. 18 .2

TABLE 1
COMPARISON OF MACROECONOMIC PERFORMANCE

IN THREE RECENT PERIODS

U.S.

CANADA JAPAN

FRANCE GERMANY

ITALY

U.K.

AVERAGE
INFLATION RATES:
1961—71

2.8

2.7

5.6

4.1

2.8

3.9

14•14

1973—80

8.5

8.7

9.5

10.1

4.9

114.9

14.0

1981—85

5.3

7.2

2.7

9.1

3.8

12.9

6.9

1961—71

3.6

5.2

10.4

5.4

4.2

5.2

2.8

1973—80

2.5

3.24

4.1

3.1

2.5

3.3

1.8

1981_85*

2.4

2.2

3.8

1.2

1.2

0.4

1.7

1961—71

2.9

4.5

9.8

6.4

5.5

6.5

3.8

1973—80

1.6

2.1

6.1

4.6

1LO

4.6

1.8

1981—85

3.7

2.24

5.3

4.5

3.9

3.5

5.0

1961—71

14.8

24.9

1.2

1.6

0.8

5.1

2.6

1973—80

6.6

7.0

1.9

4.5

2.9

6.6

4.9

1981-85

8.3

10.4

2.5

8.7

7.1

9.6

11.9

AVERAGE GNP
GROWTH RATES:

AVERAGE

PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH:

AVERAGE

UNEMPLOYMENT RATES:

*Until 198)4 for Italy

SOURCES: CPI indexes and GNP from IMF, International Financial Statistics;
productivity from U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics; unemployment
rates from OECD, Labor Force Statistics.

27.18.1

1

3
2

4

a
5

T

a
a

m

11

15
14
13

15

iT

15

15

21,

21

22

4
T4

Ta

ci wwio
ii TIZcoians
+
JAPAK

Ta

SOI1cEIRITEMSA11ONALFWJIWL STATS.

FIGURE 1: INFLATION RATES SINCE 1973

.4

—3-

1980s.

Compared with the recent period of flexible exchange rates, therefore,

the 1960s appear to have been a golden era of economic performance.

Yet we should hesitate before attributing recent economic performance to

the switch from fixed to flexible exchange rates. Although flexible rates

may

help to explain high inflation rates in the 1970s, it is much more difficult
to tie growth rates, unemployment rates, or productivity performance to a

nominal variable like the exchange rate. Nor is it easy to say how the fixed
rate system would have performed in response to the economic disturbances of
the 70s and 80s, including the two oil shocks and the sharp changes in

macroeconomic policies undertaken in Britain and the United States. Rather
than try to account for this gap in economic performance, or to speculate
about how a different exchange rate system might have performed, the paper
will focus on the choices that are presented to policy—makers today. One of'
these choices is to return to fixed exchange rates, but in today's economic
environment this may prove as difficult as putting Humpty Dumpty together
again.

The paper addresses a number of issues important to exchange rate policy:

Exchange Rate Variability: The first section of the paper examines the
problem which exchange rate policy is designed to address, exchange rate

variability. It distinguishes between two types of exchange rate variability,
the short—run volatility of exchange rates characteristic of all asset prices
and the misalignment of exchange rates which may persist for several years at

a time. This distinction is crucial to an understanding of exchange rate
policy, since actions designed to reduce volatility may not be well suited to
countering misalignments.

Role of Sterilized Intervention: Casual observers may regard exchange market
intervention as the primary tool of exchange rate policy, yet existing

27.18.2

evidence raises doubts about the effectiveness of intervention unaccompanied

by changes in money supplies. The second section of the paper reviews
existing statistical evidence on so-called sterilized intervention, then

studies two recent episodes of foreign exchange intervention in November 1978
and September 1985.

Fixed Exchange Rates: Those who look on the Bretton Woods System with
nostalgia may not recall how that system actually performed in practice. The
third section examines arguments for and against fixed exchange rates in

general. It then reviews experience under the Bretton Woods System as well as
the recently established European Monetary System.

Rules for Managed Floating: The fourth section considers various proposals
for managing exchange rates, including the rules adopted by the International

Monetary Fund in 1978. One ambitious scheme for exchange rate management
involves establishing target zones for the major currencies. The fourth
section examines target zones in detail because of the attention given to
targets in recent government and academic discussions.

1. The Problem of Exchange Rate Variability
Variable exchange rates pose problems for an economy, but the problems

vary widely depending upon the nature of the variability. A useful
distinction can be drawn between two types of variability, volatility and

misalignment. Volatility is the day—to-day, month-to-month variability of
exchange rates, a variability that may have no trend to it. Misalignment, in
contrast, is the persistent departureof an exchange rate from its long run
competitive level. Misalignment thus refers not to month—to—month variability
but to longer-lasting movements of exchange rates, and only to those movements
which depart from relative price trends, thus altering the relative

competitiveness of a country's goods.3 This distinction is important for

27. 18 .2

—5—

intervention policy because a case might be made that only one form of

variability is harmful and therefore might Justify intervention. It must be
admitted at the outset, however, that this distinction between the two forms
of exchange rate variability is more easily made in theory than in practice,
since exchange rates may exhibit their greatest volatility during periods of

misalignment. Nonetheless, the paper will consider each form of variability
in turn.

1.1. Volatility
One of the lessons learned from the voluminous literature on exchange
rate behavior written in the 1970s is that exchange rates behave like asset
prices, displaying much more volatility than most macroeconomic variables such

as output or the prices of goods and services.4 This is not surprising given
the dominance of asset trades in the determination of exchange rates. Table 2
examines the volatility of exchange rates using one measure of volatility, the

standard deviation of monthly percentage changes in exchange rates.5 This
measure of volatility, suggested by Lanyi and Suss (1982), counts as variable
only those movements in exchange rates which depart from an average trend
(measured as a percentage change).

Volatility Comparisons
Table 2 compares the volatility of' exchange rates with the volatility of

price ratios based on two aggregate price indexes, the consumer price index
and the wholesale price index, for the so-called Group of Five industrial
countries, France, Germany, Japan, United Kingdom and United States.
According to this table, bilateral exchange rates are more than twice as
volatile as these price ratios, in some cases more than five times as

volatile.6 This should not be surprising once it is recognized that, unlike

27.18.2

TABLE 2
STANDARD DEVIATIONS OF MONTHLY PERCENTAGE CHANGES

IN EXCHANGE RATES AND OTHER PRICES,
JULY 1973-DECEMBER 1985

JAPAN

FRANCE

GERMANY

NOMINAL BILATERALa

0.027)4

0.0279

0.0288

0.0255

REAL BILATERALa,b

0.0256

0.0272

0.0302

0.0271

EXCHANGE RATES:

NOMINAL EFFECTIVE°

0.0166

0.0229

0.0120

0.0113

0.0195

REAL EFFECTIVEb,c

0.0176

0.0208

0.0116

0.0118

0.0197

RATIOS OF CpItSa

0.009)4

0.0037

0.0039

0.0081

RATIOS OF WpItSa

0.0106

0.0123

0.0078

0.0090
0.0597

PRICES:

STOCK INDEXES

0.0388

0.029L1

0.0580

0.0315

COMMODITY PRICES

COPPER

COTTON
0.0656

RICE
0.0700

TIN

WHEAT

0.05)46

0.06)46

0.01481

NOTES:

aAll bilateral comparisons are vis-a-vis the United States.
bReal exchange rates are measured using wholesale price indexes.
CEfféctive exchange rates are weighted averages of ten countries'
exchange rates (0—5 plus Belgium, Canada, Italy, the Netherlands, and
Switzerland); weights are based on total trade (imports plus exports) in
manufactures.

SOURCES: Monthly series: International Monetary Fund, International
Financial Statistics tape.
Trade weights: Morgan Guaranty Trust, World Financial Markets.

27.18.1

-6—

many goods prices which are changed only infrequently, exchange rates are free
to respond to any new information hitting the exchange markets.

Even though exchange rates are volatile when compared with price indexes,
however, they are less volatile than some asset prices like stock exchange

indexes. And exchange rate volatility is also generally lower than the
volatility of commodity prices quoted on organized exchanges. Table 2 also
reports volatility measures for both sets of variables. Notice that three
agricultural commodities important to farming communities, cotton, rice, and
wheat, have almost three times the volatility of exchange rates.
That exchange rates are so much more volatile than prices should suggest

that the volatility of real exchange rates is also quite large. Table 2 also
provides evidence that real rates are about as volatile as nominal rates.
This table presents volatility measures of' nominal and real bilateral exchange

rates as well as nominal and real effective exchange rates. Throughout the
paper, the real exchange rate (Rt) is defined as the ratio of the domestic
price index

(XtP) where
(1)

to the domestic currency value of the foreign price index
is the domestic currency price of the foreign currency:7

Rt

P/(XtP)

The domestic and foreign prices used are wholesale price indexes (or WPI's)
which are available on a monthly basis for most industrial countries.
Effective exchange rates are obtained by weighting the exchange rates of ten
countries (G—5 plus five medium-size industrial countries) by the share of
total trade in manufactures (imports plus exports) of one country with each of

the other countries.8 The lesson to be learned from this table is an
important one: real exchange rates are volatile primarily because nominal

exchange rates are volatile. That is, the relative stability of price levels

27. 18.2

—7—

means that nominal exchange rate volatility translates into real exchange rate
volatility.

Excessive Volatility?
Recent studies have addressed the question of whether asset prices are
excessively volatile relative to the underlying factors determining their

values. Shiller (1979), for example, studies whether long term interest rates
are excessively volatile relative to interest rates on short term bonds. He
finds that the volatility of long rates exceeds the limits imposed by term—
structure models which represent long term rates as averages of expected short

term rates. The same type of methodology can be used to investigate the
volatility of exchange rates.9 But the tests are valid only if the researcher
uses the correct underlying model of exchange rates, and there is little

consensus about the appropriate model to use)0 Huang (1981) shows that
exchange rates are excessively volatile relative to a monetary model of

exchange rates. But exchange rate volatility has yet to be investigated in
terms of other models, so whether exchange rates exhibit excessive volatility
remains an open question.

Changes in Volatility over Time
We have lived with flexible exchange rates for over a decade now, but
there is no evidence that exchange rate volatility has declined as traders

have become more accustomed to flexibility. Figure 2 illustrates the pattern
of volatility over time for the real effective exchange rates for the yen and

dollar. (The currencies in the European Monetary System, including the
Deutche mark, are discussed in Section 3). Volatility is measured over the
twenty-four months immediately prior to each time period. The yen and dollar
experienced a decrease in volatility in 1976—77 before being hit by the second

27. 18.2

ao
ao

ao

acM

aow

ao

ao

ao

aca

ao

10

U

TO
DOU.AR

s.a or csmty x

TO

02
TEN

ciim ovn+24 Mo,mIs

II

$OI SAlE AS TAILE 2

83

84

FIG. 2: VOLATILTY OF REAL EFF. RATES

1

m

—

-8-

.nd by changes in U.S. policy (to be discussed below). There are no
.Lous trends in these series.

No doubt exchange rates are much more volatile than they were under the

so—called fixed exchange rate regime of the 1960s. Table 3 uses quarterly
data for real effective exchange rates to compare volatility during the 1960s

with that of the more recent period from 1973 to 1985. Volatility is defined
as the standard deviation of quarterly percentage changes. The results are
quite clear: the Bretton Woods System's band around par values did constrain

the volatility of real exchange rates. The two currencies experiencing only a
marginal increase in volatility, the franc and mark, are those which have been
tied together in European exchange rate arrangements, first the SNAKE and more
recently the European Monetary System.

Effects on Trade
To what extent should we concerned with volatility per se? That question

is difficult to answer. There is ample evidence that the movements in
exchange rates reflected in the volatility measures are mostly

unanticipated. (For example, forward premiums explain only a fraction of the

variance of spot exchange rate changes.) So trading firms must cope with
uncertainty about exchange rates. In drawing up contracts involving foreign
exchange exposure, firms must take into account this uncertainty. They may
elect to purchase forward exchange, but the forward market is limited to less
than a dozen currencies, and for most of'

these

currencies the market is thin

for all but the shortest maturities. (Note, however, that limiting hedging
alternatives to less than a dozen currencies is less restrictive than it seems
since most of the other currencies in the world are tied to the major

currencies.) They may use the Eurocurrency markets to hedge their currency
exposure, matching assets and liabilities in different currencies (the range

27.18.2

TABLE 3
STANDARD DEVIATIONS OF QUARTERLY PERCENTAGE CHANGES

IN REAL EFFECTIVE EXCHANGE RATES

JAPAN

FRANCE

GERMANY

FIXED EXCHANGE RATE PERIOD: 1960 I - 1971
0.0066

0.0070

0.0155

KINGDOM

I:

O.O141

0.0162

FLEXIBLE EXCHANGE RATE PERIOD: 1973 II — 1985 IV:
0.0281

0.0377

SOURCES: Same as Table 2.

27. 18. 1

0.0185

0.0193

0.0391

—9—

of

currencies available closely corresponding to the set available in the

forward markets). They may take advantage of currency swaps which expand the

range of foreign currency instruments available to the average company. Firms
may also take advantage of the relatively new markets for options on foreign

exchange, particularly when bidding on contracts. Finally, large

multinational firms can diversify away much of the exchange risk. These
hedging and diversification strategies are not without costs, including the

additional managerial effort required to monitor exposure. These costs must
be weighed against whatever benefits the present system affords.
Despite strong evidence that exchange rate volatility is much greater
under flexible rates than under fixed rates, it has been difficult to
establish statistically that this increase in volatility has seriously

affected international trade. Hooper and Kohlhagen (1978) studied the effects
of volatility on bilateral trade flows of the United States and Germany with

other major industrial countries. They found "absolutely no significant
effect of exchange risk on the volume of trade" (p. 505). Cushxnan (1983)
found some evidence of reduced trade using the volatility of real rather than
nominal exchange rates as his measure of risk. Kenen and Rodrik (19814), using
multilateral trade data and effective exchange rates for eleven countries,

also found some limited evidence of trade reduction. But for some countries
in their sample, higher volatility seemed to increase rather than reduce

trade. The strongest evidence in favor of trade reduction effects was
provided by Akhtar and Hilton (19814) who examined aggregate export and import

behavior in the United States and Germany. Using a longer sample period than
Hooper and Kohlhagen who studied the same two countries, Akhtar and Hilton
found that German exports and imports were significantly reduced as a result
of the increased volatility of nominal effective exchange rates, measured as

27. 18.2

-la-

the standard deviation of daily exchange rates. Even that study, however,
found that U.S. imports were unaffected by volatility, and U.S. exports only

marginally so. How is this evidence to be interpreted? It may be that
opportunities for hedging and diversification are sufficient to limit the

impact of volatility on trade. But it also may be that our econometric
methods are not sufficiently powerful to determine the effects of volatility
on trade.

Example of a Trading Firm
At this point it is useful to remind readers that volatility as defined
is very different from the persistent misalignment of exchange rates that we

have experienced recently. When the rise in the dollar leads to a loss of
competitiveness for U.S. goods of more than thirty percent, as has happened
over the last several years, trade is bound to be affected regardless of how
successful firms are in reducing the effects of exchange rate volatility.
The distinction between the two concepts can be illustrated by a simple

example. Suppose an American firm regularly exports goods to Germany for sale
in that country. Whether these goods are invoiced in dollars or marks
determines which firm, the American exporting firm or the German importing
firm, bears the "transaction risk", the exchange risk associated with a

particular export contract. If the mark/dollar (or DM/$) rate fluctuates
widely around an equilibrium value of DM2/$ (i.e., if the DM/$ rate ishighly
volatile), that risk can be considerable. The firm bearing the transaction
risk, however, may elect to purchase a forward contract to hedge this risk.

Alternatively, the risk can be reduced by appropriate financing or

diversification strategies. Contrast the same American firm faced with a
misalignment of the DM/$ rate at a level of DM3/$ (as occurred in the early

1980s). If this misalignment is persistent, then the firm will find its

27.18.2

—.11—

"economic exposure" can not be hedged so easily. The firm may be faced with a
choice between shutting down or shifting its production facilities abroad.

1.2. Misalignment
Economists writing on flexible exchange rates in the 1960s contemplated
neither the magnitude nor the persistence of the changes in real exchange
rates that have occurred in the last fifteen years, so the term "misalignment"

is a relatively new one. In his recent study of exchange rates, Williamson
defines misalignment as the "persistent departure of the exchange rate from

its long run equilibrium level" (Williamson, 1985, p. 13). Defining such a
long run equilibrium is no simple task. Williamson identifies the long run
equilibrium exchange rate as
that which is expected to generate a current account surplus
or deficit equal to the underlying capital flow over the
cycle, given that the country is pursuing 'internal balance'
as best it can and not rericting trade for balance of
payments reasons [p. 114].
It is evident that such a definition refers to the real rather than the
nominal exchange rate, so the nominal exchange rate has to be adjusted by

relative prices through time if inflation differentials are significant. This
is analogous to calculating a purchasing power parity (or PPF) exchange rate

relative to some base period. But Williamson's concept of the long run
equilibrium rate is more sophisticated than a PPP concept since it also takes
into account real shocks such as the OPEC price increases of 1973—714 and 1978—
79.

This paper will discuss some of the problems involved in defining long—

run equilibrium when we analyze target zones for exchange rates. In this
section, there is no need to be specific about what is the equilibrium level
of any exchange rate in order to illustrate the extent of movement of real

exchange rates over time for some of the major currencies. In Figure 3 one

27. 18.2

a

no

MO

so

T4

ye
+

JAPAN

ye

o

/

/

ITA1I

//

/

-

-

FIG. 3: REAL EFFECTIVE EXCHANGE RATES

—12-

commonly cited measure of' real exchange rates, real effective exchange rates

based on wholesale prices in manufacturing, is used to illustrate the
movements of the dollar, yen, and pound sterling over the period since the

start of floating in 1973. The series illustrated are provided by Morgan

Guaranty Trust in its World Financial Markets. The figure illustrates clearly
the wide swings in real exchange rates which have characterized these

currencies.12 In the period since 1973, the most serious cases of
misalignment among the industrial countries occurred with respect to the pound

sterling and the dollar. Between 1976 and 1980, the pound rose by over forty
percent in real effective terms. Between 1980 and 1985, the dollar rose more
than thirty-five percent using yearly averages.13 Its peak in February 1985
was forty-two percent above its 1980 average. Both cases of misalignment will
be studied in detail in order to show the extent of the misalignment and its

effects on the economies concerned. Before doing so, however, the paper will
discuss some of the costs associated with misalignment to show why there is so
much concern about it.

Costs of misalignment
When real exchange rates are misaligned, there are incentives to shift
resources, both internally and externally. Internally, whenever the rate is
overvalued, services and other so—called "nontradable" industries gain at the

expense of export and import-competing or "tradable" industries. Externally,
foreign competitors gain at the expense of these same industries. These

shifts in resources are costly.1
Misalignments of the size experienced recently, where competing countries
gain a price advantage of 20 or 30 percent, can have very disruptive effects

on firms producing traded goods. Since misalignments may persist for five
years or more, production facilities in some tradables industries may be

27.18.2

—13-.

mothballed or scrapped altogether even though these facilities might be
internationally competitive at exchange rates closer to their long run

equilibrium levels. Short-run losses of competitiveness due to misalignment
can easily become permanent in cases where foreign firms are able to establish

themselves in an industry. Baldwin and Krugman (1986) have shown that such
irreversible changes can occur in industries where costs of entry (e.g.,

investment in marketing and distribution) would deter foreign competition in
the absence of the misalignment.

If a firm is a multinational, it might elect to shift the production

facility threatened by the misalignment to lower—cost countries. That
decision is not without peril, however, since today's undervalued exchange

rate might swing to overvaluation as did sterling in the late 1970s. A firm
electing to locate a production facility in Britain in the mid 1970s would
have been unpleasantly surprised by the real appreciation that followed.
Even if domestic production facilities are merely rnothballed, moreover,

the resulting unemployment is costly. Given sufficient time, the labor force
can be retrained and reassigned to non-tradable industries. But even if such
shifts of employment between industries can be effected, the costs involved

are still significant. The decision to shift to a new industry is made more
difficult by three factors. First, it is as unclear to the labor force as it
is to firms how long the misalignment will last. The decision of employees to
seek employment elsewhere or of firms to close facilities must be made despite
the considerable uncertainty about the timing of any return to equilibrium.

(Recall the uncertainty about the timing of the dollar's fall). Second, it is
hard to disentangle long run shifts in comparative advantage from

misalignment. The U.S. steel and automobile industries, for example, were no
doubt hurt by the misalignment, but the growth of foreign production was

27.18.2

-1 J4_

important as well. Third, there is the uncertainty about future protectionist
measures which might shield an industry from both misalignment and secular

declines in competitiveness. These sources of uncertainty make it difficult
for both the labor force and firms to make decisions. In the early 1980s auto
workers, for example, had to decide whether to retrain and possibly relocate
on the basis of their assessment of the duration of misalignment, the long
term prospects of the auto industry, and the political economy of

protectionism. This was a formidable task indeed-—one certainly beyond the
skills of economists.

The costs of misalignment are not limited to the firms and labor force in

the tradables sector. First, the economy as a whole must adjust its
consumption of nontradables if the resources shifted to that sector are to be

fully employed. Since the relative price of tradables has fallen, that shift
in nontradables requires an increase in total consumption relative to its long

run sustainable level. A capital account surplus will finance this consumer
surge, but at the cost of a buildup of debt. So one of the costs of the
misalignment, as emphasized earlier by Hause (1966) and Johnson (1966), is a

major shift in the time pattern of consumption.15 The second cost is one
alluded to earlier, the cost of tariffs and other protectionist measures which

may be introduced in response to the misalignment. In his study of trade
tensions between the United States and Japan, Bergzten (1982) points out the
three recent periods when protectionist pressures were at their height in the
United States were times when the dollar was most overvalued relative to the

yen. The costs of protectionist legislation if enacted, which would be
"justified" by the need to protect the tradables industries, are borne by
consumers throughout the economy.

27.18.2

-15-

Some of the costs associated with misalignments are illustrated by the
two most serious cases of misalignment among the major industrial countries,
those of Britain and the United States.

The misalignment of sterling in 1979—82
The run-up of sterling began before the Conservative Government led by
Margaret Thatcher took office in June 1979, but during the first three years

of that Government the misalignment problem became severe. Sterling rose from
$1.70/L in 1976 to $2.140/L in 1980. The rise in the nominal value of'

sterling,

moreover, was matched by its rise in real terms. Figure 3

above

shows a rise in the real effective exchange rate for sterling by 145% between

1976 and 1981. Recall that this series for the real exchange rate is based on
manufacturing prices, so the rise in the index reflects a startling loss of

price competitiveness in Britain's principal export sector. A real
appreciation of this magnitude led to what was called at the time the
"deindustrializatjon of Britain."

This appreciation is usually attributed to two main factors: the
discovery and exploitation of North Sea oil and the commitment to tight

monetary policy by the Thatcher government. Although North Sea discoveries
began in the early 1970s, production rose sharply only in the late 1970s, from
16.6 million tons in (the financial year) 1976—77 to 79.6

million

tons in

1979_80.16 So the timing of sterling's rise coincides roughly with the rise
in North Sea production (although not with the exchange market's anticipation

of this rise). In a detailed study of economic policies under the first
Thatcher Government, however, Buiter and Miller (1983) find that at most 10
percent of the real appreciation can be attributed to the effects of North Sea

oil.17 The second factor, tight monetary policy, also undoubtedly played a
role in the appreciation. The appreciation, however, may have been due more

27.18.2

—16—

to the announced targets for money growth rather than actual money growth
performance, since actual money growth (at least for the broader aggregates)

repeatedly outran the targets. After evaluating these and other explanations
of the appreciation, Buiter and Miller conclude that much of the appreciation
remains unexplained; indeed, they "find the decline in competitiveness
puzzling" (1983, p. 317).

How much of this real appreciation represents misalignment of the real

exchange rate from its equilibrium level? The discovery of North Sea oil
shifted the equilibrium real exchange rate, so some of the loss of
competitiveness of' British manufacturing might be better termed "realignment"

rather than "misalignment." That is, some of the real appreciation of
sterling reflected the necessary adjustment of relative prices called for by

this real shock. But what about the real appreciation due to the monetary
tightening (or prospective monetary tightening)? If misalignment is defined
as the departure of the exchange rate from its equilibrium level, then the
overshooting of the exchange rate associated with monetary tightening should

be labelled misalignment. The monetary policy itself may have been desirable
as part of a disinflation policy, but the accompanying temporary overshooting
of the exchange rate imposes adjustment costs which are just as severe as when
the exchange rate becomes misaligned as a result of exchange market
inefficiences or speculative bubbles.

The effects of the appreciation on the British manufacturing sectOr were

usually severe. Value added in manufacturing fell by over 8% in 1980 and by
over 6% in 1981 compared with declines of 2% or less in GDP in these same two

years. The effects on employment in manufacturing were slower to develop, but
appear to be longer lasting. According to Figure U, employment in
manufacturing declined by over )4% in 1980, but by over 10% in 1981, and it

27.18.2

I

-e

—

-Ti

-e

-4

-3

-2

.4

0

1

2

ye

TOTAL

I

ng7s-e
MA*ACTLIIQ

as
NN
PEO

TI

_-T——

SOImcEs OECO NATIONAL ACCO1IT3

I

N

FIG. 4: GROWTH IN BRITISH EMPLOYMENT

—17—

continued to decline in 1982 and 1983. The effects of sterling's loss of'

competitiveness were devastating for British manufacturing. The term "Dutch
Disease" is used to describe the loss of competitiveness of a manufacturing

sector when oil or gas discoveries drive up the exchange rate. Britain seems
to have suffered from a particularly virulent strain of this disease, although
as argued above the causes of the illness cannot be attributed to North Sea
oil alone.

Misalignment of the Dollar, 1981-85
The dollar has more recently been misaligned as seriously as the pound
sterling was in 1980-82, but the effects of the misalignment on employment

have been mitigated by strong domestic demand for U.S. goods. Figure 5 traces
three real effective exchange rates for the dollar, all based on prices in the

manufacturing sectors of the United States and its trading partners. The
three prices represented are wholesale prices, value added deflators, and

normalized unit labor costs. The real exchange rates measure U.S. relative to
foreign prices or labor costs, so a rise in any of the real exchange rate
series represents a real appreciation of the dollar and a loss of
competitiveness for U.S. manufactures.18 The sharp appreciation of' the dollar
from 1980 to 1985 is seen in all three series, appreciations of from 314 to 143

percent in five years.

The origins of the appreciation remain a controversial subject. Among
the principal causes cited are the fiscal policies of the Reagan
Administration, the tight monetary policies pursued by the Federal Reserve
Board since Paul Volcker became Chairman in 1979, the rise in investment
associated with the Tax Reduction Act of 1981, and the flight of capital to

the "safe haven" of U.S. capital markets. Branson (1985) presents the
argument in favor of attributing much of the rise to American fiscal

27.18.2

—

WPRIMANW.

T3

85

.5

105

110—

130

75

,

+

Ta

/

NONMAUD ILC

//

,1

81

//

PflERNA1JOIIALFRI.STATS.

PRICES FOR MA*FAC11IO SECTOR

77

3OIcE

*

.3

/

/

VA DEFLATOR

TTr

-I/

/

'if

1'

FIG. 5: REAL EXCHANGE RATES FOR DOLLAR

-18-

policies.

Although the defense buildup and tax cuts were spread out over

several years, Branson argues that the Reagan Administration made credible
"announcements" concerning this policy in 1981, a year when the dollar rose

sharply. Obstfeld (1985) also attributes much of the rise to fiscal policy,

but he emphasizes the separate contribution of foreign fiscal authorities. In
a back-of—the-envelope calculation of fiscal effects, he attributes to fiscal
policy a real appreciation of a little over 20 percent, but almost half of

that appreciation is due to foreign fiscal policy. Frenkel (1985) argues that
the initial rise in the dollar (in 1980) was due more to actual monetary

policy than to expected future fiscal policy. He cites the rise in short-term
interest rates which could not have been due to fiscal actions several years

in the future. Evidence for the role of investment and the "safe haven"
flight of capital is harder to find. Branson points out that while the level
of investment rose sharply in the 1983-85 recovery, the level of investment

relative to GNP was not unusually high in that period. "Safe haven" effects
may have been at work during the period, but it is hard to argue that the
degree of political risk in Europe at least was higher in the 1980s than in
earlier postwar periods.19

Unlike the origins of the misalignment, the effects on U.S. trade are

unmistakable. The export and importing-competing sectors of the U.S. economy

have been hard hit. Table 4
1980

and 1985, as

reports

the trade balance by sector in two years,

well as the percentage change in the trade balance over this

period measured as a percentage of exports in 1980. According to this table,
the sectors hardest hit by the misalignment were the auto and general consumer
goods sectors; the trade balance in autos deteriorated by almost 180% of 1980
exports during this five year period, while the trade balance in general

consumer goods deteriorated by over 200%. Even the capital goods sector,

27.18.2

TABLE 11

U.S. TRADE ACCOUNT

(IN

BILLIONS ON CURRENT $)

180
MERCHANDISE TRADE BALANCE
Agriculture and Raw Materials
Fuels
Manufactures
Capital Goods
Autos
Consumer Goods
Other

-27.7
32.7
—79.1
15.3

18

—10.2
—17.9

-122.1
1.3
—50.5
—81.2
11.6
140.6
-52.2

3.14

8.2

143.14

%CFIANGE
1980-85
143.3
-30.5
36.2
-90.3
_Lr3.3

-179.9
-207.9
57.8

*Measured as a percent of exports in 1980 (imports in the case of fuels).

SOURCE: Survey of Current Business, National Income and Product Accounts.

27.18.1

—19—

normally the strongest of the U.S. manufacturing sectors, deteriorated sharply

with the trade balance falling to $11.6 billion from a 1980 level of $L3i
billion. The trade balance as a whole went from a deficit of $27.7 billion in
1980 to an alarmingly large deficit of $122.1 billion in 1985.20
The misalignment, of course, was not the sole cause of this deterioration

in U.S. trade performance. During the 1980-85 period, growth in Europe lagged
behind that in the United States, causing faster growth of imports in the

United States. In addition, the debt crisis forced Latin American countries
to curtail their imports from the United States, a factor which may be
particularly important in explaining the fall in U.S. exports of capital

goods. But the trade sector had to have been seriously affected by a change
in relative prices of the magnitude experienced.

The misalignment led to a fall in production and employment in many

subsectors of manufacturing. Branson and Love (1986) have estimated
disaggregated equations for production and employment in the United States to

determine the effects of the dollar's appreciation. They attribute a loss of
1.3 million jobs in U.S. manufacturing to a L0

percent

appreciation of the

dollar. This job loss was concentrated in the durable goods sectors, with
many of these jobs being lost in two of those sectors, primary metals and non-

electrical machinery. Nonetheless, the effects of the dollar's appreciation
on industrial production and employment were not as severe as in the case of

Britain for two reasons. First, the trade sector is much less important to
the U.S. economy than it is to the British. Perhaps more importantly, the
appreciation coincided with a defense buildup as well as a consumer boom which
kept domestic demand for U.S. goods strong despite the inroads made by foreign
goods.

27. 18.2

-20-

The two case studies serve to illustrate the disruptive effects of
sizable misaligrunents. One sector of the economy, the tradables sector,
suffers inordinately during the period of the misalignment while the rest of

the economy stumbles on. During the period of sterling's misalignment, the
dichotomy between traded and nontraded sectors took a geographical form. The
north of England, where traditional industries such as steel and automobiles
were centered, suffered from severe unemployment, while the area around London

remained relatively prosperous. In the United States, the contrast in
fortunes between the rust-belt and the sun-belt can be explained at least in
part by the deterioration of U.S. competitiveness associated with the
appreciation of the dollar.

The problems associated with misalignment thus differ markedly from those

associated with volatility. No simple hedging strategy can protect a firm
from a loss of relative competitiveness of thirty per cent or more.

Having defined these problems of exchange rate variability, the paper now

turns to the search for solutions. Some observers might contend that the
solution is obvious: governments must adopt policies designed to minimize the

variability of exchange rates. Yet the fact that there are costs associated
with volatility and misalignment does not in itself justify policies designed

to limit exchange rate variability. Before discussing the arguments for and
against exchange rate policies, the paper reviews evidence on the
effectiveness of the most common instrument used to control exchange rates,
foreign exchange intervention.

2. The Effectiveness of Foregp Exchange Intervention
The central question addressed in this section is the following: does
foreign exchange intervention constitute a separate instrument of exchange
rate policy, or does it work solely through its effects on domestic and

27. 18.2

—21—

foreign money supplies. If the latter is the case, then intervention must be
considered in the broader framework of monetary policy.

2.1. Definition of Foreign Exchange Intervention
This section begins with a definition of foreign exchange intervention.
Intervention is difficult to define because there are many ways in which the

monetary authorities can influence exchange rates. The Working Group on
Exchange Market Intervention, commissioned to study foreign exchange
intervention by the Versailles Summit of June 1982, adopted a narrow
definition of intervention modified to include certain "passive" operations.
According to the Working Group's Report (hereafter referred to as the
Jurgerisen Report),21 the narrow definition consists of "any sale or purchase

of foreign exchange against domestic currency which monetary authorities

undertake in the exchange market." It includes all central bank purchases and
sales of foreign exchange against domestic currency, whatever form of

financing is used (reserves, swaps, official borrowing, etc.). The Jurgensen
Report adds to this narrow definition three forms of "passive" intervention:
sales concluded by the central bank with public sector entities including the
central government (which would otherwise have undertaken the transactions in
the exchange market), IMF drawings, and interest payments on international

reserves. This definition makes intervention equivalent to the change in the

monetary authorities' net foreign currency assets excluding any capital gains
on existing assets. The definition specifically does not include exchange
market transactions carried out by other private or public entities which
might be considered to be "directed" by the government or central bank (such
as Eurodollar loans to public authorities) because it is so difficult to
establish the intent of the authorities in the case of such transactions.

27.18.2

-22—

More important than the precise definition of intervention is the

distinction between sterilized and non-sterilized intervention. The Jurgensen
Report defines sterilized intervention as a "change in the monetary
authorities' net foreign currency assets which is offset by a corresponding
change in their net domestic assets so that their monetary liabilities (or,

specifically, the monetary base) remains unchanged" (p. 6). Non-sterilized
intervention, in contrast, involves a one-for—one change in the authorities'

net foreign currency assets and the monetary base. Non-sterilized
intervention thus is a form of monetary policy, distinquishable from
conventional open market operations only in the asset being exchanged for

money.22 There is virtually unanimous agreement among economists that nonsterilized intervention can affect exchange rates, just as more
conventionally-defined monetary policy can undoubtedly affect exchange

rates. The effectiveness of sterilized interventior, in contrast, is a much
more controversial topic. Yet if foreign exchange intervention is to be
regarded as a separate instrument of economic policy, distinct from monetary
policy, then it must take the form of'

sterilized

intervention.

2.2. Effectiveness of Sterilized Intervention
There are three distinct channels through which sterilized intervention

can affect exchange rates.23 The first is the most straightforward:
sterilized intervention works by altering the supplies of assets in private

portfolios, thus requiring a realignment of asset returns. This portfolio
balance channel requires that foreign and domestic securities be imperfect

substitutes. The more substitutable are these securities, the smaller is the
realignment of asset returns, and thus the smaller is the change in the

current exchange rate, required to rebalance portfolios. In the limiting case
of perfect substitution between securities, where investors regard domestic

27. 18.2

-23—

and foreign bonds as interchangeable, sterilized intervention is completely
ineffective, at least through this portfolio balance channel.

The other two channels operate through announcement effects requiring
either market inefficiencies or superior information on the part of the

authorities. If the market is inefficient, intervention operations may help
to focus the attention of the public on hitherto neglected factors even though

the operation itself provides no new information. It is difficult to provide
a convincing rationale for why market operators would neglect publicly

available information, or why intervention would refocus their attention on
this information. But we cannot rule out this possibility a priori.
Alternatively, the intervention operation could provide new information by
signalling the private market about the future monetary policies of the

authorities.21 This last channel could operate even if the market were
efficient, in the sense that market participants incorporate all available
information in forming their expectations, since the authorities naturally
have superior information about their future intentions.

There is extensive empirical research on the effectiveness of sterilized
intervention. Although this evidence is far from conclusive, it is strong
enough to have led the Jurgensen Report to conclude that "there was broad
agreement among the members of the Working Group that sterilized intervention
alone did not appear to have constituted an effective instrument in the face

of persistent market pressures" (p. 20). Whether or not sterilized
intervention might have a short-term impact through announcement effects was
less clear to the Working Group.

The Jurgensen Report's conclusion is based on two different types of

evidence. First, there are tests of "speculative efficiency", which are
actually joint tests of uncovered interest parity and market efficiency.

27. 18 .2

Second, there are estimates of portfolio models designed to determine the

influence of bond supplies on risk premia. These two sets of evidence reach
sharply different conclusions.
"Speculative Efficiency" Tests
Tests of "speculative efficiency" are based on uncovered interest parity,
the equality of expected returns on securities denominated in different

currencies. If uncovered interest parity holds, the expected interest return
on a dollar security should equal the expected return on a foreign currency
security measured in terms of'

dollars

(the expected return consisting of the

foreign interest rate plus the expected capital gain or loss on the foreign

currency).25 The expected returns will be equal whenever investors regard the
two securities as perfect substitutes. If investors are risk—averse, on the
other hand, then they will regard two securities denominated in different
currencies as imperfect substitutes, and a risk—premium will separate the two

expected returns. In that case, sterilized intervention might be effective if
it can change the relative supply of dollar and non-dollar securities enough
to affect the risk premium.

To determine whether uncovered interest parity holds, investigators must
examine actual, not expected, returns (since expected returns are not

observable). Uncovered interest parity does not ensure that actual returns
are equal on securities denominated in different currencies. But the
differential between these returns should be random as long as the forecast
errors from predicting exchange rates are random, which will be the case if

the exchange market is "efficient." The "speculative efficiency" test, which
tests jointly whether uncovered interest parity holds and the exchange market
is efficient, thus examines whether actual returns on securities denominated
in different currencies are equal except for a random factor.

27. 18.2

—25-

During the 1970s, a score of investigators ran tests of speculative

efficiency using different time periods and currencies. With few exceptions,
they were unable to reject the speculative efficiency hypothesis. The
evidence was strong enough for Mussa (1979, p. 214) to conclude in his summary

of empirical regularities in the foreign exchange market that "the interest
differential in favor of domestic currency bonds is equal approximately to the
expected rate of depreciation of domestic money in terms of foreign money."
Recent studies, however, have been able to reject the speculative
efficiency hypothesis using longer data sets and more sophisticated

statistical techniques.26 In fact, they have provided such convincing
evidence against speculative efficiency that researchers have turned their
attention towards explaining deviations from uncovered interest parity in
terms of risk premia (while maintaining the hypothesis that the exchange
market is efficient).

Direct Evidence of Risk Premia
If investors are risk averse, the expected returns on securities
denominated in different currencies will be separated by a risk premium which
is a function of the relative supplies of foreign and domestic securities,
domestic arid foreign wealth, and other factors.27 Investigators have searched
for evidence of this risk premia without success. Rogoff (19814), for example,
finds no evidence that the interest differential between U.S. and Canadian

bonds is sensitive to the relative supply of these bonds. (So he finds no
evidence that sterilized intervention in the Canadian dollar market, which
would alter the relative supplies of U.S. and Canadian dollar bonds, could

affect exchange rates). Other investigators have used more elaborate models
to £nvestigate risk premia, but have reached conclusions similar to those of
Rogoff.28

27. 18 .2

-26-

Interpreting the Conflicting Evidence

The two sets of evidence from speculative efficiency and portfolio

balance studies seem to give conflicting results. The studies of speculative
efficiency suggest the importance of a time—varying risk premium, but the
portfolio balance studies are unable to explain that risk premium in terms of

relative asset supplies. There are at least three ways to reconcile this
evidence. First, an appeal can be made to market inefficiencies which would
account for the ex post interest differentials without appealing to a risk

premium. But to date no one has provided a convincing rationale for why
traders would fail to eliminate any perceived profit opportunities in the

foreign exchange market. Second, it may be the case that, even though a timevarying risk premium is important in explaining interest differentials,

sterilized intervention (or any other change in relative bond supplies) has a

negligible effect on that risk premium. Third, existing empirical methods may
not be sophisticated enough to establish the effectiveness of sterilized

intervention. Unfortunately, there is no basis for choosing between these
last two alternatives. It is evident that the menu of' assets available to
investors is much larger than the choice between domestic and foreign bonds

modelled in many studies. Portfolio decisions, moreover, have an
intertemporal dimension in which consumption and investment decisions are made
simultaneously, in contrast to the static models that form the basis of

existing empirical estimates.29 It is unclear whether or not more
sophisticated empirical models, based on a larger menu of assets and
incorporating intertemporal decisions, would confirm or refute existing

empirical evidence. To date, however, there is no evidence that sterilized
intervention can affect exchange rates, at least through conventional

portfolio balance channels. On the basis of existing evidence, therefore, it

27. 18.2

-27—

is difficult to justify using sterilized intervention to carry out exchange
rate policy.

If sterilized intervention is ineffective, a second conclusion follows:

to pursue active exchange rate management, there is no substitute for monetary

policy. Monetary policy can be pursued either with traditional domestic
instruments or with non-sterilized foreign exchange intervention. Whether the
latter is called monetary policy or not is of little importance.
Yet even if monetary policy is necessary for exchange rate management,
there is still a potential role for sterilized intervention if such
intervention provides a signal to the market about future monetary policy.
Because of the very nature of announcement effects, however, it is difficult

to find evidence of them using conventional statistical methods. Two
successive intervention operations of equal size may provide different signals
to the market, so they may have different effects on the exchange rate.

2.3. Two Episodes of Foreign Exchange Intervention
Because statistical evidence leaves the question of announcement effects

unresolved, one might believe that the study of specific episodes of active

foreign exchange intervention might help to resolve this question. Such
episodes are difficult to interpret, but two particularly interesting are

singled out for study. These are the November 1, 1978, announcement of a
dollar defense package by the Carter Administration and the G—5 intervention
of September 1985.

1978 Dollar Defense Package

This episode bolsters the Jurgensen Report's view that intervention can

have significant short term effects. But the ultimate failure of the defense
package, despite the fact that the U.S. authorities assembled $30 billion for
foreign exchange intervention, suggests that short term intervention packages

27.18.2

-28-

alone are not effective unless they are followed by longer term changes in

monetary policy. The dollar defense package came at a time when the foreign
exchange market was in disarray reflecting the growing loss of confidence in

the policies of the Carter administration. In her in-depth study of this
crisis, Margaret Greene (19814, p. 28), a senior official in the Federal

Reserve Bank of New York, describes the market as follows: "During the last
week of October, the selling of dollars reached near-panic proportions, and
dollar rates plummeted to record lows against several major currencies."
After the President announced an anti-inflation program on October 24, a
program received by skepticism by the financial markets, the authorities sold

almost $1 billion equivalent of marks. Yet the dollar dropped against the
mark from DM1.81/$ to DM1.72/$ over the next four trading days.

Similarly,

the dollar dropped against the yen from 181/$ to 178/$.
The package announced on November 1, in contrast to the anti-inflation

program, was an impressive one. First, monetary policy was tightened, with
the discount rate raised by an "unprecedented" 1 percentage point to a (then)

historic high of 9%. (Thus the package had an important monetary policy
component.) Second, a $30 billion package of foreign currency resources was
assembled for future intervention consisting of $15 billion in swaps with
foreign central banks, $5 billion in drawings on the IMF and sales of SDRs,
and $10 billion in so—called "Carter bonds", U.S. Treasury notes denominated
in marks and Swiss francs to be sold abroad.

The market was obviously impressed with the scope of the package and the

resolve about future policy which it seemed to represent. By 9:13 a.m. on

November 1, the dollar had moved 7% above the previous day's low against the
mark to DM1.83/$.30 Within 23 minutes, the dollar had moved up another 1%
against the mark while the Desk sold the equivalent of $69 million marks, to

27.18.2

-29—

SF1.5671$ while the Desk sold $19 million of Swiss francs, and to 1187.57$

with the Desk selling $5 million. As Figure 6 illustrates, by the time of the
closing in London the dollar had risen against the mark to DM1 .85/$ and

against the yen to 1186.51$. By the end of the (New York) day, the dollar had
risen to DM1 .879/$ and to 1187.9/$, up seven to ten percent from its lows of

the day before. The foreign exchange intervention undertaken by the Desk that
day amounted to a little more than $600 million, over two-thirds of it
consisting of intervention in the market for marks.

The U.S. authorities, in cooperation with the Bundesbank, Swiss National
Bank, and Bank of Japan, had to intervene repeatedly in the following weeks as

the market tried to test official resolve. Figure 6 shows that the dollar
stabilized at around DM1.90/$ and 1190/$ through the first two weeks of

November, then rose somewhat more in the following two weeks. By the end of
November, U.S. intervention had totalled more than $3.5 billion. On
December 1, the spot rates for the dollar were DM1.9/$ and 1203.57$, both
rates being significantly above the October lows.

This episode illustrates the effectiveness of monetary and exchange

market operations in halting a currency's slide. But it also illustrates the
limitations of such action if not followed up by more fundamental changes in

monetary policy and macroeconomic policy in general. The rise of the dollar
stalled in early December as market participants became skeptical again about

the Carter Administration's policies towards inflation. Then the dollar was
hit by the shock of an OPEC price increase of 114.5% following the political

upheavals in Iran. During the month of December, foreign exchange
intervention was almost as sizable as in November, totalling more than 3.1

billion. Yet no new monetary policy initiatives were taken. By the end of
the month the dollar had fallen to DM1 .828/$ and 1194.60/$. The short-run

27.18.2

1.72

1.74

Lye

Lye

to

t02

t04

tee

tee

to

1.92

Lao

toe

23

naA iws

TEN/S ANO CM/S

B

—TEN/S

NOV1

sotmc TIE

FIG. 6: NOVEMBER 1.1978 POLICY SHIFT

27

-30—

impact of the November 1 package had faded, and the time afforded to make more

fundamental adjustments in policy had been squandered. As Greene summarized
the episode (19814, p. 140): "If this time is not put to productive use, then

intervention alone, no matter how large or how well coordinated, will not be
effective."
G-5 Intervention in September 1985

The dollar rose through most of the four years of the first Reagan

Administration, peaking in February 1985. After falling from its February
highs during the following spring and summer, the dollar began to rally in

early September. That rally was cut short by the Group of Five (G-5) meeting
of finance ministers and central bank governors in New York on Sunday,

September 22. According to the G-5 statement issued at the end of' that day
(IMF Survey, October 7, 1985, p. 297):

The Ministers and Governors agreed that exchange rates
should play a role in adjusting external imbalances. In
order to do this, exchange rates should better reflect
fundamental economic conditions than has been the case. They
believe that agreed policy actions must be implemented and
reinforced to improve the fundamentals further, and that in
view of the present and prospective changes in fundamentals,
some further orderly appreciation of the main non-dollar
currencies against the dollar is desirable. They stand ready
to cooperate more closely to encourage this when to do so
would be helpful. [Emphasis added.1

The statement had an immediate effect on exchange rates. As the Harris Bank
Foreign Exchange Weekly Review later remarked: "Foreign exchange traders were
taken by surprise, and the dollar dropped sharply following the announcement,
even before any official intervention occurred" (February 7, 1986, p. 1).

In

Figure 7, daily exchange rates for the yen are illustrated. The dollar fell

against the yen from 2140.1/$ to 231.7/$ by the close in London on Monday the

23rd. It fell further to 219.5/$ by Friday of that week. The dollar also

27.18.2

sT

210

214

218

218

no

222

224

p226

230

232

234

236

236

240

242

244

a

300CT
YEN/I ExcHA* RATE

23

SO(cE TIE n*i.wi

7

14

FIGURE 7: G-5 INTERVENTION

21

26

-31—

fell sharply against the mark from DM2.81414/$ on Friday September 22 to
DM2 .680/$ on the following Friday.

There is a puzzle in this dramatic movement.

The exchange rates fell

despite the fact that interest differentials were virtually constant. In the
case of one month Eurocurrency deposits, for example, the interest

differential between dollar and yen deposits and between dollar and OH
deposits remained roughly constant throughout the week. Indeed, both
-

differentials remained constant until late October when the Japanese

authorities

tightened credit conditions in their market. The fall in spot

rates in the absence of interest rate movements may be due to pure

announcement effect of the G-5 communique.

That is, the exchange rates may

have moved primarily because the G-5 announcement signalled future changes in
policy rather than because of the foreign exchange intervention that followed

the announcement. This interpretation
though foreign exchange intervention

is bolstered by the fact that, even

following the G-5 announcement was not

much greater than intervention in February and March of 1985, exchange rates
moved much more after the G-5 announcement.31

What did the G-5 announcement signal? The Bank for International
Settlements Annual Report (1986, p. 1149) cited two factors. First, the joint

communique gave a "convincing demonstration of unanimity and common policy
resolve, and . .

. the

subsequent intervention operations were fully

coordinated and had the wholehearted support of nearly all the major

industrial countries represented." The fact that the policy actions were
coordinated was said to be of crucial importance both because of the
potentially larger scale of any intervention

more of an assurance that the authorities

working at cross purposes. Second, the

27.18.2

operations and because there was

of different countries would not be

G-5 statement marked a major change in

-32-.

U.S. policy which had shunned foreign exchange intervention since the

beginning of the Reagan Administration. As the BIS describes it (1986, p.
1149),

ff]rom the point of view of credibility, it was of crucial
importance that, for the first time, the US
authorities,
whose capacity to sell dollars is in principle unlimited,
were seen to recognize the need for a further downward
adjustment of the dollar.
Yet, given the evidence against sterilized

intervention, one must remain

skeptical about whether either factor, international

coordination or the

active participation of the United States, could have been decisive if the G-5
countries had simply announced a series of sterilized intervention

operations. Instead, the G—5 announcement may have moved exchange rates
because the market believed either that the intervention would be monetized or
that the intervention, even though sterilized, signalled future changes in
monetary policy.

In the case of the G-5 announcement, the evidence is unclear whether or

not foreign exchange intervention was monetized. As indicated above, short
term interest differentials between the dollar and the mark or yen remained
constant from September 22 through most of October. The first unambiguous

sign of changes in monetary policy occurred in Japan in the last week of

October. The dollar had begun to rally somewhat, so the Japanese authorities
decided to tighten monetary conditions, sending short term interest rates from

6.5% to 8% in only a few days. As a result, the yen resumed its upward rise.
Comparison of These Two Episodes
A comparison of these two episodes is quite instructive. The 1978
defense package bucked a downward trend of the dollar. If it had been the
signal for a fundamental change in U.S.

monetary policy toward a more

restrictive stance, then the short term gains in strengthening the dollar in

27. 18.2

—33—

November and December 1978 might have been consolidated and extended into 1979

and beyond. But since no such fundamental change was forthcoming, the dollar
resumed its downward trend. The G—5 intervention, in contrast, was clearly
reinforcing rather than bucking a trend. In fact, it is useful to ask whether
the G—5 announcement and actions that followed were on balance successful in
driving the dollar down relative to its previous trend.

Figure 8 tries to answer that question by putting the period immediately

following this announcement into longer term perspective. This figure shows
the weekly movement of the yen from January through December 1985,

highlighting the G-5 announcement. The trend of the dollar against the yen is
downward throughout, but in the period immediately following the announcement

the dollar's fall accelerates. The same cannot be said of the dollar's fall
relative to the mark. It is true that the G-5 announcement halts a temporary
rise in the dollar, but it merely restores that mark to its previous trend.

These figures lend support to Martin Feldstein's (1986, p. 6) view that "for
Germany and other G5 countries, the Plaza (New York) meeting was essentially a

nonevent." Yet even if Feldstein is right about currencies other than the
yen, the G-5 period may provide evidence for announcement effects in the case

of the yen. Under one interpretation, the dollar fell relative to the yen
because the market perceived a greater degree of cooperation between Japan and
the United States than in the previous four years, and a willingness on the
part of the Japanese government to pursue a tighter monetary policy to drive
the yen down, a policy not actually put into effect until late October.
*

This

******

section has established the limits of foreign exchange intervention

as a distinct' exchange rate policy. If intervention is monetized, it can have
powerful effects on exchange rates, but so also can conventional monetary

27. 18.2

2

2.1

22

2.3

2.4

as

a.

2.7

a.

as

3

3.1

32

JAIl

3.3

3.4

U

FEB
MAR

APR

MI
+

JR.
DM/$

100 TEN/s

SEP

YIEW

AUG

WEOCLY

SPOT RATE&DM/5 *10100 lflL/$

MAY

ScEHARESMilk.

OCT

NOV

FIGURE & WEEKLY SPOT RATES IN 1985

DEC

_314_

policy. If intervention is sterilized, in contrast, then its effects on the
exchange rate are thought to be minimal. The announcement of the intervention
may be the occasion for a rally in the exchange market, but perhaps only if
the market believes that the intervention signals broader changes in monetary
policy.

Because the evidence implies that sterilized intervention is ineffective,
the remainder of the paper assumes that monetary policy, broadly defined to
encompass non-sterilized intervention, is the prime instrument of exchange
rate policy. The discussion now moves from the choice of' policy instruments
to the design of exchange rate policy.

Exchange rate policy could take a variety of forms. Governments could
reestablish a system of fixed exchange rates, perhaps with wider bands to

accommodate greater variability of exchange rates. The fixed rates could be
confined to regional groupings of countries as in the European Monetary System

or encompass all industrial countries. Second, governments could retain the
present system of flexible exchange rates, but institute stricter rules

governing exchange rate management. Third, governments could establish a
system of target zones for exchange rates with "soft margins" which leave

governments with some discretion concerning intervention. All three
alternatives, which involve systemic changes in the international monetary
system, contrast sharply with ad hoc agreements like the G-5 intervention

which are designed to cope with specific exchange rate problems. The
following sections will explore these alternatives.

3. Putting Huinpty Dumpty Back Together Again: Restoring Fixed Exchange Rates

This section analyzes the case for returning to fixed exchange rates.

The first part considers the general rationale for fixing exchange rates. The
next two parts ask what lessons can be learned from two fixed exchange rate

27.18.2

-35-

systems, the Bretton Woods System which lasted until 1971 and the European
Monetary System established in 1979.

3.1 Rationale for fixed exchange rates
Although many rationales have been offered in support of fixing exchange

rates, two are particularly prominent in most discussions. First, fixed
exchange rates help to neutralize financial disturbances which might otherwise

have an impact on the real side of the economy. Second, fixed rates provide
discipline to governments that might otherwise follow inflationary policies.
Each argument is considered in turn.
Sources of disturbances
Economists analyzing exchange rate regimes have often posed the following

question: Would fixed or flexible exchange rates be preferable in the presence
of a particular disturbance?

Fixed exchange rates can be shown to be

superior when financial disturbances are predominant in an economy. A fall in
the demand for money, for example, can be neutralized by a reduction in its

supply leaving the exchange rate unaffected. If investors shift from domestic
money to foreign securities, this can be neutralized by intervention in the

foreign exchange market. In either case, the policy designed to keep the
exchange rate fixed also helps to keep the disturbances confined to the

financial sector, so that output and employment are left undisturbed. If
disturbances originate in the real sector of the economy, however, it is

difficult to make a case for preventing exchange rate movements since these
movements generally facilitate the adjustment of relative prices which real

disturbances require.32 A rise in demand for exports, for example, leads to
an appreciation of the domestic currency under flexible rates since the
increase in demand raises domestic interest rates and attracts capital from

abroad. The appreciation of the domestic currency, by shifting demand to

27. 18.2

-36—

foreign goods, helps to dampen the rise in domestic demand.33 Thus fixed
exchange rates (or target zones for exchange rates to be discussed below) are
better designed for periods when financial disturbances are predominant.
Most economists analyzing the desirability of foreign exchange
intervention have implicitly assumed that exchange rate fluctuations can be

traced directly to a particular disturbance or group of disturbances. The
case for foreign exchange intervention is much stronger if exchange rate
fluctuations instead reflect excessive volatility due to market

inefficiencies. If exchange rates are excessively volatile (as discussed in
Section 1), then fixed rates, or at least policies designed to limit exchange
rate fluctuations, may be called for even in economies where disturbances are

predominantly real in origin. Similarly, if exchange rates are driven by
speculative "bubbles," self-fulfilling expectations which depart from market
fundamentals, then exchange market intervention may be called for.
In the present context of the misaligned dollar, this characterization of

real and financial disturbances takes a more specific form. As mentioned
above, many economists trace the appreciation of the dollar during the first
four years of the Reagan Administration to the expansionary fiscal policy of

that administration. This fiscal expansion represents a "real" disturbance
because the defense buildup has shifted expenditure towards U.S. domestic

goods (both traded and nontraded). Branson (1986) points out that the
appreciation of the dollar has moderated the effects of the fiscal expansion
on domestic output and prices by switching domestic and foreign private

consumption towards foreign goods. If that appreciation had been prevented
through the monetary expansion required to keep exchange rates fixed, then the
real appreciation of the dollar required for adjustment in the real sector
would have been brought about by a rise in the U.S. price level rather than by

27. 18.2

-37—

a nominal appreciation of the dollar.

Branson suggests that higher U.S.

prices would not have been preferable to

the nominal appreciation and

consequent fall in the inflation rate that did occur.
If instead of being caused

by the fiscal expansion, the dollar's recent
rise had been due to a speculative bubble or to a more conventional
type of
financial disturbance, then the case for fixing the exchange rate would
have

been stronger.3 In the presence of financial disturbances, intervention
to
limit or halt the appreciation of the
real sector from the disturbance.

Presumably this intervention would have had

to have been non-sterilized, in which
involved a significant change in

dollar would have helped to insulate the

case the intervention would have

monetary conditions. The question that has

to be asked is whether governments

are willing to tie their monetary policy to

an exchange rate target in such circumstances.
Discipline
Proponents of fixed exchange rates often base their case on a second

rationale: fixed rates impose discipline on national governments since
inflationary policies soon run up against a balance of payments constraint.
It is true that a government

following inflationary policies under flexible

exchange rates must contend with the depreciation
same government under fixed exchange rates is

of its currency, but that

likely to have to contend with a

highly visible balance of payments crisis. If the crisis results in a
devaluation of the domestic
to be much more politically

currency, that change in currency values is likely
damaging than a gradual change in currency values

brought about "by the market." This discipline argument for fixed exchange
rates might appear to be a persuasive one, especially after more than a decade
of high inflation when governments were free to pursue "independent" monetary
policies under flexible rates.

27.18.2

-38-

In practice, however, the discipline provided by

fixed rates is less than

complete for the following reasons:

(1) First, fixed exchange rates exert no discipline over expansionary fiscal
policies, at least as long as capital flows are highly sensitive to

interest differentials. Higher government spending financed by either
taxes or bond issues induces an inflow of capital and a balance of
payments surplus rather than deficit.35

(2) Second, the fixed rate system as a whole has no external constraint
unless currencies are tied to an external standard. If N-i currencies
are tied to a reserve currency, as currencies were tied to the dollar
under the Bretton Woods System, then there is discipline for the system

as a whole only to the extent that the reserve currency country manages
to discipline itseir.6 Under Bretton Woods, the United States maintained a relatively stable price level throughout the 1950's and early
1960's, but during the Vietnam War the Johnson and Nixon Administrations
followed what were widely regarded as inflationary policies.

(3) If, instead, all currencies are tied to a commodity like gold, then the
increases of the world money supply are dependent on chance discoveries
of' gold and can be affected by political instability in the producing

countries. If the gold supply does not increase rapidly enough to keep
pace with real activity, then either the world price level must fall
(accompanied, most likely, by a fall in real activity) or banking systems
must develop alternative means of payment (as happened in the last half

of the nineteenth century). In times of crisis, moreover, governments
are unlikely to adhere to the external standard, since the stability of
their banking systems is likely to be regarded as more important than the

credibility of their external standard. During several banking panics of

27. 18 .2

—39—

the nineteenth century, even the Bank of England, the stalwart defender
of the gold standard system, suspended gold payments in an attempt to
stabilize its banking system.

(4) Whether or not the U.S dollar (as the

Nth currency) is tied to an

external standard, par values for all N currencies can be changed. Once
a par value is changed, future commitments to a fixed rate system are
less credible than before, so countries must weigh the benefits of a

change in parity against the loss of credibility. A general lesson to be
learned from past exchange rate systems is that governments will abandon

fixed pegs, even if only temporarily, if exchange rate flexibility will
help to ease the adjustment of their economies to a major shock. This
was as true of Britain in the nineteenth

century, despite its pivotal

role under the gold standard, as it was of France and later Britain in
the interwar period, and a host of countries in the Bretton Woods

period. If governments are likely to abandon pegs in a crisis, then it
is necessary to ask what is the value of the discipline afforded by fixed

rates. The answer must be that the value of the discipline is highly
dependent on how participants in the financial markets assess the

commitment of the government to the par value and the likelihood of

shocks large enough to alter that commitment. So the discipline argument
is less decisive than it appears to be.

3.2. Weaknesses of the Bretton Woods System
The paper now turns to an assessment of the Bretton Woods System, the
fixed rate system which tied most currencies together during the post-war

period until 1971. After fifteen years of flexible exchange rates, many

observers look back longingly at this period. As already noted, the
macroeconomic performance under Bretton Woods compares favorably with that of

27.18.2

_14Q_

the more recent period. Against this must be weighed some

of the inherent

weaknesses of the Bretton Woods System which observers of the time considered
major drawbacks of this fixed rate system.
Lack of Monetary Independence
The Bretton Woods System was often criticized for providing no discipline
for the reserve currency country (for the reasons discussed above).

The

United States, in effect, was too free to pursue an independent monetary

policy to the detriment of the system as a whole. But an equally serious
weakness of the Bretton Woods System was the lack of monetary independence

afforded to other countries of the system. The Bretton Woods System imposed
such an extreme form of discipline on these countries that independent

monetary policies to deal with disturbances were severely handicapped.
If one country tried to increase its money supply by increasing domestic
credit in the banking system, then this led to an incipient decline in
interest rates and an outflow of capital which offset, at least partially, the

initial increase in the money supply.37 This offsetting effect of capital
flows is characteristic of any fixed exchange rate system with internationally
mobile capital.

Capital Controls
If capital flows offset domestic monetary expansions or contractions, one
solution is to restrict such flows with controls of one form or another. That
solution was adopted widely under the Bretton Woods System.

The recent period

of exchange rate flexibility, by no coincidence, has witnessed the progressive
dismantling of controls beginning with controls in Germany and the United
States in 197k, and Britain in 1978 and Japan in several stages beginning in

1980. Of the major industrial countries during this period, Italy has
maintained and France has enhanced their controls, but that is because they

27. 18.2

have had to defend exchange rate parities within the European Monetary

System.38
The overall effectiveness of capital controls in stemming reserve flows
is in some doubt since banks and other institutions go to some lengths to find

ways to evade controls. But there is no doubt that controls distort
investment and borrowing incentives as two episodes from the Bretton Woods
period will illustrate.

(1) The Kennedy and Johnson Administrations constructed progressively more
complex barricades in an attempt to stem outflows of capital from the

United States during the 1960s. In 1963, the Kennedy Administration
began with an interest equalization tax on securities issued by

foreigners in the U.S. market. The Johnson administration followed with
its voluntary credit-restraint program in 1965 which limited the liquid
foreign assets that U.S. banks and non-bank financial institutions could
hold, and a direct investment program in that same year which compelled
U.S. corporations to finance overseas operations with funds raised

outside the United States. U.S. banks responded by expanding their
operations in London and other foreign centers, in part to serve the U.S.

corporations driven abroad for financing. With the arbitrage link
between the United States and foreign financial centers severed, large
interest differentials developed which reflected the distortionary

effects of the controls. At one point in 1969, the three-month
Eurodollar deposit rate rose to 11.5% at a time when U.S. Treasury bill
rates were at 7.7% and U.S. certificate of deposit rates (because of the

Federal Reserve's Regulation Q) remained fixed at 6%. Such remarkably
large differentials distorted financing decisions by U.S. and foreign

corporations. The controls also had the unintended effect of giving

27.18.2

-)42-

infant industry protection to the Eurodollar and Eurobond markets in
London.

(2) Similar interest differentials developed between Germany and the
Eurocurrency markets in response to a network of controls which the

German authorities built beginning in 1971. The controls were
progressively tightened in an attempt to close loopholes, finally
extending to nearly all claims by non—residents to residents, until they
were removed in early 19714. Figure 9 compares the internal German
interest rate (on interbank loans) with the Euromark deposit rate (which

is always approximately equal to the covered Eurodollar rate). The
figure illustrates very clearly the effects of the controls which were
designed to limit inflows rather than outflows of funds, and therefore
led to a higher interest rate in Germany than in the market for mark

deposits in London. At one point in early 1973, the differential between
the internal and external markets reached the remarkably high level of

11%. That is, an interbank loan in Germany carried an interest rate 11%
higher than a mark-denominated loan, perhaps made by the same bank, in

the Eurocurrency markets. With differentials that large, there is no
doubt that considerable managerial effort was expended in finding ways to
evade such controls.

The U.S. and German controls were not isolated examples. In fact,
controls were the norm during the Bretton Woods period. As discussed below,
they are also a prevalent feature of the European Monetary System.
Exchange Rate Crises
In the 1960's there was a tendency to blame private agents in the
financial markets for the "speculation" which brought on balance of payments

crises. Thus, for example, British Labor Government ministers characterized

27.18.2

SI

annum

Source: Herring and Marston, 1976,

1973
p.

9.

1974

Nete:Euromsrk raIs—Wedn.sday quotations on three-month 0-mark
deposits k London; German rate—rsls of lotersst In th. Frankfurt Interbank loan market for three-month funds; covered Eurodollar rate—the
Wednesday quotations on the b4d rate on thrse-month U.S. dollardenominated time deposits In London minus the Wednesday 0-mark
premium quoted In Frankfurt.
lewns: Money Manager for Euromadc rate, and Federal Reserve Board
for all other Interest and exchangerates.

Eurodollar rati

ThE EUROMARK, COVERED EURODOLLAR, AND
GERMAN INTERBANK RATES, JANUARY 1973—AUGUST 1974

FIGURE ¶

-'43—

speculators who took positions against the pound as the "Gnomes of Zurich".

More recently, however, international economists have formulated "balance of
payments crisis" models whose central actors are these same Gnomes, now

transformed into rational investors who speculate against governments. These
governments, in turn, blindly follow domestic credit expansions that are

unsustainable. The Gnomes help to accelerate the date of the crisis, a crisis
that is in any event inevitable, but otherwise act like responsible citizens.
There is no doubt some truth in both views of balance of payments

crises. As politicians of the 1960s knew only too well, increased capital
mobility makes it more difficult for governments to sustain parities that are

under attack by speculators. But, on the other hand, the decision to change
parities is often dominated by political considerations because governments

have committed themselves to defending parities. When parity adjustments
justified by economic factors are postponed on political grounds, speculators

attempt to force the government's hand. The government may respond by
instituting restrictive macroeconomic policies simply to defend a parity
value, policies which under a flexible rate system it might be able to

avoid. Or it may attempt to shield its reserves from attack by restricting
capital movements. Jhether the government successfully defends the parity or
riot, the country loses. If the parity holds, the economy is disrupted by the

crisis and by the policies which have been adopted to defend the parity. If
the parity collapses, speculators win capital gains at the expense of the

central bank. We illustrate several of these features of exchange rate crises
by describing the sterling crisis of the mid—1960's.
The Sterling Crisis
This crisis began building at the time when Harold Wilson's Labor

Government came to power in October ig6'4. The Wilson Government chose riot

27.18.2

_14L

to devalue at that time despite

a strong economic case that devaluation would
help restore British competitiveness. One
prominent reason given for the

decision was the Government's fear
"devaluation party," the Labor

that it would be identified as the

Party having devalued (in 19L9) the last time

it was in power. (This is a good example of the discipline
provided by a
fixed rate system, although in this case the discipline
postponed needed
adjustments).

Having made the decision not to
series of balance of payments crises
when it had to arrange a $3

billion

devalue, the Government had to face a
beginning soon after attaining office

international credit from foreign central

banks. (This was at a time when British

bank reserves totalled only $2.6

billion and the monetary base $9.1 billion). The Government managed to

surmount each crisis, in part by arranging foreign central bank financing but

also by instituting restrictive

macroeconomic policies, until the fall of 1967

when the speculative pressure became overwhelming. On the final day before

devaluation, Friday November 17, British foreign exchange reserves fell by $1
billion (in a country where capital controls were as tight as anywhere in
Western Europe) (Solomon, 1977, p. 95). The next day sterling was devalued by

11L3%. Not only did the Government have to succumb to the pressures of
foreign exchange speculation, but in doing so it lost over £350 million as a

result of intervention in the forward markets.
In his assessment of the
adviser at the Federal Reserve

sterling crisis, Robert Solomon, a former senior
Board, points out two lessons of the sterling

crisis:

It exhibited the potential for, and the impact of,
speculative flows in the accounts of a major trading
country
It pointed up the weakness of an exchange
rate system in which a change of parity of a major currency
became a political issues of the highest order that engaged
heads of' state; in such a system a change in the exchange
27. 18.2

_15_

rate could be excessively delayed, permitting the build-up of
a large imbalance which, when action was finally taken to
correct it, required massive shifts of resources.
These same two lessons were consistent themes in the exchange rate crises of
the Bretton Woods system until its demise in 1971.

These weaknesses of the Bretton Woods System turned opinion sharply
against fixed exchange rates, especially after the failure of the Smithsonian
Accord of' December 1971 (to be discussed below). It was only after a near
decade of floating that sentiment turned back against flexible rates, at least
in Western Europe where the European Monetary System was established in 1979.

3.3. The European Monetary System
The European Monetary System (or EMS) was established on March 13, 1979
to tie together the currencies of member countries in a joint float against

the dollar and other foreign currencies. The initial membership of the EMS
consisted of all European Community members except the United Kingdom which

elected to float freely.1 All members except Italy agreed to limit
fluctuations of their currencies to 2% around a grid of central rates; Italy
adopted a 6% margin. As stated by the European Council in its Resolution of
December 1978, the main objective of the EMS was to create a "zone of

stability in Europe." The following evaluation of the EMS's success in
achieving this objective is based primarily on an excellent statistical
analysis by Rogoff (1985).142

Reducing the Variability of Exchange Rates
This

section begins by examining the success of the EMS in reducing the

variability of exchange rates. There is evidence that the variability of

bilateral

exchange rates has been significantly reduced in the EMS. Rogoff

measures exchange rate variability by the variances of unanticipated changes

in exchange rates.3 For both nominal and real bilateral rates, the variances

27.18.2

-4 6-

have fallen for exchange rates
between the mark and the other two major
currencies, the French franc and
rate, the variance of

monthly prediction errors has

while in the case of the
almost four-fifths

lira. In the case of the nominal franc/DM
fallen by two-thirds,

nominal lira/DM rate, the reduction has been by

The results for real

exchange rates are less

but still statistically

dramatic,

significant. This is for a period when bilateral
rates between the mark and dollar or yen were
becoming more, not less,
volatile.

Countries in the EMS,

of effective

however, should be Concerned about the variability

exchange rates as well as EMS

reason to believe that the

at the price of greater
and those of other

bilateral rates. There is some

stability of intra—EMS bilateral rates is purchased

variability in exchange rates between EMS currencies

countries, so the EMS may not have

stabilized effective

exchange rates. Rogoff shows that among the three
major EMS currencies,
only the lira has experienced

a reduction in volatility for its nominal

effective exchange rate. A similar pattern
emerges for the real effective
exchange rate, with the lira

being the only currency among the three to
experience a significant reduction
in volatility. it should be pointed out
that countries outside the
EMS, including the United States, United Kingdom,
and Japan, experienced
statistically significant increases in the volatility
of real effective
rates, so the EMS may have
helped to prevent the volatility
of EMS currencies from
rising even in the case of the franc and mark.
Role of Capital Controls
Another set of evidence, also due to Rogoff, provides

perspective on how the EMS works,

within the EMS, If most

an interesting

Rogoff examined real interest differentials

disturbances are financial in nature, then foreign
exchange intervention that stabilizes
exchange rates should also stabilize

27. 18.2

-L7-

interest rates. Yet, as Rogoff shows,

the variability of real interest rate

differentials has increas4 in the EMS, at least between the three largest

countrieS.5 There are two possible interpretations

of this result, neither

of them favorable to the EMS. First, disturbances may have been primarily
intervention
real in nature. But if this is the case, then foreign exchange

the discussion of intervention policy

within the EMS is undesirable (see

to the
above). Or capital contrpi may have been a major factor contributing

stability of EMS exchange rates.
capital controls, it provides

If the EMS is held together by extensive

much less of a model for a world exchange rate

system.

the
GiavazZi and Giovannifli (1986) present an interesting analysis of

role of French and Italian capital
reproduces their graphs of'

controls within the EMS. Figure

10

interest differentials between the (free)

lira
EurocurrencY markets and national markets in French franc and

instruments. Large differentials

between the free and regulated markets

trade credits,
emerge at times of exchange rate crises. (In normal times
controls, are sufficiently large to
which are largely exempt from the

eliminate any differentials). These
times of crises show how binding

interest differentials which emerge in

the controls are on investment flows.U6

Nonetheless, the controls appear to

be essential if the authorities are to

GiavazZi and
defend weak currencies of the EMS from speculative attack. As
Giovannifli (1986, p. L73) conclude:

countries have to choose
In the present system weak currency
between the welfare losses associated with capital controls
volatility of short-term
and the losses arising from the
interest rates, and, as the evidence shows, overwhelmingly
be an
opt for the former. Thus capital controls appear to
important feature of the EMS, which allows weak currency
countries to take part in the exchange rate arrangement,
domestic interest rate
without suffering from excessive
fluctuations [p. )473].

27.18.2

FIGURE 10

6L0
51.5

33.5
24.0
14.5

5.0
191t

1301

19$!

19$!

1934

46

1 Un

40

Of

35

30
25

20
15

19$0

1951

19$!

ad o(*bore

19*5

as oas.o d.p.it.

Source: Glovannini and Giovazzi, 1986,

p. 468.

Thus we have in the EMS an exchange rate system which has managed to stabilize
bilateral exchange rates within Europe, but only by severely limiting capital

flows between the countries of the EMS. Perhaps that is the only way to
maintain fixed exchange rates in today's environment.
Other Features of the EMS

One reason that capital controls are so essential to the EMS is that the
system has failed to bring about the convergence of inflation rates among its
members, a key objective of the EMS.17 Rogoff compares five year average
inflation rates before and after the establishment of the EMS. He reaches the
surprising conclusion that any convergence of inflation rates that did take
place was between the inflation rates of Germany and two outside countries,
Japan and the United Kingdom.
Because inflation rates have been so divergent, frequent parity changes

have been necessary among EMS currencies. There have been eleven realignments
since the inception of the EMS. The franc-DM parity alone has been changed
six times, the latest realignment being in January 1987, for a cumulative

depreciation of the franc relative to the mark of over 27 percent. Similarly,
the lira-DM parity has been changed seven times for a cumulative depreciation
of the lira of over 38 percent.
Some of the realignments have been quite large.

The latest realignment

on January 12, 1987, involved a revaluation of the mark and guilder by only
three percent and the Belgian franc by two percent.

But the April 1986

realignment lowered the franc relative to the mark by 6 percent, while in July
1985 the lira was devalued 7.8 percent against all other EMS currencies and in
April 1986 fell 3 percent more relative to the mark and guilder when those

currencies revalued by 3 percent. The frequency and magnitude of' these

27. 18.2

_)49.

realignments

suggests how difficult it is to maintain a fixed rate system

today.

4. Managed Floating
The alternative to fixed exchange rates would seem to be flexible
exchange rates, but there are many shades of gray in between these two

extremes. Present exchange rate arrangements are usually referred to as a
system of managed flexibility. There are very few rules to this system, if
indeed the term "system" is appropriate to a laissez-faire world. In its 1978
amendments to its Articles of Agreement, the International Monetary Fund did

specify certain guidelines for exchange rate intervention. This section
begins by examining these guidelines, then turns to several more specific

rules for managed floating which have been proposed. Very different from
these rules are the taxes on exchange market transactions to be considered

next. Finally, "target zones" for exchange rates are analyzed in some detail
because they have received so much attention recently.

4.1. Alternative Approaches to Managing Exchange Rates
In the 1978 amendment to its Articles of Agreement, the IMF specified
three principles that should govern exchange rate policies:
Principle' A: A member shall avoid manipulating exchange rates or the

international monetary system in order to prevent effective
balance of payments adjustment or to gain an unfair competitive
advantage over other members.
Principle B: P. member should intervene in the exchange market if necessary to

counter disruptive conditions which may be characterized inter
alia by disruptive short-term movements in the exchange value of
its currency.

27.18.2

-50—

Principle C: Members should take into account in their intervention policies
the interests of other members, including those of the countries

in whose currencies they intervene. (IMF Survey, May 2, 1977).
It is not easy for a group of governments with different agendas to

achieve agreement on a set of policy rules. So it may not be surprising that
the principles adopted in this agreement are not specific enough to be binding

on any government. Unless there are objective criteria for determining
whether or not a country is "manipulating" its exchange rate to gain unfair
competitive advantages, for example, Principle A may not prevent such
behavior. Even the definition of' "disruptive short-term movements" may prove
elusive once it is recognized that exchange rates naturally exhibit high

volatility. To ensure that these principles are carried out, some have
proposed more specific rules of exchange rate management.

Minimal Reform: The "Reference Rate" Proposal
One of' the most interesting proposals was that made by Wilfred Ethier and

Arthur Bloomfield (1975) in the Princeton Essay series. These economists,
writing soon after the breakdown of Bretton Woods, recognized that a return to

fixed exchange rates, whether desirable or not, was simply not feasible. So
instead of' specifying rules that mandated central bank intervention as had

been done in the Bretton Woods System, they proposed rules that prohibited

certain types of central bank actions. But unlike the IMF Principles later
adopted, they offered objective criteria for evaluating central bank adherence

to rules. The "reference rate" proposal which they formulated had two rules
(Ethier and Bloomfield, 1975, p. 10):

1.

No central bank shall sell its own currency at a price below its
reference rate by more than a fixed percentage (possibly zero) or buy its
own currency at a price exceeding its reference rate by more than a fixed
percentage. This is the sole restriction imposed upon central-bank
intervention.

27.18.2

—51-

2.

The structure of reference rates shall be revised at periodic pre—
specified intervals through some defined international procedure.

The aim of the first rule was to prohibit a central bank from driving its
currency away from its reference level (thereby "manipulating" its exchange

rate in the language of the IMF's Principle A). For example, a central bank
could not drive its currency down to gain, competitive advantage for its export
industry.

At the same time, the proposal did not oblige the central bank to

intervene at all. (It is in this sense a "minimal reform" proposal). Nor did
the proposal prevent the central bank from "leaning against the wind" to limit
movements away from the reference rate.

The authors recognized that their proposal was limited in aim, but it did
provide a means to limit the type of competitive depreciations that had

plagued countries during the 1930's. In order for this proposal to be
successfully implemented, however, countries would have to agree on the
reference rates themselves "through some defined international procedure"

(their second rule). The discussion of target zones below identifies some of
the formidable problems involved in defining equilibrium exchange rates.

It

also points out how difficult it would be for different national governments

to agree on equilibrium rates. Both of those problems carry over to any
agreement' on reference rates.

Rules for Leaning Against the Wind

Because volatility itself is viewed as a major problem by some

governments, policies of "leaning against the wind" have become common. Such
policies are designed to limit the "disruptive short—term movements" addressed

by the IMF's Principle B. This form of intervention requires minimal
knowledge of what factors may be moving the exchange rate, and does not

require that the authorities have superior knowledge about the long run
equilibrium exchange rate.

27.18.2

It does presuppose that exchange rates are too

-52-

volatile in general, and that intervention operations can be effective in
reducing this volatility.

There is a danger, however, that central banks might lean against the
wind more in one direction than the other, thus imparting a bias to exchange

rate movements over time. To ensure against "manipulating" exchange rates in
this way, central banks could be required to balance out their net purchases

and sales of foreign exchange over a given period. Argy (1982, p. 27) cites
one rule that "[n]et reserve changes in a given direction should not persist
for more than a few consecutive months (except when reserve levels are

excessive or deficient)." Argy, however, goes on to argue that such rules
would be difficult to implement, and might even provoke one-way speculation.
If governments wish to limit exchange rate volatility, there is a non—

market alternative to foreign exchange intervention. This involves imposing a
tax on exchange market transactions.

Tobin's Exchange Market Tax
This tax, proposed by James Tobin (1982), is imposed on each exchange

market transaction at a uniform rate, perhaps 1%. The tax has the explicit
aim of "throw[ing] some sand in the wheels of our excessively efficient

international money market" (Tobin, 1982, p. 89). According to Tobin, a tax
of this magnitude is unlikely to make much difference to merchandise trade
transactions, since the tax represents such a small proportion of the value of

the product and the profit on the transaction. But such a tax is likely to be
a much more significant factor in a round trip financial transaction, thus

discouraging "hot money flows." It would make overnight or one month
roundtrip investments in foreign currencies almost prohibitively expensive.

Even in the case of a three month investment, a 1% tax paid twice in the

27.18.2

-53—

roundtrip

transaction could be overcome only by an 8% differential between

interest rates in the two currencies involved.

For a tax of this nature to be successful, it must be uniformly imposed
throughout the world, for otherwise financial transactions will gravitate to

tax-free zones. The experience of U.S. controls in the 1960's illustrates
that point. If such a tax were somehow internationally coordinated, however,
it is likely to have a significant impact on the volume of foreign exchange

transactions, especially those associated with short term investments. For
that reason, the tax may reduce the volatility of exchange rates. But such a
tax is unlikely to have a significant effect on the misalignment of exchange
rates because longer term investments and trade transactions would remain

largely unaffected. William Poole has drawn an analogy between Tobin's tax

and a real estate transfer tax.8 The latter may reduce the volatility of
real estate prices, but surely does not affect the longer run level of

prices. Nor would it prevent a speculative bubble from developing.
Like the exchange market tax, the reform proposals governing intervention

outlined above offer no solution to the misalignment problem. They provide
"rules of the game" for managed floating, but they provide little positive

guidance for exchange rate policy. The first rule of the reference rate
proposal does prohibit central banks from deliberately creating a misalignment
through exchange market intervention, but none of the major misalignments

experienced recently have been caused by central bank intervention. None of
the rules prohibit other macroeconomic policies that can lead to

misalignment. Nor do they require that central banks take positive action to
prevent misalignments from developing. The paper will consider one type of
reform proposal, "target zones," which does address the misalignment

27.18.2

-54-

problem. Since this proposal has received much attention recently, its
characteristics will be described in some detail.

4.2. Targets Zones for Exchange Rates
In the Bretton Woods System of fixed exchange rates, the national
authorities were committed to intervening in the foreign exchange market
whenever the exchange rate reached a 1% "band" on either side of its par value

vis—a—vis the dollar. A "target zone" system of exchange rates also has bands
for the exchange rate, but these bands are typically much further apart, thus
allowing considerable fluctuation in the exchange rate.

More importantly, in

a target zone system the authorities make no firm commitment to defend those

margins. One of the leading advocates of target zones, John Williamson, has
described the zone as "a range beyond which the authorities are unhappy to see
the rate move, despite not being prepared to precommit themselves to prevent
such movements" (Williamson, 1985, p. 64).

Williamson's Proposal for Target Zones
Given Williamson's central role in the debate over target zones, it is

useful to spell out his proposal more fully.49 His target zones would involve
five elements (Williamson, 1985, 72):

(1) soft margins, rather than a commitment to prevent the rate from straying
outside the target zone;

(2) a zone perhaps 20 percent wide (i.e., with 10 percent margins), outside
of which rates would be considered 'clearly wrong';

(3) a crawling zone, with the crawl reflecting both differential inflation
and any need for balance of payments adjustment;

(4) publication of the target zone; and

27.18.2

-55—

(5) the partial direction of monetary policy,

including foreign exchange

intervention, to discourage the exchange rate from straying outside its
target zone.

The target zone system thus would be a form of managed float with the targets
well defined but with national authorities only tentatively committed to
intervention or other policy actions.

Anatomy of Target Zones

Target zones share some of the characteristics of fixed exchange

rates,

but there are important differences which may be the source of both strengths

and weaknesses for this proposed system. The paper next examines some of
system's crucial characteristics, then addresses the question of how targets
might be chosen.
(1) Wide Bands

With margins permitting fluctuations of twenty percent, this system is

not designed to limit the volatility of exchange rates. Thus hedging by
corporations will be as important as in a flexible regime. But if the targets
are adhered to and the margins hold, then the system can be regarded as a way
of avoiding misalignments.

The wide margins permit those abrupt shifts in speculative sentiment

which appear to characterize flexible regimes. Nonetheless, exchange rate
crises cannot be ruled out, at least when exchange rates approach the margins.
(2) Analogy with National Monetary Targets

Zones are more akin to national monetary targets than exchange rate
parities under the Bretton Woods System.

Like monetary growth targets,

target zones for exchange rates single out one economic variable for special
attention without firmly precommitting the national authorities to achieving a
specific target for that variable.

27. 18.2

—56—

Yet there are important differences between monetary growth targets and

target zones for exchange rates. First, unlike the money growth targets, the
target zones provide no continuous guide for policy since the targets are

binding only when the exchange rate reaches one of its margins. It is true
that in some countries monetary growth targets are set in terms of bands, but
these bands are usually much narrower than those proposed for exchange rate

targets. Second, the variable targetted, the exchange rate, is an endogenous
variable which is normally determined by many factors other than economic
policy.

It is true that the money supply is also an endogenous variable

affected by both bank and nonbank behavior, but the authorities have more
direct control over the money supply than the exchange rate.
(3) Anchor for System?

One of the advantages of a fixed rate system is the anchor such a system

provides for inflationary expectations. Target zones provide no such anchor,
since the zones are explicitly adjusted for differences in inflation rates.
The zones may help to anchor expectations regarding real exchange rates, but
only if governments are perceived as being willing to defend the margins.
(14) Commitment to Defend Margins.

Despite the wide margins around the targets, governments will eventually
be faced with the choice between defending the targets or changing them.

Economists advising a government faced with a speculative attack are likely to
advocate defending the targets only if they view exchange rate movements as

part of the problem. (Recall the discussion of economic disturbances in the
previous section where exchange rates movements sometimes facilitated, rather

than hindered, the adjustment of the economy). Given a permanent shift in the
demand for a country's exports, for example, the government would be well

27.18.2

—57—

advised to change the

exchange rate target rather than defend it. But if the

change is temporary, then defense of

the target might be warranted.

(5) The Political Economy of Target Zones
The rationale for target

zones is very different if governments are

viewed as the principal source of economic disturbances.
might have a political rather than

Target zones then

economic role to play in stabilization.

Proponents of target zones argue that announced exchange rate
constrain governments in their

targets might

macroeconomic policies, much like multilateral

tariff agreements constrain national trade policies.
In the specific context of the
target zones might have

dollar's misalignment, it is argued that

encouraged the Reagan Administration to follow a less

expansionary fiscal policy. This may be a difficult argument to
however, since in order to pursue its

overcame much stronger domestic

sustain,

fiscal policy, the Administration

constraints than any international agreement

could have imposed.

A better case for the political role of target zones
can be made in the

European context. A frequent argument in favor of the European
System is that it constrains member

Monetary

countries to pursue policies closely in

line with, its largest member, West Germany. The Mitterand
Government in

France, for example, stayed within the EMS despite being severely
Constrained
at times by the requirements of
membership. One major exception to this
European pattern is the United Kingdom

which has rejected joining the EMS

exchange rate arrangements in favor of free floating of the pound sterling.
Perhaps the best that can be said for
target zones is that it may be relevant

this political justification for

to governments predisposed to the

constraints or strongly committed to regional or global cooperation. For
governments aiming to pursue policies

27.18.2

significantly different from those of

-58-

other industrial countries, target zones may

be swiftly discarded if they

become a major impediment to such policies.
(6)

Objective

Criteria for Modifying Targets

The problem of constraining government
the target zone proposal did not provide

Here there is a direct conflict between

behavior would be less serious if

for the modification of targets.
the politics and economics of

international agreements. In order to constrain governments to keep
commitments, there should be no exceptions permitted except those clearly
But the economic arguments for

specified at the time of an agreement.

modifying targets in the face of real disturbances may be very compelling.
To complicate the problem, there
about the need for changes in

is seldom a consensus among experts

real exchange rates. Instead, they may disagree

about the nature and scope of a

disturbance as well as about its effects on

the real exchange rate. Without objective
should be changed, the changes will

indicators dictating when targets

made based at least partly on political

considerations.

Consider the recent misalignment of the dollar. Although the

about its
appreciation lasted over four years, there is no clearcut consensus

causes. The appropriate policies

to follow if the misalignment is due to the

those to
fiscal policies of the Reagan Administration are very different from
follow if the dollar's appreciation

is due to bubbles or to capital flows

changes.5°
seeking a "safe haven" or to an investment boom triggered by tax
Similarly, although sterling's appreciation

lasted over (four) years,

economists still dispute whether North Sea oil, tight monetary policies,
other factors caused the appreciation.

the causes ofa misalignment, there
modification of targets.

27.18.2

or

When there is so much dispute about

is unlikely to be a consensus about

-59-

Defining Exchange Rate Targets
If economic conditions are

favorable, governments might be willing to

precommit themselves to a system of target zones. But formidable problems

await the negotiators of such an

agreement. Chief among these problems is

that of finding (and agreeing upon) appropriate targets.

It is useful to

follow Williamson's description of how targets might be defined:

(1) The first step in defining

a target rate or target zone for the real

exchange rate is to decide about the
account balance of each country (or

appropriate equilibrium current

equivalently, the "underlying capital

flow' in Williamson's terminology since

the capital account must be the

mirror image of the current account). The equilibrium current account of
a developing country like Brazil or Thailand is very different from that
of an industrial country like Germany or France. In estimates of his
"fundamental equilibrium exchange rate," Williamson makes explicit
allowances for such differences among countries. This is not to say that
judgments about equilibrium current accounts are easy to make, as the
experience of the Smithsonian meeting discussed below makes clear. Not
least of the problems is that the negotiating governments will understand
the close connection between the current account "equilibrium" agreed
upon and the prospects for their leading export industries.

(2) Once figures for equilibrium current accounts are agreed upon, then real
exchange rates consistent with them can be calculated using a trade model

with its associated trade elasticities. To do so, it is first necessary
to adjust the current account for cyclical factors, then to calculate the

discrepancy between the equilibrium current account and the cyclically
adjusted current account for a particular year. The trade model is then
used to calculate the change in real exchange rates necessary to

27.18.2

-60-.

equilibrate the current account.51 Since estimates of price elasticities
range widely, this step in the calculation is fraught with

difficulties. Cutting the elasticities in half, for example, requires
twice as large a change in real exchange rates to achieve equilibrium.

(3) The calculations so far only determine the equilibrium real exchange rate
in a single year. It is then necessary to adjust that rate for real

disturbances that occur through time. Among such real disturbances are
the oil price shocks experienced twice during the 1970s, natural resource

discoveries (such as North Sea oil for Britain), secular movements in
demand, and secular movements in supply, including differential

productivity growth rates. One issue that arises is whether to take into
account changes in government policy if such changes are not just
temporary measures but last for a number of years. In his study of
exchange rates, Williamson explicitly

excludes the shift in U.S. fiscal

policy under the Reagan Administration because it is not sustainable in

the long run. He also excludes variations in demand or supply over the
business cycle from whatever source.

Most of these adjustments require that arbitrary judgments

be made.

Recall how difficult it was for analysts to evaluate the effects of the first

OPEC price increase in 1973. Even the effects of productivity growth are
difficult to assess. To illustrate some of the difficulties involved in
determining equilibrium rates, the next section examines the Smithsonian

greement of exchange rates, an agreement reached by the major industrial
countries in December 1971.

27. 18.2

—61—

Multilateral Agreement on Exchange Rates: the Smithsonian Accord
The Smithsonian Agreement provides one of the few examples of a
multilateral exchange rate agreement, but the lessons to be learned from
this
agreement are none too encouraging about

exchange rate agreements in general.

First, the agreement was reached only after

prolonged and sometimes

acrimonious negotiations stretching through the fall of 1971. One of the
reasons why the negotiations were so difficult was that the objectives of the
participants were inconsistent with one another, which is not surprising given
the pivotal role played by exchange rates in each economy. The U.S.

Administration wanted to achieve a turnabout of $13 billion in its current
account through the realignment of currencies.
the OECD envisaged, when their individual
of their current balances of

The other major countries of

estimates were summed, a reduction

only $3 billion (Solomon, p. 199). That an

agreement was at all possible in these circumstances
to the heavy-handed actions of the Nixon

is probably attributable

Administration. In August 1971 that

administration imposed import surcharge of ten percent in lieu of an agreement
to realign the major currencies.

Second, the agreement set new exchange rates that were simply
unsustainable in the long run, despite President Nixon's characterization of
the accord as the "most significant

monetary agreement in the history of the

world" (New York Times, December 19, 1971, p. 1). It is interesting to

compare the rates agreed upon at the Smithsonian meeting with those prevailing
a little over a year later after the Agreement had broken down and most rates

were allowed to float. Table 5 presents the central

rates agreed upon at the

Smithsonian meeting as well as the market exchange rates prevailing in the

second quarter of 1973. The market rates diverge from the Smithsonian central
rates by more than ten percent in three out of four instances, with the dollar

27.18.2

TABLE 5
CCI1PARISON OF SMITHSONIAN AND 1973 2ND QUARTER SPOT RATES

% DEVIATIONS
from
from
Actual
Adjusted

SMITHSONIAN PARITIES

1973 II

Actual

Adjusted*

Actual

308.00

309.72

264.98

.114.O

—14.4

2.6057

2.6886

2.5300

—2.9

—5.9

3.2225

3.1119

2.736

—15.1

—12.1

DM/$
FF/$

5.1157

4.8842

4.4288

-13.4

—9.3

*Smithsofliafl Parities adjusted for changes in WPI for manufacturing

from

December 1971 to second quarter 1973.

SOURCES: Bank for International Settlements, Annual Report, 12th June 1972
for Parities; IMF, International Financial Statistics for Exchange
Rates; unpublished IMF Data for WPI for Manufacturing.

27.18.1

-62—

weaker after the advent of

pound). The table also

floating than before (except in the case of the

presents a comparison between

second quarter of 1973 and the
order to see if the

the market rates in the

central rates adjusted for

changes in prices in

divergence was caused by relative

inflation rates during
the interim period. (Wholesale prices in manufacturing
are used to adjust the
central rates.) In the case of the yen and pound, the
market rates deviate
more from the adjusted central
rates than from the
original central rates; for
the other two
currencies, the deviations are
smaller, but are still about ten
percent off the mark. Thus
an agreement reached only after
prolonged
negotiations resulted in an
exchange rate realignment that did not go far
enough in lowering the value of the dollar.
The obstacles to agreement and to successful implementation

of target

zones are formidable. As James

Tobin, writing in 1978, expressed it: "it is
scarcely conceivable that the various
OECD countries could
individually
project, much less agree on, much less
convince skeptical markets of, a system

of equilibrj or target

exchange rates for 1980 or 1985"

(Tobin, 1982,

p. 1493)52
Some advocates of target

zones acknowledge the economic arguments against
such a system, but nonetheless
contend that targets have a role to play in
fostering international economic
cooperation. They argue that an agreement on
target zones at least commits
governments to regular consultations on exchange
market developments
Even such regular
consultations, however, may not induce
governments to limit the divergences
in macroeconomic policies that cause many
misalignments. And if they do
not, then this argument for targets loses much
of its force.

27. 18.2

—63—

5.

concluding Connents

This paper began by describing two

distinct types of exchange rate
Each type of variability imposes

variability, volatility and misalignment.
its own costs on an economy, and

each presents a different challenge to

exchange rate policy.

The volatility of exchange rates could

be sharply curtailed if the

industrial countries agreed to reinstitute a fixed rate system with narrow

bands. The EEC has succeeded in fixing bilateral rates within Europe,
although fixed rates within the European

Monetary System have been maintained
and through the imposition of

only through frequent parity adjustments
extensive capital controls.

In contemplating such a move, however, countries should recall the
lessons of the Bretton Woods System.

Fixed rates cannot be maintained without

extensive capital controls. The paper has analyzed the distortions to
investment and borrowing incentives that are entailed by such measures.
Balance of payments crises, moreover,

will inevitably break out unless

frequent parity changes are permitted.

But if parity changes are permitted,

inflation
one of the chief benefits of fixed rates, the credibility given to
to
targets, will be lost. Fixed rates, finally, will inhibit the adjustment
real shocks like the oil price increases

experienced in the 1970s.

Short of fixing exchange rates, countries
foreign exchange intervention policies.

could pursue more active

There might be a role for

international agreements to ensure that intervention is confined to 'leaning

against the wind' operations or to prevent

intervention from allowing

countries to 'manipulate' exchange rates to gain competitive advantages. The
the
analysis of foreign exchange intervention policy above suggests that

27. 18.2

intervention would have to be non-sterilized, so active intervention would
require a compromise of monetary targets.
If misalignment is the most important problem, then the search for an
ideal exchange rate policy may be too narrowly focused to be effective. A

major source of misalignment in the last ten years has been the macroeconomic
policies pursued by countries like the United States and Britain. It is not
at all clear that the solution to

major policy imbalances among the industrial

countries lies in limiting exchange rate movements rather than changing the
policies themselves.

The adoption of target zones for exchange rates, on the other hand,
may
have a useful role to play in inducing
governments to modify their policies.
At the very least, the breaching of target zones may call attention to the
need for international consultations

on macroeconomic policies. Whether

target zones would be any more successful than the IMF agreements remains to
be proven.

The Jurgensen Report concluded that exchange rate policy must consist of
more than (sterilized) intervention to be successful.
willing to commit their macroeconomic policies to

Countries must be

controlling exchange

rates. In many circumstances, governments may find that limiting exchange
rate variability is not worth this price.

27.18.2

-65—

Footnotes
'The author is the James R. F. Guy Professor of Finance and Economics at
the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania and a Research Associate
at the National Bureau of Economic Research. He would like to thank William
Branson, Martin Feldstein, Dale Henderson, and Richard Herring for helpful
comments on an earlier draft.
The passages are from Paris, 1937, p. 166, and Harrod, 1951, pp. 582—814.

2Productivity tends to rise in recovery periods, so the recent rise in
productivity in these two countries may be partly a cyclical phenomenon.
3Later sections discuss how measures of misalignment take into account
real economic shocks (which usually require departures of exchange rates from
relative price trends).
useful survey of this literature is Frenkel and Mussa (19814).
5Kenen and Rodrik (19814) show that other measures of volatility give
roughly similar results.

6Similar results are obtained for earlier periods by Frenkel and Mussa
(1980) and Bergstrand (1983).

71f Rt measures the real exchange rate of the dollar relative to the
pound sterling, for example, then a rise in Rt reflects either a rise in U.S.
rises) or a fall in the dollar price
relative to British prices (i.e.,

of the pound (Xt falls reflecting a depreciation of the pound). In either
case, a rise in Rt reflects a loss of competitiveness for U.S. exports.
8Notice how much less variable the effective exchange rates, which
represent a diversified basket of currencies, are compared with the bilateral
rates (whether nominal or real).
9just because most movements in an exchange rate are unforecastable does
not imply that the exchange rate is excessively volatile, although companies
engaged in international trade may regard the volatility as too high,
Instead, the volatility of an exchange rate is "excessive" if it exceeds that
of the factors which determine it.
10Meese and Rogoff (1983) examine the out-of-sample performance of
several well—known models of the exchange rate, and conclude that a random
walk model performs as well as any of these models.

William5on'S concept of the "underlying capital flow" is linked to
current account targets (as discussed below in the section on "Defining
Exchange Rate Targets").
is interesting to note that while the yen was more volatile than the
dollar during the period 1973-85, the misalignmeflts of the dollar were larger
than those of the yen. This underscores the need to carefully distinquish
between the two concepts.
27. 18.2

—66—

3Note that a rise in the real exchange
appreciation of that currency.

rate represents a real

14For further discussion of adjustment costs associated
with
misalignments, see Branson (1981), Richardson
(1984) and Williamson (1985).

15A pointed out by Williamson (1985), it is interesting
that Johnson saw
misalignments arising from misguided intervention
policy under fixed rates
(maintaining unrealistic parities) rather than from market forces under
flexible rates. Like most economists
at that time, Johnson did not foresee
the large misalignments that were to occur under flexible rates.
l6See Atkinson, Brooks, and Hall (1985). Note that the
round of
OPEC price increases in 1978-79 raised the value of the North second
Sea discoveries.

171f the real
appreciation was equal to 45%, then 10% represents 2/9 of
the entire loss of competitiveness.
Forsyth and Kay (1980) attribute a larger
proportion of the appreciation to North Sea oil.
18These series are obtained from the IMF's International
Financial
Statistics. Because productivity
growth is generally greater in the
manufacturing sector than elsewhere in an advanced
economy, real exchange
rates based on general price indexes (which contain nontraded as well as
traded goods) provide a less reliable index of relative competitiveness than
real exchange rates based on manufacturing prices alone. For further
discussion, see Marston (1986). For a discussion of the relative merits of
value added deflators and unit labor costs as measures of international
competitiveness, see Artus (1978).
19There is no evidence, for example, that interest rates
charged on
Eurodollar loans to Europeans rose relative to loans to Pmerican residents.

20These figures, taken from the national income accounts, are smaller
than the balance of payments figures
widely quoted in the press, but are more
relevant for determining the effects of the misalignment on output and
employment.
21Ju'gensen Report, U.S. Treasury, 1983 p. 4. Philippe Jurgensen was
Chairman of the Working Group. The countries represented in this group were
the so—called Group of Seven (Or G-7)
countries: Canada, France, Germany,
Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, and United States.

22Sterilized intervention
effectively consists of swapping foreign bonds
for domestic bonds, although the operation has several steps to it. Recall
that central banks typically hold
foreign exchange reserves in the form of
interest—bearing, foreign currency-denominated securities. When a central
bank wants to intervene in the exchange market, it first sells the foreign
securities, then uses the foreign currency so obtained to buy domestic
currency from the private sector. If the intervention is to be
sterilized,
the sale of foreign currency is followed by an expansionary open market
operation (or an analogous monetary operation in different institutional
environments) involving the purchase of domestic bonds with the recently
acquired domestic currency, thus restoring the monetary base to its initial

27. 18.2

—67—

level. For further discussion of such operations, see Girton and Henderson
(1977) and Marston (1985).
23This description of the three channels draws on Loopesko (198)4).
214Mussa (1981) emphasizes the importance of' announcement effects in his

study of foreign exchange intervention for the Group of Thirty. See also the
recent analysis of announcement effects by Kenen (1986).

25if

'

i

are the domestic and foreign interest rates, respectively,

and s is the expected change in the spot exchange rate (the capital gain on
the foreign currency), then uncovered interest parity implies that

it i +

s

26Hansen and Hodrick (1980), for example, adopt a generalized least
squares estimating procedure so that they can utilize overlapping
observations, thus making it possible to use weekly data rather than the
monthly or quarterly data typically employed in the past. Cumby and Obstfeld
(19814) also use weekly data but adopt techniques to take into account the nonstationarity of the foreign exchange data. These studies and others that have
followed are able to reject decisively the joint hypothesis of market
efficiency and uncovered interest parity. Levich (1985) provides a
comprehensive survey of recent studies.

27Two recent surveys of the theoretical literature on risk premia are
Adler and Dumas (1983) and Branson and Henderson (1985).
28See, for example, Obstfeld (1983), Frankel and Engel (198)4), and
Danker, Haas, Henderson, Symansky, and Tryon (1985).

29Studies of international asset pricing based on intertemporal utility
functions include Stulz (1981) and Hansen and Hodrick (1983).
30me following account relies heavily on Greene (19814).

31For a similar view, see Ueda (1986). Intervention in the autumn of
1985 totalled $13 billion dompared with $10 billion in February and March of
1985 (BIS 1986, p. 1)49).

32For a general analysis of foreign exchange intervention in the presence
of different types of disturbances, see Henderson (19814).

disturbance. The
33A similar analysis applies to any aggregate demand
effects of aggregate supply disturbances on the exchange rate, however, are
ambiguous since an increase in aggregate supply lowers prices at the same time
that output expands (so nominal output, and hence the demand for transactions
balances, may rise or fall).
314Among those investigating speculative bubbles as the source of the
dollar's appreciation are Krugrnan (1985) and Frankel and Froot (1986).

27.18.2

-68351f a government pursues an expansionary fiscal policy
indefinitely,
then eventually foreign investors will balk at further exposure to Political
risk. But until that point is reached, a country is free to expand through
fiscal means.
the reserve currency country follows an expansionary monetary
policy, the resulting balance of payments deficits are
automatically financed,
since the country gaining reserves invests them in the securities of the
reserve currency country. The monetary base of the reserve currency country,
moreover, does not decline as a result of the deficit as long as other
countries choose to hold their foreign exchange reserves in the form of
securities rather than the monetary base of the
reserve currency country.
McKinnon (1974) has proposed that all foreign currency reserves be held in the
form of central bank balances (bearing a market interest rate). If this were
the case, foreign exchange intervention would affect the monetary bases of
both reserve and non-reserve currency countries alike.

If domestic and foreign securities are perfect sLthstituteS, the
attempt
by one country to increase its money supply through domestic credit
expansion

succeeds only to the extent that this one country manages to increase the
money supply of the entire system. (The system would be like a set of
reservoirs connected by open channels; an attempt to increase the water level
in one would succeed only to the extent that the water levels of all were
increased). Formal models of the offset phenomenon are presented in Kouri and
Porter (197L) and Herring and Marston (1977).
381n 1986 both Italy and France relaxed some of their controls, but
many
transactions by residents remain restricted.

39For an excellent account of this period, see Chapter V of Solomon,
1977.

UOBank of England, Quarterly Bulletin, December 1969, Table 18.

41The members were
Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy,
Luxembourg, and the Netherlands. The United Kingdom formally Joined the
EMS,
but chose not to participate in the exchange rate mechanism. For a detailed
discussion of the system, see Ungerer et al. (1983).

the successes of the EMS which will not be discussed since it
lies outside the scope of the paper is the development of the European
Currency Unit (or ECU) as a parallel currency. For an interesting
discussion,
see Padoa—Schioppa (1985).
1420ne of'

23He uses the forward rate as the predicted exchange rate in the case of
nominal rates and forecasts of real exchange rates based on a random walk
model or a vector autoregression in the case of real exchange rates.

Canzoneri (1982) and Marston (198)4) analyze this possibility in
theoretical models of exchange rate unions.
145me one exception is the real interest rate differential between
Germany and Italy formed by using a VAR forecast.

27.18.2

—69—

U6The controls also lead to asymmetric responses of EMS currencies to
outside disturbances, since among the three most important EMS currencies only
the mark has open capital markets. When there is speculative pressure
involving the dollar, for example, the mark takes the brunt of this pressure,
thus causing strains within the EMS. See Marston (1984).
7As Jacques van Ypersele, one of the architects of the EMS, has
described it: "The objective was indeed that external stability be the result
less of artificially imposed constraints than of a convergence of economic
trends among member countries, in particular of prices and costs" (Ypersele,
1984, p. 15).
8See Brainard and Perry, 1986, "Symposium on exchange rates, trade and
capital flows," p. 23LL Another tax that has been proposed by Leviatan (1980)
is the "real interest rate equalization tax." This tax, by creating a wedge
between domestic and foreign interest rates, tries to reduce the incentive for
outflows (or inflows) of capital when a country abruptly changes its monetary
policy. A country trying to stabilize its price level through monetary
contraction, for example, would ordinarily have to contend with an
appreciation caused by an inflow of capital. By creating a wedge between
domestic and foreign returns, however, a country might be able to dampen the
currency appreciation. Such a tax is probably best thought of as a supplement
to national monetary policies, to be used when one country's policies depart
sharply from those of other countries.
49Earlier advocates of targets for exchange rates include the "Optica
Group" of economists from EEC countries. See Commission of the European
Communities (1975).
50Branson (1986) underscores the confusion regarding the source of the
the
dollar's rise by suggesting that misalignment is a "topic . .
National Science Foundation, not a new Bretton Woods." (p. 176)

. for

51For further discussion of this approach to estimating equilibrium
exchange rates and the problems associated with it, see Artus (1978).
52There is reason to believe that agreements on equilibrium rates would
be even more difficult to achieve in the 1980s than in 1971. Experts differ
widely in their estimates of equilibrium rates today, in large part because of
the many structural changes which have occurred since the Smithsonian
Agreement. Consider the key bilateral rate between the yen and dollar.
Before the dollar recently plunged from 250/$ to Y160/$, estimates of the
equilibrium value of this bilateral rate were as wide ranging as the market
rates themselves. Williamson, for example, cites six studies with estimates
ranging from 131/$ to 209/$. Krause (1986) writes of a possible 1O0/$
rate. Changes in energy prices make all such calculations difficult. But
another major reason why the yen-dollar rate is difficult to assess is the
pattern of productivity growth in the United States and Japan which distorts
simple purchasing power parity calculations. (For further discussion, see
Marston, 1986.)

27. 18.2

-70-

References

Adler, Michael, and Bernard Dumas, 1983, "International portfolio choice and
corporation finance: a survey," Journal of Finance, 38: 925814.
Akhtar, M. A., and R. Spence Hilton, 198)4, "Effects of exchange rate
uncertainty on German and U.S. trade," Federal Reserve Bank of' New York,

Quarterly Review, Spring: 7-15.

Argy, Victor, 1982, Exchange Rate Management in Theory and Practice.
Princeton Studies in International Finance No. 50. Princeton:
International Finance Section.
Atkinson, F. J., S. J. Brooks, and S. G. F. Hall, 1985, "The Economic Effects
of North Sea Oil," National Institute Economic Review, November.
Artus, Jacques R., 1978, "Methods of assessing the long—run equilibrium value
of' an exchange rate," Journal of International Economics, 8 (May): 277299.

Baldwin, Richard, and Paul R. Krugman, 1986, "Persistent effects of large
exchange rate shocks," NBER Working Paper No. 2017, September.
Bergsten, C. Fred., 1982, "What to do about the U.S.-Japan economic
problem,"
Foreign Affairs, 60: (Summer).
Bergstrand, Jeffrey H., 1983, "Is exchange rate volatility 'excessive', New
England Economic Review, (September/October): 5—1)4.
Brairiard, William C., and George L. Perry, eds., 1986, "Symposium on exchange
rates, trade and capital flows," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity:
165—235.

Branson, William H., 1981, "Leaning against the wind' as exchange rate
policy," processed.
Branson, William H., 1985, "Causes of' appreciation and volatility of the
dollar," in The U.S. Dollar--Recent Developments, Outlook, and Policy
Options, Kansas City: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 33-52.

Branson, William H., 1986, "The limits of monetary coordination as exchange
rate policy," in Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1: 175—9)4.
Branson, William H., and Dale W. Henderson, 1985, "The specification and
influence of asset markets," in Ronald W. Jones and Peter B. Kenen, eds.,
Handbook of International Economics, vol. 2. Amsterdam: North-Holland,
7)49—805.

Branson, W. H., and James P. Love, 1986, "Dollar appreciation and
manufacturing employment and output," NBER Working Paper No. 1972, July.

27.18.2

—71—

Buiter, Wiflem H., and Marcus H. Miller, 1983, "Changing the Rules: Economic
Consequences of the Thatcher Regime," Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity, 2: 305—65.

Canzoneri, Matthew, 1982, "Exchange intervention policy in a multiple country
world," Journal of International Economics, 13, (November).

Coission of the European Communities, "OPTICA report 1975: Towards economic
equilibrium and monetary unification in Europe," Brussels, processed.
Cumby, Robert E., and Maurice Obstfeld, 1984, "International interest rate and
price level linkages under flexible exchange rates: a review of recent
evidence," in John Bilson and Richard C. Marston, eds., Exchange Rate
Theory and Practice, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 121-51.
Cushinan, David 0., 1983, "The effects of real exchange rate risk on
international trade," Journal of International Economics, 15, (August):
145...63.

Danker, Deborah J., Richard A. Haas, Dale W. Henderson, Steven A. Symansky,
and Ralph W. Tryon, 1985, "Small empirical models of exchange market
intervention: applications to Germany, Japan, and Canada," Staff Studies
No. 135, April. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
Board.
De Grauwe, Paul, 1985, "The European Monetary System during 1979-814: an
evaluation," International Economics Research Paper No. 147, Leuven:
Centrum voor Ecoriornische Studien, June.
Ethier, Wilfred, and Arthur I. Bloomfield, 1975, Managing the Mana&ed Float,
Essays in International Finance No. 112. Princeton: International
Finance Section, October.
Feldstein, Martin, 1986, "The impact of economic policies on the outlook for
world trade." Remarks delivered to the International Monetary
Conference, Boston, Massachusetts, processed.
Forsyth, J. P., and J. A. Kay, 1980, "The Economic Implications of North Sea
Oil Revenues," Working Paper No. 10, London: Institute for Fiscal
Studies, 1980.

Economic
Frankel, Jeffrey A., 1985,"The dazzling dollar," Brookins Papers on

Activy, No. 1:

199—217.

Frankel, Jeffrey A., and Charles M. Engel, 19814, "Do Asset-Demand Functions
Optimize over the Mean and Variance of Real Returns: A Six Currency
Test," Journal of International Economics, 17: 309-323.

Frankel, Jeffrey A., and Kenneth Froot, 1986, "The dollar as a speculative
bubble: a tale of fundamentalists and chartists," NBER Working Paper No.
18514, March.

27. 18 .2

-72-

Frenkel, Jacob, 1985, "Commentary on 'Causes of Appreciation and
Volatility of
the Dollar'", in The U.S.
Dollar__Recent Developments, Outlook, and
Policy Options, Kansas City: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas
City, 53-63.
Frenkel, Jacob, and Michael Mussa,
1980, "The efficiency of
foreign exchange
markets and measures of
turbulence,"
American Economic
81.

Review, 70: 374_

Frenkel, Jacob, and Michael Mussa, 19814, "Asset markets,
exchange rates, and
the balance of payments," in
Ronald W. Jones and Peter B.
Handbook of International
Kenen, eds.,
Economics, Vol II, Amsterdam:
679—747.
North-Holland,

Giavazzi, Francesco, and Alberto
Giovanriini, 1986, "The EMS and the
dollar,"
Economic Policy, 1,2: 455_7A4
Girton, Lance, and Dale W. Henderson, "Central bank operations
in foreign and
domestic assets under fixed and
flexible exchange rates," in Peter B.
Clark, Dennis E. Logue, and Richard
J. Sweeney, eds., The Effects of
Exchange Rate Adjustments.
Washington:
Department of the Treasury, 15179.

Goldstein, Morris, 1984, The Exchange
Rate System: Lessons of the Fast and
ptions for the Future, Occasional
Paper No. 30. Washington:
International Monetary Fund.

Greene, Margaret L., "U.S. experience
with foreign exchange intervention:
September l977—December 1979," Staff Studies No. 128, October.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
Hainada, Koichi, and Akiyoshi
Horiuchi, 1986, "Monetary and real effects of the
internationalization of' a national
currency: the case of the yen," in
Sven Arndt and J. David
Richardson, eds., Real-Financial Linkages in Open
Economies. Washington: American
Enterprise Institute, forthcoming.

Hansen, Lars Peter, and Robert 3. Hodrick,
1980, "Forward exchange rates as
optimal predictors of future spot rates: an econometric
analysis,"
Jourhal of olitical

Economy, 88, (October): 829-53.

Hansen, Lars Peter, and Robert 3. Hodrick,
1983, "Risk averse speculation in
the forward foreign exchange market: An econometric analysis of
linear
models. In Exchange Rates
and International Maroeconomics, ed. by Jacob
Frenkel.

Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Harrod, R. F., 1951, The Life of John Maynard Keynes,

London: MacMillan.

Hause,

J. C., 1966, "The welfare costs
of disequiljbrj exchange rates,"
Journal of Political Econom1, 74: (August).

Henderson, Dale W., 198)4, "Exchange market
intervention operations: Their
role Iri financial policy and their
effects," in John Bilson and Richard
Marston, eds., Exchange Rate Theory arid Practice. Chicago:

of

27.18.2

Chicago Press, 359_14143.

University

—73—

Richard J., and Richard C. Marston, 1976, "The forward market and
interest rates in the Eurocurrency and national money markets," in Carl
H. Stem, John H. Makin, and Dennis E. Logue, eds., EurocurrenCieS and the
International Monetary System, 139—63.

Herring,

Herring, Richard J., and Richard C. Marston, 1977, National Monetary Policies
and International Financial Markets. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Hooper, Peter, and Steven W. Kohlhagen, 1978, "The effect of exchange rate
uncertainty on the prices and volume of international trade," Journal of
International EconomicS, 8, November, 183-511.
approach to the exchange rate in an
Huang, Roger D., 1981, "The monetary
efficient foreign exchange market: tests based on volatility," Journal of
Finance, 36,1 (March): 31—41.
Johnson, Harry G., 1966, "The welfare costs of exchange rate stabilization,"
Journal of Political Economy, 714: 14
What role for

Peter B., 1986, "Exchange-rate management:
Kenen,intervention,"
paper presented at the A.E.A. meetings, December 1986,
processed.

Kenen, Peter B., and Dani Rodrik, 198'4, "Measuring and analyzing the effects
of short-term volatility in real exchange rates," Working Papers in
International Economics, Princeton: International Finance Section,
March.
Kouri, Pentti, and Michael Porter, 19714, "InternatiOnal capital flows and
of PoliticalEc9nOmy, 82, (May/June):
portfolio equilibrium," Journal
14143—67.

Krause, Lawrence B., 1986, "Does a yen
sense?" processed.

valued at 100 per dollar make any

dollar sustainable?" in The U.S.
Krugman, Paul R., "Is the strong
Dollar--Recent Developments, Outlook, and Policy Options, Kansas City:
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 103—132.
Lanyi, Anthony, and Esther C. Suss, 1982, "Exchange rate variability:
alternative measures and interpretation," International Monetary Fund,
December.

of exchange rates: price
Levich, Richard M., 1985, "Empirical studies efficiency,"
in R. W. Jones and
behavior, rate determination and market
Economics, Vol. 2.
P. B. Kenen, eds., Handbook of
Amsterdam: North-Holland, 979-1O40.

1nternatOal

Liviatan,

N., 1980, "Anti_inflatiOnarY monetary
tax," Warwick Economic Research Papers 171.

policy and the capital-import

Rates, Intervention,
Loopesko, Bonnie E., 1984, "Relationships among Exchange
Investigation," Journal of
and Interest Rates: An Empirical
Internatiopa1MOeY and Finance,.3,3 (December): 257-77.

27.18.2

_714 -

Marston,

Richard C., 198)4,

"Financial disturbances
and the effects of an
exchange—rate union," in
Jagdeep Bhandari,
Under Uncertainty.
ed.,
Exchange Rate Management
Cambridge: MIT Press.
Marston, Richard C.,
1985, "Stabilization
Ronald W. Jones and Peter B. Kenen, policies in open
economies," in
eds., Handbook of
Economics, Vol 2.
International
Amsterdam: North
Holland, 859-916.
Marstori, Richard C., 1986, "Real
exchange rates and
United States and
productivity growth in the
Japan," N.B.E.R.
Working Paper No. 1922, May.
McKinnon, Ronald I., 1974, A New Tripartite
Dollar Standard, Essays in International
Monetary Agreement or a Limping
Finance No. 106, Princeton:
International Finance Section.

Meese, Richard A., and
of the seventies: Kenneth Rogoff, 1983, "Empirical
exchange rate models
Do they fit out of
sample?" Journal of International
Economics, 1, (February): 3-2)4.
Mussa, Michael, 1979,
"Empirical Regularities in the Behavior of
Rates and Theories
of the Foreign
Exchange
Allan H. Meltzer,
Exchange Market," in Karl Brunner and
Policies for
Employment, Prices, and
Carnegie—Rochester Conference Series
Exchange Rates,
on Public
57.
Policy, Vol 11, 1979, 9—
Mussa, Michael, 1981, The Role of Official
6. New
Intervention, Occasional Papers No.
York: Group of Thirty.
Obstfeld, Maurice, 1983, "Exchange
rates, inflation, and the sterilization
problem: Germany, 1975—81,"
European Economic
Review, 21,1/2
(March/April): 161—89.

Obstfeld, Maurice, 1985,
Brookings Papers on "Floating Exchange Rates: Experience and Prospects,"
Economic Activity, 2: 369—)450.
Padoa-Schioppa, Tomasso, 1985, "Lessons from
European University Institute "European the European Monetary System,"
Forum" Lecture, Firerize: Badia
Fiesolana, February 20th.
Paris, James Daniel,

1938, Monetary Policies of the United States:
New York: Columbia
University Press.

1932—38.

Richardson, J. David, 19814, "The new
nexus among trade, industrial and
exchange—rate policies," in
Tamir Agmon, Robert G. Hawkins, and
M. Levich, eds., The Future of
the
Richard
Lexington: Lexington Books, 253—79.International Monetary System,
Rogoff, Kenneth, 19814, "On the effects of

of weekly data," Journal of Monetary sterilized intervention: an analysis
50.
Economics, 14,2 (September): 133-

27.18.2

—75—

be achieved without
Rogoff, Kenneth, 1985, "Can exchange rate predictability
evidence from the EMS," European Economic Review,
monetary convergence:
28,1-2 (June—July): 93-115.
interest rates and
Shiller, Robert J., 1979, "The volatility of long-term
expectations models of the term structure," Journal ofpJticEcoflOm,

87 (December): 1190—1219.
International Monetary System, 19U5-76: An
Solomon, Robert, 1977, The
Insider's View. New York: Harper and Row.

model of international asset pricing,"
Stulz, Rene, 1981, "A
Financial Economics, 9: 383_1406.
reform," in Essays
for international monetary
Tobin, James, 1982, "A proposal
MIT Press, 488-94.
in Economics: Theory and Policy. Cambridge
current accounts and exchange rates before and after
Ueda, Kazuo, "Japan-U.S.
University Working Paper No. 15.
the G5 agreement," New York
Peter Nyberg, 1983, The European Monetarl
Ungerer, Horst, Owen Evans and 1979—8?,
Occasional Paper No. ig, Washington,
System: the Experience,
D.C.: International Monetary Fund, May
fl

Exchange Rate Systm, Policy Analyses
Williamson, John, 1985, The
Institute for International
International Economics No. 5, Washington:
EconomicS, June.

Intervention, 1983, port. Washington:

Working Group on Foreign Exchange
referred to as the Jurgensen Report).
U.S. Treasury. (In text,

SysteQifl22!0fl

Europeafl Monetary
Ypersele, Jacques van, 1985, The
Commission of the European Communities.
and Outlook, Brussels:

27. 18.2

