                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               DECOMPOSING MEDICAL-CARE EXPENDITURE GROWTH

                                          Abe Dunn
                                        Eli B. Liebman
                                        Adam Shapiro

                                      Working Paper 23117
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23117


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   February 2017




We would like to thank Ana Aizcorbe, Ernie Berndt, Michael Chernew, David Cutler, Bill
Marder, Joe Newhouse, Allison Rosen, and Jack Triplett. We would also like to thank the
participants at the NBER/CRIW Conference on Measuring and Modeling Health Care Costs and
2013 iHEA 9th World Congress. The views expressed in this paper are solely those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Bureau of Economic Analysis, the Federal Reserve
Bank of San Francisco, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System or the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Abe Dunn, Eli B. Liebman, and Adam Shapiro. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Decomposing Medical-Care Expenditure Growth
Abe Dunn, Eli B. Liebman, and Adam Shapiro
NBER Working Paper No. 23117
February 2017
JEL No. I10,I11

                                         ABSTRACT

Medical-care expenditures have been rising rapidly, accounting for over 17 percent of GDP in
2012. In this study, we assess the sources of the rising medical-care expenditures in the
commercial sector. We employ a novel framework for decomposing expenditure growth into four
components at the disease level: service price growth, service utilization growth, treated disease
prevalence growth, and demographic shift. The decomposition shows that growth in prices and
treated prevalence are the primary drivers of medical-care expenditure growth over the 2003 to
2007 period. There was no growth in service utilization at the aggregate level over this period.
Price and utilization growth were especially large for the treatment of malignant neoplasms. For
many conditions, treated prevalence has shifted towards preventive treatment and away from
treatment for late-stage illnesses.

Abe Dunn                                        Adam Shapiro
Bureau of Economic Analysis                     Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
Abe.Dunn@bea.gov                                adam.shapiro@sf.frb.org

Eli B. Liebman
Department of Economics
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708
ebs30@duke.edu
    Decomposing Medical-Care Expenditure Growth
                Abe Dunn, Eli Liebman, and Adam Hale Shapiro

                                        February 1, 2017


                                              Abstract
          Medical-care expenditures have been rising rapidly, accounting for over 17 per-
      cent of GDP in 2012. In this study, we assess the sources of the rising medical-care
      expenditures in the commercial sector. We employ a novel framework for decom-
      posing expenditure growth into four components at the disease level: service price
      growth, service utilization growth, treated disease prevalence growth, and demo-
      graphic shift. The decomposition shows that growth in prices and treated preva-
      lence are the primary drivers of medical-care expenditure growth over the 2003 to
      2007 period. There was no growth in service utilization at the aggregate level over
      this period. Price and utilization growth were especially large for the treatment of
      malignant neoplasms. For many conditions, treated prevalence has shifted towards
      preventive treatment and away from treatment for late-stage illnesses.



1     Introduction
    Medical-care expenditures per capita in the United States is larger and rising faster
relative to other developed countries (see Chernew and Newhouse (2012) and Chandra
    We would like to thank Ana Aizcorbe, Ernie Berndt, Michael Chernew, David Cutler, Bill Marder,
Joe Newhouse, Allison Rosen, and Jack Triplett. We would also like to thank the participants at the
NBER/CRIW Conference on Measuring and Modeling Health Care Costs and 2013 iHEA 9th World
Congress. The views expressed in this paper are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily re‡ect
the views of the Bureau of Economic Analysis, the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, or the Board
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.


                                                   1
and Skinner (2012)). In 2012, health care accounted for more than 17 percent of U.S.
GDP, which was nearly double the average of other OECD countries. Despite the sub-
stantial expenditures on medical care in the United States, many gaps remain in our
understanding of the sources of expenditure growth. Current national statistics that
track spending by service category (for example, physicians, hospitals and prescription
drugs) do not convey information about spending for speci…c disease categories. To …ll
this void, academics and policy makers have advocated for more detailed statistics on
health-care expenditures centered around a key target of health spending: disease treat-
ment (see Berndt et al. (2000) and Accounting for Health and Health Care (2010)).
Additional information on disease spending may provide greater insight into how to
contain and e¢ ciently manage health-care expenditure growth.
    We analyze health-care expenditures in the commercial sector over the period 2003
to 2007. The commercial health-care market is economically important, accounting for
60 percent more expenditures than Medicare in 2012. Over this period of study, com-
mercial medical-care expenditures per commercially insured person grew by 26 percent,
surpassing the 20 percent growth in nominal GDP per capita.1 Prior research studies
have examined several factors driving the growth in medical-care expenditures, but each
of these studies leaves out pieces of the puzzle. For instance, Roehrig and Rousseau
(2011), Starr, Dominiak, and Aizcorbe (2013) and Thorpe, Florence, and Joski (2004)
look at the cost of disease and the prevalence of disease, but do not analyze changes in
service prices or service utilization (that is, the quantity of services per episode of care);
Aizcorbe and Nestoriak (2011) and Dunn, Liebman, Pack, and Shapiro (2012) look at
cost of disease treatment used as a measure of disease price growth, but do not assess
disease prevalence. Statistical agencies such as the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) and
Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA), as well as research by Bundorf, Royalty, and Baker
(2009) report changes in service prices for precisely de…ned services, but do not focus
on the cost of disease treatment or disease prevalence. None of the prior literature has
analyzed all these factors in one setting, which can leave policymakers without context
   1
     Commercial medical-care expenditure growth is calculated from the National Health Expenditure
Accounts. Overall in‡ation as reported by the BEA PCE de‡ator grew by 11.5 percent over the period
of study. Commercial premiums also grew faster than in‡ation with a growth rate of around 32 percent
according to estimates from the Kaiser Employee Health Bene…t Survey.


                                                 2
for the di¤erent results and without understanding about where these studies disagree.
This is important, since we …nd that broad generalizations for why spending changes
often overlook important trends that are disease-speci…c.
    The aim of this study is to more comprehensively assess the sources of medical-care ex-
penditure growth. We do so by decomposing expenditure growth into four distinct com-
ponents: service-price growth, service-utilization growth, prevalence-of-treated-disease
growth, and demographic shift. We track and dissect these key components of medical-
care expenditure growth for the years 2003 to 2007 for the commercial sector using a
rich claims database from MarketScan that contains millions of enrollees. The frame-
work presented in this paper breaks expenditures into various components applying a
similar methodology to that developed in Dunn, Shapiro and Liebman (2014). First,
using demographic population weights assessed in Dunn, Liebman, and Shapiro (2014a),
we extract expenditure growth attributable to demographic shifts— primarily, an aging
population. Second, as advocated by most health experts, we allocate expenditures into
disease-level categories. This allows protocols, technologies, and prices relevant for treat-
ing speci…c diseases to vary uniquely over time. Third, we break expenditures down into
expenditures per treatment and treated prevalence of a disease. For example, in the
case of hypertension, we track the number of episodes of treatment for hypertension per
capita as well as the expenditures per episode of treating hypertension. Finally, expen-
ditures per episode of treatment is split into service price and service utilization. Service
price represents the payment for a speci…c service, for example, a 15-minute o¢ ce visit.
Service utilization represents the quantity, or intensity, of services performed during an
episode of treatment. For example, in our methodology, a 30-minute doctor o¢ ce visit
will be a higher quantity of services than a 15-minute o¢ ce visit.
    Analyzing each of these factors within a single framework allows for a simple and
tractable way of comparing the various contributors to medical-care expenditure growth.
Foremost, determining whether expenditures are rising from disease prevalence, service
utilization, service prices, or demographic reasons is informative to policy makers at-
tempting to hold back the rising cost of health care. The methodology also provides
a more precise mapping between BLS methods (which track price per service) and the
types of price indexes that health economists have advocated (expenditures per episode


                                             3
for a speci…c disease, often referred to as a disease price).
    We …nd that, between 2003 and 2007, rising medical-care expenditures per capita
(that is, per commercially enrolled person) came from two primary sources: an increase
in the prevalence of treated diseases (accounting for around one-third of the increase in
expenditure growth) and an increase in service prices (accounting for around half of the
increase in expenditure growth). The remaining increase is attributable to demographic
shifts, in particular, a slightly aging commercially insured population. Interestingly, there
is no aggregate growth in expenditures due to service utilization per episode. In fact,
service utilization may be falling slightly for some conditions and increasing for others.
While service price growth is a large contributor to expenditure growth, it is important
to highlight that price growth does not greatly exceed in‡ation. After de‡ating price
growth measures by the national personal consumption expenditure (PCE) de‡ator, we
…nd that growth in prevalence accounts for 60 percent of expenditure growth in our
sample. Around 27 percent is attributable to real service price growth and 18 percent to
demographic shift. Service utilization has no impact on growth.
    The three largest contributors to expenditure growth are the medical practice cat-
egories of orthopedics, gastroenterology, and endocrinology. These practice categories
represented 33 percent of expenditures in 2003 but made up 40 percent of expenditure
growth between 2003 and 2007. Each of these practice categories had large growth in
service prices and the prevalence of treated disease. The major practice category with
the largest expenditure growth was preventive and administrative services, which grew
64 percent over the sample period, although this category accounted for only 2.4 percent
of spending in 2003. On the ‡ip side, cardiology made up 12 percent of 2003 expendi-
tures but accounted for less than 8 percent of the share in expenditure growth. This
relatively slow rise in expenditures per capita for cardiology services is attributable to
a decline in the prevalence of heart disease but also to a decrease in service utilization.
Our decomposition for the cardiology condition category shows that the decline in service
utilization was driven by a shift from inpatient to outpatient services and from brand to
generic drugs. These shifts may be indicative of greater e¢ ciency, since fewer resources
are necessary to treat each episode. The shifts are re‡ected in lower disease price growth
relative to the service price index, which holds utilization constant. This …nding is con-


                                             4
sistent with the work of Cutler et al. (1998), who …nd that a price index that allows
for greater substitution across services leads to lower price growth for the case of heart
attack treatments.
    Digging deeper into the speci…c disease categories reveals some interesting patterns.
Within cardiology and endocrinology services, there has been a large increase in the
prevalence of early-stage contributors to heart disease such as hypertension, diabetes,
obesity, and hyperlipidemia. However, there has been a decline in the prevalence of is-
chemic heart disease. This pattern may indicate that people are simply seeking treatment
for heart disease at an earlier stage of illness. Indeed, there has been a large increase in
spending on preventive services across the entire sample. For example, two of the largest
contributors to growth in spending for gastroenterology were attributable to preventive
services. Speci…cally, there was a 41 percent increase in expenditures per capita on “gas-
troenterology signs and symptoms”(a large portion of which includes colonoscopy) and
a 34 percent increase in expenditures per capita for patients with “non-malignant neo-
plasm of intestines”(e.g., benign polyps). Our decomposition shows that the majority of
this growth is attributable to an increase in the prevalence of treatment and demographic
shifts.
    Our decomposition also sheds light on the factors that contribute to the rapid rise in
the treatment cost of cancer. Over the …ve-year sample period, expenditures per capita
rose twice as fast for malignant neoplasms (48 percent growth in expenditures per capita)
than non-malignant neoplasms (24 percent growth in expenditures per capita). A large
reason for the discrepancy is the di¤erence in growth in the costs of treatment (that
is, expenditures per episode of care). Service prices for malignant neoplasms grew over
twice as fast as service prices for non-malignant neoplasms. This may indicate that more
expensive and innovative services are playing a role in cancer spending growth.
    This paper …nds results in the aggregate that are consistent with Bundorf, Royalty,
and Baker (2009) that use a similar data and time period. Speci…cally, after accounting
for overall in‡ation, they show that the growth in the health sector is mostly driven by
nonprice factors. Our paper adds to their …ndings by providing a more nuanced picture
of the factors leading to more health care utilization and higher prices. In particular, we
…nd that overall utilization growth is rising because of a higher treated prevalence growth


                                             5
for many conditions, while for other condition categories, such as cardiology, it appears
that demographics play a more important role. We also …nd that service prices do not
rise uniformly and that price growth for the treatment of malignant neoplasms is growing
particularly fast. Several other disease-speci…c …ndings are highlighted throughout the
text.
    One limitation of our study is that it looks at a shorter time period and only a
subset of the population (i.e., the commercial population) compared to some of the
previous studies that apply survey data, such as Roehrig and Rousseau (2011), and
Starr, Dominiak, and Aizcorbe (2013), so a direct comparison with our paper is not
possible. Indeed, the use of large claims data is especially important for accurately
measuring factors driving expenditure growth for precisely de…ned disease categories, to
account for underreporting in survey data, and to study patterns in relatively rare but
economically important health conditions (see Zuvekas and Olin (2009) and Aizcorbe et
al. (2012)).
    This paper focuses on the economic analysis of the components of medical care expen-
diture growth and trends. However, there are several methodological issues that arise
when studying the components of expenditure growth that are not covered in this paper.
Some of these topics are explored in companion pieces to this work: (1) Dunn, Lieb-
man, Rittmueller and Shapiro (2014) examine di¤erent approaches for assigning medical
services to disease categories and the e¤ect of these assignments on the components of
spending growth; (2) Dunn, Liebman, and Shapiro (2014b) examine alternative strate-
gies for separating utilization and price, which o¤er some implications for medical-care
price indexes; (3) Dunn, Liebman, and Shapiro (2014a) examine the representativeness
of the data used in our study and the e¤ects of analyzing di¤erent samples and applying
alternative weights; and (4) Dunn, Shapiro, and Liebman (2014) study the geographic
di¤erences in expenditure levels across MSAs.


2    Methodology of Index Construction
  The methodology of this paper borrows heavily from the Dunn, Shapiro, and Lieb-
man (2014) study of geographic variation in disease expenditures. However, instead of


                                           6
focusing on di¤erences across regions, we examine di¤erences over time. To begin, we
measure expenditures per capita for disease d for time period t, Cd;t which is simply total
expenditures for disease d in period t divided by the total commercial-insured popula-
tion in period t. To create a measure of medical-care expenditure growth, we form the
following expenditure-per-capita index (ECI):

                                                       Cd;t
                                           ECId;t =         ;                                        (1)
                                                       Cd;0
where Cd;0 is expenditures per capita for disease d in the base period, 0. Next, we create
a demographically …xed ECI, or DECI, by applying age, geographic location, and
gender weights to our selected commercially insured population, so that the age and sex
distribution is identical across regions and time periods.2 A measure of demographically
…xed medical care expenditure growth from period 0 (the base period) to t is then:

                                                         Cd;t
                                          DECId;t =                                                  (2)
                                                         Cd;0
where Cd;t is expenditures per capita after …xing the demographic distribution to the
base period. Note that any di¤erence between the ECI and DECI will be attribut-
able to demographic shifts in the commercially insured population. We label this the
“demographic residual”(Dem):

                                Demd;t = ECId;t         DECId;t + 1:                                 (3)
    Since the denominator of the Cd;t term is the full population, this measure of expen-
diture growth does not take into account the health of the population. For instance, if
expenditures per capita are higher in the second period because more individuals de-
velop ischemic heart disease (i.e., a rise in the prevalence of ischemic heart disease), the
   2
    Age, sex and major census region counts of those with private health insurance were accessed for each
year from http://www.census.gov/cps/data/cpstablecreator.html. The age categories were: 0 (babies
only), 1-17, 18-24, 25-34, 35-44, 45-54, 55-64. This left us with 42 buckets (7 age buckets x 2 gender
buckets x 4 regions). Then, using those counts we weighted up the number of enrollees in each of
those 42 buckets to match the population counts from the CPS. For the ECI, we weighted to the CPS
population for each year, to compute the DECI we weight each year of our sample to the 2007 CPS
population (see Dunn, Liebman, and Shapiro (2014a)).


                                                   7
expenditure measure Cd;t will grow, even if the expenditures per episode of heart dis-
ease does not change. Alternatively, Cd;t may grow if the expenditures per heart disease
episode increases, even if prevalence remains unchanged. In the following section we will
decompose the growth in population expenditures into the prevalence of the condition
and the expenditures per episode of the condition.


2.1     Decomposing Expenditure Per Capita into Expenditure Per
        Episode and Prevalence of Treated Disease
   We divide demographically …xed expenditures per capita, Cd;t , into two components.
One component is the prevalence of treated disease index, P REVd;t , which we de…ne as
growth in the demographically …xed prevalence of treated disease, prevd;t :

                                                         prevd;t
                                         P REVd;t =              ;                                      (4)
                                                         prevd;0
where prevd;t is the number of episodes treated in the population divided by the commer-
cially insured population, holding …xed the demographic distribution. Note that prevd;t
includes only those who are aware of their condition and seek some medical attention,
and excludes those individuals who are unaware of their condition or are aware of their
condition and choose not to be treated.3 Note that the de…nition of treated prevalence
in this paper denotes the number of episodes per capita rather than the number individ-
uals treated per capita within a year, which is a measure that is often reported in the
literature.4 However, work by Dunn, Liebman, Rittmueller, and Shapiro (2014) …nds
little di¤erences in the treated prevalence growth or growth in cost per case when using
   3
     Those individuals who have a condition but are unaware that they have a condition or do not seek
medical attention for their condition would be considered in measuring the population’s prevalence, but
are not included in the treated prevalence …gure.
   4
     For cases of conditions that appear multiple times in a year, episodes of care per population is likely
a more accurate measure of the probability that the disease is treated in the population. For example,
comparing a population where the ‡u appears twice a year per person, to a population where the ‡u
appears a single time per year, the episode-based statistic will re‡ect the higher probability of observing
the ‡u in the …rst population. In practice, Dunn, Liebman, Rittmueller, and Shapiro (2014) …nd this
di¤erence to be unimportant when measuring changes in treated prevalence or cost per case.



                                                     8
this alternative de…nition of treated prevalence and cost per case.
    The second component of Cd;t is the expenditures per episode d, cd;t . This is some-
times referred to as cost per case or treatment cost in the literature. The value cd;t
may be calculated by dividing total expenditures of disease d by the number of episodes
of disease d in period t, holding …xed the demographic distribution to the base period.
It follows that the medical-care expenditure index, or MCE index, is a measure of the
medical-care expenditures for the treatment of an episode of care for a certain disease,
and is de…ned as the dollar amount of medical care used until treatment is completed.5
Denoting cd;0 as the average expenditures per episode in the base period, t = 0, the MCE
index for disease d is the ratio of the two measures:

                                                         cd;t
                                           M CEd;t =                                                 (5)
                                                         cd;0
Since this index controls for the health of the individual, it may be viewed as measuring
the cost of treatment. Thus, if the M CEd;t is larger than one, it signi…es that the
expenditure for treating disease d is larger than the base period and if the index is less
than one it signi…es that the expenditure is less than the base.
   Using these equations it follows that Cd;t = cd;t prevd;t . From this we can see that the
DECId;t may be decomposed into its two components, which include the episode-based
index, M CEd;t and the prevalence of treated disease index, P REVd;t :6

                                                     (prevd;t    prevd;0 )(cd;t   cd;0 )
           DECId;t = M CEd;t + P REVd;t +                                                  1:        (6)
                                                                prevd;0 cd;0
This equation makes it clear that the DECI will rise if there is either an increase in the
P REVd;t or an increase in the M CEd;t . These two components of expenditure capture
distinct elements of cost growth. Changes in the prevalence of a condition capture the
changing health of the population, such as the growth in diabetes due to obesity. It
may also re‡ect a growing awareness of a condition, such as the increase in awareness
   5
      For example, for an individual with a broken foot, the episode of treatment will be de…ned by the
dollars of medical services used to treat that condition from the …rst visit to a provider until the foot
is healed. For medical conditions that are chronic, we interpret an episode as expenditure for services
used to treat the chronic condition over a one-year period.
    6
      A decomposition using logs is: log(DECId;t ) = log(M CEd;t ) + log(P REVd;t ):


                                                   9
and diagnosis of high cholesterol. The second component of care may be viewed as the
price for treating the disease, which includes the prices of those services and also the mix
of those services provided. Assuming that the quality of the underlying treatment mix
remains constant, this treatment price re‡ects the productivity in the health sector for
the treatment of disease d.
    The indexes presented here are directly related to a simple and often reported …gure,
total medical-care expenditures per capita. To see this, we can create aggregate disease-
speci…c indexes from the population-based measure, ECId;t . When ECId;t is weighted
by the national expenditure share for each disease in the base period, this becomes a
measure of medical-care expenditures per capita relative to the base period’s medical-care
expenditures per capita:
                              X
                  ECIt =           ECId;t (Expenditure Share0 )
                               D
                                        0         1    P
                            X Cd;t              Cd;t
                                   @  Cd;0 A  D
                          =          P       =P
                            D
                              Cd;0     Cd;0     Cd;0
                                            D           D
                              Medical-Care Expenditures Per Persont
                          =                                         :
                              Medical-Care Expenditures Per Person0

2.2     Expenditure Per Episode Decomposition:                          Service Price
        and Service Utilization
2.2.1   A Motivating Example

    To help motivate our methodology for decomposing service price and service uti-
lization, we start with a simple example. Consider a time period t where people are
treated for hypertension (h) (i.e., high blood pressure) where there exists only one type
of treatment available— a 15-minute o¢ ce visit. Let




                                            10
              Nh;t = Number of treated hypertension episodes.
               ch;t = Average expenditure for hypertension per episode.7
               qh;t = Number of 15-minute o¢ ce visits per episode.
                                                             ch;t
               ph;t = Price per 15-minute o¢ ce visit (i.e.,      ).
                                                             qh;t

    Also suppose there is a comparison or base time period, t = 0, where the price for a
15-minute o¢ ce visit for hypertension is ph;0 . In this simple case, the relative price level
                    ph;t
of t to 0 is simply ph;0 . Clearly, this ratio re‡ects only di¤erences in the contracted prices,
                                                                                             qh;t
not the number of 15-minute o¢ ce visits. Similarly, the relative utilization level is qh;0
which depends only on the number of 15-minute o¢ ce visits performed per episode. It
follows that the relative expenditures per episode between t and 0 may be expressed as:

                                   ch;t      ph,t qh;0       ph,t qh;t
                       M CEh;t =        =                                :                   (7)
                                   ch;0      ph,0 qh;0       ph,t qh;0
    The …rst term in (7) is a price index, and the second term is a utilization index. Ex-
panding on this example, now suppose that hypertension may be treated with two types
of services, prescription drugs and physician o¢ ce services, where the service categories
correspond to the subscripts (D) and (O). That is, qh;t;O and ph;t;O are the utilization
and price for the physician o¢ ce visits, and qh;t;D and ph,t;D are the utilization and price
for prescription drugs. Continuing with the index decomposition that is parallel to (7),
but with two services, the decomposition becomes:


        ch;t   ph;t;O qh;t;O + ph;t;D qh;t;D
             =                                                                               (8)
        ch;0   ph;0;O qh;0;O + ph;0;D qh;0;D
                                                                                             (9)
                    ph;t;O qh;0;O + ph;t;D qh;0;D        ph;t;O qh;t;O + ph;t;D qh;t;D
              =
                    ph;0;O qh;0;O + ph;0;D qh;0;D        ph;t;O qh;0;O + ph;t;D qh;0;D

Again the …rst term corresponds to the price index and the second term corresponds to
the utilization index.


                                               11
2.2.2    The General Case

    In the general case, we de…ne the medical-care expenditure for the treatment of an
episode of a disease (that is, a speci…c condition) as the total dollar amount of medical
care used until treatment is completed, including all service categories.8 To demonstrate
how to decompose the M CE in the general case, it is useful to start by showing that
the average expenditure is calculated by totaling dollars spent on all services to treat the
                                                                         P
condition and dividing those dollars by the number of episodes: cd;t =      pd;t;s Qd;t;s =Nd;t ,
                                                                                   s
where Qd;t;s is the quantity of services for service type, s; pd;t;s , is the service price for
service type s; and Nd;t is the number of episodes treated. To simplify, let qd;t be a vector
of services utilized for the typical treatment of diseases at time t, qd;t = Qd;t =Nd;t , where
the component of the utilization vector for service type s is, qd;t;s = Qd;t;s =Nd;t . Similarly,
let pd;rt be a vector of service prices, where the price for a particular service type and
disease can be calculated by dividing its average expenditure by the average quantity of
                             c
services provided: pd;t;s = qd;t;s
                               d;t;s
                                     where cd;t;s is the average episode expenditure for disease
d for service type s at time t. This decomposition allows us to create a service price and
service utilization index. The service price index (SPI) is then calculated as

                                                    pd;t qd;0
                                        SP Id;t =             ;
                                                       cd;0
which holds the utilization of services …xed at a base-period level. The SPI measures
the compensation necessary to purchase a …xed utilization of medical goods when going
from the base period to time t. The service utilization index (SUI) may be de…ned as:

                                                    pd;0 qd;t
                                        SU Id;t =             ;
                                                       cd;0
which holds the price of services …xed while allowing the utilization of services to vary.
The SUI measures the compensation necessary to purchase medical goods in the time
period t to the amount of compensation necessary in the base period. We choose to
apply Laspeyres indexes for price and quantity, so that the estimates may be compared
to a base period: essentially answering the question, how much are disease expenditures
   8
    For medical diseases that are chronic, we interpret an episode as the total expenditure for services
used to treat the chronic disease over a one-year period.


                                                  12
di¤erent than the base period due to price di¤erences or due to utilization di¤erences?
With these indexes the decomposition that relates these three indexes is additive, rather
than multiplicative.9 The relationship between these three indexes is described by the
following decomposition:

                                                 (qd;t   qd;0 )(pd;t   pd;0 )   pd;0 qd;0
              M CEd;t = SP Id;t + SU Id;t +
                                                            cd;0                   cd;0
Here the MCE index is equal to the service price index, SP Id;t , plus the service utilization
                                    (q  q )(p       p )                   p    q
index, SU Id;t , plus a cross term, d;t d;0cd;0 d;t d;0 , and subtracting d;0cd;0d;0 (which is close
to 1). The cross term accounts for joint changes in both price vectors and utilization
vectors and, in practice, the term is near zero. In the case where there are very few
changes in utilization over time, SU Id;t is …xed near 1, then the M CEd;t will entirely be
determined by service prices. Similarly, if there are very few changes in service prices
over time, SP Id;t , is near 1, and the M CEd;t will entirely be determined by utilization.


3       Data
   We use retrospective claims data for a sample of commercially insured patients from
                R
the MarketScan Research Databases from Truven Health. The speci…c claims data
used is the Commercial Claims and Encounters Database which contains data from the
employer and health plan sources containing medical and drug data for several million
commercially insured individuals, including employees, their spouses, and dependents.
Each observation in the data corresponds to a line item in an “explanation of bene…ts”
form in a medical claim. Each claim can consist of many records, and each encounter
can consist of many claims.
   We use a sample of enrollees that are not in capitated plans from the MarketScan
database for the years 2003 to 2007. We also limit our sample to enrollees with drug
bene…ts because drug purchases will not be observed for individuals without drug cov-
    9
    This approach follows others in the health literature that also apply additive decompositions (e.g.,
Roehrig and Rousseau (2011)), which leaves a cross-term. As another possibility, we could have used a
Laspeyres index for the price index and a Paasche index for the quantity index, which provides an exact
decomposition (e.g., SU I Laspeyres SP I P aasche = M CE).


                                                  13
erage. The MarketScan database tracks claims from all providers using a nationwide
convenience sample of enrollees. Each enrollee has a unique identi…er and includes age,
sex, and region information that may be used when calculating patient weights. All
claims have been paid and adjudicated.10
    The claims data were processed using the Symmetry grouper from Optum. The
grouper assigns each claim to a particular episode treatment group (ETG) disease and
severity category. Thus each disease category d represents a type of disease (e.g., hy-
pertension), as well as the severity of the disease classi…ed into up to four severity bins.
A higher severity number indicates a more serious medical condition. In this manner,
“hypertension 3”is a distinct disease with a higher severity relative to “hypertension 1.”
    The grouper uses a proprietary algorithm, based on clinical knowledge, that is applied
to the claims data to assign each record to a clinically homogeneous episode. The episode
grouper allocates all spending from individual claim records to a distinct condition; the
grouper also uses other information on the claim (e.g., procedures) and information from
the patient’s history to allocate the spending. For instance, for claims submitted by a
physician, the grouper uses the ICD-9 code to allocate spending. If there are procedure
codes present, they can be used to decide which ICD-9 code is most applicable to that
claim.
    An advantage of using the grouper is that it can use patients’medical history to assign
diseases to drug claims, which typically do not provide a diagnosis. For example, each
claim is grouped to one distinct episode which consists of one disease grouping (ETG).
The grouper works in chronological fashion, but can update old episodes as it gathers
more information, so an early diagnosis of chest pain can be updated to heart disease as
further ICD-9 codes arrive. This is in contrast to the primary diagnosis method which
would imply that a person had both chest pain and heart disease. Furthermore, severity
operates the same way: when someone is grouped to hypertension 3, their previous
claims, which were grouped to hypertension 2, get updated to hypertension 3.
    Another advantage of the grouper over the primary diagnosis method is that it uses
a patient’s history to assign diseases to drug claims, which typically do not provide a
diagnosis and account for a lot of spending. For instance, the grouper examines which
 10
      Additional details about the data and the grouper used in this paper are in Dunn et al. (2012a).



                                                   14
episodes the patient has, then matches their drug claims to an episode based on the NDC
code on the drug claim and the timing of the episodes.11
    However, one downside of using these algorithms is that they are also considered
a “black box” in the sense that they rely entirely on the grouper software developer’s
expertise. The ETG Symmetry grouper is applied to one calendar year of data at a
time. Although this limits the amount of information used for each person (since we
often observe multiple years), it also avoids potential biases that may occur if the grouper
is not applied symmetrically across all years.12
    Finally, it is important to note that while the ETG groupings are based mostly on
ICD-9 disease codes, we aggregate the ETGs to Major Practice Categories, as is done
in Aizcorbe and Nestoriak. However, this is solely for presentation purposes, and the
practice category of the physician on the claim has little bearing into which ETG the
claim is assigned. Rather, we group entire episodes to practice categories after the ETGs
have been assigned to each claim.
    For all measures but the ECI, demographic weights are applied to each individual
to adjust for di¤erences in age, sex, and region across populations, so the expenditure
estimates may be comparable across years. Speci…cally, enrollees in each year are assigned
weights so the weighted population has an age and sex distribution that is identical to
that of the U.S. commercially insured population in 2007.13 To look at the growth
in expenditure due to population growth and shifts, we also calculate total weighted
  11
      See Rosen et al. (2012), Dunn et al. (2014) for more detailed information about how the grouper
works and for information about how the ETG grouper relates to other groupers. For instance, Dunn et
al. (2014) compares the robustness of their results using the ETG to other grouping methods, including
the CCS codes used by Roehrig and Rousseau.
   12
      The ETG grouper allocates each record into one of over 500 disease groups. To symmetrically
process the data, we apply the ETG episode grouper on the claims data one year at a time. Applying
the grouper one year at a time can split episodes into two, which may lead to an overstatement of
the count of episodes and an understatement to the average price of an episode. However, applying
the grouper across years leads the grouper to incorporate more information in later years, introducing
an arti…cial time-trend to the results. We explore the robustness of the estimates to various grouping
methodologies in Dunn et al. (2014).
   13
      We use 2007 as the base to look at a population of individuals and their diseases that is more similar
to our current population distribution. Similar results are found if we use the 2003 population as the
base.


                                                    15
spending over this period in a way that allows populations to vary.


3.1     Service Price, Utilization, and Episodes
    The number of episodes is a simple count of the total number of episodes of a medical
disease that end in the sample period. Total episode expenditures are measured as the
total dollar amount received by all providers for the services used to treat an episode of a
speci…c disease (including both out-of-pocket payments and amounts paid by insurance
…rms).
    Service utilization measures are created for each type of service based on the de…-
nition of a service within that service type. The service-type categories are inpatient
hospital, outpatient hospital, physician, prescription drug, and other. Measuring service
utilization is not a straightforward task since the de…nition of “service”is a bit ambigu-
ous and there are a variety of ways that one could de…ne it across various service types.
Ideally, we would like the de…nition of a speci…c service to depend on how the price of
that service is typically set and paid. For example, for physician services, individuals
pay a unique price for each procedure done to them (that is, the insurer and the patient
together pay this amount), whereas the prices paid to facilities are often set based on
the treated disease. Next we describe how the quantity of services is measured for each
service type.

3.1.1   Measuring the Quantity of Service by Service Type

    For each claim line in the data, we …rst categorize it by place of service, which
determines the service-type category. For each category, the following steps describe
how the amount is determined for each visit, where a visit is de…ned by the enrollee and
the date of service or admission:
    Physician o¢ ce - Physician visits are priced based on procedures performed in a
physician’s o¢ ce. Since not all procedures are equivalent, each procedure is weighted to
re‡ect the intensity of the service. For the Medicare payment system, Relative Value
Units (RVUs) de…ne reimbursement rates and are intended to capture the intensity of the
services provided. In that spirit, we proxy for the intensity of service by using the average


                                             16
prices for each Current Procedural Terminology (CPT-4) code and modi…er code. The
total quantity of services performed in an o¢ ce is then computed by summing over these
RVU amounts. More precisely, the total amount of services from a physician o¢ ce visit
                              P
is computed as qof f ice = cpt2V isit pcpt;of f ice , where cpt 2 V isit is a complete list of CPT
procedures performed during the visit in an o¢ ce setting and pcpt;of f ice is the base price
for procedure code, cpt. The base group price, pcpt;of f ice , is computed as the average price
in the data for that procedure code and modi…er code across all time periods. Since most
insurers set prices from a base price schedule (e.g., 10 percent above Medicare rates),
one can think of the price of a cpt code at time t as the base price multiplied by a scalar
price, t , where ptcpt = t pcpt . For instance, if a CPT code that equals 99213 indicating
a 15-minute established patient o¢ ce visit has an average price of $100, its value will be
100 RVUs (i.e., p99213 = 100). It should be clear that the RVU amount is a measure of
utilization and not price. To see this, if the fee on a 15-minute o¢ ce visit is $120 at time
t (pt99213 = $120), then the price of the service will be calculated as $120/100RVU=1.2
                     pt
$/RVU (i.e., t = pcpt ).14
                       cpt
    Hospital inpatient - Inpatient hospital stays not only consist of facility fees paid to the
hospital, but also fees paid to the physician. A variable in the claims data distinguishes
these two types of payments. For the portion of fees paid to the hospital, the amount of
services is measured as the average dollar amount for an inpatient stay for the observed
disease. For the portion of fees paid to the physician, we assign an RVU in the same way
that we calculate an RVU in an o¢ ce setting. The total amount of services performed in
an inpatient setting is calculated by adding the physician and facility amounts. Speci…-
                                  P
cally, qinpatient = pd;inpatient + cpt2V isit pcpt;inpatient where pd;inpatient is the base price for
inpatient facility claims for disease d, where the base price is the average price in the
data across all time periods for a visit to an inpatient facility for treating disease d. The
       P
term cpt2V isit pcpt;inpatient is the amount calculated for the physician portion of the bill
and is computed in a manner identical to the physician o¢ ce category, but is based on
only physician claims in an inpatient setting.
    Hospital outpatient - Outpatient hospital visits are calculated in an identical fashion
  14
   This methodology for calculating utilization for physician services is identical to that conducted by
Dunn and Shapiro (2012).



                                                  17
to the inpatient hospital visits. That is, the facility amount is calculated based on the
average outpatient visit for that disease, and the doctor’s portion of the total amount
is calculated based on the average payment for the procedure codes in an outpatient
setting.
    Prescription drugs - The amount of the prescription drug varies based on the mole-
cule, the number of pills in the bottle, the strength of the drug, and the manufacturer. An
11-digit National Drug Code (NDC) uniquely identi…es the manufacturer, the strength,
dosage, formulation, package size, and type of package. To capture these di¤erences, we
calculate the average price for each NDC code. This means we treat branded and generic
products that contain the same active molecule as distinct drugs. The average price for
each NDC code represents the amount of the service used. Speci…cally, the amount of
                                P
drug services used is qdrug = N DC2V isit pN DC , where N DC 2 V isit is a complete list
of NDC codes purchased from a visit to a pharmacy and pN DC is the base price for a
speci…c NDC code. The base price for each NDC is computed as the average price in
the data.
    All other - The other category primarily includes ambulatory care, independent labs,
and emergency room visits. For these services, if no procedure code is available, the
amount of each category is measured as the average cost for a visit to that particular
place of service for treating a particular disease (for example, the average cost of an
ambulatory care visit to treat ischemic heart disease). For cases where procedure codes
are available, we use the average cost of that procedure code for that place of service.
    Our decomposition relies on the institutional feature that insurers and providers
typically negotiate from a percentage of a base fee schedule (for example, 10 percent above
Medicare rates).15 As our measure of service price can be intuited as the expenditures
from a visit divided by a proxy for a “RVU”, it can also be thought of as a percentage
amount from a base (or average) payment— a measure close to how prices are actually
set. For this reason, these measures of service quantity subsequently allow us to create
service prices that correspond well with how fees are negotiated in the marketplace. In
other words, our approach attempts to construct a unit value index that re‡ects the
  15
    In a survey of 20 health plans conducted by Dyckman & Associates, all 20 health plan fee schedules
were in‡uenced by the Medicare fee schedule. That is, a resource-based relative value scale (RBRVS),
essentially adopting Medicare’s base fee schedule.


                                                 18
heterogeneity in how goods and services are actually priced.16 It can also be shown that
if pricing is set based on a percentage of a set fee schedule then our index is equivalent
to an index that prices speci…c procedures. See Dunn, Shapiro, and Liebman (2014) and
the associated appendix for additional details.


3.2     Summary Statistics
    Table 1 provides some basic descriptive statistics for the selected commercially insured
population of the MarketScan data. Each enrollee is assigned a population weight based
on age, gender, and location so that the number of enrollees represents the actual number
of commercially insured enrollees measured by the Current Population Survey (CPS).
Note that this table reports …gures where weights are applied, so that the population
changes and grows with the actual commercially insured population.17 As described
above, when calculating the DECI and subsequent decomposition indexes, we hold …xed
the age, gender, and location. There are 455 ETG disease categories in the sample,18
representing $454.4 billion for 180.5 million enrollees in 2003, growing to $589.4 billion
and 182.5 million enrollees in 2007. This growth is accompanied by a growth in the
number of episodes from 2.7 per enrollee in 2003 to 3.0 per enrollee in 2007. The average
  16
     Note that our approach di¤ers from Bundorf et al. (2009) which also studied individual service
prices over time, though not at the disease level. Since they do not calculate disease-level prices, they
are able to separately price each individual CPT code and NDC code. In contrast, this is not possible
in a disease-based framework because not all CPT codes and NDC codes are observed for every disease
across all years.
   It should also be noted that there are alternative methods for pricing medical services that may not be
re‡ected in the methods applied here. For instance, for Medicare patients, outpatient hospital facility
services are often priced based on the Ambulatory Payment Classi…cation system and this method is
also used by many commercial insurers.

  17
    Our weights were constructed using data from http://www.census.gov/cps/data/cpstablecreator.html.
  18
    Severity adjustment increases the number of disease categories to 682. About 19 percent of expen-
ditures are not assigned to any ETG disease category. Ungrouped claims include screening for diseases
and other records that cannot be assigned a category. The ungrouped claims are removed from our
analysis. If we do not adjust for severity, then the ungrouped share falls to 13 percent, but the results
stay the same.



                                                   19
age grew slightly from 32.3 to 32.9 over the sample period. The table shows that this
growth is primarily from an increased percentage of enrollees over the age of 55.

                    Table 1. Summary Statistics

                                                         2003      2007
                    Expenditure (Billions)              $454.39   $589.35
                    Enrollees (Millions)                180.58    182.53
                    Expenditure per Capita (Enrollee)   $2,516    $3,229
                    Episodes per Capita (Enrollee)        2.71      2.96
                    Expenditure per Episode              $929     $1,092
                    Percent Male                         49.5%     49.6%
                    Average Age                           32.3      32.9
                    < Age 18                             27.3%     26.3%
                    Age 18 - Age 24                       9.6%      9.6%
                    Age 25 - Age 34                      14.5%     14.7%
                    Age 35 - Age 54                      36.3%     35.6%
                    > Age 55                             12.2%     13.8%




4     Results
4.1    Aggregated Indexes
    We begin our analysis by examining aggregated time-speci…c indexes, which provide
information about the entire commercial health-care market for a given year. Speci…-
cally, we create ECIt , DECIt , P REVt , M CEt , SP It , SU It , and Demt by weighting
each disease-speci…c index by the expenditure share of that disease in the base period.
The top panel of Figure 1 displays the aggregated expenditures per capita index (ECIt )
along with its decomposition between the demographic residual (Demt ) and the demo-
graphically …xed expenditures per capita index (DECIt ). The ECI grew 6.4 percent
per year from 2003 to 2007— a total of 28 percent over the four years. Demographic
factors accounted for about a tenth of this growth, as the demographic residual grew by
only 3 percent over the four years and the DECI grew by 25 percent.

                               Figure 1. Aggregated Indexes



                                                  20
 1.3

1.25

 1.2

1.15

 1.1

1.05

  1

0.95
       2003   2004           2005             2006         2007
                Expenditure per Capita (ECI)
                Demographic Residual (Dem)
                Dem. Fixed Expenditure per Capita (DECI)




                          21
           1.300

           1.250

           1.200

           1.150

           1.100

           1.050

           1.000

           0.950
                     2003        2004             2005            2006             2007

                                        Dem. Fixed Expenditure per Episode (MCE)
                                        Dem. Fixed Service Price (SPI)
                                        Dem. Fixed Services per Episode (SUI)




    The second panel displays the DECIt along with its decomposition between the
M CEt and P REVt . Growth in M CEt represents about 56 percent of the total growth
in the DECI while growth in the prevalence index accounted for about 41 percent.
Speci…cally, the M CEt grew by 3.3 percent per year while the P REVt grew by 2.5
percent. Note that the growth in the aggregate P REVt may re‡ect either an increase
in treated prevalence or a shift toward more expensive diseases. Finally, the third panel
decomposes the M CEt between service prices (SP It ) and service utilization (SU It ).
These aggregate indexes show that the cost of treatment growth is entirely due to changes
in the underlying prices of the services and not the quantity of services being provided
per episode. To be more precise, the SP It grew by 3.8 percent per year (15.9 percent
over the sample period) while the SU It fell just 0.4 percent over the sample period.
    All spending is calculated in nominal terms, but because health care has taken up
an increasing share of GDP, it is interesting to investigate the contributing factors to
growth after accounting for national in‡ation …gures. Previous researchers also accounted
for in‡ation, including Roehrig and Rousseau (2011) and Bundorf et al. (2009), two
papers that have looked at decomposing expenditure growth into components of price
and utilization. After accounting for in‡ation by the PCE de‡ator (which grew by 11.5
percentage points between 2003 and 2007), we …nd that real service prices grew by 1

                                               22
percent per year— about 4 percent from 2003 to 2007. This is consistent with the …nding
in Bundorf et al. (2009) who also look at commercial markets and …nd very little service
price growth relative to in‡ation over the 2001-2006 time period for the commercial
sector. Another way of stating this is that, of the 28 percent expenditures per capita
(ECIt ) growth from 2003 to 2007, 15.1 percentage points were attributable to things
other than PCE in‡ation. Two-thirds of those 15.1 percentage points are attributable to
increasing prevalence of treated diseases19 and one-…fth was attributable to demographic
shifts.20


4.2        Major Practice Categories
    The aggregated indexes discussed above suggest that expenditure growth is occurring
for two primary reasons: (1) growth in service prices and (2) growth in the prevalence of
treated diseases. As treatments and changes in treatments are unique to each disease,21
we next show indexes speci…c to 22 Major Practice Categories (MPC), the ETG aggregate
  19                            1 P REV2007
       This was calculated as      ECI      ,   where P CE2007 is one plus the percentage growth in the PCE
                                 1 P CE2007
                                       2007
de‡ator between 2003 and 2007.
  20
     At …rst glance 1 year increase in the average age seems too small to lead to a 3 percent increase
in expenditures, but a more careful look at the data highlights the considerable di¤erences in costs for
those in di¤erent age groups. For example, the composition of the population shifts so those over 55
account for 1.6% more of the population. Likewise, those under 18 account for 1% less of the share of the
population. This can make a signi…cant impact since those over-55 are more than 4 times as expensive as
those under-18, on average. Back of the envelope calculations seem to suggest that these small changes
in the composition of the population are su¢ cient to cause a 3% increase in the expenditure growth.
   The results presented here are quite distinct from the results of Roehrig and Rousseau (2011), who
use the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey data and …nd that, even after accounting for in‡ation,
expenditure per capita growth is primarily driven by expenditures per episode (i.e., M CE) and not
prevalence, with the growth in the expenditure per episode accounting for 75 percent of expenditure
growth. We …nd that expenditure per episode accounts for only about 20 percent of in‡ation-adjusted
growth in the commercial sector. The study of a distinct time period may be a key factor causing these
di¤erent …ndings. These di¤erences warrant future investigation.
  21
     This has been demonstrated in prior work by Thorpe, Florence, and Joski (2009), Roehrig and
Rousseau (2011), Aizcorbe and Nestoriak (2011), Dunn et al. (2012a), and Dunn, Shapiro, and Liebman
(2012).



                                                         23
categories provided by Optum for the Symmetry ETG grouper.22 Each category is
calculated as a weighted average of the many underlying disease-severity speci…c indexes
in that category, where the weights are the proportions of expenditure shares in 2003.23
These broader categories give some sense of where expenditure growth is occurring.
    We report MPCs ordered according to the size of their expenditure share in Table 2.
The largest category is orthopedics and rheumatology, which accounted for 16.6 percent
of spending in 2003. Spending in this category grew from $418 per capita in 2003 to
$558 per capita in 2007— an increase of 33 percent as indicated by the 2007 ECI of
1.33. Orthopedics’share of expenditure growth (19.6 percent) exceeded its share of 2003
expenditure (16.6 percent), which is attributable to the fact that this diagnostic category
grew faster than average. We can assess the sources of this growth by examining the 2007
indexes. For instance, demographic shift accounted for 3 points of the 33-percentage-
point increase in expenditures per capita, treated prevalence accounted for another 12
percentage points, service prices accounted for 15 percentage points, service utilization
3 percentage points, and the cross-term is zero.
  22
     These categories align with specialties, but they have no bearing on how the grouper processed the
data. A visit to a general practitioner would be treated as identical to a visit to a specialist, if the same
diagnoses and procedures were performed.
  23
                                                                                           P
     For instance, the aggregated ECI for Cardiology was calculated as ECICard;t =                ! d ECId;t
                                                                                          d2Card
               PCd;0
where ! d =        Cd;0   and Card is the set of diseases in the Major Practice Category: Cardiology.
              d2Card




                                                     24
Table 2. Major Practice Category


                                            2003        2007   2003 Share  Share of
                                        Expenditure Expenditure of Total Expenditure               2007 Indexes
                                         per Capita per Capita Expenditure  Growth    ECI Dem    DECI PREV MCE     SPI   SUI
      Orthopedics & rheumatology            $418        $558      16.6%     19.6%    1.33 1.03   1.30 1.12 1.17   1.15   1.03
                 Cardiology                 $296        $348      11.8%      7.3%    1.18 1.07   1.11 1.04 1.06   1.16   0.93
             Gastroenterology               $228        $304      9.1%      10.6%    1.33 1.04   1.29 1.11 1.17   1.17   1.01
                Gynecology                  $181        $222      7.2%       5.9%    1.23 1.02   1.22 1.01 1.20   1.19   1.01
               Endocrinology                $169        $236      6.7%       9.4%    1.40 1.05   1.34 1.27 1.07   1.17   0.93
              Otolaryngology                $163        $186      6.5%       3.2%    1.14 1.00   1.14 1.03 1.11   1.13   1.00
                 Neurology                  $147        $195      5.8%       6.7%    1.33 1.03   1.30 1.10 1.19   1.21   0.99
               Pulmonology                  $119        $143      4.7%       3.4%    1.20 1.04   1.16 1.01 1.16   1.20   0.97
                 Psychiatry                 $119        $150      4.7%       4.3%    1.26 1.00   1.26 1.13 1.12   1.15   1.01
                Dermatology                 $115        $149      4.6%       4.7%    1.29 1.02   1.28 1.08 1.18   1.16   1.03
                 Obstetrics                 $112        $139      4.4%       3.9%    1.25 0.99   1.26 1.08 1.17   1.15   1.02
                  Urology                    $91        $116      3.6%       3.5%    1.27 1.05   1.22 1.12 1.11   1.14   0.98
                Hematology                   $62         $82      2.5%       2.8%    1.32 1.04   1.28 1.11 1.15   1.22   0.96
       Preventive & administrative           $59         $97      2.4%       5.3%    1.64 1.02   1.62 1.29 1.26   1.14   1.11
                 Hepatology                  $59         $68      2.3%       1.2%    1.15 1.03   1.12 0.99 1.12   1.17   0.96
              Ophthalmology                  $40         $50      1.6%       1.4%    1.25 1.06   1.19 1.13 1.05   1.09   0.98
            Infectious diseases              $34         $48      1.3%       1.9%    1.41 1.03   1.38 1.15 1.18   1.12   1.06
                Nephrology                  $34         $47       1.3%       1.9%    1.39 1.06   1.33 1.49 0.90   0.91   1.00
                Neonatology                 $25         $36       1.0%       1.5%    1.43 1.12   1.32 1.14 1.17   1.13   1.03
        Isolated signs & symptoms           $19         $21       0.7%       0.3%    1.12 1.01   1.11 1.00 1.11   1.10   1.02
   Late effects, environmental trauma       $14         $18       0.6%       0.6%    1.30 1.02   1.27 0.96 1.34   1.29   1.04
           Chemical dependency              $12         $18       0.5%       0.7%    1.42 1.00   1.41 1.38 1.06   1.10   0.99
                    Total                  $2,516      $3,229    100.0%    100.0%    1.28 1.03   1.25 1.10 1.14   1.16   1.00



    One striking feature of Table 2 is the substantial growth in preventive health ser-
vices. This category represented only 2.4 percent of 2003 expenditures but 5.3 percent
of expenditure growth between 2003 and 2007. This category appears to be growing out
of proportion for two reasons: increased prevalence of treatment (29 percent growth) as
well as a large increase in service utilization (11 percent growth). Looking more deeply
at this category, it appears that expenditures are driven primarily by more individuals
receiving routine exams. One question raised is whether the greater prevalence and uti-
lization of preventive services ultimately leads to lower overall health expenditures and
better health outcomes. This is especially important given that the recent health care
reform passed in the Patient Protection and A¤ordable Care Act encourages the use of
preventive care services. Although more preventive care services are likely to lead to
expenditures increasing in the short term, it is unclear what the long-term e¤ects may
be on both future health and expenditures.
    It is especially interesting to note that many of the other diagnostic categories do

                                                             25
not grow in proportion to their expenditure share. For example, cardiology diseases
accounted for around 12 percent of spending in 2003, but only 7.3 percent of the expen-
diture growth between 2003 and 2007. Although service prices in this area are growing
at a similar pace with other disease categories (around 16 percent) expenditure growth
is kept in check by slower-than-average growth in prevalence as well as declining service
utilization. Endocrinological diseases, many of which are major contributors to cardio-
vascular diseases, also show a decline in service utilization, however they show much
faster growth in treated disease prevalence. For this reason, expenditures per capita rose
twice as fast for endocrinological diseases than for cardiology diseases.
    For many disease conditions, we see important di¤erences between the disease price
(MCE) and the prices of the underlying services (SPI). These di¤erences may be of
signi…cant economic importance. For instance, if the SPI growth exceeds the MCE, this
indicates that the price of disease treatment is growing slower than the rate implied by
traditional in‡ation measures. To better understand the di¤erence between SPI and
MCE indexes, we apply an additional decomposition that reports the di¤erence between
the SPI and MCE indexes by service type, s.24 The decomposition equation is

                                                 X
M CEd;t = SP Id;t +(M CEd;t SP Id;t ) = SP Id;t + (M CEd;t;s SP Id;t;s ) Exp. Shared;0;s
                                                         s
                                                                                                (10)
                                                             0                 1
                               X                             B qd;0;s pd;0;s C
                 = SP Id;t +        (M CEd;t;s   SP Id;t;s ) B
                                                             @X
                                                                               C:
                                                                               A
                                s                                qd;0;s pd;0;s
                                                                 s

    The term (M CEd;t;s SP Id;t;s ) Exp. Shared;0;s represents service category s’s con-
tribution to the di¤erence between the M CE and SP I indexes. To gain some addi-
tional intuition for this equation, we take the decomposition from equation (10), but
remove the cross term, which gives the approximate relationship M CEd;t        SP Id;t +
  24
     This same decomposition is applied in Dunn, Liebman, and Shapiro (2014b). The only di¤erence
is that here we apply it to the full sample of diseases, while in Dunn, Liebman, and Shapiro (2014b),
looked only at disease conditions with more than 10,000 episodes.


                                                 26
       Table 3. Comparison of MCE and SPI and sources of differences, 2003 - 2007

                                                                Contribution to MCE-SPI difference
                                                 Inpatient Outpatient Physician              Brand    Generic
                                     MCE - SPI    Hospital Hospital    Office       Other    Drugs     Drugs
       Orthopedics & rheumatology      0.017      -0.026        0.001    0.038      0.021    -0.036    0.019
               Cardiology              -0.097     -0.101        -0.005   0.017      -0.001   -0.028    0.021
            Gastroenterology           -0.003     -0.035        -0.008   0.014      0.041    -0.029    0.015
              Gynecology               0.010      -0.044        0.029    0.030      0.002    -0.016    0.009
             Endocrinology             -0.092     -0.090        0.000    -0.001     0.008    -0.055    0.047


SU Id;t 1. Applying this approximation, we substitute SU I           1 for M CE SP I
into equation (10); then the decomposition by service category is M CEd;t       SP Id;t +
P
   s (SU Id;t;s 1) Exp. Shared;0;s . From this approximate decomposition, one can see
that the di¤erence between the two indexes will primarily depend on the change in uti-
lization of the di¤erent services and the corresponding expenditure share of the service
category.
    Table 3 shows the contribution of each service type, s, to the di¤erence between
the MCE and SPI (applying the exact decomposition 10). Table 3 shows several clear
patterns across services for the top …ve spending diseases.25 First, nearly every disease
category shifts away from spending on inpatient services, which is especially large for
cardiology and endocrinology conditions. This savings from reduced utilization on in-
patient services is partly o¤set by an increase in the utilization of physician services
for most disease categories. For drug services, we observe a shifting away from branded
drugs, leading to a relative decline in the MCE, and we see an increase in generic drugs,
contributing to an increase in the MCE. Combined, the shifting away from branded drugs
toward generics causes a net decline in the MCE relative to the SPI for these top …ve
diseases.26



  25
    See Dunn, Shapiro, and Liebman (2014) for a more complete discussion of this topic.
  26
    Although generics are considerably cheaper than branded drugs, the total di¤erence may not be
re‡ected in the tables. Generic drugs tend to be cheaper, pulling down the cost of treatment, but the
lower cost of generics may also imply that consumers are purchasing more generic prescription drugs.



                                                           27
4.3     Disease-Speci…c Indexes
    Our methodology for decomposing expenditure growth may be used to drill down
even further to the speci…c disease-severity level. Due to the large number of diseases,
there are numerous dimensions in which we could look at the growth in expenditures.
In the following section, we demonstrate how the methodology may be applied to a few
areas of spending. Speci…cally, we focus on those diseases that are included in some
of the larger MPCs and on the treatment of neoplasms (that is, benign and malignant
tumors).

4.3.1    Cardiology and Endocrinology



Table 4. Cardiology and Endocrinology

                                               2003          2007
                                            Expenditure   Expenditure                2007 Indexes
                                             per Capita    per Capita   ECI DEM DECI PREV MCE        SPI   SUI
         Ischemic heart disease 1              $55           $54        0.98 1.07 0.91 0.95 0.96    1.14   0.86
              Hypertension 1                   $48           $64        1.33 1.06 1.27 1.14 1.11    1.13   1.01
                Diabetes 1                     $43           $68        1.58 1.09 1.48 1.28 1.16    1.17   1.01
         Ischemic heart disease 2              $30           $32        1.07 1.08 0.99 1.09 0.91    1.09   0.84
          Hyperlipidemia, other 1              $26           $37        1.43 1.08 1.35 1.29 1.05    1.16   0.95
         Ischemic heart disease 3              $24           $24        1.01 1.07 0.94 0.88 1.07    1.20   0.90
         Ischemic heart disease 4              $22           $23        1.05 1.07 0.98 0.91 1.08    1.20   0.90
                 Obesity 2                     $17           $15        0.89 1.00 0.88 1.55 0.57    1.04   0.54
  Cardiovascular diseases signs & symp. 1      $16           $18        1.13 1.02 1.11 1.02 1.09    1.11   1.00
                Diabetes 4                     $13           $17        1.27 1.03 1.23 1.04 1.19    1.20   1.00


    Table 4 reports the expenditure decomposition for the ten largest diseases by spend-
ing in the two major practice categories of cardiology and endocrinology. The number
that appears after each disease description is the severity level, ranging between 1 to 4
for many diseases, with a higher number indicating a greater severity. The table shows
there have been large increases in the prevalence of treated hypertension, hyperlipidemia,
diabetes, and obesity. This may correspond to changing lifestyles or eating habits of the


                                                 28
commercially insured population. However, these four diseases are also major contrib-
utors to ischemic heart disease, which has strikingly shown a decline in treated preva-
lence.27 This may indicate that people are seeking treatment earlier, bef ore ischemic
heart disease arises, perhaps re‡ecting a growing awareness of this medical condition.
Indeed, evidence from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey shows
very rapid growth in treated prevalence for diabetes, hyperlipidemia, and hypertension,
even though the underlying clinical prevalence has remained relatively ‡at for these
conditions.28
    Also of note is that spending for low-severity ischemic heart disease has been declining
over the sample period. In fact, were it not for an aging commercial population, spending
per capita would have fallen by almost 10 percent between 2003 and 2007. This decline
in spending is mostly attributable to the large decline in service utilization. This …nding
is also consistent with the work of Cutler et al. (1998), who …nd the quality-adjusted
prices for treating heart attacks to be declining. As discussed in the previous section,
this shift in utilization is attributable to the shift from inpatient to outpatient services
in the treatment of heart disease.
  27
     The decline in treated prevalence may be seen by averaging over the di¤erent severities of is-
chemic heart disease based on expenditures per capita.        A study by the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention has also reported a decline in the prevalence of ischemic heart disease
for the 2006 to 2010 period based on the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System surveys
(http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm6040a1.htm).
  28
     Speci…c values of these trends from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey are
reported in Roehrig and Rousseau (2011).




                                                29
4.3.2    Gastroenterology


Table 5. Gastroenterology

                                                       2003        2007
                                                    Expenditure Expenditure                   2007 Indexes
                                                     per Capita per Capita    ECI    DEM    DECI PREV MCE    SPI    SUI
           Inflammation of esophagus 1                   $27        $29       1.09   1.02   1.07 1.06 1.01   1.12   0.92
   Gastroenterology diseases signs & symptoms 1          $23        $33       1.41   1.03   1.39 1.16 1.20   1.15   1.05
 Non-malignant neoplasm of intestines & abdomen 1        $20        $27       1.34   1.08   1.26 1.16 1.08   1.08   1.02
              Hernias, except hiatal 1                   $10        $12       1.19   1.03   1.16 1.02 1.14   1.19   0.96
                  Appendicitis 1                          $9        $12       1.41   0.99   1.42 1.15 1.24   1.20   1.02
          Inflammatory bowel disease 3                    $7        $11       1.51   0.99   1.52 1.28 1.19   1.18   1.03
      Malignant neoplasm of rectum or anus 2              $6         $9       1.45   1.08   1.37 0.93 1.47   1.41   1.05
           Inflammation of esophagus 2                    $5         $6       1.12   1.06   1.06 1.12 0.95   1.12   0.86
                Bowel obstruction 1                       $5         $7       1.26   1.05   1.22 1.04 1.16   1.13   1.03
      Malignant neoplasm of rectum or anus 3              $5         $8       1.55   1.10   1.45 0.95 1.54   1.49   1.04


    Similar to cardiological and endocrinological diseases, gastroenterological diseases saw
a shift in prevalence to earlier stage-of-illness treatment. Table 5 shows that prevalence
in “gastroenterology signs and symptoms 1”and “non-malignant neoplasm of intestines
and abdomen 1” (e.g., benign polyps) both saw 16 percent growth in prevalence over
the sample period. These two diseases represented one-…fth of gastroenterological ex-
penditures in 2003 and grew by 41 and 34 percent, respectively, over the sample period.
Endoscopic procedures (mainly colonoscopy) represented the largest share of spending
(16.4 percent of spending) for “gastroenterology signs and symptoms 1,”indicating that
this disease category likely represents a large amount of preventive treatment. By con-
trast, “malignant neoplasm of the rectum or anus”saw a decline in prevalence. Similar to
cardiology services, there seems to be shift in prevalence from later-stage severe illnesses
to preventive care. This growth in prevalence of preventive treatment may be attribut-
able to the new screening guidelines instituted by the Committee of the American College
of Gastroenterology (ACG) in 2000.29 Note that, although prevalence declined for rectal
cancer, expenditures per capita rose signi…cantly over the sample period. Our decompo-
  29
    The ACG recommends colonoscopy every 10 years, beginning at age 50, as the preferred strategy.
This is in contrast to a menu of options strategy endorsed by the American Cancer Society.


                                                    30
sition shows that this was mainly attributable to the large growth in the cost of treatment
(the M CE index grew by approximately 50 percent). As we discuss in Section 4.3.4,
many other types of cancer also reported large growth in treatment costs over the sample
period.

4.3.3    Gynecology


Table 6. Gynecology

                                                    2003        2007
                                                 Expenditure Expenditure                 2007 Indexes
                                                  per Capita per Capita ECI     DEM    DECI PREV MCE    SPI    SUI
        Malignant neoplasm of breast 1               $26         $41     1.60   1.10   1.50 1.07 1.40   1.27   1.10
Non-malignant neoplasm of female genital tract 3     $19         $21     1.09   0.99   1.09 1.02 1.07   1.16   0.92
        Malignant neoplasm of breast 2               $17         $25     1.52   1.03   1.49 1.10 1.36   1.28   1.06
   Conditions associated with menstruation 1         $15         $14     0.99   1.01   0.99 0.87 1.14   1.13   1.03
Non-malignant neoplasm of female genital tract 1     $12         $15     1.18   0.99   1.19 0.94 1.26   1.19   1.06
     Non-malignant neoplasm of breast 1              $11         $11     1.03   1.01   1.02 0.85 1.20   1.18   1.02
                Endometriosis 1                       $9         $8      0.89   0.98   0.90 0.82 1.10   1.14   0.97
   Conditions associated with menstruation 2          $9         $13     1.43   0.99   1.43 1.11 1.29   1.21   1.07
    Other diseases of female genital tract 1          $9         $9      1.08   1.03   1.05 1.04 1.01   1.17   0.86
        Malignant neoplasm of breast 3                $8         $10     1.33   1.02   1.31 1.07 1.23   1.26   0.98


   As shown in Table 2, gynecology was the fourth largest diagnostic category in 2003
but the …fth largest in 2007, falling behind endocrinology. This was attributable to
the slightly lower-than-average growth in ECI (23 percent) for this diagnostic category.
Table 6 reports the ten largest gynecological diseases in terms of expenditures per capita.
These ten diseases made up about three-quarters of 2003 gynecological spending. The
results show that the lower-than-average spending was mainly attributable to “non-
malignant neoplasm of the genital tract 3 and 1,”“non-malignant neoplasm of the breast
1,”and “conditions associated with menstruation 1.”Expenditures for these diseases all
grew less than 10 percent over the 2003 to 2007 sample period. Our decomposition shows
that cost of treatment (M CE) growth was about average for these diseases, however,
they had low growth in prevalence and had negligible growth due to demographic factors.
By contrast, the highest spending gynecological disease, breast cancer, had large growth


                                                  31
in the cost of treatment— 40 percent growth in M CE for severity 1 and 36 percent growth
in M CE for severity 2.

4.3.4    Neoplasms


Table 7. Neoplasms

                                                    2003        2007
                                                Expenditure Expenditure                 2007 Indexes
                                                 per Capita per Capita ECI     DEM    DECI PREV MCE    SPI    SUI
                                  Malignant          $50         $77    1.53   1.06   1.47 1.07 1.37   1.27   1.33
     Neoplasm of breast
                              Non-Malignant          $11         $12    1.04   1.01   1.03 0.85 1.21   1.18   1.03
                                  Malignant          $16         $21    1.27   1.09   1.17 0.95 1.23   1.28   1.40
Neoplasm of pulmonary system
                              Non-Malignant          $1          $1     1.12   1.03   1.09 1.04 1.05   0.97   1.08
                                  Malignant          $13         $21    1.55   1.09   1.46 0.97 1.51   1.45   0.99
 Neoplasm of rectum or anus
                              Non-Malignant          $2          $3     1.73   1.09   1.64 1.52 1.08   1.06   1.04
                                 Malignant           $13         $20    1.55   1.15   1.40 1.09 1.29   1.17   1.07
    Neoplasm of prostate
                              Non-Malignant          $4          $6     1.56   1.13   1.43 1.06 1.35   1.15   1.19
                                 Malignant           $10         $14    1.35   1.08   1.28 1.08 1.18   1.11   1.04
   Neoplasm of skin, major
                              Non-Malignant          $15         $19    1.27   1.03   1.25 1.13 1.10   1.11   1.00
                                 Malignant          $162        $240    1.48   1.08   1.40 1.08 1.30   1.25   1.05
       All neoplasms
                              Non-Malignant         $107        $133    1.24   1.03   1.21 1.11 1.11   1.15   0.98
                             All other diseases    $2,247      $2,856   1.27   1.03   1.24 1.10 1.13   1.15   0.99


    To more comprehensively assess expenditure growth for cancer treatment, we group
neoplasm conditions in Table 7. Speci…cally, we display the …ve most expensive neoplasm
conditions (in terms of expenditures per capita), both malignant neoplasms and non-
malignant neoplasms separately. For ease of display, we aggregated severity types into
one disease category (e.g., neoplasm of breast 1, 2, and 3 were aggregated into “neoplasm
of breast”). Note that neoplasms are not a MPC, rather we pull neoplasms from a across
di¤erent MPCs to compare them for Table 7. At the bottom of the table we also report
aggregated indexes of all malignant and non-malignant neoplasms, along with aggregated
indexes of all conditions but neoplasms.30
 30
    For instance, the aggregated ECI for non-malignant neoplasms was calculated as ECIN on;t =
 P                              C
      ! d ECId;t where ! d = P d;0Cd;0 and N on are the set of non-malignant diseases.
d2N on                        d2N on




                                                   32
    The …rst result to note is that “non-malignant neoplasms” look very similar to “all
other diseases.”Speci…cally, the M CE for non-malignant neoplasm treatment grew by 11
percent over the sample period, slightly below the 13 percent growth in all other diseases.
By contrast, the cost of treatment for malignant neoplasms grew much more rapidly, with
an M CE growth of 30 percent. Faster growth for malignant neoplasms is attributable
to both service prices, which grew by 25 percent, and service utilization, which grew by
5 percent. A plausible reason for this discrepancy between malignant neoplasms and the
rest of the sample is the distinct and likely innovative technologies that are used to treat
malignant neoplasms. Note that in our framework, when a procedure is …rst introduced
into the market (i.e., an innovation), it will show up as an increase in utilization if this
new procedure is measured to have a large quantity of RV U s. Furthermore, its price
may subsequently increase as the new procedure di¤uses and demand rises.


5    Conclusion
    This paper presents a descriptive picture of the various sources of health-care ex-
penditure growth. Our decomposition shows that growth in both service prices and
prevalence of treated disease are responsible for the large increase in nominal medical-
care expenditure growth. Other factors, such as changes in the demographics of the
population or changes in service utilization, have a limited impact on expenditures.
    Perhaps equally important to the descriptive …ndings of this study are the avenues
for future research that it reveals. For instance, our analysis shows that there has been
tremendous growth in preventive service expenditures. Future research may decipher
whether these preventive services ultimately lead to lower expenditures in the future,
better health outcomes, or both. Second, although utilization has been declining for
some diseases due to a shift from inpatient to outpatient services, some areas such as the
treatment for malignant neoplasms have seen a growth in both service utilization and
service prices. We hypothesize that this growth in the cost of treatment is attributable
to the large degree of innovation for cancer treatment. However, a more comprehensive
study speci…c to cancer treatment will likely lead to a better understanding of this cost of
treatment growth. Third, future research may uncover if the shift in treated prevalence


                                            33
toward diseases that lead to ischemic heart failure (e.g., hypertension and hyperlipidemia)
and away from ischemic failure is due to a worsening health status of the population or
if it is attributable to better awareness of these types of conditions or more individuals
with a condition seeking treatment. If the growth is attributable to an earlier awareness
of a health condition, this may translate into lower expenditure growth or better health
outcomes in the future.


References
 [1] Aizcorbe, Ana and Nicole Nestoriak, (2011), “Changing Mix of Medical Care Ser-
        vices: Stylized Facts and Implications for Price Indexes”, Journal of Health
        Economics, 30(3) pgs 568-574.
 [2] Aizcrobe, Ana, Eli Liebman, Sarah Pack, David Cutler, Michael Chernew and Alli-
        son Rosen, (2012), “Measuring Health Care Costs of Individuals with Employer-
        Sponsored Health Insurance in the U.S.: A Comparison of Survey and Claims
        Data”, Statistical Journal of the International Association for O¢ cial Statistics,
        28(1-2), pgs 43-51.
 [3] Berndt, Ernst, David Cutler, Richard Frank, Zvi Griliches, Joseph Newhouse, and
        Jack Triplett, (2000), “Medical Care Prices and Output”, Handbook of Health
        Economics, Chapter 3.
 [4] Bundorf, Kate, Anne Royalty, and Laurence Baker, (2009), “Health Care Cost
       Growth Among the Privately Insured”, Health A¤airs, September/October.
 [5] Chandra, Amitabh and Jonathan Skinner, (2012), “Technology Growth and Ex-
       penditure Growth in Health Care”, Journal of Economic Literature, 50(3) pgs
       645-680.
 [6] Chernew, Michael and Joseph Newhouse, (2012), “Health Care Spending Growth”,
        Handbook of Health Economics, Chapter 1 pgs 1-43.
 [7] Cutler, David M., Mark McClellan, Joseph P. Newhouse, and Dahlia Remler. “Are
        Medical Prices Declining? Evidence from Heart Attack Treatments.” Quarterly
        Journal of Economics 113 (1998) pgs 991-1024.

                                            34
 [8] Dunn, Abe, Eli Liebman, Sarah Pack, and Adam Shapiro, (2012), “Medical
       Care Price Indexes for Patients with Employer-Provided Insurance: Nationally-
       Representative Estimates from MarketScan Data”, Health Services Research,
       Forthcoming.
 [9] Dunn, Abe, Eli Liebman, Lindsey Rittmueller, and Adam Shapiro, (2014), “De…ning
       Disease Episodes and the E¤ects on the Components of Expenditure Growth”,
       Bureau of Economic Analysis, Working Paper.
[10] Dunn, Abe, Eli Liebman, and Adam Shapiro, (2014a), “Developing a Framework
       for Decomposing Medical-Care Expenditure Growth: Exploring Issues of Rep-
       resentativeness”, Chapter 17 in Dale Jorgenson, Steven Landefeld, and Paul
       Schreyer, eds., Measuring Economic Sustainability and Progress, NBER Book
       Series Studies in Income and Wealth, Forthcoming.
[11] Dunn, Abe, Eli Liebman, and Adam Shapiro, (2014b), “Implications of Utilization
       Shifts on Medical-Care Price Measurement”, Health Economics, Forthcoming.
[12] Dunn, Abe, Adam Shapiro, and Eli Liebman, (2014), “Geographic Variation in
       Commercial Medical-Care Expenditures: A Framework for Decomposing Price
       and Utilization”, Journal of Health Economics, 32(6), pgs 1153-1165.
[13] Roehrig, Charles and David Rousseau, (2011), “The Growth in Cost Per Case Ex-
        plains Far More of US Health Spending Increases Than Rising Disease Preva-
        lence”, Health A¤airs, 30(9) pgs 1657-1663.
[14] Rosen, Allison, Eli Liebman, Ana Aizcorbe, and David Cutler, (2012), “Comparing
        Commercial Systems for Characterizing Episodes of Care”, Bureau of Economic
        Analysis, Working Paper.
[15] Starr, Martha, Laura Dominiak, and Ana Aizcorbe, (2014), “Decomposing Growth
        in Spending Finds Annual Cost of Treatment Contributed Most to Spending
        Growth, 1980-2006”, Health A¤airs, 33(5) pgs 1657-1663.
[16] Thorpe, Kenneth, Curtis Florence, and Peter Joski, (2004), “Which Medical Con-
       ditions Account for the Rise in Health Care Spending?”, Health A¤airs, August
       - Web Exclusive.


                                        35
[17] Zuvekas, Samuel. and Gary Olin, (2009), “Accuracy of Medicare Expenditures in
        the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey”, Inquiry, 46 pgs 92-108.




                                       36
