NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MENU COSTS AND THE
NEUTRALITY OF MONEY

Andrew S. Caplin
Daniel F. Spulber

Working Paper No. 2311

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue

Cambridge, MA 02138
July 1987

We thank Andrew Abel, Roland Benabou, Olivier Blanchard, Dennis Canton, Stan
Fischer, Ben Friedman, Barry Nalebuff, William Nordhaus, David Romer, Julio
Rotembeng, Eytan Sheshinski, John Veitch and an anonymous referee for valuable.
conffiients. Spulber's research was supported by the National Science Foundation
under Grant No. SES-82-19121. The paper was presented at the Fifth World Congress
of the Econometric Society, Cambridge, MA, 1985, and at the NBER Program in
Economic Fluctuations Conference, October 1985. The research reported here is
part of the NBER's research program in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2311
July 1987

Menu Costs and the Neutrality of Money

ABSTRACT

A model of endogenous price adjustment under money growth is presented. Firma
follow (a, S) pricing policies and price revisions are imperfectly synchronized. In the ag-

gregate, price stickiness disappears and money is neutral. The connection between firm
price adjustment and relative price variability in the presence of monetary growth is also

investigated. The results contrast with those obtained in models with exogenous fixed
timing of price adjustment.

Andrew S. Caplin
Department of Economics
Princeton University

Princeton, NJ 08544

Daniel F. Spulber
Department Of Economics
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA 90089-0035

I. Introduction
Historically-determined nominal prices can lead to inertia in the aggregate level of
prices, leaving room for monetary shocks to influence real variables. Formal models connecting the microeconomic behavior of nominal prices with aggregate price stickiness in-

clude models with staggered price and wage decisions [Fischer, 1977; Taylor, 1980; Blan-

chard, 1983b; Parkin, 1986J, models with partial adjustment of prices (e.g., Rotemberg
[19821), and the more recent menu cost" models of Akerlof and Yellen [1985], Blanchard
and Kiyotaki [1985] and Mankiw [19851. We present an alternative aggregate model with

microeconomic price stickiness which emphasizes the importance of endogenous timing of

price adjustments. The model provides conditions under which money shocks have no real
effects.

A number of macroeconomic models of price stickiness have a common microeconomic

base: infrequent but large changes in nominal variables are assumed to be more economical

then frequent small changes.' The models also share the assumption that the time between
successive price revisions is pre-set, and hence unresponsive to shocks to the economy. This

assumption is questionable both at the microeconomic level and in the aggregate. Formal
microeconomic models (e.g., Sheshinski and Weiss [1983]) strongl) suggest that more

rapid

inflation will shorten the time between price revisions. Empirical evidence against the fixed

timing assumption is presented by Cecchetti [1986] and Liebermann and Zilbefarb [i98s].
At the aggregate level, large monetary shocks may increase the number of agents revising
their nominal prices in a given period. This in turn reduces the extent of price level inertia.

An important open question remains: what are the real effects of monetary shocks with
endogenous timing of price revisions?

The present paper assumes that individual firms adjust their prices using (a, 5) pricing

policies of Sheshinski and Weiss [1977, 1983]. To model asynchronization, we make a

cross-sectional assumption on initial prices. The price level is derived endogenously by
aggregating across firms. Aggregate price stickiness then vanishes despite the presence of
1

-

nominal price rigidity and imperfectly synchronized price revisions.
The presence of relative price variability as a consequence of inflation is also observed
endogenously through aggregation of cross-sectional price data. A simple formula is derived

linking nominal price adjustment by firms with cross-sectional variability of inflation rates.

The basic model is outlined in section II. The neutrality proposition is presented in
section III. In section IV, the model is applied to study relative price variability. Section
V provides further discussion of the model and its assumptions Conclusions are given in
section VI.

H. The Model

hA. The Aggregate Setting
We provide an aggregate model of price dynamics with individual firms pursuing
asynchronous (a, S) pricing policies. The structure of the aggregate model is kept as simple
as possible to highlight the distinction between our model and others with asynchronous
price and wage decisions. These alternative models frequently assume a staggered pattern
of timing (e.g., Akerlof 11969], Fischer 119771, Taylor f1980] and Blanchard [1983b]).

Money growth is subject to continuous shocks. The stochastic process governing
monetary growth is taken as exogenous by all firms in the economy.2 Let M(t) denote the
logarithm of the money supply at time t, where time is measured continuously. We assume

that the money supply process is increasing over time and does not make discrete jumps.
ASSUMPTIoN 1. Monotonicity and Continuity. The money supply does not decrease Over

time, M(t1) M(t2) for ij t2. Also, the money supply process is continuous in the
time parameter t. Normalize such that M(0) = 0.
The monotonicity assumption will rule out periods of deflation. The continuity assumption

allows a simple characterization of firm pricing policies. The assumption also plays a role

in analysing the cross-sectional behavior of prices. This issue is taken up below. The
monetary process is sufficiently general as to accommodate feedback rules. We will consider
2

-

particular examples of monetary processes below.

There is a continuum of firms in the economy indexed by i E 10,11. All firms face
identical demand and cost conditions. The assumed microeconomic structure is based on
the menu cost model of Sheshinski and Weiss 11977, 1983J. Let q(t) and Q(t) represent
firm i's nominal price and the aggregate price index respectively, with p(t) and P(t) their

respective logarithms. The aggregate price index, P(t), is derived endogenously below
from individual firm prices. It is convenient to express firm i's real price, q(t)/Q(t), in log

form, r(t),
(1)

rt(t) 2 p1(t) — P(t) = ln[qj(t)/Q(t)j,

for all I E 10,11. We take r(0) as given.
The aggregate price index, Q(t), is determined endogenously by aggregating individual

firms' nominal prices, q(t). The index is assumed to depend only on the frequency distribution over nominal prices. Because firms have menu costs of price adjustment, prices

may remain dispersed in the long run. Thus, the set of observed prices at any date may
be described by a time-dependent frequency distribution function, say Ct(q). The index
M assumed also to satisfy homogeneity; when nominal prices double, so does the index.3

ASSUMPTIoN 2. Symmetric Price Index. The aggregate price index, Q(t), depends only
on the frequency distribution of nominal prices and satisfies homogeneity,

(2)

Q(t) = Q(Gt(q)), where C(q) is the proportion of firms i E 10,11

such that q(t) S q.
(3)

If G,(q) = Gt3(Aq) for all q, then AQ(t1) = Q(t2), for any t1,t3 0.

This condition is satisfied by a wide variety of common price indices.4 An example of a
price index which satisfies assumption 2 is a simple average of nominal prices based on their

f

f

frequency distribution, Q(t) = qdct(q). More generally, let Q(t) = w(q, Cg(.))qdCt(q)
where w(q, C) represents weights as a function of prices q and the distribution of nominal
3

-

prices C. The assumption requires the weights to satisfy w(q, Cg1) = w(Aq, Cr3) when
C11(q) = Ct3(Aq) for all q. An example of such a set of weights is w(q,C) =
q/fqdc(q).

flB. The Market Setting
Consumer demand is assumed to depend only on the firm's real price and on real
money balances. Writing the arguments in log form, consumer demand faced
by firm 1,
r1, is defined by
(4)

r1ft)

r(r1(t),.&f(t) — P(t)),

where rift) and M(t) — P(t) are the log of firm i's price and the log of real balances
rpectively.5 One rationale for this is to assume that real balances enter consumer utility
functions, as in for example Rotemberg [1982, 1983]. Note also that all firms have some

positive demand even though prices are dispersed. This may arise if the commodities are

imperfect substitutes. It may also be that consumer search across firms is costly and that
consumers do not recall prices posted by firms in earlier periods, see Benabou 11985b1.
Costs

are assumed to be fixed in real terms. Production at rate X1(t) gives rise to

real flow costs, C(x1ft)). This assumption rules out stickiness in nominal input prices,
including contractua wages. This prevents us from addressing the relationship between
price stickiness and wage stickiness, a topic of independent interest, see Blanchard [1983J.°

Additional study of the present model with input price stickiness is clearly desirable. All
profits are distributed to consumers, and firm costs accrue to consumers as income.7

The good is assumed to be non-storable, so that the firm's output is supplied at the

same date it is produced. This removes intertemporal linkages embodied in inventories.
As a result, the only variables which influence the firm'sflow rate of real profits,

the instantaneous real price and the level of real money balances,8
B[r1(t),Mft) — P(t)J

B1(t)

(5)

=

X1(1(g) [eP(t)x1(t)_c(x1(t))].

-4

B(t), are

Thus, the output of firm 1, X1(t), is a function of its real price and the level of real

money

balances which solves the problem in equation (5),
X1(t) = X(r1(t),Af(t)

(6)

Let X(t)

represent

—

P(t)).

the constant dollar value of aggregate output, X(t)

J0' (q(t)/

Q(tflX4t)di = : 9'(t)X1(t)di.
In the absence of menu costs, the firm picks its instantaneous

price, r(t), to maximize

flow profits B(r(t), M(t) — P(t)) .° Nominal price stickiness is introduced into the model
in the form of a real menu cost, fi, which is incurred each time the firm changes its nominal
price.'0 This fixed transaction cost results in price stickiness at the level of the individual

firm. Rather than responding smoothly and continuously to changes in the overall price
level the firm responds only occasionally, and with discrete price jumps.
We consider a firm which continuously monitors the price level, and pursues an (a, S)

pricing policy, as introduced by Sheshinski and Weiss. The impact of this policy on the

dynamics of the firm's real price is illustrated in Figure I. The instant the log of the real

price, r(t), hits the fixed lower limit a, the firm adjusts its nominal price, returning the

log of the real price to its upper limit, S. Let D S — a represent the size of the firm's
price increase. Then, the changes in the firm's nominal price within any time period 10,t}

are always an integer multiple of the price range, p(t) — p(O) = k(t)D, where k(t) 0 is

an integer. Noting that r(0) = p(0) and using the definition of the firm's real price in
equation (1), we may formally characterize the (a, S) pricing policy as follows; r(t)

[8,5]

and

(7)

rt(t) — r(0)

= (p(t) — p(O))

—

(P(t) — P(0)) = k1(t)D — (P(t) — P(O)).

Hence, changes in the log of the firm's real price are an integer multiple of D minus the
log of the price level.

[Insert Figure 1 about herel
-

5

Two important requirements are necessary for (s,S)-typepolicies to be optimal. One

requirement is stationarity of real balances over time, M(t) — P(t) =

—P(O),

so that

demand, 1's, is stationary. We will demonstrate that in equilibrium this requirement is
satisfied. The other requirement concerns restrictions on the form of the anticipated inflation process. Conditions for optimality of (a, S) pricing policies in a stochastic setting
have been considered by Sheshinski and Weiss j1983J, Danziger [1984] and more recently

by Caplin and Sheshinski [1986]." Danziger considers a world with discrete inflationary

shocks. He demonstrates that when inflationary shocks arrive one at a time with expo-

nentially distributed interarrival times, then the optimal pricing policy is of the (a,S)
variety.'2 With general inflationary processes, the optimal pricing policy may take a more
complex form.

The central qualitative feature of (8, 5) pricing policies is that they make the time between successive price revisions endogenous: prices change more frequently when inflation

rapid than when it is slow. Alternative models of asynchronous price setting involve
fixed decision times regardless of ensuing shocks to the economy. Seen in this light, one
may be less concerned with the precise optimality of (s, 5) pricing policies.'3 Rather, they

may be seen as a simple and tractable alternative to the assumption of a predetermined
pattern of price revisions.
Analysis of the time path of aggregate prices in our framework requires specification of

the initial distribution of prices across firms in theeconomy. it is assumed that firms' initial

real prices r1(O) are uniformly distributed over the range (a, S]. For ease of exposition, we

rtate the uniformity assumption with a frequency distribution F0(p) which defines the
proportion of firms with the logs of their initial prices p(O) no higher than p.
ASSUMPTIoN 3. Uniformity. The frequency distribution over initial real prices satisfies

fo forpa,
Fo(p)=lb/D

ti

forp5.
6

The uniform initial distribution of prices across the price range (a, 5J is the analogue in
prices of the standard Assumption of uniformly staggered price changes over time. Indeed,
Assumption 3 is equivalent to an assumption of uniform staggered timing in the special

case where inflation is constant at some rate A >

0.

However, it will be apparent that
in a stochastic setting a uniform distribution of initial prices has significantly different
implications.
In a fundamental sense, Assumption 3 may be viewed as a statement about the endoge-

nous tendency of prices to become uniformly distributed after a long history of inflationary

shocks and pursuit of fixed (a.S) policies. This lies outside the current framework since
firms pursuing identical (a, S) policies in the face of inflation retain forever the initial
difference in their real prices. However, if firms pursue slightly distinct (a, S) policies,

or randomize on their trigger price a (as in Benabou [1985a]), their real prices become

statistically independent of one another with the passage of time. A related result for
inventories states that, absent degeneracies, firms which pursue (a, S) inventory policies
have inventory levels which are independent in the long run, Caplin [19851.

111. Neutrality
We address the connection between asynchronous price decisions and aggregate price

stickiness. To what extent is the individual finn stickiness in nominal prices reflected in

aggregate price inertia? The central result of the paper is that real balances and aggregate output are invariant to monetary shocks. Price stickiness disappears in the aggregate.

Given (a, 5) pricing rules the initial distribution of real prices is invariant and remains
uniform. The aggregate nominal price index exactly reflects nominal money shocks. Con-

sumer demand as a function of real prices and real balances remains stationary. This
results in constant aggregate output.
In the absence of real shocks to the economy, money neutrality is appropriately defined
as follows.
7

DEFINITION 1. Money is neutral if aggregate real output is invariant to monetary shocks,

X(t) = X(O), for all 2 0.
Monetary policy may influence the di8tribution of real prices across firms in our model, as
will be seen in section IV. However, these distributional effects cancel out in the aggregate.

Suppose that firms follow (8,5) policies in anticipation of constant real balances. That

1, firms expect that P(t) = M(t). Then, by the description of (a,S) pricing policies in
equation (7), we may calculate each firm's nominal price as a function of cumulativemoney

growth and the firm's initial price,

p(t)

(9)

k1(t)D+p1(O),

where k1(t) is an integer determined by the requirement that r(t)

[a, S]. Proposition
1 verifies that aggregation of these nominal prices yields a price level equal to cumulative
money growth at each time 2, so that money is neutral.

The neutrality result may be understood by observing that the (a, 5) policy moves
real prices around a circle. The method of proof is easily illustrated using Figure II. Points

on the circle represent the range of the log of the firm's real prices. At the apex of the
circle, the outer limits of the range are adjacent. At time 21, r(ti) is firm i's real price.
Inflation occurring between time 21 and 22 reduces the real price to rt(t2) as indicated by
the counter-clockwise motion. Between time 22 and 23, inflation drives the real price down

to a, the price is then readjusted up to S and further inflation drives the real price to
r1ft3).

It is critical to note that the rotation engendered by monetary growth is invariant

to the location of the initial real price on the circle, thus preserving the initial uniformity

at real prices.
[Insert Figure II about here]
PROPOsITIoN 1. Given Assumptions 1 to 3, money is neutral if firms follow (s,5) pricing

policies in anticipation of constant real balances.
8

Proof of Proposition 1. Let money growth be written as an integer multiple of D and

a remainder, 6(t).

M(t) = k(t)D + 6(t)

(10)

where k(t) 0 and 6(t) 0 are chosen such that 6(t) c D. If firms follow (s, S) pricing
policies and anticipate constant real balances, then by equation (9), the log of each firm
i's nominal price can be expressed in terms of the components of money supply growth in
equation (10),

(n)

—
—

fp(o) +k(t)D,
1 p(O)

forp1(0) > a+b(t),
+ Lk(t) + 1]D, for p(0) $ + 6(t).

Equation (ii) shows that ifs + 6(t) <p(0) S then a + M(t) <p(t) a i-M(t) + D —6.

Also ifs <p(0) a + 6(t) then a + M(t) + D — 6 cp(t) S + M(t). By uniformity of
initial real prices (Assumption 3), it follows that p(t) — M(t) is uniform over the interval
(a, SJ, or equivalently,

forpa+M(t),
(0
Ft(p) = b/D forp=a+M(t) +6, withoCb< D,
(1
forpS-i-M(t).

(12)

The frequency distribution over nominal prices is then given by G (q)
Fg (In q).
Note that Gt(q) is defined over (et+M(t),e5+M(O]. Thus, we may define Gt(eM(Ox) over

(e, a5] so that Gt(eMO)x) = Go(z) for x (e', E5J. Therefore, by the assumption of
a symmetric price index, Q(t) = eM(t)Q(o). Thus, we have verified that endogenously
derived inflation matches monetary growth and real balances are constant, Q(t)/eM(t) =
Q(0). Furthermore, since r(t) = p1(t) — .P(t) = pt(t) — M(t) is uniform over (a,S] for t 0

we have
Fl

(13)

X(t) =

=

Pt

J0 e(t)X(rj(t),p(o))di J0e"(°)X(r1(O),P(o))di,

so X(t) = X(0).

Q.E.D.

9

Consider an illustrative example. Note first that since p (t) is uniformly distributed

on (a + M(t), S +M(t)], q(t) is distributed on (etM(t),e5M(t)} with distribution G1(q) =
(in q)/D. If we use the simple arithmetic mean as our symmetric price index, the price

level is then
1SM(t)
Q(t)

(lID)]M (t)

dq = e()(eS — e')/D = eM(0Q(O).

The central feature of Proposition 1 is that it provides a simple framework in which

there are monetary shocks, asynchronous nominal price revisions, but no stickiness in

the aggregate price level. In fact, P(t) — M(t) = P(o). Thus it contrasts strongly with
monetary models with a fixed staggered pattern of price and wage revisions, which can
generate significant aggregate price stickiness (e.g., Akerlof [1969], Blanchard [1983J, and
Fischer [19771). In qualitative terms, the difference between the results can be simply

explained. In the staggered timing framework, large monetary shocks draw a response
from a fixed fraction of the population, with the remainder pursuing an unchanged policy.

The size of the predetermined pool of decision makers will influence the extent of price
revision by those currently free to decide: on average, agents' prices adjust only partially
to large monetary shocks. In contrast, the (5, s) model makes the fraction of firms which

revise prices in any given period endogenous. Hence rapid growth of the money supply
causes an increase in the number of price increases in a given period. Surprisingly, our
simple form of endogenous timing completely removes aggregate inertia.

The result also provides a new perspective on the emerging study of menu costs and
monetary policy in a static setting e.g., Akerlof and Yellen [1985], Blanchard and Kiyotaki
11985], Mañkiw [19851). Here, Akerlof [1985] argues that the presence of a small menu

cost may make it optimal for an individual firm to maintain a fixed nominal price in the
face of a monetary shock. This may lead to a welfare loss larger than the menu cost itself.

The extension from the case of a single firm to the economy as a whole is based on a
representative agent framework. Since one firm fails to adjust its price, so do all firms,
and as a result there can be a significant real impact to the open market operation.
10

Taken literally, such reasoning can only be applied for the first monetary shock to an
economy which had never before been out of static equilibrium. Even the second monetary
shock may have a different effect, since after the first shock, the hypothesis that the initial

real price is at its equilibrium level fails. Proposition 1 presents a simple setting where the
presence of menu costs indeed prevents many firms from revising prices. However, those
who do adjust their price do so discontinuously. Although only a few firms may adjust

their prices, they adjust their prices by a large amount. The net result is that monetary
shocks are absorbed with no real impact.

-

Proposition 1 also provides a positive answer to a question posed by Sheshinski and

Weiss 11983] for their model of (a, 5) pricing policies. They are concerned with providing

a consistent aggregate version of their model. They consider identical firms facing exoge-

nous inflationary shocks, unifonniy distributed with respect to the time of their last price
increase. Sheshinski and Weiss (1983, p. 523J note that:
large and/or closely spaced shocks may lead to synchronization and hence

change
the distribution. There is thus no simple correspondence between the process
of
exogenous shocks and the process followed by the aggregate price level.

Proposition 1 demonstrates that with identical firms, consistent aggregation requires that
firms be uniformly distributed in terms of the log of their initial real price levels rather than

the time of their last price change. The distinction is that in a stochastic setting uniformity

in timing is unstable, while uniformity in real prices is continuously sustained.'4

1V. Menu Costs and Relative Price Variability
In this section, we develop formulae linking inflation and firm pricing policies to rel-

ative price variability. These formulae can be seen as stochastic generalizations of the
deterministic price dispersion models of R.otemberg and Cecchetti [1981J, and Cecchetti
119851, which are based on staggered price setting. Our results also clarify the relationship between price variability and the time period between successive observationsof the
economy.15

The association between inflation and relative price variability has been widely in11

vestigated, see Fischer 119811 for a survey. The empirical research suggests a positive
association between relative price variability and both the mean and the variance of the
overall rate of inflation.'0 One important line of research into inflation and relative prices
originates with Barro 119761. Here it is inflationary variability rather than the rate of inflation per se which drives relative price variability. As the variability of inflation increases so

individual firm estimates of inflation become more widely dispersed, driving apart firms'

pre-set prices.t7 Barro's approach is further developed by Cukierman [1979], Cukierman
and Wachtel 119821, Eercowitz [1981] and Parks 119781.

An alternative theory holds that inflationary variations in relative pricescan be caused
by nominal price inflexibility (Cecchetti [1985J, Mussa 11981] and Rotemberg 11983D.' Our

formulae lie in this alternative tradition, stressing the costs of changing nominal prices.
The basic characterization of relative price variability to be given here is based on repeated observations of the economy, with successive observations separated by a fixed time

period of arbitrary length r > 0. With this discrete pattern of observations, cumulative
inflation during the tth time period is denoted llT(t). Proposition 1 allows us to identify
the inflation rate with the (stochastic) growth of the money supply,

flr(t) E P[r(t + 1)1 — P[rt! = Mfr(t + 1)1 — M[rt].

(14)

Our results of this section require only that flt(t) is a stationary stochastic process. It
is also convenient to restrict attention to inflation or money supply processes which are
regularly behaved.

AssUJ.fpTIoN 1 A. Statior&arity. For any r > 0, the process 11' (t) of equation (14) is
a stationary stochastic process, with long-run probabilities specified by the density

function #T(rI). The density of #(IT) is assumed to be non-atomic, with compact
support.

As in the proof of Proposition 1, it is useful to separate inflation into an integer
multiple of D and a residual.'9 Definition 2 provides the appropriate formalization.
12

-

DEFINITION 2. With cumulative inflation measured over periods of length r > 0, the
residual inflation process, br(t), is defined as llT(t) taken modulo D.

In light of Assumption 1A, the residual process b'(t) is itself stationary, has compact
support, with long-run probabilities specified by the density function qt(b) satisfying,

(is)

qt(b) =LvkD+b

Individual firm price increases are also measured at intervals of
(16)

length r,

nr(t) e p[r(t + 1)J —
To measure inflation, we use a specific price index. This is the standard Divisia index

of inflation, with equal expenditure shares for distinct firms I
(17)

[0,lJ.

'I

flt(t) e J IIT(t)di.
0

The Divisia index is standardly employed in empirical studies of relative price variability
(e.g., Fischer [1981], Hercowitz [1981], Parks [1978] and Vining and Elwertowski [1976J).

The Divisia index is symmetric. By Proposition 1, it follows that the endogenous inflation

measure in equation (17) is consistent with monetary growth in equation (14).
Relative price variability, V(t), is measured as the dispersion of individual firm infla-

tion rates around the aggregate rate of inflation,
(18)

r(t) J

0

1111(t) — flT (t)]2di.

We are interested in the statistical properties of VT(t), and in particular the influence
of D, the size of individual price increases. Intuition suggests that increases in D may raise

the general level of relative price variability. A precise characterization of the expected
level of relative price variability is contained in Proposition 2.

PRoPOSITION 2. Expected relative price variability is related to price changes, D, and
the residual inflation process, bT(t), as follows:
13

-

EEVT(t)I = E{bT(t)(D —

(19)

with b' (t) as in Definition 2.
Proof of Proposition 2. To simplify notation, the superscript r is suppressed through-

out the proof. We first separate period t inflation in the standard manner,

fl(i) = k(t)D +

(20)
with

6(t),

k(t) a non-negative integer, and 0 S 6(t) cD. The (a, S) pricing policies imply that

individual firm price increases obey

21'

''' —— f k(t)D

'

for

1. [k(t) + 1]D for

rift) >

+ 6(t),

r(t) a +6(t).

hence (n (t) — 11(t))2 takes value 62 for r (t) above a + 6(t),

(D —

b) otherwise. But from

Proposition 1 we know that real prices r(t) are distributed uniformly over (a, 5] for t 0.
Hence, using the definition of V(t), we have

V(t) =

(22)

[D —6(1)] 62(1) ÷ [i] [D

— 6(1)12

= b(t)(D—b(t)).
Finally, Assumption 1A implies that 6(t)

is

a stationary process, allowing us to take a-

pectations in (22).

Q.E.D.

Proposition 2 shows that the range of individual price variation D is a central determinant of the variability of individual price increases. However, interpretation of the result

I

complicated

by the presence of the residual inflation process, b(t).

While

the formula

does suggest a positive association between D and relative price variability, examples with

a negative association are readily constructed.2°
By changing the time interval between observations, it is possible to greatly simplify

the formulae of Proposition 2. The results are stated for a restricted class of inflation
14

processes introduced in Assumption lA.2' The restriction is imposed to simplify proofs:
the analysis may incorporate more general conditions.
ASSUMPTION 18. Two-rate inflation process. Monetary growth (and hence inflation) can

take place at one of two distinct rates, g and g, with g > 9L 0.
The time spent
with inflation of g (resp. QL) is distributed exponentially with parameter Ajrj (reap.
AL).

A desirable feature of the two-rate inflation

processes of assumption 18 is that their simple

Markovian 8tructure is inherited by the discretely observed process Ht(t). The state of
the system at time I comprises a specification of all firms' instantaneous real
prices, rift),
and the current inflation rate, H or L. State transitions in the ensuing interval depend
only on cumulative inflation over the interval, and the level of inflation at the end of the

interval. Such state transitions are then Markovian, since information available prior to I
M irrelevant to the probabilistic progress of the system.22

With this background, we can provide the simple formulae of Proposition 3 which
apply respective7y to "widely-spaced" and to "closely-spaced" observations of the

economy.

The Proposition is proved in the Appendix.

PROPOSITION 3. Given assumptions 18, 2 and 3, if firms follow (a, 5) pricing policies

and r is the period of observation then expected relative price variability satisfies the
following:
(a)

D2
lim EVt(t) = —,

(6)

rEv(e)1 =D.

6

[Enr(t)j

The surprising feature of part (a) of Proposition 3 is that with widely separated obsenrations, relative price variability depends only on D. It may be that the formula is roughly
-

15

appropriate for semi-annual data where firms change prices at intervals ranging from one

to three months. The applicability of part (b) of Proposition 3 is harder to gauge: the
observation period must be considerably shorter than the time between successive price
revisions.

Sheshinski and Weiss (1983) provide useful formulae for assessing the impact of pa-

rameter changes on D = S —

the range of the log of real prices.23 For gj, = 0, they
establish that the range D is increasing in the price adjustment cost fi and increasing in
a,

the certainty-equivalent rate of inflation g where p = (AL + p)gH/(AL + Aff + p) and where

p is the rate of interest. Changes in parameter values AL, Ag, p and g will affect the
price range and thus relative price variability as defined in Proposition 3a. However, it

ii difficult to establish a direct relation between the mean and variance of inflation and
relative price variability.

it is possible to determine the effects of menu costs on relative price variability. Be-

cause (a,S) policies may not be optimal, we assume that firms choose the best (a, 5)
bounds. Then, we use a time period r D/gH. Since 11(t) = k(t)D + b(t) from equation
(20) the number of nominal price changes within the time period under observation is
always zero so that 11(t) = b(t). Then, we may write expected relative price variability,
using Proposition 2, as follows,

E[Vt(t)J = .E{rI(t)[D —

(23)

The inflation process 11(t) is independent of adjustment costs and the range of prices is

increasing in fi. Thus, if firms follow the best (a, S) pricing policy, expected relative price

variability is increasing in the menu costs of price adjustment, fi.

V. Interpretation of Assumptions
The neutrality of money in our model is particularly dependent on the (a, 5) form of
firm pricing policies. For firms to follow (a, 5) policies, the monetaryprocess must at least

exhibit monotonicity and continuity. These requirements may be quite restrictive.
-

16

When the monetary process is non-monotone, it will sometimes be necessary for the

firm to lower its nominal price. The one-sided (s, pricing policies must be replaced
S)
by two-aided pricing policies, as analyzed by Barro [19721.24 With the two-sided pricing

policies, the neutrality proposition no longer holds: it may even be that unusually rapid
monetary expansion is associated with increased real balances and vice versa.25 A theoretical difficulty in modeling two-sided policies is that their properties under aggregation
appear highly complex. Specifically, it is not possible to specify an initial cross-sectional
dhtribution of prices which survives shocks.26 In economic terms, this implies that a second

positive shock to the money supply may have very different effects than the first positive
shock. Such effects may well have non-intuitive implications: for example, after two suc-

cessive positive shocks, output may be higher in response to a negative than in response
to a third positive shock to the money supply. In the absence of a fully developed model,
such comments remain speculative.
The assumed continuity of the money supply process has two roles. First, it gives rise
to the simple form of the individual firm equations for price transitions. In particular (7) no
longer holds in the absence of continuity, since if the real price falls by a discrete amount at

any given instant, then it may at some point fall strictly below s. The immediate response
of increasing the real price to S then involves a discrete jump in the real price in excess of
1)

S—a, contradicting (7). Sample path continuity plays an additional role in relation to

the uniformity Assumption 3. Jumps in the price level act as a coordinating device, pulling

many firms in the economy to adjust at the same instant, and eliminating uniformity. The
uniformity of initial prices is however the only distribution which is invariant to shocks.
Finally, there are additional conditions under which fixed alternative pricing policies

may be optimal. Significant alterations in the monetary process may lead agents to revise

trigger points.27 One possibility is that a sudden increase in the rate and variability of
money growth causes all agents to broaden their trigger range, raising S and lowering
a. In this case, real balances may rise in the short run as firms find insufficient benefit
17

from a price change. This increase in real balances corresponds to the effect noted in
the literature on the impact of menu costs in a static setting, as in Akerlof and Yellen
11985]. Once again, note that the short-run beneficial impact of monetary policy is not
stable. When real balances have risen enough, a sudden burst of price increases may be
triggered as all firms go to the very top of their real price range. This process will result
in a reduction of real balances to below their initial level, and a corresponding slowdown
in activity.

The neutrality result depends on firms anticipating constant real money balances.
What would happen if firms anticipated systematic changes in real money balances? For
aample if firms expect real money balances, and therefore demand, to increase, this may

kigger an earlier price increase, thus counteracting the rise in real balances. A formal
analysis of this possibility is of interest.
It is worthwhile noting a concern about the exogenous demand functions, F, particularly in evaluating comparative dynamics. It would, of course, be desirable to construct the
demand functions endogenously from consumer utility functions with either differentiated

products or consumer search. Ball and Romer 119861 derive such demand functions in a

general equilibrium model with differentiated products. With endogenous search activity,

demand at a real price of rg(t) >

0

may be zero if all others firms have identical prices

r5(t) = 0, but positive if other firms have widely dispersed
prices. Hence the functions
FJr1 (t), M(t) — P(t)] must be treated as conditional on the levels of S and a in the rest of

the economy. Benabou f1985bJ provides a thorough treatment of the interaction between

search and menu costs.

VI. Conclusion
The paper presents a model in which inflation is derived endogenously through price

adjustment by firms, If firms pursue (a, S) price adjustment policies and the log of real
prices are initially uniformly dispersed, then money shocks are shown to be neutral. Thus,

nominal changes, such as monetary growth, do not have aggregate real effects despite the
18

presence of menu costs of price adjustment. Although money is neutral, we observe the
presence of relative price variability.

The model illustrates that individual firm price stickiness and staggered timing need
not lead to aggregate price stickiness. This suggests that real effects of money shocks may
depend more on fixed-length contracts than simply on asynchronous nominal price adjustment. Overall, the analysis highlights the importance of cross-sectional timing assumptions

in macroeconomic models.

19

APPENDIX
Proof of Proposition 3. To prove part (a) in light of Proposition 2 requires only,
(Al)

with b'(t)

lim {E{v (t) (D —
as

=

in definition 2. Let Ht(x) denote the long-run cumulative distribution of

H'(x) =

(A2)

jn(6)db.

The heart of the proof of part (a) is contained in Lemma 1.

LEMMA 1: ForO 6 D, lm,. Ht(x) = 6/D.
PROOF: With the simple two-level inflation process of Assumption
6, the individual firm's

discretely observed real price behavior is ergodic, with a uniquestationary density b(r(t))
which is uniform over (a, SJ. Ergodicity can be proved by applying the procedure of Caplin

and Spulber 11985, Proposition 1]. The trivial amendment concerns the fact that g and

CL may both be positive in the current case: in the earlier version CL = 0. The existence
of this simple ergodic distribution implies that,

limP{rt(t + r) 6 (5— 6,X) I rt(t) = S} = b/D.

(A3)

But r(t) 6 Ea,SI and equation (7) show that the events {rt(t+r)

and {6(t)

6

(5—6,5)1 r(t) = S}

r1(t) = 5) are equivalent. An identical argument applies conditions on

other initial prices. This allows the conditioning to be removed so that,
(A4)

urn P{V(t) b) = b/D,

as claimed.

Q.E.D.

20

Lemma 1 demonstrates that for 0 6 D, Fm(b) — b/D in distribution. Application of Proposition 8.12 of Breiman 119681 allows us to take limiting expectations using

the uniform density,
(AS)
as

= AP(D

iixn{E[V(t)(D —

—

b)db

— c; =

=

claimed.

To establish part (b), it must be shown that for r sufficiently small,

1

(A6)

for any given c

j!

E{b(t)(D —

D.E(ll'(t))

(0,1). To confirm this, pick a time interval r below e(DIYH), so that the

maximal inflation rate in any given period is below eD. Then,
(A7)

E[bT(t)(D —

= E[fl(t)(D — bt(t))] c DE(rV(t)).

In addition,
(As)

E[bft)(D — b'(i))] E[fl'(t)(D —

eD)]

=

(1

—

c)DELIIT(t)J.

Together, (AT) and (As) establish part (b).

Princeton University and National Bureau of Economic Research
University of Southern California

21

Q.E.D.

FOOTNOTES
1. An exception is Rotemberg [1983] who considers instead increasing marginal costs
of nominal price revisions.

2. In general, the money growth process may be set as a feedback rule based on the

history of output.
3. Individual firms set 3 and S taking the price level as exogenously given. However,
for given levels a and 5, the index endogenously determines P(O): will the exogenous and

endogenous indices be consistent? The answer is generally no: however, if we associate
higher real balances with higher levels of a and 5, there will be some initial specification
cd real balances guaranteeing this static consistency, since higher real balances raise the
desired average real price, raising the endogenous level of P(O) relative to the exogenous
level,
4. Blanchard and Kiyotaki [1985] and Ball and Romer [1986] derive symmetric price

indices based on an underlying symmetric utility framework.

5. The assumption that demand is independent of future prices rules out consumer
speculation. Benabou [1985a1 presents an analysis of optimal pricing policies in the face
of consumer storage and speculation. In principle, the future path of real money balances
may also influence real demand. For present purposes, Proposition 1 will allow us to ignore

this potentially complex dependence.
6. Gordon [19813 finds evidence for price stickiness for periods with widely different

forms of labor contract. This suggests that there are important sources of price stickiness
other than the behavior of input prices.
7. By Walras' law, market clearing in the commodity market implies market clearing
in the money market, see for example Rotemberg [1982].

8. The present formulation allows the firm to ration its customers. The case without
rationing can also be handled by the model, see Sheshinsici and Weiss [1983].

9. With standard assumptions, increases in real money balances which increase demand for the commodity will also raise the firm's optimal real price.
22

-

10. There is an issue here concerning the proper treatment of menu costa. If these
are indeed real costs they should be explicitly included as part of output. Hence a closed
model of the economy should properly include a sector of variable size dedicated to the
production of menus. This is ignored in our formulation.

11. Sheshinski and Weiss [1983) employ a special form of the stochastic inflation
process. Caplin and Sheshinski [1986] present a discrete time formulation with i.i.d. infla-

tionary shocks.

12. While the discrete nature of Danziger's inflation process contradicts Assumption
1, our analysis including the neutrality proposition nevertheless applies.
13. Even in the inventory literature, Arrow, Harris and Marschak [1951] study (a, 5)

policies because of their relative simplicity. The first general proof of optimality is due

to Scarf [19601. Further, stationary (a, 5) policies are frequently analyzed and applied
in situations where they are undoubtedly sub-optimal (such as in multi-echelon inventory
systems (Schwarz [1981]) and in more general non-stationary environments (Karlin and
Fabens [19591).

14. In a deterministic world with constant inflation, the two forms ofuniformity are
equivalent.

15. As Cecchetti [1985) notes in a non-stochastic setting, there is no cross-sectional
variance of inflation rates when the observation period is an integer multiple of the period
between price revisions.
16. Early studies include Graham [1930] and Mills [1927]. More recent work includes
Vining and Elwertowski [1976], Pagan, Rail and Trivedi [1983], Balk [1985] and Marquez
and Vining [1984].

17. According to this approach, the apparent association between the level of inflation

and relative price variability is a statistical artifact, resulting from an actual association

between the mean level of inflation and the variability of inflation. This relationship is
explicitly investigated by Taylor [1981].

18. See also Carlton [1978] and Hubbard and Weiner [i9ss] who consider markets
with both spot transactions and nominal contracting.
19. The formal identification between (a, S) policies and the modulo arithmetic also

23 -

plays & role in the inventory literature, (see Caplin [1985]).
20. For example with UT(t) uniform over [9, 10] an increase in D from 8 to 9 reduces

EVT(t) from 9 to
21. Assumption lB represents a slightly more general form of the inflation process
studied by Sheshinski and Weiss [1983].

22. Note that transitions in the rate of inflation between distance observations are
not independent of cumulative inflation. High cumulative inflation is associated with an

1suing inflation rate of 9H Hence transition probabilities for the Markov process are
non-separable between real price transitions and transitions in the inflation rate.

23. The related (s,S) inventory literature suggests that increases in the mean and
variance of sales will raise order size. The well-known Wilson lot-size formula (more familiar

the square-root formula for money demand) expresses the relationship in simple form.

The more recent approximation formula of Ehrhardt [1979] has similar properties.
24. An analogous model of money holding with both inflows and outflows is due to
Miller and On f 1966].

25. A suggestive example is presented in Blanchard and Fischer 119851.
26. This will of course, invalidate the neutrality proposition.

27. Blinder 119811 examines the related issue of changing trigger points and their
impact on aggregate inventory behavior.

24

REFERENCES
Akerlof, George A., "Relative Wages and the Rate of Inflation," Quarterly Journal of
Economics, LXXXIII (1969), 353-74.
____________ and Janet Yellen, "A Near-Rational Model of the Business
Cycle, With

Wage and Price Inertia," Quarterly Journal of Economies, C (1985), 823-38.
Arrow, Kenneth 3., Thomas Harris and Jacob Marschak, "Optimal Inventory Policy,"
Econometrica, XIX (1951), 250-72.

Balk, B.M., "Inflation Variability and Relative Price Change Variability in the Netherlands,
1951-1981," Economic Letters, XIX (1985), 27-30.

Ball, Lawrence and David Romer, "Are Prices Too Sticky," Princeton University, Department of Economics, Mimeo (August 1986).

Barro, Robert 3., "A Theory of Monopolistic Price Adjustment," Review of Economic
Studies, XXXIX (January 1972), 17-26.

• "Rational Expectations and the Role of Monetary Policy," Journal of Monetary Economics, II (1976), 1-32.

Benabou, Roland, "Optimal Price Dynamics and Speculation With a Storable Good,"
Mimeo (1985a), Cambridge, MA: MIT.
• TMSearchers, Price Setters and Inflation," Mimeo (1985b), Cambridge, MA:

MIT.

Blanchard, Olivier, Wrice Asynchronization and Price Level Inertia," in R. Dornbusch
and M. Simonsen, eds., Indexation, Contracling and Debt in an Inflationary World
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1983).

___________ and Stanley Fischer, "Notes on Advanced Macroeconomic Theory," Chapters 9 and 10, Mimeo (1985).

___________ and N. Kiyotaki, "Monopolistic Competition, Aggregate Demand Externalities and Real Effects of Nominal Money," NBER Working Paper No. 1770 (1985),
Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.

Blinder, Alan S., "Retail Inventory Investment and Business Fluctuations," Brookings
-

25-

Paper. on Economic Activity, II, (1981), 443-505.
Breiman, Leo, Probability (Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1968).

Caplin, Andrew S., "The Variability of Aggregate Demand with (5, a) Inventory Policies,"
Econornetrica, LIII (November 1985), 1395-1410.

___________ and Eytan Sheshinski, '(s,S) Pricing Policies," Mimeo, (1986).
____________ and Daniel F. Spulber, "Inflation, Menu Costs and Relative Price Variabil-

ity," Harvard Institute for Economic Research Discussion Paper No. 1181, (1985).
Canton, Dennis W., "Market Behavior With Demand Uncertainty and Price Inflexibility,"
American Economic Review, LVIII (1978), 571-87.

Cecchetti, Steven, "The Frequency of Prior Adjustment: A Study of the Newsstand Prices

of Magazbee, Journal of Econometric,, XXXI (1986), 255-74.
"Staggered Contracts and the Frequency of Price Adjustment," Quarterly
Journal of Economic,, C (1985), 935-60.
Cukierman, Alex, !The Relationship Between Relative Prices and the General Price Level,

A Suggested Interpretation, American Economic Review, LXIX (September 1979),
595-609.

___________ and Paul Wachtel, "Relative Price Variability and Nonuniform

Inflationary

Expectations," Journal of Political Economy, XC (1982), 146-57.

Danziger, Leif, "Stochastic Inflation and the Optijnal Policy of Price Adjustment," Economic Inquiry, XXII (1984), 98-108.

Ehrhardt, R.A., "The Power Approximation for Computing (a, 5) Inventory Policies,"
Management Science, XXV (1979), 777-86.

Fischer, Stanley, "Long Term Contracts, Rational Expectations, and the Optimal Money
Supply Rule," Journal of Political Economy, LXXXV (1977), 191-205.
____________ "Relative Shocks, Relative Price Variability, and Inflation," Brookings Pa-

per. on Economic Activity (1981).

Graham, Frank D., Exchange, Priee8 and Production in Hyper-Inflation: Germany 19201993, (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1930).

Gordon, Robert 1, 'Output Fluctuations and Gradual Price Adjustment," Journal of
Economic Literature, XIIX (1981), 493-530.

26

Hercowitz, Zvi, "Money and the Dispersion of Relative Prices," Journal of Political Economy, LXXXIX (April 1981), 328-56.

Hubbard, Robert C. and Robert 3. Weiner, "Nominal Contracting and Price Flexibility in
Product Markets," NBER Working Paper No. 1738 (1985), Cambridge, MA: National
Bureau of Economic Research.
Karlin, Samuel and A. Fabens, "A Stationary Inventory Model with Markovian Demand,"

in K. Arrow, S. Karlin and P. Suppes, eds., Mathematical Methods in the Social
Sciences, (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1959).
Liebermann, Y. and B.Z. Zilbefarb, "Price Adjustment Strategy Under Conditions of High

Inflation: An Empirical Examination," Journal of Economics and Business, XXXVII
(198s), 253-65.

Mankiw, N. Gregory, "Small Menu Costa and Large Business Cycles: A Macro-economic
Model of Monopoly," Quarterly Journal of Economics, C (1985), 529-39.

Marquez, John and Daniel It. Vining, "Inflation and Relative Price Behavior; A Survey
of the Literatures," in M. Ballabou, ed., Economic Perspectives, vol. 3. (Harwood
Academic Publishers, 1984).

Miller, M. and D. On, "A Model of the Demand for Money by Firms," Quarterly Journal
of Economics, LXXX (1966), 413-35.

Mills, Frederick C., The Behavior of Prices, (New York; Arno hess, 1927), National
Bureau of Economic Research, (reprint 1975).
Mussa, Michael, "Sticky Prices and Disequilibrium Adjustment in a Rational Model of the
Inflationary Process," American Economic Review, LXXI (December 1981), 1020-27.

Pagan, A.R., A.D. Hall and P.K. Trivedi, "Assessing the Variability of Inflation," Review
of Economic Studies, L (October 1983), 585-96.

Parkin, Michael, "The Output-Inflation Trade-off When Prices are Costly to Change,"
Journal of Political Economy, XCZV (1986), 200-24

Parks, Richard W., "Inflation and Relative Price Variability," Journal of Political Economy, LXXXVI (February 1978), 79-95.

Rotemberg, Julio, "Monopolistic Price Adjustment and Aggregate Output," Review of
Economic Studies, XLIX (October 1982), 517-31.
27

-

• Aggregate Consequences of Fixed Costa of Price Adjustment," American
Economic Review, LXXIII (June 1983), 433-36.
• "FixI Costs of Price Adjustment and the Costs of Inflation," Sloan School
of Management, Mimeo, (December 1981).

Scarf, Herbert FL, "The Optlinality of (a, S) Policies in the Dynamic Inventory Problem,"

Chapter 13 in K.J. Arrow, S. Karlin and P. Suppes, eds., Mathcmaticoi Methods in
the Social Sciences, (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1959).

Schwarz, L.B., ed. Multi-Level Production/Inventory Control Systems: Theory and Practice. (Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1981).

Sheshinski, Eytan and Yorain Weiss, "Inflation and Costs of Price Adjustment," Review
of Economic Studies, LIV (1977), 287-303.

___________ and

•

"Optimum Pricing Policy Under Stochastic Inflation,"

Review of Economic Studies, L (July 1983), 513-29.

Taylor, John B., •Aggregate Dynamics and Staggered Contracts," Journal of Political
Economy, LXXXVIII (1980), 1-23.

• "On the Relation Between the Variability of Inflation and the Average
Inflation Rate," in Karl Brunner and Allan H. Meltzer, eds., The Costs arid Consequences of Inflation, Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, vol. 15,
(Amnerdana: North-Holland, 1981), 57-85.

Vming, Daniel R., Jr. and Thomas C. Elwertowski, "The Relationship Between Relative
Prices and the General Price Level," American Economic Review, LXVI (September
1976), 699-708.

-

28

r (t)

S

S

t

Figure I

Ss
r(t3)

Fiqure ii:

