NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE (DIS)ADVANTAGES OF CLEARINGHOUSES BEFORE THE FED
Matthew S. Jaremski
Working Paper 23113
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23113

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2017

The author would like to thank Charles Calomiris, Mark Carlson, Eric Hilt, Ellis Tallman, David
Weiman, and David Wheelock as well as seminar participants at Barnard College, Vanderbilt
University, University of Delaware, the Federal Reserve Board, and the Federal Reserve Bank of
Atlanta for their valuable comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the
author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Matthew S. Jaremski. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

The (Dis)Advantages of Clearinghouses Before the Fed
Matthew S. Jaremski
NBER Working Paper No. 23113
January 2017
JEL No. G21,G32,N21
ABSTRACT
Operating in individual cities, U.S. clearinghouses were the closest thing to a central bank before
1914, but they only assisted banks that chose to join the association. Using an annual bank-level
database for seven states between 1880 and 1910, this paper shows that after the entry of a
clearinghouse member banks were less likely and non-member banks in the same city were more
likely to close. The results are driven by the fact that the presence of clearinghouses led all banks
to become more exposed to systemic liquidity risk, yet only provided liquidity to member banks
during panics.

Matthew S. Jaremski
Colgate University
Department of Economics
13 Oak Drive
Hamilton, NY 13346
and NBER
mjaremski@colgate.edu

1. Introduction
Modern financial systems are governed by a patchwork of laws and supervisors. In
addition to increasing legal costs, the patchwork encourages the pursuit of regulatory arbitrage
whereby institutions alter their composition and services to operate under the loosest laws. This
arbitrage can also change the nature of the banking sector, bringing in new business and
expanding its exposure to certain factors. Therefore, even a well-regarded central bank could
cause negative spillovers when it does not cover the entire system. Leading up to the recent
financial crisis, shadow banks in the U.S. used their loose supervision to capture larger market
shares and increase their connection to depository institutions through the purchase of mortgagebacked securities and the sale of credit default swaps. The Fed's lack of direct oversight over the
shadow banking system hampered their attempts to curb this risky behavior and quickly provide
liquidity to the entire system.1 At the same time, individual depositors trusted in the security of
their FDIC covered institutions. Narratives about the crisis argue that the growth of shadow
banking obscured the underlying market risk and left the nation vulnerable; however, it is
difficult to test this narrative using modern data because of the organizational complexity of
commercial and shadow banks.
The National Banking Era (1863-1914) offers a uniquely valuable testing ground for
examining such spillovers. Private clearinghouse associations were the source of emergency
funds of that time. Each operating in a single city, clearinghouses acted as quasi-central banks,
monitoring bank behavior and providing short-term loan certificates backed by collateral during
panics. However, the private clearinghouses only assisted those banks that chose to join the
association. As many banks remained outside of the associations, the period allows for the
1

Even with universal oversight, the Fed might not have prevented a downturn from occurring. For instance, some
banks under the purview of the Fed (e.g., Citibank) still took on excess risk during the 2000s housing market boom.

1

identification of the effect of clearinghouses based on within-city variation, explicitly controlling
for pre-existing factors that led to clearinghouse entry, local economic factors that influenced
bank stability, and bank-specific characteristics. A comprehensive bank-level database from
Indiana, Michigan, Minnesota, New York, Ohio, Pennsylvania, and Wisconsin from 1880 to
1910 allows this analysis for a large number of cities and years. In addition to having available
annual balance sheet data for the period, these states contained over half of all commercial bank
assets and had a wide range of urban, rural, manufacturing, and agricultural areas.
Created by groups of commercial banks, clearinghouse associations were established to
facilitate the clearing of checks and bank notes, but quickly evolved to monitor banks, publish
information, and provide emergency liquidity during financial panics (Timberlake, 1984; Gorton,
1985; Gorton and Mullineaux, 1987). Timberlake (1984, p. 2) describes their creation: “In the
absence of a central banking institution, the commercial banks could not effectively cope with
emergency conditions in financial centers. However, the circumstances of their existence
prompted their defense; and the defense they developed in the United States was an extension of
the functions of the clearinghouse associations”. Gorton (1985, p. 277) states that the "powers
and functions that clearinghouses developed most resembled those of a central bank". Cannon
(1910, p. 96) calls them "one of the finest examples the country has ever seen of the ability of the
people when left to themselves to devise impromptu measures for their own relief".
Clearinghouses were created in over 200 cities by 1914, yet membership requirements prevented
many banks from joining and receiving the benefits.
The disparity between members and non-members was evident during the Panic of 1907.
Banks that were part of the New York City Clearinghouse had few losses, whereas trust
companies that were not members suffered widespread deposit losses. Moen and Tallman (2000)

2

argue that the difference between the two types of institutions was due to public perception of
emergency liquidity as much as it was on the result of the liquidity itself. Depositors were much
more likely to run on institutions that were not covered by the clearinghouse, even those many
trust companies were found to be solvent when examined. As the clearinghouse refused to assist
banks outside the association, JP Morgan had to coordinate a bailout of the trust companies by
the U.S. Treasury and private individuals to provide liquidity to non-member banks.
To the extent that non-members believed the presence of a clearinghouse prevented
panics through monitoring or emergency lending, the entry of a clearinghouse might have pushed
them to take more liquidity risk and be more susceptible to panics when they did occur. The
question of whether the entry of the clearinghouse influenced the closure rates and stability of
non-member banks has proved difficult to answer. Moen and Tallman (1994, 2000) and Hoag
(2011) examine clearinghouse members relative to non-members, but they restrict their analysis
to Chicago and New York during the Panics of 1893 and 1907 and find conflicting results.2
Using a bank-level database stretching over seven states and 30 years, I confirm that the
creation of a clearinghouse significantly decreased the probability of closure for member banks
and significantly increased the probability for non-member banks. The result remains even after
controlling for balance sheet risk, economic growth, and restricting the analysis to just cities that
would establish a clearinghouse.
Interbank liquidity risk seems to have been behind the differential closure risk amongst
members and non-members. Specifically, the creation of a clearinghouse allowed the location to
become a hub on the interbank deposit network. Banks in other cities began to deposit funds in

2

While Jaremski (2015) analyzes the effects of clearinghouses on national banks from 1865 through 1914, the study
does not separate members from non-members. Since many national banks did not join the local clearinghouse, the
analysis only captures the effect of the clearinghouses on the average bank rather than on the average member bank.

3

clearinghouse members to take advantage of their extended clearing networks and access to
emergency funds, whereas non-member banks put more of their own funds on deposit in other
banks mistakenly believing that the creation of a clearinghouse would have protected the city as
a whole from liquidity shocks. As shown by Sprague (1910), Calomiris and Gorton (1991), and
Wicker (2000), the interbank network afforded gains in the efficiency of payment systems, but
during periods of seasonal stringency, it transmitted idiosyncratic shocks across the entire system
and led to nation-wide financial panics. Clearinghouses, therefore, increased systemic liquidity
risk for all banks, but only provided emergency liquidity to member banks when panics occurred.
Even though clearinghouses increased interbank balances and systemic liquidity risk, the
data show that neither the decision to create a clearinghouse nor the decision to become a
member is related to interbank funds or measures of bank risk. Clearinghouse entry was based on
the population growth of a location, whereas the choice of clearinghouse membership was
related to the number of other banks in the location. The creation of a clearinghouse was thus
primarily a response to the demand for check clearing by local individuals and firms, and the
growth of the interbank network was an added bonus. To put it another, a clearinghouse allowed
banks to connect to the interbank network in a way that population or economic growth would
not have been able to achieve in its absence.
In this way, the historical period also provides insight into the risks of central
counterparties (CCPs). Just like clearinghouses, CCPs reduce the costs and liquidity risk of
individual members, but at the same time, the resulting concentration of clearing could amplify
systemic risk and transmit shocks across the entire network. The crisis prone nature of the
historical interbank system, therefore, provides a cautionary tale of what could happen as the
system becomes more concentrated and proper risk-control measures are not put into place.

4

2. The Development of Clearinghouses in the United States
The nation’s historical payments systems were highly fragmented. The general adherence
to unit banking meant that most banks could not open any branches. The lack of branching
severely increased the costs of clearing, as checks had to be cleared externally rather than
internally. A receiving bank would have had to either physically travel to the paying bank or
mail the check to the paying bank. The first option was easy enough if the receiving and paying
banks were located in the same city but costs rose as the distance between banks increased.
Two institutions developed to mitigate these costs. The first of these was the interbank
correspondent system. In place of opening branches, banks created relationships with other banks
in key cities instead. The respondent bank opened a deposit account at the correspondent bank,
and the correspondent bank agreed to clear checks drawn on local banks at par (depositing the
proceeds into the respondent’s account). The respondent bank earned interest on its reserves and
gained a way to cheaply clear non-local checks, while the correspondent benefited from having
access to the respondent's funds. The Comptroller of the Currency and many state legislatures
even codified the interbank network into bank requirements by allowing banks to hold reserves
on deposit in a larger city. (James, 1978; James and Weiman, 2010; Bordo and Wheelock, 2013)
Interbank connections within the network served a secondary purpose: channeling
interregional payments and interbank loans to fund seasonal peaks in local lending that exceeded
local retail deposits. Therefore, even if a bank was not concerned about clearing checks, they still
had an incentive to establish correspondent relationships to receive interest on their idle funds
and receive seasonal liquidity loans. Systemic liquidity risk, however, was an unintended
byproduct. Respondent banks suffered liquidity risk because their correspondent banks might
suspend convertibility of deposits into cash, and leave them without access to their accounts.
Correspondent banks suffered liquidity risk because they might be faced with sudden withdrawal
5

demands by respondent banks. Banks that were both receivers and providers of funds were the
worst affected, suggesting that those banks in the middle of the interbank network had the most
to lose (Calomiris and Carlson, 2016). Nearly all of the period’s nation-wide panics were caused
by idiosyncratic shocks that were transmitted and multiplied up through the interbank network.
(Sprague, 1910; Calomiris and Gorton, 1991; Wicker, 2000)
Clearinghouse associations were the second type of institution that mitigated clearing
costs. First started in New York City during 1853, clearinghouses were private organizations
created by banks to reduce shoe leather costs by providing a central location and time to clear
checks and bank notes every day rather than to each local bank individually. Clearinghouses also
provided a central place to clear out-of-town checks and allowed member banks to quickly
redeem the checks sent by its respondent banks through the interbank connections of the entire
membership. This mechanism allowed clearinghouse cities to serve as the hubs on the interbank
network, and granted banks in the city the ability to drawn in even more interbank deposits. To
put it another way, the establishment of the clearinghouse gave a location a distinct institutional
advantage that no amount of population or bank growth could have achieved.
Clearinghouse membership came with stipulations and requirements. To begin, banks
generally had to pay a fee, submit to a balance sheet examination, and certify their capital stock.
After becoming a member, banks had to submit financial statements, allow examinations, and
were often subject to higher minimum capital requirements and reserve requirements relative to
deposits than existing state regulations.3 These additional requirements could have been an
attempt to reduce the regulatory differences between national and state bank members as much
as they were to protect against risk-taking.
3

During the period, capital requirements were generally entry barriers rather than prudential regulation.

6

The requirements of clearinghouses often discouraged some banks from joining. For
instance, no trust companies became members of the New York City's clearinghouse due to its
high reserve requirements. As a result, only 56.3 percent of the 1,010 banks that operated in the
sample’s clearinghouse cities became members (Table 1). Due to their small size and low
regulations, state banks were less likely to adopt membership than national banks, but many still
became members.
The ability of clearinghouses to lower costs depended upon establishing relationships
with member banks and keeping operations relatively local. Banks in other cities, therefore,
formed their own associations. The structure and bylaws of associations were fairly homogenous,
often following New York City’s example, and deviations were often changes to reserve
requirements or fees. Figure 1 provides a geographic view of the 59 clearinghouses created in the
sample states by 1910.
Mutually owned by the member banks, clearinghouses were non-profit organizations and
only charged enough to pay their administrative bills. The determinants of clearinghouse creation
were thus based on the benefits that the clearinghouse offered to members: the cost of clearing
and desire for emergency liquidity. First, because the number of checks that would need to be
cleared in a given day was directly related to the number of people in that location, populated
cities would have benefited most from a centralized clearing system. Indeed, 46 of the 63 cities
in the sample states with more than 30,000 people established a clearinghouse by 1910, and only
2 of the 31 cities with more than 60,000 people did not create a clearinghouse by 1910. The early
expansion of clearinghouses was particularly limited to the largest cities: Cincinnati, Cleveland,
Columbus, Detroit, Indianapolis, Milwaukee, Minneapolis, New York City, Philadelphia,

7

Pittsburgh, St. Paul, and Syracuse. As several clearinghouses were formed with less than five
banks in the city, the number of banks was a secondary factor to population.
Second, banks might have valued a safety net during panics. Most panics during the
period were crises of systemic liquidity risk associated with moderate increases in insolvency
risk and a small proportion of bank failures. Lacking a central bank to provide funds, solvent
banks sometimes were forced to close their doors. As discussed in the next section,
clearinghouses provided emergency liquidity to member banks during panics. These issues
assisted the banking system and allowed member banks to withstand the panic. In fact, 16
clearinghouses were established within the three years after the Panics of 1893 and 1907, and
most of these were established in small cities, suggesting less of a desire for clearing and more of
a desire for emergency liquidity.

2.1 Clearinghouses as Lenders of Last Resort
The clearinghouse system evolved to do much more than clear bank debt. During the
Panic of 1857, the policy committee of the New York City Clearinghouse authorized the issue of
clearinghouse loan certificates to qualified member banks. The certificates were backed by
collateral (typically commercial paper or government bonds) from the receiving bank, but they
were drawn on the clearinghouse, making them a joint-liability of the members. Members thus
could conserve their limited currency reserves by settling clearinghouse obligations with
certificates rather than currency, and while member banks were required to accept the certificates
during clearing, they gained interest on holding the certificates. When a member defaulted, the
remaining members bore the loss in proportion to their capital stock.
Clearinghouse innovated in the subsequent panics. During the Panic of 1860, the New
York City Clearinghouse pooled their members' reserves to create a fund for mutual aid, the
8

practice was quickly discontinued. The Panic of 1873 ushered in the use of certified checks
which did not require collateral. The Panic of 1893 brought the use of lower denomination
clearinghouse notes which could be given to non-members. Clearinghouses also protected their
members from negative information releases during panics. This protection included replacing
the weekly publication of individual bank statements with the publication of a single aggregate
clearinghouse statement and guarding the names of banks that received loan certificates.
(Gibbons, 1859; Calomiris and Schweikart, 1991)
The record shows that clearinghouses primarily protected their members from financial
panics and that non-member banks could not rely on them for protection. First, it was not until
the issue of clearinghouse notes in the 1890s that emergency liquidity could directly flow outside
of the association. Even then, many clearinghouses chose not to issue notes at all. Second, given
that interest rates were fixed for all borrowers and members were responsible for losses, the loan
committee had a vested interest in providing good loans. They thoroughly checked the borrowing
bank's collateral assets and often examined the bank itself. Third, clearinghouses did not
authorize any emergency liquidity until a shock began to harm their members. For instance, the
New York City Clearinghouse waited several months before authorizing loan certificates during
the Panic of 1893 because its members were not directly affected by the agricultural shocks that
started the panic.
While the clearinghouse undoubtedly brought some positive benefits to member banks
during the panics, their public actions might also have caused some negative spillovers to nonmember banks. Moen and Tallman (2000) provide many accounts from the New York Times and
Chicago Daily Tribune on the actions of the clearinghouses. These accounts often highlighted
the protective actions of the clearinghouse and discussed the concern amongst other banks. For

9

example, the Times reported in October of 1907 that the Knickerbocker Trust Company "had not
been aided by the clearinghouse or JP Morgan and his associates because the company's capital
and surplus was impaired" and that Morgan “did not care to assume the responsibilities of
previous poor management” (p. 150). The reports likely decreased public distress over member
banks, yet increased distress over non-member banks. To put it another way, the clearinghouse
could have concentrated runs on non-member banks, regardless of their asset portfolio.
Table 1 illustrates the effect of clearinghouses by calculating the fraction of bank closures
in the sample states from 1880 through 1910. The top panel shows that simple comparisons of
banks can be misleading when they do not take account of geographic and economic
characteristics. According to the panel, 35 percent of all member banks closed, yet only 25
percent of all non-member banks closed. However, clearinghouses (and thus members) were in
financial centers that were highly exposed to interbank risk, whereas most non-members were in
small towns that had much less interbank exposure and no clearinghouse. Indeed, the bottom
panel of Table 1 shows that clearinghouse members were much less likely to close than nonmembers when restricting the sample to banks in cities with a clearinghouse before 1910.
Compared to the 35 percent of member banks that closed over the thirty year period, almost 55
percent of non-member banks in clearinghouse locations closed. These values amount to annual
probabilities of closure of about 1.2 percent and 1.9 percent respectively.
These differences across banks in similar locations are dramatic, but could be caused by
endogenous selection into membership based on characteristics such as bank size, composition,
or age. The rest of the paper, therefore, accounts for other factors to isolate the differential effect
of clearinghouses on the closure rates of member and non-member banks.

10

3. Data
I combine annual national and state bank data to examine the effect of clearinghouses on
members and non-members. The national bank data come from Jaremski (2013). Culled from the
Comptroller of the Currency's Annual Report, the data contain the annual balance sheet of every
national bank in operation each year. Data are missing for 1885 when balance sheets were not
reported and for 1905 when certain balance sheet items were combined. The state bank balance
sheet data come from the state reports of Indiana, Michigan, Minnesota, New York, Ohio,
Pennsylvania, and Wisconsin.4 Due mostly to states reporting information biennially during the
early 1880s, state bank balance sheets are missing for Indiana in 1880, 1882, and 1884,
Minnesota in 1883, Ohio in 1883 and 1893, and Wisconsin in 1883, 1885, and 1887.
To create consistent balance sheet measures, one must make some adjustments when
combining the various reports. First, I aggregate unique balance sheet items listed in a few state
reports into more common items. For instance, time deposits, checking deposits, demand
deposits, savings deposits, and certificates of deposits are merged into a single individual
deposits measure. I also avoid extreme outliers and data errors by dropping banks whose
deposits, capital, or loans were equal to total assets. Second, I fill missing balance sheet
observations to avoid years when only one type of bank was observed in a state. The
interpolation begins with a simple linear interpolation of each individual bank’s observations

4

Data for Indiana are from the Annual Report of the Auditor of State of the State of Indiana. Data for Michigan are
from the Annual Report of the State Treasurer of the State of Michigan before 1889 and the Annual Report of the
Commissioner of the Banking Department of the State of Michigan thereafter. Data for Minnesota are from the
Report of the Public Examiner of the State of Minnesota to the Governor before 1910 and the Annual Report of the
Banking Department of the State of Minnesota thereafter. Data for New York are from the Annual Report of the
Superintendent of Banks of the State of New York. Data for Ohio are from Annual Report of the Auditor of State to
the Governor of Ohio. Data for Pennsylvania are from the Reports of the Several Banks and Savings Institutions and
Banks Organized under the Free Banking Law of Pennsylvania before 1895 and the Annual Report of the
Commissioner of Banking thereafter. Data for Wisconsin are from the Semi-Annual Statement on the Condition of
State and Private Banks of Wisconsin before 1895, the Annual Report of the Bank Examiner from 1896 to 1902, and
the Annual Report of the Commissioner of Banking thereafter.

11

(i.e., the midpoint of the two surrounding years). Using the Comptroller of the Currency’s statelevel data in the Annual Reports, I adjust those interpolated values by uniformly shifting all of
the values so that the average change for those imputed values is identical to the observed change
that year in the aggregate value of that variable for banks in that state. Lastly, I define the year of
bank closure as the year after the last balance sheet was published. While I account for reported
or slight name changes, it is possible that a few of these “closures” might be substantial name
changes or mergers. However, as these changes could also have been driven by distress and
insolvency, the results should not be greatly biased. The final database contains 81,721
observations for 3,102 national banks and 4,100 state banks from 1880 through 1910, and covers
over half of all bank assets in the United States.
Clearinghouse information comes from the Merchants and Bankers Directory (18801889), Rand McNally Bankers Directory (1890-1900), and the Polks Bankers Directory (19011910). The directories provide a list of banks in each year denoting which cities had a
clearinghouse and which banks were members. Because the directories were generally published
in January, I designate membership as the year before the clearinghouse notation first appeared. I
verify or adjust clearinghouse entry dates with Cannon (1900) and the Comptroller’s Annual
Report whenever possible. Two clearinghouses cease operation in the sample. In the empirical
analysis, observations after closure from the county are dropped to avoid identifying on the
closure. Results are similar when the cities are dropped altogether.
While the bank balance sheets exist for every year, the county-level Census database
assembled by Haines (2004) only contains information each decade. This limitation is restrictive
because many clearinghouses were not created at the end of a decade, and a decennial regression
model would pick up changes occurring before a clearinghouse entered. To obtain more precise

12

estimates of the effect of clearinghouses, I aggregate counties to their 1880 boundaries and
assume that the county-level census variables grew linearly over time to create estimates for the
years in-between each decennial observation.

4. Empirical Analysis
Before determining whether clearinghouses affected bank behavior, I explore what led to
the creation of a clearinghouse and what led individual banks to become members. If either
decision was endogenous to the local economic or financial conditions, then we must control for
those conditions before testing for the effect of clearinghouses. I start in Section 4.1 by
examining the decision to create a clearinghouse based on the characteristics of the location and
the characteristics of the banks in that location. I also test whether clearinghouse locations had
differential pre-trends prior to the establishment of a clearinghouse. In Section 4.2, I then
examine the decision of individual banks to become a member based on the characteristics of
their location and balance sheet composition.
I find that the factors associated with clearinghouse entry and membership are not related
to the risk profile of individual banks, and therefore, after controlling for environmental factors
as explanatory variables, the analysis can be confident of identifying the causal effect of
clearinghouses on bank behavior. First, Section 4.3 examines whether banks altered their balance
sheet composition after the establishment of a local clearinghouse. The analysis examines not
only the behavior of member banks but also the behavior of non-member banks to determine
whether there were differential responses to the creation of the clearinghouse. Second, Section
4.4 examines whether banks were less likely to close after becoming a member. Membership not
only provided banks with the ability to receive emergency liquidity during panics, but it also

13

provided positive media coverage that mitigated public fears of insolvency. As in the balance
sheet analysis, I separately test the behavior of member and non-member banks.

4.1 Determinants of Clearinghouse Entry
I model entry using a linear probability model where the dependent variable takes the
value of "1" if a clearinghouse was created in the county during the following year and “0”
otherwise. As the entry of a clearinghouse was likely to have quickly influenced a county’s
banking system but not its economic activity, the banking measures are lagged one year but the
census variables are not. Moreover, observations after a clearinghouse entered are dropped to
avoid any subsequent changes, and counties without banks are dropped to avoid locations that
would not need a clearinghouse. The full specification is:

where

is a vector of county-level variables including the logarithm of population, the

logarithm of farm value per person, and the fraction of the population living in an area of 25,000
people or more. No manufacturing variable can be included in the regressions because none is
available at the county-level for the 1910 Census.

, and

are respectively the logarithms of the number of banks, bank assets, due from
banks and due to banks balances in the county in the previous year. When the balance sheet
variables are included alongside the number of banks, their coefficients are identified from the
average size of the balance sheet item, testing whether a few large banks rather than a few small
banks were more likely to start a clearinghouse. Fixed effects for each year ( ) control for
nation-wide shocks such as financial panics and either state or county-fixed effects ( ) control
for local economic conditions.

is the robust error term that is clustered by county. The

14

definitions and summary statistics of the explanatory variables are provided in Table 2.
Table 3 shows that clearinghouses were attracted to large cities. The coefficients on
population and the fraction living in a place of 25,000 or more are always statistically significant
and positive. The coefficients of both variables are largest when controlling for county-fixed
effects suggesting population growth mattered, not just the level of population. On the other
hand, the other variables suggest that the general size of the banking system matters, but not its
growth or the composition of its banks. The coefficient on the number of banks is positive and
statistically significant in the state-fixed effects regressions (columns (1), (5), and (8)), but
economically small. The logarithm of total assets is only statistically significant when neither
county-fixed effects nor the number of banks are included in the model (column (3)),5 and the
interbank variables are never statistically significant. Therefore, population growth rather than
bank growth seems to have been the main determinant of clearinghouse creation.
Next, I test whether locations that would create clearinghouses were differentially
growing from those that would not. The model is:

where

is either the number of banks, total assets, individual deposits, due from banks, due to

banks, population, or urbanization,

is a linear time trend,

is a dummy

variable that takes a value of “1” if a clearinghouse was eventually established in the location,
is the robust error term clustered by county, and the rest of the variables retain their prior
definitions. The model is estimated using two different samples. The first sample consists of data
from 1880 through 1890 and contains only those locations that had not established a
5

The reduction in the effect of bank assets suggests that the overall size of the banking system mattered rather than
the distribution amongst banks. Indeed, using a Gini Coefficient of assets to account for the size distribution of
banks directly produces a negative but insignificant correlation with clearinghouse entry.

15

clearinghouse by 1890. The second sample consists of data from 1880 through 1900 and contains
only those locations that had not established a clearinghouse before 1900.
Table 4 indicates that there were no differential trends in locations’ balance sheets before
they established a clearinghouse. The only bank variable that displays a differential pre-trend is
the number of banks in the 1880 through 1900 sample. However, confirming the result of Table
3, the population and urbanization of clearinghouse locations were growing much faster than
non-clearinghouse locations.
To be clear, these results do not imply that the banking systems of clearinghouse
locations were stagnant, but rather imply that any differential bank growth was due to differential
population growth. Indeed, the coefficients suggest that places with high population growth were
also experiencing high bank growth, particularly for growth in the number of banks and due to
banks balances. Population growth thus brought in more banks, interbank liabilities, and
clearinghouses. As such, the models in the rest of the paper control for population as a separate
variable to avoid confounding the effect of a clearinghouse with the effect of population.

4.2. Determinants of Clearinghouse Membership
The next potential source of endogeneity is the individual membership decision by banks.
Finding a proper control group for examining the choice of membership is more complicated
than controlling for location. Regardless of their composition, banks could not join a
clearinghouse if one did not exist in their city. The presence of a clearinghouse also could have
altered the decisions of entering banks. To mitigate these issues, I limit the sample to a crosssection of banks in the year before a clearinghouse opened in their city. Each bank’s membership
decision is then observed just prior to when it was first confronted with a clearinghouse. The

16

restriction drops potentially endogenous new banks and banks that did not have a choice to join a
clearinghouse. The model is:

where

is a dummy denoting whether the bank became a member of a clearinghouse in the

following year,

and

banks in the county respectively,

are the logarithms of the number of national and state
is the logarithm of the bank’s age,

variable for whether the bank was a state bank,
below, and

is a dummy

is a vector of balance sheet items described

is the robust error term clustered by county. Due to the limited number of

clearinghouses established each year and banks per location, year and county-fixed effects are
not included in the model.
I have chosen several key balance sheet risk indicators based on historical studies of
banking and the CAMELS measures used by modern bank regulators. Ln(Assets) measures bank
size. The ratio of Capital to Assets (where capital contains paid-in capital as well as surplus and
retained earnings) measures capital adequacy and insolvency risk. The ratio of Cash to Deposits
measures the bank’s capacity to meet bank runs in currency. The ratio of Loans to Assets
measures the size of a bank’s loan portfolio, and the ratio of Real Estate Owned to Assets is
included as a proxy for loan risk. Used by studies such as Calomiris and Mason (1997, 2003),
real estate owned contains foreclosed properties and is the best proxy of previous loan failures
available because the reports of the Comptroller and state officials do not include information on
income or asset quality. The ratios of Due From Banks to Assets and Due to Banks to Liabilities
measure the size of interbank relationships and the bank's exposure to other market participants.
The summary statistics of each variable are provided in Table 2.

17

Table 5 shows that state banks were not necessarily more or less likely to become
clearinghouse members than national banks after controlling for age, location-specific factors,
and composition. Instead, banks located in towns with few other banks were the most likely to
adopt a membership. The results make intuitive sense given the sample captures founding
members. Banks in a city with few banks would only have started a clearinghouse if they all
agreed to join. Alternatively, the balance sheet characteristics are not significant determinants of
membership. Appendix Table A.1 shows that the results are similar when adding observations
from Illinois between 1889 and 1910 to the model, suggesting that the lack of statistical
significance is not just due to the low number of observations.
The data indicate that the decision to become a clearinghouse member is based on a
bank’s environment rather than its balance sheet composition. However, the piecemeal approach
might mask the overall risk of banks’ portfolios. To examine overall risk, I estimate the
determinants of bank closures for two samples. The first examines the determinants of closure
for all locations without an active clearinghouse and the second examines the determinants of
closure for only clearinghouse locations before they gained a clearinghouse. Both samples avoid
any changes that the entry of a clearinghouse could have had on bank outcomes, and each
provides a different comparison group by which to measure risk. The model is:

where

is the robust error term clustered by bank and the rest of the variables retain their

definitions. Using the coefficients in Appendix Table A.2, I calculate each bank’s predicted
portfolio risk in the year before a clearinghouse entered. I then estimate equation (3) using
predicted portfolio risk as the only control variable. Seen in Table 6, the coefficient on both

18

predicted risk variables are negative but not statistically significant. As such, the results suggest
that selection into clearinghouse membership was not determined by individual bank risk and I
can proceed to analyze the effect of clearinghouses on bank outcomes.

4.3 Effect of Clearinghouses on Balance Sheets
The previous sections have indicated that clearinghouse entry was based on a location’s
population and that banks in locations with few surrounding banks were more likely to join an
entering clearinghouse. While controlling for these factors that led to clearinghouse entry and
membership, the next step is to examine the behavior of banks after the entry of a clearinghouse
became members, starting with changes to their balance sheet composition.
A detailed model is needed to isolate the effect of clearinghouses on bank balance sheets.
First, I control for the determinants of clearinghouse entry by including each county’s
population, urbanization, and farm value as well as the number of state and national banks.
Second, I include the logarithm of the bank’s age to capture growth trends that existed over the
lifetime of the bank, year-fixed effects to capture effects that existed across the financial system
in a given year, and bank-fixed effects to capture time invariant bank characteristics. Third, I
drop banks that entered a county after a clearinghouse was established because their composition
might have been endogeneous to the existing clearinghouse and drop banks in a city that
established a clearinghouse before 1880 because the model would not be able to separate the
bank-fixed effect and the clearinghouse dummy for those banks. Finally, to estimate the spillover
effects on non-members, I create a separate indicator variable that denotes whether the bank was
in a city with a clearinghouse but was not a member. The model takes the form of:

19

where

is a dummy denoting whether the bank was in a clearinghouse city and was a

member in the current year,

is a dummy denoting whether the bank was in a

clearinghouse city but was not a member in the current year,

is a vector of bank-fixed effects,

is the robust error term clustered by bank, and the other variables retain their definitions.
The first column of each set in Table 7 shows that banks changed their balance sheet
composition after joining a clearinghouse. Member banks grew their total assets by 9 percent and
increased their proportion of due to banks balances by 0.8 percentage points.6 The second
column of each set shows that banks that did not choose to become members increased their
proportion of due from banks balances by 1.4 percentage points. The results also suggest that
non-member banks received some additional interbank liabilities after the creation of a
clearinghouse. The lack of statistical significance suggests that this effect was not universal. As
many interbank relationships were long-lived, respondent banks might have chosen to deepen
their relationship with a non-member bank rather than start a new relationship with a member
bank.
While the effects on the interbank measures might seem small, they are over and above
the rise in total assets (and liabilities) as well as the trend in population. Indeed, in Appendix
Table A.4, the effect of a clearinghouse on the logarithms of due to banks and due from banks
balances ranged from 20 to 42 percent even with population as a control. The arrival of a
clearinghouse thus led to a large expansion of a location’s interbank balances and its exposure to
systemic liquidity risk. Most panics during the period were driven by seasonal stringency and
bank suspensions in other locations. Respondent banks lost access to their deposits in
6

The effects of a clearinghouse’s entry had slightly different effects on state and national bank members. Table A.3
shows that state banks took on a little less risk and national banks took on a little more risk after becoming a
member. However, there is no differential effect on state member bank stability in Table A.5.

20

correspondent banks, and correspondent banks experienced runs from their respondent banks.
Even solvent banks might have been forced to close as a result of illiquidity.
The effect of clearinghouse entry on interbank balances is not surprising. The
establishment of a clearinghouse provided the city with a central location to clear debt and
connected the correspondent networks of member banks. It thus vaulted a city from the edge of
the interbank network into the middle and allowed banks to become integrated in a way that
neither economic nor bank growth could have achieved. The differential interbank changes at
member and non-member banks likely reflect that: (1) banks in other locations saw increased
value from the connection of the member banks’ clearing networks and their access to
emergency funds and (2) non-member banks believed that the clearinghouse would provide
liquidity in times of panic and thus sought to receive interest on their reserves by placing them
on deposit in other banks. Many of the clearinghouses established after 1900 had full
membership amongst local banks, suggesting they learned from previous panics when
clearinghouses did not provide funds to non-members. Moreover, the data suggest that some
non-member banks placed funds in local clearinghouse member banks in order to have access to
their clearing networks.
With some measures increasing and some decreasing, it is helpful to examine the overall
effect of clearinghouses on pre-clearinghouse balance sheet risk. I therefore test whether total
portfolio risk changed after the entry of a clearinghouse using the two predicted preclearinghouse risk measures calculated in the previous section. In Table 8, the coefficients show
that member banks decreased their pre-clearinghouse predicted risk after the entry of a
clearinghouse. The negative coefficients on non-member banks suggest an overall reduction in
predicted risk, but it is not statistically significant. Therefore, the entry of a clearinghouse does

21

not seem to increase typical insolvency or loan risk, but rather increased systemic liquidity risk
of all banks by making the city a hub on the interbank network.

4.4 Effect of Clearinghouses on Bank Closure
Similar to equation (4) except with the addition of clearinghouse member dummy, I
model the probability of closure over the following year using the model:

where the variables retain their previous definitions. In this case, I include either state or countyfixed effects because the use of bank-fixed effects would restrict the examination in two ways.
First, the analysis could not include banks that survived the period as the fixed effects would
completely determine the outcome of surviving banks. Second, the inclusion of bank-fixed
effects (or demeaning the variables) would prevent the examination of any constant balance
sheet differences between banks. As such, the model would not be able to compare big and small
banks but rather would compare banks that were growing at different rates.
In Table 9, banks that became members of the local clearinghouse were 0.8 to 1.6
percentage points less likely to close even after controlling of balance sheet risk, population
growth, and the size for the banking system.
Bank closures were also more prevalent in high population counties. A 10 percent
increase in population increased the probability of closure by 0.08 to 0.3 percentage points.
Population not only captures the number of watchful depositors and size of potential bank runs,
but also captures interbank liquidity risk. The inclusion of population is thus important to control
for factors that would make banks in large cities more likely to close than those in rural areas. In
the following analysis, the model is also explicitly limited to clearinghouse locations to provide a
22

more homogenous comparison group. Appendix Table A.6 shows that the effects of interbank
funds and population are larger but the other results are similar when dropping rural areas from
the sample.
The coefficients on the balance sheet ratios show that small banks with high proportions
of capital, real estate owned, and due to banks were more likely to close. When county fixed
effects are included in column (4), the probability of closure decreases by 0.19 percentage points
for every 10 percent increase in assets, increases by 0.54 percentage points for every 10
percentage point increase in capital to assets, and increases 0.51 percentage points for every 10
percentage point increase in due to banks to liabilities. Applying the balance sheet coefficients in
column (3) of Table 9 to the balance sheet changes in the first column of each set in Table 7
indicates that member banks reduced their probability of closure by 0.169 percentage points after
the entry of a clearinghouse.
The evidence suggests that clearinghouses made member banks less likely to close, but
did they also affect surrounding non-members? Unlike the balance sheet regressions that
examine only the time series variation of bank membership, the bank closure regressions also
examine cross-sectional variation. The focus on both types of variation creates a problem when
including both clearinghouse dummies because the model would compare member and nonmember banks in populated cities that were subject to high interbank risk with banks in the
surrounding rural areas that were not as exposed. To avoid this problem, I drop cities that never
received a clearinghouse and focus only on cities that created a clearinghouse between 1880 and
1910, leaving the model to compare banks in similar locations before and after they created a
clearinghouse. The model is now:

23

where the variables retain their previous definitions.
The regressions results in Table 10 indicate that members were less likely and nonmembers were more likely to close after the entry of a clearinghouse. In column (4), the entry of
a clearinghouse increased the probability of closure by 3.2 percentage points for non-members
and decreased the probability of closure by 1 percentage point for members. The coefficient for
clearinghouse members falls just above the 10 percent cutoff when both state-fixed effects and
balance sheet measures are included in column (3), but it still remains economically significant.
Comparing Tables 9 and 10, population becomes an even larger determinant of bank
closure in the clearinghouse location sample. The coefficients on the proportions of due to banks
and due from banks balances also significantly increase, confirming that interbank risk is more
prevalent in clearinghouse locations than areas that did not have a clearinghouse. The
comparison of tables also shows that positive and significant coefficient on the capital to assets
ratio is mitigated when focusing on clearinghouse locations, suggesting that the result was driven
by a comparison of banks in large financial centers that would have had higher failure rates and
capital requirements with banks in rural areas that would not.
Again it is useful to calculate the size of a clearinghouse’s effect on closure through
balance sheet changes. Applying the balance sheet changes estimated in the second column of
each set in Table 7 to the coefficients in column (4) of Table 10 indicates there were small
reductions in risk for both types of banks. The probability of closure was reduced by 0.17
percentage points for the balance sheet changes of members and was reduced by 0.07 percentage
points for the balance sheet changes of non-members. Indeed, other than the shift towards

24

interbank liabilities for members and interbank assets for non-members, the rest of the balance
sheet changes generally lowered the loan and insolvency risk profile of banks.
The empirical evidence is clear: the entry of a clearinghouse helped banks that became
members and hurt others. Even after comparing banks in the same city and controlling for
balance sheet composition, a member bank was less likely to close and a non-member bank was
more likely to close. The analysis suggests that the negative effect is not through increasing loan
or insolvency risk, but rather through increasing systemic liquidity risk and hanging non-member
banks out to dry during liquidity panics. Member banks could receive emergency liquidity to
help them weather the panic and remain open, while non-member banks had to make due with
whatever cash reserves they started with. The arrival of a clearinghouse also created a clear
public separation between “protected” and “unprotected” banks during panics. Depositors would
have been more likely to run on a bank that was not covered by a clearinghouse than one that
was regardless of their composition. Indeed, clearinghouse banks published weekly balance sheet
statistics compared to other banks that only provided them at most every quarter, leaving less
uncertainty about member banks than others during the panics.

5. Conclusion
Kroszner (2000, p.158) writes "the 'lesson' learned from [the Panic of 1907] was that the
clearinghouse mechanism appeared to be inadequate to serve the financial system of the U.S. and
was used as a motivation for the creation of the Federal Reserve System.” This paper highlights
the positive and negative impacts of clearinghouses and why a more inclusive institution was
needed. For starters, the clearinghouse system audited its members’ balance sheets and provided
emergency liquidity during panics. As a result, member banks were less likely to close over the
highly cyclical period. However at the same time, the entry of a clearinghouse negatively
25

influenced the stability of surrounding banks that did not become members. Because less than
60% of banks in clearinghouse cities became members, the introduction of clearinghouses might
have endangered the financial system as much as they stabilized it.
Interbank liquidity risk seems to be the mechanism behind the differential closure risk.
The creation of a clearinghouse moved a location from the edge of the interbank network into the
middle. Seeking to take advantage of the clearing network of members, respondent banks in
other locations deposited funds into clearinghouse members. Banks that were not members of the
clearinghouse, on the other hand, began to deposit significantly more of their money in
correspondent banks, potentially under the mistaken belief that the location's clearinghouse
would protect them from liquidity shocks. The growth introduced systemic liquidity risk to an
area as both respondent and correspondent banks were influenced by shocks to other parts of the
system. As clearinghouses only provided emergency liquidity to member banks, non-member
banks would be left without needed funds when a panic occurred. Clearinghouses also mitigated
depositors’ fears of member banks by publically supporting member banks' solvency, while at
the same time casting suspicion on non-member banks.
The exclusivity of the clearinghouses was a reason why the nation passed the Federal
Reserve Act (1913) rather than encouraging the expansion of the clearinghouse system. As
described by Wicker (2005), the establishment of a central bank was not just about emergency
relief to illiquid banks during panics. If it was the goal, then the combined funds issued under the
Aldrich-Vreeland Act (1908) and the clearinghouse system were likely sufficient (Jacobson and
Tallman, 2013). Instead the adoption of a central bank was an attempt to provide stability to the
entire banking system over time—something the exclusionary approaches of clearinghouses
could not achieve. First, the Federal Reserve forced every national bank to become a member

26

and strongly encouraged state banks and trust companies to join. The pressure reduced the
number of non-protected banks and made sure that a lender of last resort was available to banks
in all cities. Second, it installed an active lender of last resort that was available to provide
emergency and seasonal liquidity during all periods rather than just during financial panics. The
accessibility of the discount window protected banks from all economic fluctuations and not just
wide-scale problems (Miron, 1986). Third, the Fed attempted to take over the interbank network
by forcing member banks to hold reserves at the Fed rather than in correspondent banks and
offering to clear checks at par. By placing reserves at the Fed instead of large correspondent
banks, the Fed sought to remove the systemic liquidity risk that led to the period’s many panics.
While the Federal Reserve was intended to unify the banking system, it never stretched
over the entire system, and inevitably, the connection between institutions inside and outside the
system led to the depth of both the Great Depression and Great Recession. In 1929, only about
35 percent of state and national banks were members of the Fed. These non-member banks relied
heavily on their interbank networks for liquidity, just as they had during the National Banking
Period (Calomiris et al., 2015). However when the panic started, country banks withdrew their
deposits from money center banks specifically when they were needed the most (Mitchener and
Richardson, 2015). Leading up to the Great Recession, institutions moved outside the purview of
the Fed to avoid regulations and oversight. Again these institutions created tight connections to
the formal banking sector. Therefore, as their securitized assets took losses from the collapse of
the housing sector, they pulled the rest of the system down with them. This study along with the
historical narrative emphasizes policies that unify financial regulation and decrease the number
of institutions outside the formal system. By making sure that most if not all financial institutions

27

are under the same regulator, aggregate risks will be able to be properly measured and actions
taken by the regulator during panics would be more effective.
The results also offer a cautionary tale on the recent push towards CCPs. In late 2009, the
G20 mandated that all standardized over-the-counter derivatives should be cleared through
CCPs. Similar to historical clearinghouses, CCPs reduce risk amongst participants by
multilaterally netting trades and imposing broader risk control measures, but the resulting
concentration could transmit shocks across financial markets and increase systemic risk. While
they fared well during the recent financial crisis as a small portion of the market (Cecchetti,
Gyntelberg, and Hollanders, 2009), the recent regulatory push has greatly expanded the number
and types of derivatives handled by CCPs (Domanski, Gambacorta, and Picillo, 2015; Rahman,
2015). Just as in the historical period (Calomiris and Carlson, 2016), the growing concentration
will only increase the exposure to systemic risk and could lead to large-scale financial crises. The
concern over systemic risk has been voiced by a number of recent studies including Duffie and
Zhu (2011), CPSS-IOSCO (2012), Steigerwald (2013), Domanski, Gambacorta, and Picillo
(2015), Wendt (2015), and Park and Abruzzo (2016), but there are few modern examples in
which to study the dynamics.

28

Works Cited
Bordo, M., Wheelock, D., 2013. The Promise and Performance of the Federal Reserve as Lender
of Last Resort 1914-1933. In Bordo, M., Roberds, W., (Eds.), The Origins, History, and
Future of the Federal Reserve: A Return to Jekyll Island. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, pp. 59-98.
Calomiris, C., Carlson, M., 2016. Interbank Networks in the National Banking Era: Their
Purpose and Their Role in the Panic of 1893. BIS Working Paper 535.
Calomiris, C., Gorton, G., 1991. The origins of banking panics: models, facts, and bank
regulation. In Hubbard, G., (Eds.) Financial markets and financial crises. University of
Chicago Press, Chicago, pp. 109-174.
Calomiris, C., Jaremski, M., Park, H., Richardson, G., 2015. Liquidity Risk, Bank Networks, and
the Value of Joining the Fed. NBER Working Paper w21684
Calomiris, C., Mason, J., 1997. Contagion and Bank Failures During the Great Depression.
American Economic Review 87, 863-883
Calomiris, C., Mason, J., 2003. Fundamentals, Panics, and Bank Distress During the Great
Depression. American Economic Review 93, 1615-1647.
Calomiris, C., Schweikart, L., 1991. The Panic of 1857: Origins, Transmission, and
Containment. Journal of Economic History 51, 807-834.
Cannon, J., 1900. Clearing Houses‒Their History, Methods, and Administration. D. Appleton
and Company, New York.
Cannon, J., 1910. Clearinghouses. National Monetary Commission. Government Printing Office,
Washington, DC.
Cecchetti, S., Gyntelberg, J., Hollanders, M., 2009. Central Counterparties for over-the-counter
derivatives. BIS Quarterly Review September 2009, 45-58.
Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems and Technical Committee of the International
Organization of Securities Commissions (CPSS-IOSCO), 2012. Principles for Financial
Market Infrastructures. www.bis.org/publ/cpss101a.pdf
Domanski, D., Gambacorta, L., Picillo, C., 2015. Central Clearing: Trends and Current Issues.
BIS Quarterly Review December 2015, 59-76.
Duffie, D., Zhu, H., 2011. Does a Central Clearing Counterparty Reduce Counterparty Risk?.
Review of Asset Pricing Studies 1, 74-95.
Gibbons, J., 1859. The Banks of New York, Their Dealers, the Clearinghouses, and the Panic of
1857. New York: D. Appleton and Co.
Gorton, G., 1985. Clearinghouses and the Origin of Central Banking in the United States.
Journal of Economic History 45, 277-283.
Gorton, G., Mullineaux, D., 1987. The Joint Production of Confidence: Endogeneous Regulation
and Nineteenth Century Commercial-Bank Clearinghouses. Journal of Money, Credit,
and Banking 19, 457-468.
Haines, M., 2004. Historical, Demographic, Economic, and Social Data: The United States,
1790-2000. ICPSR Study 2896. Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social
Research, Ann Arbor, MI.
Hoag, C., 2011. Clearinghouse Membership and Deposit Contraction during the Panic of 1893.
Cliometrica 5, 187-203
James, J., 1978. Money and Capital Markets in Postbellum America. Princeton University Press,
Princeton.

29

James, J., Weiman, D., 2010. From drafts to checks: the evolution of correspondent banking
networks and the formation of the modern US payments system, 1850–1914. Journal of
Money, Credit and Banking 42, 237-265.
Jaremski, M., 2015. Clearinghouses as Credit Regulators Before the Fed?. Journal of Financial
Stability 17, 10–21.
Jacobson, M., Tallman, E., 2013. Liquidity provision during the crisis of 1914: private and
public sources. Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Working Paper 1304.
Kroszner, R., 2000. Lessons from Financial Crises: The Role of Clearinghouses. Journal of
Financial Services Research 18, 157-171.
Merchants and Bankers’ Directory (also called Merchants and Bankers’ Almanac), 1861-1890.
New York: Bankers’ Magazine Office.
Minnesota Population Center, 2004. National Historical Geographic Information System: Prerelease Version 0.1. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota. http://www.nhgis.org.
Miron, J., 1986. Financial Panics, the Seasonality of the Nominal Interest Rate, and the Founding
of the Fed. American Economic Review 76, 125-140.
Mitchener, K., Richardson, G., 2015. Shadowy Banks and the Interbank Amplifier During the
Great Depression. Unpublished working paper.
Moen, J., Tallman, E., 1992. The Bank Panic of 1907: The Role of the Trust Companies. Journal
of Economic History 52, 611-630.
Moen, J., Tallman, E., 2000. Clearinghouse Membership and Deposit Contraction During the
Panic of 1907. Journal of Economic History 60, 145-163.
Officer, L., 2008. What Was the Value of the US Consumer Bundle Then? MeasuringWorth.
http://www.measuringworth.org/consumer/
Park, Y., Abruzzo, N., 2016. An empirical analysis of futures margin changes: determinants and
policy implications. Journal of Financial Services Research 49, 65-100.
Rahman, A., 2015. Over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives, central clearing, and financial stability.
Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin 55, 283-295.
Rand McNally Bankers’ Directory, 1890-1914. McNally, Chicago.
Sprague, O., 1910. History of Crises Under the National Banking System. National Monetary
Commission, Washington, DC.
Steigerwald, R., 2013. Central Counterparty Clearing. In Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago
(Eds.), Understanding Derivatives: Markets and Infrastructure. Federal Reserve Bank of
Chicago, Chicago. https://www.chicagofed.org/publications/understandingderivatives/index
Timberlake, R., 1984. The Central Banking Role of Clearinghouse Associations. Journal of
Money, Credit, and Banking 16, 1-15.
Wendt, F., 2015.Central Counterparties: Addressing their too important to fail nature. IMF
Working Papers 15/21.
Wicker, E., 2000. Banking Panics of the Gilded Age. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

30

Figure 1: Clearinghouses By County (1880-1910)

1880

1890

1900

1910

Notes: Figures display the clearinghouses in each year in the sample states: Indiana, Michigan, Minnesota, New York, Ohio, Pennsylvania, and Wisconsin.
County boundaries obtained from Minnesota Population Center (2004).

31

Table 1: Descriptive Statistics of Banks (1880-1910)
All Banks

National Banks

State Banks

7,202

3,102

4,100

9.1%

12.8%

6.4%

Clearinghouse Members

35.3%

30.4%

42.3%

Non-Clearinghouse Members

25.4%

21.2%

28.4%

All Banks

26.4%

22.8%

29.2%

All Banks
Number of Banks
% Members
% Closed

Banks in Clearinghouse Cities
Number of Banks
1,010
419
591
% Members
56.3%
80.0%
39.6%
% Closed
Clearinghouse Members
35.3%
30.4%
42.3%
Non-Clearinghouse Members
54.9%
72.6%
50.7%
All Banks in Clearinghouse Cities
43.9%
38.9%
47.4%
Notes: Table presents the fraction of banks that became a member of their local clearinghouse and their closure rate
over the period. The statistics are broken down for all banks, only national banks, and only state banks. Since
clearinghouses could have been attracted to certain types of locations the table displays the result for the full
sample as well as just those locations that gained a clearinghouse. Data span Indiana, Michigan, Minnesota, New
York, Ohio, Pennsylvania, and Wisconsin.

32

Table 2: List of Included Variables and Descriptions
At County-Level
Variable Label
Ln(# of National Banks)
Ln(# of State Banks)
Ln(Population)
Fraction Living in Place With More than
25,000
Ln(Farm Value P.C.)
L.Ln(Number of Banks)
L.Ln(Bank Assets)
L.Ln(Due from Bank Balances)
L.Ln(Due to Bank Balances)

Mean
1.07
0.89
10.24

Std.
Dev.
0.68
0.76
0.67

Fraction of total population living in an area of 25,000 people or more in a county

0.04

0.15

Logarithm of the value of crop output per person in county
Logarithm of total number of banks in the county in the previous year
Logarithm of total bank assets in the county in the previous year
Logarithm of total due from banks balance in county in the previous year
Logarithm of total due to banks balance in county in the previous year
At Bank-Level

15.80
1.54
13.82
11.76
7.08

0.86
0.64
1.25
1.39
4.47

Description
Logarithm of the number of national banks in operation in the county
Logarithm of the number of state banks in operation in the county
Logarithm of the total population in the county

Std.
Description
Mean
Dev.
Indicator for whether bank was chartered by the state government
44.3%
49.7%
Logarithm of the number of years a bank had been in operation
2.27
1.12
Logarithm of total bank assets
12.88
1.29
Ratio of paid in capital and surplus to total assets
26.7%
12.2%
Ratio of due to banks to total liabilities
4.3%
9.6%
Ratio of total loans to total assets
61.1%
15.3%
Ratio of due from banks to total assets
13.6%
8.6%
Ratio of real estate owned to total assets
3.4%
3.9%
Ratio of cash in vault and other cash items at bank to total individual deposits
11.8%
12.2%
Indicator for whether clearinghouse was in operation in location and bank was a
Clearinghouse Member
9.0%
28.6%
member
Indicator for whether clearinghouse was in operation in location and bank was not a
Clearinghouse in City But Not Member
4.2%
20.0%
member
Notes: Table presents the description and summary statistics of the paper's main variables for Indiana, Michigan, Minnesota, New York, Ohio, Pennsylvania, and
Wisconsin. The top panel presents the county-level variables and the bottom panel displays the bank-level variables. For the county-level variables, the sample
statistics are calculated for all counties that had at least one bank. For the bank-level variables, the sample statistics are calculated for all banks in the sample.
Variable Label
State Bank Dummy
Ln(Bank Age)
Ln(Assets)
Capital/Assets
Due to Banks/Liabilities
Loans/Assets
Due from Banks/Assets
Real Estate Owned/Assets
Cash/ Indiv. Deposits

33

Table 3: County-Level Determinants of Clearinghouse Entry (1880-1910)

Ln(Population)
Fraction Living in Place
With More than 25,000
Ln(Farm Value P.C.)
L.Ln(Number of Banks)
L.Ln(Bank Assets)

(1)
0.004*
[0.002]

(2)
0.041***
[0.012]

(3)
0.005**
[0.002]

Only Counties With At Least One Bank
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
0.042***
0.004**
0.042***
0.006***
[0.012]
[0.002]
[0.012]
[0.002]

(8)
0.042***
[0.012]

(9)
0.004**
[0.002]

(10)
0.041***
[0.012]

0.094***
[0.020]

0.169***
[0.048]

0.094***
[0.020]

0.169***
[0.048]

0.095***
[0.020]

0.168***
[0.048]

0.095***
[0.020]

0.169***
[0.048]

0.095***
[0.020]

0.169***
[0.048]

-0.002*
[0.001]

-0.022***
[0.005]

-0.002
[0.001]

-0.021***
[0.005]

-0.002**
[0.001]

-0.021***
[0.005]

-0.001
[0.001]

-0.021***
[0.005]

-0.002**
[0.001]

-0.022***
[0.005]

0.005***
[0.002]

0.003
[0.003]

0.007***
[0.002]

0.005
[0.004]

0.007***
[0.002]

0.003
[0.003]

-0.001
[0.001]

-0.002
[0.002]

0.001*
[0.001]

0.001
[0.002]

L.Ln(Due from Bank Balances)

0.001
[0.001]

0.001
[0.001]

-0.001
[0.001]

-0.001
[0.001]

L.Ln(Due to Bank Balances)

-0.001
[0.001]

0.001
[0.001]

-0.001
[0.001]

0.001
[0.001]

Location Fixed Effects
State
County
State
County
State
County
State
County
State
County
Year Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Observations
10,564
10,564
10,564
10,564
10,564
10,564
10,564
10,564
10,564
10,564
R-squared
0.042
0.114
0.0412
0.1139
0.0421
0.1141
0.0411
0.114
0.0422
0.1141
Notes: Table presents the results of an OLS regression. The dependent variable is whether or not a county gained a clearinghouse in that particular year. Each
observation is a county-year and the sample spans Indiana, Michigan, Minnesota, New York, Ohio, Pennsylvania, and Wisconsin. Counties that had a clearinghouse
before 1880 or did not have a bank are dropped. Counties are also dropped from the sample after a clearinghouse was established. Dollar values are deflated to 1900
using Officer (2008). Robust standard errors clustered by county are provided in brackets. * denotes significance at 10%; ** at 5% level and *** at 1% level.

34

Table 4: County-Level Trends Before The Establishment of Clearinghouse (1880-1900)
Only Counties Without A Clearinghouse from 1880-1890
Ln(Due From
Ln(Due To
# of Banks
Ln(Assets)
Ln(Deposits)
Banks)
Banks)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Established Clearinghouse
0.014
0.010
0.006
0.007
0.152
in 1890s * Linear Trend
[0.057]
[0.010]
[0.012]
[0.016]
[0.133]
Ln(Population)

3.198***
[0.879]

1.312***
[0.234]

1.389***
[0.260]

1.299***
[0.330]

3.261**
[1.443]

Fraction Living in Place
With More than 25,000

-0.294
[0.478]

0.444***
[0.149]

0.390**
[0.164]

0.346*
[0.198]

0.180
[0.829]

Ln(Farm Value P.C.)

1.470
[1.177]
County
Yes
3,135
0.265

-0.275
[0.290]
County
Yes
3,135
0.530

# of Banks
(1)
0.083*
[0.047]

Ln(Assets)
(2)
-0.001
[0.009]

2.806***
[0.914]

0.942***
[0.188]

0.983***
[0.195]

0.972***
[0.246]

2.065**
[0.893]

-0.168
[0.312]

0.314***
[0.077]

0.367***
[0.084]

0.299***
[0.110]

0.355
[0.445]

Location Fixed Effects
Year Fixed Effects
Observations
R-squared

Established Clearinghouse
in 1900s * Linear Trend
Ln(Population)
Fraction Living in Place
With More than 25,000

-0.415
-0.697**
-1.942
[0.276]
[0.334]
[1.601]
County
County
County
Yes
Yes
Yes
3,135
3,135
3,135
0.491
0.177
0.047
Only Counties Without A Clearinghouse from 1880-1900
Ln(Due From
Ln(Due To
Ln(Deposits)
Banks)
Banks)
(3)
(4)
(5)
-0.001
0.001
0.015
[0.008]
[0.011]
[0.046]

Ln(Farm Value P.C.)

Ln(Population)
(6)
0.011*
[0.006]

Fraction
Urban
(7)
0.014*
[0.007]
0.143**
[0.056]

0.450***
[0.062]

-0.075**
[0.034]

0.379***
[0.084]
County
Yes
3,135
0.635

County
Yes
3,135
0.197

Ln(Population)
(6)
0.008***
[0.002]

Fraction
Urban
(7)
0.007***
[0.002]
0.075***
[0.026]

0.345***
[0.029]

-0.028***
[0.011]

0.014
-0.194
-0.441**
-0.698*
-0.692
0.421***
[1.309]
[0.294]
[0.218]
[0.387]
[1.536]
[0.117]
Location Fixed Effects
County
County
County
County
County
County
County
Year Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Observations
6,564
6,564
6,564
6,564
6,564
6,564
6,564
R-squared
0.413
0.631
0.647
0.422
0.045
0.659
0.202
Notes: Table presents the results of an OLS regression. The dependent variable is provided in the column headings. Each observation is a county-year, and the sample spans
Indiana, Michigan, Minnesota, New York, Ohio, Pennsylvania, and Wisconsin. Counties that did not have a bank are dropped. The top panel only examines counties that did not
have clearinghouse between 1880 and 1890, and the bottom panel only examines countries that did not have a clearinghouse between 1880 and 1900. Dollar values are deflated to
1900 using Officer (2008). Robust standard errors clustered by county are provided in brackets. * denotes significance at 10%; ** at 5% level and *** at 1% level.

35

Table 5: Bank-Level Determinants of Clearinghouse Membership (1880-1910)
Probability of Becoming A Member of Local
Clearinghouse In Year It Started
(1)
(2)
State Bank Dummy
-0.065
-0.037
[0.061]
[0.079]
Ln(Bank Age)

0.019
[0.018]

0.008
[0.018]

Ln(# of National Banks)

-0.204**
[0.079]

-0.161*
[0.081]

Ln(# of State Banks)

-0.127**
[0.048]

-0.136***
[0.045]

Ln(Population)

0.086
[0.066]

0.074
[0.075]

Fraction Living in Place
With More than 25,000

0.112
[0.145]

0.014
[0.136]

Ln(Farm Value P.C.)

-0.009
[0.038]

-0.005
[0.045]

Ln(Assets)

0.063
[0.046]

Capital/Assets

0.247
[0.237]

Due to Banks/Liabilities

0.171
[0.233]

Loans/Assets

0.240
[0.182]

Due from Banks/Assets

0.588
[0.408]

Real Estate Owned/Assets

0.193
[0.682]

Cash/ Indiv. Deposits

-0.306
[0.422]
Location Fixed Effects
State
State
Observations
284
284
R-squared
0.125
0.182
Notes: Table presents the results of an OLS regression. The dependent variable is
whether the bank became a member of the local clearinghouse in the first year it
started. The sample consists of banks in Indiana, Michigan, Minnesota, New York,
Ohio, Pennsylvania, and Wisconsin in the year prior to when a clearinghouse
entered their city. Dollar values are deflated to 1900 using Officer (2008). Robust
standard errors clustered by county are provided in brackets. * denotes significance
at 10%; ** at 5% level and *** at 1% level.

36

Table 6: Effect of Predicted Pre-Clearinghouse Risk on Clearinghouse Membership (1880-1910)
Probability of Becoming A Member of Local
Clearinghouse In Year It Started
(1)
(2)
Predicted Risk Measure Using All
-1.255
Locations Without Active Clearinghouses
[0.897]
Predicted Risk Measure Using Only Clearinghouse
Counties Before A Clearinghouse Entered

-0.517
[1.018]

Location Fixed Effects
Location
Location
Observations
282
282
R-squared
0.308
0.300
Notes: Table presents the results of an OLS regression. The dependent variable is whether the bank
became a member of the local clearinghouse in the first year it opened. The sample consists of banks in
Indiana, Michigan, Minnesota, New York, Ohio, Pennsylvania, and Wisconsin in the year prior to when
a clearinghouse entered their city. The predicted portfolio risk measure is obtained by applying the
regressions results of Table A.2 which examines the probability of bank failure in each period before a
clearinghouse entered as a function of bank and locational characteristics to the portfolios of each bank.
The two different risk measures come from estimating the bank failure regression using all banks
without a clearinghouse or when restricting the sample to only clearinghouse counties before a
clearinghouse entered. Dollar values are deflated to 1900 using Officer (2008). Robust standard errors
clustered by county are provided in brackets. * denotes significance at 10%; ** at 5% level and *** at
1% level.

37

Table 7: Effect of Clearinghouses on Member and Non-Member Bank Balance Sheets (1880-1910)
Dropping Banks that Entered After Clearinghouse
Real Estate
Ln(Assets)
Loans/Assets
Owned/Assets
Clearinghouse Member
0.090***
0.096***
0.006
0.006
-0.002
-0.001
[0.026]
[0.026]
[0.006]
[0.006]
[0.002]
[0.002]
Clearinghouse in City
0.088
0.011
0.005
But Not A Member
[0.062]
[0.011]
[0.007]
Ln(Bank Age)
0.306***
0.306***
0.035***
0.035***
-0.001*
-0.001*
[0.007]
[0.006]
[0.002]
[0.002]
[0.001]
[0.001]
Ln(# of National
-0.046*** -0.045***
0.021***
0.021***
-0.001
-0.001
Banks)
[0.016]
[0.016]
[0.004]
[0.004]
[0.001]
[0.001]
Ln(# of State
0.011
0.011
0.009***
0.009***
-0.001
-0.001
Banks)
[0.009]
[0.009]
[0.003]
[0.003]
[0.001]
[0.001]
Ln(Population)
0.562***
0.558***
-0.035*** -0.035***
0.010***
0.010***
[0.049]
[0.049]
[0.012]
[0.012]
[0.004]
[0.004]
Fraction Living in Place
0.036**
0.036**
0.027***
0.027***
-0.005*** -0.004***
With More than 25,000
[0.016]
[0.016]
[0.004]
[0.004]
[0.001]
[0.001]
Ln(Farm Value P.C.)
-0.153**
-0.159**
-0.028
-0.028
0.001
0.001
[0.066]
[0.065]
[0.018]
[0.018]
[0.004]
[0.004]
Location Fixed Effects
Bank
Bank
Bank
Bank
Bank
Bank
Year Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Observations
73,818
73,818
73,818
73,818
73,818
73,818
R-squared
0.603
0.603
0.109
0.109
0.060
0.061
Due from Banks/
Due to Banks/
Capital/Assets
Assets
Liabilities
Clearinghouse Member
0.004
0.005
0.003
0.003
0.008**
0.009**
[0.003]
[0.003]
[0.005]
[0.005]
[0.003]
[0.003]
Clearinghouse in City
0.014*
-0.003
0.012
But Not A Member
[0.008]
[0.011]
[0.008]
Ln(Bank Age)
-0.021*** -0.021***
-0.053*** -0.053***
-0.002**
-0.002**
[0.001]
[0.001]
[0.001]
[0.001]
[0.001]
[0.001]
Ln(# of National
-0.017*** -0.017***
0.007**
0.007**
-0.009*** -0.009***
Banks)
[0.003]
[0.003]
[0.003]
[0.003]
[0.002]
[0.002]
Ln(# of State
-0.001
-0.001
-0.008*** -0.008***
0.005***
0.005***
Banks)
[0.002]
[0.002]
[0.002]
[0.002]
[0.001]
[0.001]
Ln(Population)
-0.011
-0.012
0.041***
0.041***
0.020***
0.020***
[0.007]
[0.007]
[0.009]
[0.009]
[0.007]
[0.007]
Fraction Living in Place
0.008***
0.008***
-0.021*** -0.021***
0.006**
0.006**
With More than 25,000
[0.002]
[0.002]
[0.003]
[0.003]
[0.003]
[0.003]
Ln(Farm Value P.C.)
0.020**
0.019**
-0.022
-0.022
-0.018**
-0.019**
[0.009]
[0.009]
[0.014]
[0.014]
[0.009]
[0.009]
Location Fixed Effects
Bank
Bank
Bank
Bank
Bank
Bank
Year Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Observations
73,818
73,818
73,818
73,818
73,818
73,818
R-squared
0.075
0.075
0.431
0.431
0.020
0.020

Cash/Indiv. Deposits
0.088
0.095
[0.101]
[0.108]
0.115
[0.111]
0.047
0.046
[0.030]
[0.030]
-0.067
-0.066
[0.078]
[0.077]
0.045*
0.045*
[0.027]
[0.026]
0.155***
0.150***
[0.042]
[0.040]
-0.220*** -0.219***
[0.068]
[0.068]
-0.803
-0.811
[0.768]
[0.775]
Bank
Bank
Yes
Yes
73,818
73,818
0.001
0.001

Notes: Table presents the results of an OLS regression. The dependent variable is described in the column heading. Each observation is a bankyear and the sample spans Indiana, Michigan, Minnesota, New York, Ohio, Pennsylvania, and Wisconsin. Banks that entered after a
clearinghouse was established and locations that established a clearinghouse before 1880 are dropped. Dollar values are deflated to 1900 using
Officer (2008). Robust standard errors clustered by bank are provided in brackets. * denotes significance at 10%; ** at 5% level and *** at 1%
level.

38

Table 8: Effect of Clearinghouses on Member and Non-Member Bank Balance Sheet Risk (1880-1910)
Dropping Banks that Entered After Clearinghouse
Predicted Risk Measure Using
Predicted Risk Measure Using
All Locations Without Active
Only Clearinghouse Locations
Clearinghouse
Before a Clearinghouse Entered
Clearinghouse Member
-0.002***
-0.001
-0.002**
-0.001
[0.001]
[0.002]
[0.001]
[0.002]
Clearinghouse in City
But Not Member

-0.002
[0.002]

-0.002
[0.002]

Ln(Bank Age)

0.015***
[0.001]

0.015***
[0.001]

0.010***
[0.001]

0.010***
[0.001]

Ln(# of National Banks)

0.001***
[0.001]

0.001***
[0.001]

-0.002**
[0.001]

-0.002**
[0.001]

Ln(# of State Banks)

-0.001***
[0.001]

-0.001**
[0.001]

-0.001***
[0.001]

-0.001***
[0.001]

Ln(Population)

-0.010***
[0.001]

-0.010***
[0.001]

-0.011***
[0.002]

-0.011***
[0.002]

Fraction Living in Place
With More than 25,000

-0.002***
[0.001]

-0.002***
[0.001]

-0.004***
[0.001]

-0.004***
[0.001]

Ln(Farm Value P.C.)

0.004*
0.004*
0.005*
0.005*
[0.002]
[0.002]
[0.003]
[0.003]
Location Fixed Effects
Bank
Bank
Bank
Bank
Year Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Observations
73,818
73,818
73,818
73,818
R-squared
0.406
0.406
0.167
0.167
Notes: Table presents the results of an OLS regression. The dependent variable is described in the column
heading. Each observation is a bank-year and the sample spans Indiana, Michigan, Minnesota, New York,
Ohio, Pennsylvania, and Wisconsin. Banks that entered after a clearinghouse was established and locations
that created a clearinghouse before 1880 are dropped. The predicted portfolio risk measure is obtained by
applying the regression results of Table A.2 which examines the probability of bank failure in each period as
a function of bank and locational characteristics to the portfolios of each bank. The two different risk
measures come from estimating the bank failure regression using a sample of all banks without a
clearinghouse or when restricting the sample to only clearinghouse counties before a clearinghouse entered.
Dollar values are deflated to 1900 using Officer (2008). Robust standard errors clustered by bank are
provided in brackets. * denotes significance at 10%; ** at 5% level and *** at 1% level.

39

Table 9: Determinants of Bank Closure (1880-1910)
Probability of Closing
(1)
(2)
(3)
Clearinghouse Member
-0.012*** -0.012***
-0.008**
[0.003]
[0.004]
[0.003]

(4)
-0.011**
[0.004]

State Bank Dummy

0.029***
[0.004]

0.029***
[0.004]

0.019***
[0.004]

0.019***
[0.004]

Ln(Bank Age)

0.014***
[0.001]

0.014***
[0.001]

0.023***
[0.001]

0.023***
[0.001]

-0.003
[0.003]

-0.003
[0.003]

0.003
[0.003]

0.003
[0.003]

Ln(# of State Banks)

0.013***
[0.002]

0.013***
[0.002]

0.017***
[0.002]

0.017***
[0.002]

Ln(Population)

0.007***
[0.003]

0.007***
[0.003]

0.010***
[0.003]

0.010***
[0.003]

Fraction Living in Place
With More than 25,000

-0.001
[0.008]

-0.001
[0.008]

0.003
[0.008]

0.003
[0.008]

Ln(Farm Value P.C.)

-0.003*
[0.002]

-0.003*
[0.002]

-0.002
[0.002]

-0.002
[0.002]

Ln(Assets)

-0.019***
[0.002]

-0.019***
[0.002]

Capital/Assets

0.054***
[0.012]

0.054***
[0.012]

Due to Banks/Liabilities

0.051***
[0.014]

0.051***
[0.014]

Loans/Assets

-0.001
[0.006]

-0.001
[0.006]

Due from Banks/Assets

0.009
[0.011]

0.009
[0.011]

0.154***
[0.034]

0.154***
[0.034]

Ln(# of National Banks)

Real Estate Owned/Assets
Cash/ Indiv. Deposits

-0.004
-0.004
[0.008]
[0.008]
Location Fixed Effects
State
County
State
County
Year Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Observations
81,665
81,665
81,665
81,665
R-squared
0.0052
0.0134
0.009
0.0185
Notes: Table presents the results of an OLS regression. The dependent variable is
whether or not the bank closed in the following year. Each observation is a bankyear and the sample spans Indiana, Michigan, Minnesota, New York, Ohio,
Pennsylvania, and Wisconsin. Dollar values are deflated to 1900 using Officer
(2008). Robust standard errors clustered by bank are provided in brackets. *
denotes significance at 10%; ** at 5% level and *** at 1% level.

40

Table 10: Determinants of Bank Closure - Breaking out Members and Non-Members (1880-1910)
Only Cities That Established a Clearinghouse Between 1880 and 1910
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Clearinghouse Member
-0.012**
-0.013**
-0.008
-0.010*
[0.006]
[0.006]
[0.006]
[0.006]
Clearinghouse in City
But Not Member

0.042***
[0.015]

0.040***
[0.015]

0.035**
[0.015]

0.032**
[0.015]

0.003
[0.010]

0.004
[0.010]

-0.006
[0.011]

-0.005
[0.011]

0.016***
[0.003]

0.017***
[0.003]

0.025***
[0.004]

0.027***
[0.004]

Ln(# of National Banks)

-0.010
[0.009]

-0.007
[0.012]

-0.011
[0.010]

-0.007
[0.013]

Ln(# of State Banks)

0.011**
[0.005]

0.013**
[0.006]

0.010*
[0.005]

0.011*
[0.006]

Ln(Population)

0.014
[0.011]

0.045**
[0.022]

0.022**
[0.011]

0.055**
[0.023]

Fraction Living in Place
With More than 25,000

0.019
[0.017]

-0.001
[0.024]

0.030*
[0.017]

0.004
[0.024]

-0.018***
[0.006]

-0.015
[0.013]

-0.016**
[0.007]

-0.017
[0.013]

-0.028***
[0.006]

-0.029***
[0.006]

Capital/Assets

0.025
[0.039]

0.029
[0.040]

Due to Banks/Liabilities

0.117**
[0.048]

0.125**
[0.050]

Loans/Assets

-0.006
[0.021]

-0.009
[0.022]

Due from Banks/Assets

0.062
[0.046]

0.065
[0.046]

0.258***
[0.091]

0.252***
[0.089]

State Bank Dummy
Ln(Bank Age)

Ln(Farm Value P.C.)
Ln(Assets)

Real Estate
Owned/Assets
Cash/ Indiv. Deposits

0.001
-0.002
[0.030]
[0.030]
Location Fixed Effects
State
County
State
County
Year Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Observations
8,769
8,769
8,769
8,769
R-squared
0.0198
0.0249
0.0283
0.034
Notes: Table presents the results of an OLS regression. The dependent variable is whether or not the
bank closed in the following year. Each observation is a bank-year and the sample spans Indiana,
Michigan, Minnesota, New York, Ohio, Pennsylvania, and Wisconsin. Banks in locations that did not
establish a clearinghouse between 1880 and 1910 are dropped from the sample. Dollar values are
deflated to 1900 using Officer (2008). Robust standard errors clustered by bank are provided in
brackets. * denotes significance at 10%; ** at 5% level and *** at 1% level.

41

Table A.1: Bank-Level Determinants of Clearinghouse Membership - Adding Illinois Banks
Probability of Becoming A Member of Local
Clearinghouse In Year It Started
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
State Bank Dummy
-0.056
-0.037
[0.053]
[0.069]
Ln(Bank Age)

0.022
[0.018]

0.011
[0.017]

Ln(# of National Banks)

-0.163**
[0.066]

-0.128*
[0.071]

Ln(# of State Banks)

-0.112***
[0.040]

-0.118***
[0.038]

Ln(Population)

0.086
[0.061]

0.077
[0.067]

Fraction Living in Place
With More than 25,000

0.052
[0.126]

-0.037
[0.114]

Ln(Farm Value P.C.)

-0.006
[0.036]

-0.004
[0.040]

Ln(Assets)

0.060
[0.042]

Capital/Assets

0.226
[0.224]

Due to Banks/Liabilities

0.114
[0.195]

Loans/Assets

0.248
[0.157]

Due from Banks/Assets

0.576
[0.388]

Real Estate Owned/Assets

0.159
[0.666]

Cash/ Indiv. Deposits

-0.236
[0.390]

Predicted Risk Measure Using All
Locations Without Active Clearinghouses

-0.852
[0.723]

Predicted Risk Measure Using Only Clearinghouse
Counties Before A Clearinghouse

-0.048
[0.949]

Location Fixed Effects
State
State
State
State
Observations
316
316
316
316
R-squared
0.129
0.151
0.069
0.063
Notes: Table presents the results of an OLS regression. The dependent variable is whether the bank became a
member of the local clearinghouse in the first year it started. The sample consists of banks in the year prior to when
a clearinghouse entered their city. In addition to Indiana, Michigan, Minnesota, New York, Ohio, Pennsylvania, and
Wisconsin, this sample also contains Illinois banks in the year before a clearinghouse was established in their city
from 1889 to 1910 to determine whether the results are driven by small sample sizes. Dollar values are deflated to
1900 using Officer (2008). Robust standard clustered by county are provided in brackets. * denotes significance at
10%; ** at 5% level and *** at 1% level.

42

Table A.2: Determinants of Bank Closure Before Clearinghouse Entry (1880-1910)
Probability of Closing In Years Before City Gained a
Clearinghouse
Only Locations that Would
All Locations Without
Eventually Create A
Active Clearinghouse
Clearinghouse
(1)
(2)
State Bank Dummy
0.034***
0.005
[0.005]
[0.014]
Ln(Bank Age)

0.024***
[0.001]

0.025***
[0.004]

Ln(# of National Banks)

0.015***
[0.004]

-0.008
[0.023]

Ln(# of State Banks)

0.023***
[0.003]

0.003
[0.008]

Ln(Population)

0.026***
[0.008]

-0.015
[0.036]

Fraction Living in Place
With More than 25,000

0.001
[0.013]

0.006
[0.031]

Ln(Farm Value P.C.)

-0.003
[0.003]

0.002
[0.024]

Ln(Assets)

-0.023***
[0.003]

-0.028**
[0.011]

Capital/Assets

0.034***
[0.013]

0.050
[0.058]

Due to Banks/Liabilities

-0.002
[0.015]

0.042
[0.057]

Loans/Assets

-0.008
[0.007]

-0.077**
[0.032]

Due from Banks/Assets

-0.006
[0.011]

0.069
[0.066]

0.144***
[0.037]

0.011
[0.093]

-0.001
[0.001]

0.001
[0.001]

Real Estate Owned/Assets
Cash/ Indiv. Deposits

Location Fixed Effects
County
County
Year Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
Observations
63,317
4,023
R-squared
0.0178
0.0324
Notes: Table presents the results of an OLS regression. The dependent variable is whether or not the
bank closed in the following year. Each observation is a bank-year and the sample spans Indiana,
Michigan, Minnesota, New York, Ohio, Pennsylvania, and Wisconsin. As denoted by the column
headings, the results are estimated using all locations without a clearinghouse as well as for restricting
the sample to only cities that would establish a clearinghouse. Dollar values are deflated to 1900 using
Officer (2008). Robust standard errors clustered by bank are provided in brackets. * denotes
significance at 10%; ** at 5% level and *** at 1% level.

43

Table A.3: Effect of Clearinghouse Membership on Balance Sheets - Breaking Out State Banks From National Banks (1880-1910)
Dropping Banks that Entered After Clearinghouse
Real Estate
Ln(Assets)
Loans/Assets
Owned/Assets
Cash/Indiv. Deposits
Clearinghouse Member
0.090***
0.028
0.006
0.017**
-0.002
-0.004**
0.088
0.101
[0.026]
[0.031]
[0.006]
[0.008]
[0.002]
[0.002]
[0.101]
[0.116]
Clearinghouse Member
0.159***
-0.030**
0.007*
-0.034
*State Bank Dummy
[0.051]
[0.012]
[0.004]
[0.051]
Ln(Bank Age)
0.306***
0.304***
0.035***
0.035***
-0.001*
-0.001*
0.047
0.047
[0.007]
[0.006]
[0.002]
[0.002]
[0.001]
[0.001]
[0.030]
[0.031]
Ln(# of National
-0.046***
-0.045***
0.021***
0.021***
-0.001
-0.001
-0.067
-0.067
Banks)
[0.016]
[0.016]
[0.004]
[0.004]
[0.001]
[0.001]
[0.078]
[0.078]
Ln(# of State
0.011
0.012
0.009***
0.009***
-0.001
-0.001
0.045*
0.045*
Banks)
[0.009]
[0.009]
[0.003]
[0.003]
[0.001]
[0.001]
[0.027]
[0.027]
Ln(Population)
0.562***
0.563***
-0.035***
-0.035***
0.010***
0.010***
0.155***
0.155***
[0.049]
[0.049]
[0.012]
[0.012]
[0.004]
[0.004]
[0.042]
[0.041]
Fraction Living in Place
0.036**
0.035**
0.027***
0.027***
-0.005***
-0.005***
-0.220***
-0.220***
With More than 25,000
[0.016]
[0.016]
[0.004]
[0.004]
[0.001]
[0.001]
[0.068]
[0.068]
Ln(Farm Value P.C.)
-0.153**
-0.146**
-0.028
-0.029*
0.001
0.001
-0.803
-0.804
[0.066]
[0.066]
[0.018]
[0.018]
[0.004]
[0.004]
[0.768]
[0.769]
Location Fixed Effects
Bank
Bank
Bank
Bank
Bank
Bank
Bank
Bank
Year Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Observations
73,818
73,818
73,818
73,818
73,818
73,818
73,818
73,818
R-squared
0.603
0.604
0.109
0.110
0.060
0.061
0.001
0.001
Due from Banks/Assets
Capital/Assets
Due to Banks/Liabilities
Clearinghouse Member
0.004
0.001
0.003
-0.003
0.008**
0.010**
[0.003]
[0.004]
[0.005]
[0.006]
[0.003]
[0.005]
Clearinghouse Member
0.007
0.017*
-0.006
*State Bank Dummy
[0.006]
[0.009]
[0.007]
Ln(Bank Age)
-0.021***
-0.021***
-0.053***
-0.053***
-0.002**
-0.002**
[0.001]
[0.001]
[0.001]
[0.001]
[0.001]
[0.001]
Ln(# of National
-0.017***
-0.017***
0.007**
0.008**
-0.009***
-0.009***
Banks)
[0.003]
[0.003]
[0.003]
[0.003]
[0.002]
[0.002]
Ln(# of State
-0.001
-0.001
-0.008***
-0.008***
0.005***
0.005***
Banks)
[0.002]
[0.002]
[0.002]
[0.002]
[0.001]
[0.001]
Ln(Population)
-0.011
-0.011
0.041***
0.041***
0.020***
0.020***
[0.007]
[0.007]
[0.009]
[0.009]
[0.007]
[0.007]
Fraction Living in Place
0.008***
0.008***
-0.021***
-0.021***
0.006**
0.006**
With More than 25,000
[0.002]
[0.002]
[0.003]
[0.003]
[0.003]
[0.003]
Ln(Farm Value P.C.)
0.020**
0.021**
-0.022
-0.021
-0.018**
-0.018**
[0.009]
[0.009]
[0.014]
[0.014]
[0.009]
[0.009]
Location Fixed Effects
Bank
Bank
Bank
Bank
Bank
Bank
Year Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Observations
73,818
73,818
73,818
73,818
73,818
73,818
R-squared
0.075
0.075
0.431
0.431
0.020
0.020
Notes: Table presents the results of an OLS regression. The dependent variable is described in the column heading. Each observation is a bank-year
and the sample spans Indiana, Michigan, Minnesota, New York, Ohio, Pennsylvania, and Wisconsin. Banks that entered after a clearinghouse was
established and locations that established a clearinghouse before 1880 are dropped. Dollar values are deflated to 1900 using Officer (2008). Robust
standard errors clustered by bank are provided in brackets. * denotes significance at 10%; ** at 5% level and *** at 1% level.

44

Table A.4: Effect of Clearinghouses on the Levels of Member and Non-Member Bank Balance Sheets (1880-1910)
Dropping Banks that Entered After Clearinghouse
Ln(Real Estate
Ln(Assets)
Ln(Loans)
Owned)
Ln(Cash)
Clearinghouse Member
0.090***
0.096***
0.107***
0.115***
-0.182
-0.153
0.013
0.008
[0.026]
[0.026]
[0.029]
[0.030]
[0.159]
[0.160]
[0.039]
[0.040]
Clearinghouse in City
0.088
0.118*
0.461*
-0.089
But Not A Member
[0.062]
[0.063]
[0.280]
[0.125]
Ln(Bank Age)
0.306***
0.306***
0.391***
0.391***
0.505***
0.504***
0.227***
0.227***
[0.007]
[0.006]
[0.009]
[0.009]
[0.037]
[0.037]
[0.010]
[0.010]
Ln(# of National
-0.046***
-0.045***
-0.004
-0.003
-0.064
-0.062
-0.231***
-0.232***
Banks)
[0.016]
[0.016]
[0.020]
[0.020]
[0.082]
[0.083]
[0.029]
[0.029]
Ln(# of State
0.011
0.011
0.032***
0.032***
-0.180***
-0.182***
-0.107***
-0.107***
Banks)
[0.009]
[0.009]
[0.012]
[0.012]
[0.057]
[0.057]
[0.014]
[0.014]
Ln(Population)
0.562***
0.558***
0.524***
0.519***
1.341***
1.321***
1.036***
1.040***
[0.049]
[0.049]
[0.056]
[0.056]
[0.258]
[0.259]
[0.087]
[0.086]
Fraction Living in Place
0.036**
0.036**
0.087***
0.088***
-0.162
-0.160
-0.059**
-0.060**
With More than 25,000
[0.016]
[0.016]
[0.019]
[0.019]
[0.115]
[0.115]
[0.028]
[0.028]
Ln(Farm Value P.C.)
-0.153**
-0.159**
-0.216***
-0.224***
-0.125
-0.156
-0.506***
-0.500***
[0.066]
[0.065]
[0.078]
[0.077]
[0.390]
[0.390]
[0.101]
[0.100]
Location Fixed Effects
Bank
Bank
Bank
Bank
Bank
Bank
Bank
Bank
Year Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Observations
73,818
73,818
73,818
73,818
73,818
73,818
73,818
73,818
R-squared
0.603
0.603
0.382
0.382
0.058
0.058
0.161
0.161
Ln(Due from Banks)
Ln(Capital)
Ln(Due to Banks)
Clearinghouse Member
0.178***
0.202***
0.095***
0.099***
0.275*
0.302*
[0.066]
[0.066]
[0.023]
[0.024]
[0.164]
[0.168]
Clearinghouse in City
0.389
0.062
0.420
But Not A Member
[0.258]
[0.051]
[0.365]
Ln(Bank Age)
0.224***
0.224***
0.126***
0.126***
0.297***
0.297***
[0.013]
[0.013]
[0.006]
[0.006]
[0.044]
[0.044]
Ln(# of National
-0.171***
-0.169***
-0.001
-0.001
-0.129
-0.126
Banks)
[0.034]
[0.033]
[0.017]
[0.017]
[0.112]
[0.112]
Ln(# of State
0.028
0.026
-0.027***
-0.028***
0.362***
0.360***
Banks)
[0.017]
[0.017]
[0.009]
[0.009]
[0.074]
[0.074]
Ln(Population)
0.542***
0.525***
0.707***
0.704***
1.195***
1.177***
[0.107]
[0.100]
[0.052]
[0.053]
[0.316]
[0.317]
Fraction Living in Place
0.070**
0.072**
-0.059***
-0.059***
0.567***
0.569***
With More than 25,000
[0.029]
[0.029]
[0.015]
[0.015]
[0.103]
[0.103]
Ln(Farm Value P.C.)
0.036
0.009
-0.222***
-0.227***
0.089
0.060
[0.111]
[0.112]
[0.066]
[0.066]
[0.443]
[0.444]
Location Fixed Effects
Bank
Bank
Bank
Bank
Bank
Bank
Year Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Observations
73,818
73,818
73,818
73,818
73,818
73,818
R-squared
0.194
0.195
0.280
0.280
0.049
0.049
Notes: Table presents the results of an OLS regression. The dependent variable is described in the column heading. Each observation is a bankyear and the sample spans Indiana, Michigan, Minnesota, New York, Ohio, Pennsylvania, and Wisconsin. Banks that entered after a
clearinghouse was established and locations that established a clearinghouse before 1880 are dropped. Dollar values are deflated to 1900 using
Officer (2008). Robust standard errors clustered by bank are provided in brackets. * denotes significance at 10%; ** at 5% level and *** at 1%
level.

45

Table A.5: Determinants of Bank Closure - Breaking Out State Banks From National Banks (18801910)
Probability of Closing
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Clearinghouse Member
-0.012***
-0.014***
-0.011**
-0.010**
[0.004]
[0.004]
[0.004]
[0.004]
Clearinghouse Member*State
Bank

0.001
[0.006]

-0.002
[0.007]

0.007
[0.006]

0.003
[0.007]

State Bank Dummy

0.029***
[0.004]

0.036***
[0.004]

0.019***
[0.004]

0.024***
[0.004]

Ln(Bank Age)

0.014***
[0.001]

0.015***
[0.001]

0.023***
[0.001]

0.025***
[0.001]

-0.003
[0.003]

-0.001
[0.003]

0.003
[0.003]

0.007**
[0.003]

Ln(# of State Banks)

0.013***
[0.002]

0.014***
[0.002]

0.017***
[0.002]

0.018***
[0.002]

Ln(Population)

0.007***
[0.003]

0.044***
[0.006]

0.010***
[0.003]

0.048***
[0.006]

Fraction Living in Place
With More than 25,000

-0.001
[0.008]

-0.001
[0.011]

0.003
[0.008]

-0.002
[0.011]

Ln(Farm Value P.C.)

-0.003*
[0.002]

-0.004
[0.002]

-0.002
[0.002]

-0.002
[0.002]

Ln(Assets)

-0.019***
[0.002]

-0.023***
[0.002]

Capital/Assets

0.054***
[0.012]

0.048***
[0.012]

Due to Banks/Liabilities

0.051***
[0.014]

0.053***
[0.014]

Loans/Assets

-0.001
[0.006]

-0.004
[0.007]

Due from Banks/Assets

0.009
[0.011]

0.005
[0.011]

0.154***
[0.034]

0.144***
[0.034]

Ln(# of National Banks)

Real Estate Owned/Assets
Cash/ Indiv. Deposits

-0.004
-0.004
[0.008]
[0.008]
Location Fixed Effects
State
County
State
County
Year Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Observations
81,665
81,665
81,665
81,665
R-squared
0.0052
0.0134
0.009
0.0185
Notes: Table presents the results of an OLS regression. The dependent variable is whether or not the bank closed in the following
year. Each observation is a bank-year and the sample spans Indiana, Michigan, Minnesota, New York, Ohio, Pennsylvania, and
Wisconsin. Dollar values are deflated to 1900 using Officer (2008). Robust standard errors clustered by bank are provided in
brackets. * denotes significance at 10%; ** at 5% level and *** at 1% level.

46

Table A.6: Determinants of Bank Closure - Dropping Non-Urban Locations (1880-1910)
All Banks
Clearinghouse Member

(1)
-0.016***
[0.004]

(2)
-0.017***
[0.004]

(3)
-0.011***
[0.004]

(4)
-0.011***
[0.004]

Clearinghouse in City
But Not Member

Cities That Established a Clearinghouse Between
1880 and 1910
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
-0.014***
-0.011**
-0.010*
-0.008
[0.005]
[0.005]
[0.005]
[0.005]
0.028***
[0.010]

0.027***
[0.011]

0.020*
[0.010]

0.019*
[0.011]

State Bank Dummy

0.018***
[0.006]

0.019***
[0.006]

0.012*
[0.006]

0.010
[0.007]

0.013
[0.010]

0.013
[0.010]

-0.003
[0.010]

-0.005
[0.010]

Ln(Bank Age)

0.014***
[0.002]

0.014***
[0.002]

0.026***
[0.002]

0.027***
[0.002]

0.018***
[0.003]

0.018***
[0.003]

0.029***
[0.003]

0.030***
[0.003]

-0.002
[0.004]

-0.001
[0.005]

0.003
[0.004]

0.009*
[0.005]

-0.004
[0.008]

-0.001
[0.011]

-0.007
[0.008]

-0.002
[0.011]

Ln(# of State Banks)

0.011***
[0.003]

0.009***
[0.003]

0.015***
[0.003]

0.013***
[0.003]

0.006
[0.004]

0.001
[0.004]

0.007*
[0.004]

0.002
[0.004]

Ln(Population)

0.011**
[0.004]

0.066***
[0.012]

0.014***
[0.004]

0.073***
[0.012]

0.019**
[0.009]

0.058***
[0.021]

0.034***
[0.009]

0.079***
[0.022]

Fraction Living in Place
With More than 25,000

0.020**
[0.009]

0.017
[0.012]

0.021**
[0.009]

0.017
[0.013]

0.015
[0.016]

0.019
[0.021]

0.018
[0.016]

0.025
[0.021]

Ln(Farm Value P.C.)

0.001
[0.002]

-0.001
[0.003]

0.001
[0.002]

0.001
[0.003]

-0.012**
[0.006]

-0.003
[0.010]

-0.011*
[0.006]

-0.007
[0.010]

Ln(Assets)

-0.023***
[0.003]

-0.026***
[0.003]

-0.028***
[0.005]

-0.031***
[0.005]

Capital/Assets

0.076***
[0.020]

0.069***
[0.021]

0.062**
[0.031]

0.058*
[0.032]

Due to Banks/Liabilities

0.079***
[0.019]

0.081***
[0.019]

0.080***
[0.028]

0.087***
[0.029]

0.001
[0.011]

-0.001
[0.011]

-0.008
[0.020]

-0.010
[0.020]

Due from Banks/Assets

0.060***
[0.022]

0.057**
[0.022]

0.051
[0.042]

0.050
[0.043]

Real Estate Owned/Assets

0.103**
[0.052]

0.105**
[0.053]

0.242***
[0.082]

0.239***
[0.081]

Ln(# of National Banks)

Loans/Assets

Cash/ Indiv. Deposits

-0.015
-0.015
-0.018
-0.017
[0.011]
[0.011]
[0.020]
[0.020]
Location Fixed Effects
State
County
State
County
State
County
State
County
Year Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Observations
30,962
30,962
30,962
30,962
13,774
13,774
13,774
13,774
R-squared
0.0106
0.0153
0.0166
0.0227
0.0129
0.0169
0.0201
0.025
Notes: Table presents the results of an OLS regression. The dependent variable is whether or not the bank closed in the following year. Each
observation is a bank-year and the sample spans Indiana, Michigan, Minnesota, New York, Ohio, Pennsylvania, and Wisconsin. All banks in
rural counties (denoted as those without a place of 2,500 people) are dropped. Column headings provide the sample of banks used. Dollar values
are deflated to 1900 using Officer (2008). Robust standard errors clustered by bank are provided in brackets. * denotes significance at 10%; ** at
5% level and *** at 1% level.

47

