                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        HOW ARE SNAP BENEFITS SPENT? EVIDENCE FROM A RETAIL PANEL

                                          Justine S. Hastings
                                           Jesse M. Shapiro

                                        Working Paper 23112
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w23112


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2017


This work has been supported (in part) by awards from the Laura and John Arnold Foundation, the
Smith Richardson Foundation, the National Science Foundation under Grant No. 1658037, the Robert
Wood Johnson Foundation’s Policies for Action program, and the Russell Sage Foundation. Any opinions
expressed are those of the author(s) alone and should not be construed as representing the opinions
of these Foundations. We also appreciate support from the Population Studies and Training Center
at Brown University. This project benefited from the suggestions of Ken Chay, Raj Chetty, David
Cutler, Amy Finkelstein, John Friedman, Roland Fryer, Xavier Gabaix, Peter Ganong, Ed Glaeser,
Nathan Hendren, Hilary Hoynes, Larry Katz, David Laibson, Kevin Murphy, Mandy Pallais, Devin
Pope, Matthew Rabin, Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach, Andrei Shleifer, Erik Snowberg, and Anthony
Zhang, from audience comments at Brown University, Clark University, Harvard University, the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, UC Berkeley, Stanford University, Princeton University, the University of
Chicago, Northwestern University, UC San Diego, New York University, Columbia University, the
Vancouver School of Economics, the University of Southern California, UT Austin, the Quantitative
Marketing and Economics Conference, NBER Summer Institute, and from comments by discussant
J.P. Dubé. We thank our dedicated research assistants for their contributions. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w23112.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2017 by Justine S. Hastings and Jesse M. Shapiro. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
How Are SNAP Benefits Spent? Evidence from a Retail Panel
Justine S. Hastings and Jesse M. Shapiro
NBER Working Paper No. 23112
January 2017
JEL No. D12,H31,I38

                                             ABSTRACT

We use a novel retail panel with detailed transaction records to study the effect of the Supplemental
Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) on household spending. We use administrative data to motivate
three approaches to causal inference. The marginal propensity to consume SNAP-eligible food (MPCF)
out of SNAP benefits is 0.5 to 0.6. The MPCF out of cash is much smaller. These patterns obtain even
for households for whom SNAP benefits are economically equivalent to cash because their benefits
are below their food spending. Using a semiparametric framework, we reject the hypothesis that households
respect the fungibility of money. A model with mental accounting can match the facts.


Justine S. Hastings
Brown University
Department of Economics
64 Waterman Street
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
justine.s.hastings@gmail.com

Jesse M. Shapiro
Economics Department
Box B
Brown University
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
jesse_shapiro_1@brown.edu




A online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w23112
1     Introduction
This paper studies how the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) affects household
spending. SNAP, the successor to the Food Stamp Program, provides recipient households with a
monthly electronic benefit that can only be spent on groceries. It is the second-largest means-tested
program in the United States after Medicaid (Congressional Budget Office 2013), enrolling 19.6
percent of households in the average month of fiscal 2014.1
    The program’s design reflects its stated goal of increasing recipient households’ food pur-
chases.2 Yet for the large majority of recipient households who spend more on food than they
receive in benefits,3 SNAP benefits are economically equivalent to cash.4 Recent estimates of low-
income US households’ marginal propensity to consume food (MPCF) out of cash income are at
or below 0.1.5 Thus, if households obey traditional demand theory, the program mainly increases
nonfood spending.
    This tension between program rhetoric and traditional economic theory matters both for evalu-
ating SNAP and for the basic science of household decision-making. The fungibility of money is a
fundamental prediction of traditional demand theory. It is challenged by the hypothesis of mental
accounting (Thaler 1999), which posits that households treat different sources of income differ-
ently. If households treat SNAP benefits differently from cash, this would likely have important
implications for the modeling of household behavior in this and other contexts.
     1 Over the months of fiscal 2014, the number of participating households ranged from 22,580,029 to 23,053,620,

with an average of 22,744,054 (FNS 2016a). There were 116,211,092 households in the US on average from 2010-
2014 (US Census Bureau 2016).
     2 On signing the bill to implement the Food Stamp Program, President Lyndon Johnson declared that the program

would “enable low-income families to increase their food expenditures” (Johnson 1964). The Food and Nutrition
Service of the USDA says that SNAP is important for “helping families put food on the table” (FNS 2012).
     3 Hoynes et al. (2015) find that spending on food at home is at or above the SNAP benefit level for 84 percent of

SNAP recipient households. Trippe and Ewell (2007) report that 73 to 78 percent of SNAP recipients spend at least
10 percent more on food than they receive in SNAP benefits.
     4 To fix ideas, consider a household with monthly income y and SNAP benefits b. If the household spends

 f on SNAP-eligible food then it has y − max (0, f − b) available to buy other goods. Let U ( f , n) denote the
household’s strictly monotone, differentiable, and strictly quasiconcave utility function defined over the dollar
amount of SNAP-eligible food consumption f and other consumption n. Suppose that there is a solution f ∗ =
arg max f U ( f , y − max (0, f − b)) such that f ∗ > b. The first-order necessary condition for this program is a nec-
essary and sufficient condition for a solution to the program max f U ( f , y + b − f ) in which the benefits are given in
cash. Therefore f ∗ = arg max f U ( f , y + b − f ). See Mankiw (2000) and Browning and Zupan (2004) for a textbook
treatment.
     5 Castner and Mabli (2010) estimate an MPCF out of cash income of 0.07 for SNAP participants. Hoynes and

Schanzenbach (2009) estimate an MPCF out of cash income of 0.09-0.10 for populations with a high likelihood of
participating in the Food Stamp Program.

                                                            2
   In this paper, we analyze a novel panel consisting of detailed transaction records from February
2006 to December 2012 for nearly half a million regular customers of a large US grocery retailer.
The data contain information on method of payment, allowing us to infer SNAP participation.
   We use three approaches to estimating the causal effect of SNAP on household spending: a
panel event-study design using trends prior to SNAP adoption to diagnose confounds, an instru-
mental variables design exploiting plausibly exogenous variation in the timing of program exit,
and a differences-in-differences design exploiting legislated changes to benefit schedules.
   We motivate these three approaches with findings from administrative data. Rhode Island ad-
ministrative data show that household circumstances change fairly smoothly around SNAP en-
rollment, motivating our panel event-study design. The administrative data also confirm our ex-
pectation that SNAP spell lengths are often divisible by six months because of the recertification
process (Klerman and Danielson 2011; Mills et al. 2014; Scherpf and Cerf 2016), motivating
our instrumental-variables design. National administrative records show discrete jumps in SNAP
benefits associated with legislated program changes in 2008 and 2009, motivating our differences-
in-differences design.
   Panel event-study plots show that after adoption of SNAP, households in the retailer panel
increase SNAP-eligible spending by about $110 a month, equivalent to more than half of their
monthly SNAP benefit, thus implying an MPCF out of SNAP between 0.5 and 0.6. Plots motivated
by our instrumental-variables and differences-in-differences designs also imply an MPCF out of
SNAP in the range of 0.5 to 0.6. By contrast, we estimate small effects of SNAP on nonfood
spending.
   We exploit large swings in gasoline prices during our sample period to estimate the MPCF
out of cash for the SNAP-recipient households in the retail panel, in a manner similar to Gelman
et al. (2017). Data on retail panelists’ gasoline purchases show that increases in gasoline prices
lead to significant additional out-of-pocket fuel expenses for SNAP-recipient households, but little
change in SNAP-eligible spending. We estimate a very low MPCF out of changes in fuel spending,
consistent with other estimates of the MPCF out of cash for low-income populations.
   Our findings indicate that the MPCF out of SNAP is greater than the MPCF out of other income
sources. We show that this pattern holds even for households for whom SNAP benefits should be
fungible with cash because their SNAP-eligible spending before SNAP receipt exceeds their SNAP


                                                 3
benefits.
    In our analysis, we consider several possible challenges to the internal and external validity
of the estimated MPCF out of SNAP. These challenges follow from the fact that our retail panel
includes only purchases by regular customers at a single retail chain.
    The first challenge is that we may mismeasure transitions on to and off of SNAP, which we infer
using data on mode of payment at the retailer. We use data on the universe of SNAP transactions
in Rhode Island to develop and validate our approach to measuring program transitions.
    The second challenge is that SNAP participation may impact households’ choice of retailer,
which would affect the conclusions from our first two research designs. Nationally representative
survey data, and data from the Nielsen Homescan Consumer Panel, show that SNAP participation
is only weakly related to a household’s choice of retailer. We perform simulations to quantify the
sensitivity of our estimates to assumptions about the relationship between SNAP participation and
choice of retailer.
    The third challenge is that household circumstances change in the period surrounding entry
into the program, and we know relatively little about the households in the retail panel beyond their
purchases. This challenge is especially important for our first research design. We argue that trends
in food spending prior to adoption suggest a small role for confounding changes in circumstances,
and use the instrumental variables approach proposed in Freyaldenhoven et al. (2018) to account
directly for such confounds.
    The fourth challenge is that our retail panel is not a nationally representative random sample,
which limits the external validity of our estimates. We compare several features of our panel to
nationally and locally representative statistics to gauge differences in the populations.
    After laying out our evidence on the MPCF, we develop an economic model of monthly food
spending by households for whom SNAP benefits are economically equivalent to cash. We show
how to test the hypothesis of fungibility, allowing for the endogeneity of cash income and SNAP
benefits, and for the possibility that different households’ consumption functions do not share a
common parametric structure. Our tests consistently reject the null hypothesis that households
treat SNAP benefits as fungible with other income.
    We turn next to the possible psychological reasons for departures from fungibility. We discuss
responses to qualitative interviews conducted at a food pantry as part of a Rhode Island state pilot


                                                  4
proposal to modify SNAP benefit timing. Interviewees often express different intentions when
asked how they would spend additional SNAP benefits or additional cash. Using our retail panel,
we show that SNAP receipt reduces shopping effort, measured as either the store-brand share of
expenditures or the share of purchases on which coupons are redeemed, but only for SNAP-eligible
items.
    Motivated by these findings, we specify a parametric model of behavior in which households
choose expenditures and shopping effort subject to short-run time preference (Laibson 1997) and
mental accounting (Thaler 1999). Following Farhi and Gabaix (2015), we operationalize mental
accounting as a linear cost of deviating from a default level of food spending that moves one-for-
one with SNAP benefits. We fit some model parameters to our data and choose others based on
past research. Short-run time preference alone cannot explain the observed MPCF because SNAP
benefits are too small relative to desired food spending to constrain household spending even at
the beginning of the month. Introducing mental accounting allows the fitted model to match the
observed MPCF out of SNAP and the key qualitative patterns in shopping effort. The fitted model
implies that a household would be willing to give up 0.84 percent (0.0084 log points) of monthly
consumption to avoid the psychological cost of a $100 deviation from default spending.
    This paper contributes to a large literature on the effects of SNAP, and its predecessor the Food
Stamp Program, on food spending, recently reviewed by Bitler (2015) and Hoynes and Schanzen-
bach (2016). There are four strands to this literature. The first strand studies the effect of converting
food stamp benefits to cash.6 The second strand, reviewed in Fox et al. (2004), either compares
participants to nonparticipants or relates a household’s food spending to its benefit amount in the
cross-section or over time.7 The third strand studies randomized evaluations of program extensions
or additions.8

    6 Moffitt  (1989) finds that a cashout in Puerto Rico did not affect food spending. Wilde and Ranney (1996) find
that behavior in two randomized cashout interventions is not consistent with fungibility; Schanzenbach (2002) finds
that behavior in these same interventions is consistent with fungibility. Fox et al. (2004) question the validity of
the findings from Puerto Rico and one of the randomized interventions, arguing that the best evidence indicates that
cashout reduces food spending.
     7 Wilde (2001) and Hoynes and Schanzenbach (2009), among others, criticize this strand of the literature for using

a source of variation in program benefits that is likely related to non-program determinants of spending. Wilde et al.
(2009) address the endogeneity of program benefits by exploiting variation in whether household food spending is
constrained by program rules. Li et al. (2014) use panel data to study the evolution of child food insecurity in the
months before and after family entry into the food stamp program.
     8 Collins et al. (2016) study a randomized evaluation of the Summer Electronic Benefit Transfer for Children

program and use survey data to estimate an MPCF out of program benefits of 0.58.

                                                          5
    The fourth strand exploits policy variation in program availability and generosity. Studying the
initial rollout of the Food Stamp Program using survey data, Hoynes and Schanzenbach (2009)
estimate an MPCF out of food stamps of 0.16 to 0.32, with confidence interval radius ranging from
0.17 to 0.27. Hoynes and Schanzenbach (2009) estimate an MPCF out of cash income of 0.09 to
0.10 and cannot reject the hypothesis that the MPCF out of food stamps is equal to the MPCF out
of cash income. Studying the effect of legislated benefit increases between 2007 and 2010 survey
data, Beatty and Tuttle (2015) estimate an MPCF out of SNAP benefits of 0.53 to 0.64 (they do not
report a confidence interval on these values) and an MPCF out of cash income of 0.15.9 Closest to
our study, Bruich (2014) uses retail scanner data with method-of-payment information to study the
effect of a 2013 SNAP benefit reduction, estimating an MPCF out of SNAP benefits of 0.3 with
confidence interval radius of 0.15.10 We estimate an MPCF out of SNAP benefits of 0.5 to 0.6 with
confidence interval radius as low as 0.015, and an MPCF out of cash income of no more than 0.1.
    This paper contributes new evidence of violations of fungibility in a large-stakes real-world
decision with significant policy relevance. That households mentally or even physically separate
different income sources according to spending intentions is well-documented in hypothetical-
choice scenarios (e.g., Heath and Soll 1996; Thaler 1999) and ethnographic studies (e.g., Rainwater
et al. 1959). Much of the recent evidence from real-world markets is confined to settings with little
direct policy relevance (e.g., Milkman and Beshears 2009; Hastings and Shapiro 2013; Abeler and
Marklein 2017). Important exceptions include Kooreman’s (2000) study of a child tax credit in
the Netherlands, Jacoby’s (2002) study of a school nutrition program in the Philippines, Feldman’s
(2010) study of a change in US federal income tax withholding, Card and Ransom’s (2011) and
Kooreman et al.’s (2013) studies of employee savings programs in the US and the Netherlands,
respectively, Beatty et al.’s (2014) study of a labeled cash transfer in the UK, and Benhassine et
al.’s (2015) study of a labeled cash transfer in Morocco.11

     9 Studying the effect of the benefit increase arising from the 2009 American Recovery and Reinvestment Act

(ARRA) using survey data, Tuttle (2016) estimates an MPCF out of SNAP of 0.53 with confidence interval radius of
0.38. Nord and Prell (2011) estimate the effect of the 2009 benefit expansion on food security and food expenditures.
Ratcliffe et al. (2011) and Yen et al. (2008) estimate the effect of SNAP and food stamps, respectively, on food
insecurity, using state-level policy variables as excluded instruments.
    10 Bruich (2014) does not report an MPCF out of cash income. Andreyeva et al. (2012) and Garasky et al. (2016)

use retail scanner data to describe the food purchases of SNAP recipients, but not to estimate the causal effect of SNAP
on spending.
    11 See also Islam and Hoddinott (2009), Afridi (2010), Shi (2012), and Aker (2017). A closely related literature on

“flypaper effects” studies violations of fungibility by governments (Hines and Thaler 1995; Inman 2008).

                                                           6
    This paper also shows how to test for the fungibility of money without assuming that the con-
sumption function is linear or that the consumption function is identical for all households. Our
approach nests Kooreman’s (2000), but, like Kooreman et al.’s (2013), avoids the concern that a
rejection of fungibility is due to misspecification of functional forms (Ketcham et al. 2016).
    Our use of a parametric model to quantify the predictions of multiple psychological departures
from the neoclassical benchmark is similar in spirit to DellaVigna et al. (2017). Hastings and
Shapiro (2013), Ganong and Noel (2017), and Thakral and Tô (2017) also compare the predictions
of alternative psychological models. The only other paper we are aware of that reports an estimate
of a structural parameter of a model of mental accounting based on non-laboratory evidence is
Farhi and Gabaix (2017), who calibrate parameters of their model to match our empirical findings.
In this sense, our paper contributes to the growing literature on structural behavioral economics
(DellaVigna 2017).



2     Motivating evidence from administrative and survey data

2.1    Rhode Island administrative data

We use Rhode Island state administrative records housed in a secure facility at the Rhode Is-
land Innovative Policy Lab (RIIPL) at Brown University. Personally identifiable information has
been removed from the data and replaced with anonymous identifiers that make it possible for
researchers with approved access to join and analyze records associated with the same individual
while preserving anonymity. These records are not linked to our retail panel.
    The data include anonymized state SNAP records from October 2004 through June 2016, which
indicate the months of benefit receipt and the collection of individuals associated with each house-
hold on SNAP in each month. We define a SNAP spell to be a contiguous period of benefit receipt.
We assume that an individual belongs to the household of her most recent spell, does not change
households between the end of any given spell and the start of the next spell, and belongs to the
household of her first spell as of the start of the sample period. We determine each individual’s
age in each month, and we exclude from our analysis any household whose membership we can-




                                                 7
not uniquely identify in every month,12 or whose adult (over 18) composition changes during the
sample period. The final sample consists of 184, 308 unique households. For each household and
month, we compute the total number of children under five years old.
    The data also include anonymized administrative records of the state’s unemployment insur-
ance system joined via anonymized identifiers to the individuals in the SNAP records over the same
period. We compute, for each household and quarter,13 the sum of total unemployment insurance
benefits received from and total earnings reported for all individuals who are in the household as
of the quarter’s end.14 We will sometimes refer to this total as “in-state earnings” for short, and we
note that it excludes income sources such as social security benefits and out-of-state earnings.
    Finally, the data include anonymized administrative records of all debits and credits to the
SNAP Electronic Benefit Transfer (EBT) cards of Rhode Island residents for the period September
2012 through October 2015. From these we identify all household-months in which the household
received a SNAP benefit and all household-months in which the household spent SNAP benefits at
a large, anonymous retailer in Rhode Island (“Rhode Island Retailer”) chosen to be similar to the
retailer that provided our retail panel.


2.2     Changes in household circumstances around SNAP adoption

Because SNAP is a means-tested program and its eligibility rules incorporate a poverty line stan-
dard, household income and household size are major determinants of SNAP eligibility (FNS
2016b). We therefore hypothesize that entry into SNAP is associated with a decrease in in-state
earnings and an increase in the number of children. Figure 1 shows panel event-study plots of in-
state earnings and number of children as a function of time relative to SNAP adoption, which we
define to occur in the first quarter or month, respectively, of a household’s first SNAP spell. In the



   12 This can occur either because we lack a unique identifier for an individual in the household or because a given

individual is associated with multiple households in the same month.
   13 The quarterly level is the most granular at which earnings data are available. We use data only on household-

quarters in which the household is observed for all three months of the quarter. Data on earnings are missing from our
database for the fourth quarter of 2004 and the second quarter of 2011.
   14 We exclude from our analysis any household-quarter in which the household’s total quarterly earnings exceed

the 99.9999th percentile or in which unemployment insurance benefits in any month of the quarter exceed three times
the four-week equivalent of the 2016 maximum individual weekly benefit of $707 (Rhode Island Department of Labor
and Training 2016).

                                                          8
period of SNAP adoption, in-state earnings decline and the number of children rises, on average.15
    Past research shows that greater household size and lower household income are associated,
respectively, with greater and lower at-home food expenditures among the SNAP-recipient popu-
lation (Castner and Mabli 2010).16 It is therefore unclear whether these contextual factors should
contribute a net rise or fall in food expenditures in the period of SNAP adoption. Because figure 1
shows that these factors trend substantially in the periods preceding SNAP adoption, we can assess
their net effect by studying trends in spending prior to adoption.
    Figure 1 therefore motivates our panel event-study research design, in which we look for sharp
changes in spending around SNAP enrollment, and use trends in spending prior to SNAP adoption
to diagnose the direction and plausible magnitude of confounds.


2.3     Length of SNAP spells and the certification process

When a state agency determines that a household is eligible for SNAP, the agency sets a certi-
fication period at the end of which benefits will terminate if the household has not documented
continued eligibility.17 The certification period may not exceed 24 months for households whose
adult members are elderly or disabled, and may not exceed 12 months otherwise (FNS 2014). In
practice, households are frequently certified for exactly these lengths of time, or for other lengths
divisible by 6 months (Mills et al. 2014).
    Figure 2 shows the distribution of SNAP spell lengths in Rhode Island administrative data. The
figure shows clear spikes in the density at spell lengths divisible by 6 months. The online appendix
reports that the change in in-state earnings is economically similar between quarters that do and do
   15 An  analogous plot in the online appendix shows that in-state earnings rise in the quarters leading up to program
exit. The online appendix also includes a plot of trends in income and number of children around SNAP adoption
constructed from the Survey of Income and Program Participation.
    16 Past research also finds that unemployment—a likely cause of the decline in income associated with SNAP

adoption—is associated with a small decline in at-home food expenditure. Using cross-sectional variation in the
Continuing Survey of Food Intake by Individuals, Aguiar and Hurst (2005) estimate that unemployment is associated
with 9 percent lower at-home food expenditure. Using pseudo-panel variation in the Family Expenditure Survey, Banks
et al. (1998) estimate that unemployment is associated with a 7.6 percent decline in the sum of food consumed in the
home and domestic energy. Using panel variation in the Panel Study of Income Dynamics, Gough (2013) estimates
that unemployment is associated with a statistically insignificant 1 to 4 percent decline in at-home food expenditure.
Using panel variation in checking account records, Ganong and Noel (2016) estimate that the onset of unemployment
is associated with a 3.1 percent decline in at-home food expenditure.
    17 Federal rules state that “the household’s certification period must not exceed the period of time during which the

household’s circumstances (e.g., income, household composition, and residency) are expected to remain stable” (FNS
2014).

                                                           9
not contain a spell month divisible by 6.
    Figure 2 motivates our instrumental variables research design, which exploits the six-month
divisibility of certification periods as a source of plausibly exogenous timing of program exit.


2.4    Legislated changes in SNAP benefit schedules

The online appendix shows the average monthly SNAP benefit per US household from Febru-
ary 2006 to December 2012, which coincides with the time frame of our retail panel. The series
exhibits two large discrete jumps, which correspond to two legislated changes in the benefit sched-
ule: an increase before October 2008 due to the 2008 Farm Bill, and an increase in April 2009
due to the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act.18 These facts motivate our differences-in-
differences research design, which exploits these legislated benefit increases to estimate the MPCF
out of SNAP.


2.5    Inferring SNAP adoption from single-retailer data

Households can spend SNAP at any authorized retailer (FNS 2012). Because we will conduct our
analysis of household spending using data from a single retail chain, we are at risk of mistaking
changes in a household’s choice of retailer for program entry or exit. We use Rhode Island EBT
records to determine how best to infer program transitions in single-retailer data.
    For each K ∈ {1, ..., 12} and for each household in the EBT records, we identify all cases
of K consecutive months without SNAP spending at the Rhode Island Retailer followed by K
consecutive months with SNAP spending at the Rhode Island Retailer. We then compute the share
of these transition periods in which the household newly enrolled in SNAP within two months of
the start of SNAP spending at the retailer, where we define new enrollment as receipt of at least
$10 in SNAP benefits following a period of at least three consecutive months with no benefit.
    Figure 3 plots the share of households newly enrolling in SNAP as a function of the radius
K of the transition period. For low values of K, many transitions reflect retailer-switching rather
than new enrollments in SNAP. The fraction of transitions that represent new enrollments increases

   18 Two smaller jumps, in October of 2006 and 2007, coincide with the annual cost of living adjustments to SNAP
payments (FNS 2017b). We do not exploit these smaller changes in our analysis as we expect more precise inference
from larger changes in benefits.

                                                       10
with K. For K = 6, the fraction constituting new enrollments is 87 percent. When we focus on
households who do the majority of their SNAP spending at the retailer in question—a sample
arguably more comparable to the regular customers in our retail panel—this fraction rises to 96
percent.
   Motivated by figure 3, our main analysis of SNAP adoption in the retailer data will use transi-
tions with K = 6 and above, and we will present sensitivity analysis using larger minimum values
of K.


2.6     SNAP participation and choice of retailer

Even if we isolate suitably exogenous changes in SNAP participation and benefits, our analysis of
single-retailer data could be misleading if SNAP participation directly affects retailer choice.
   Ver Ploeg et al. (2015) study the types of stores at which SNAP recipients shop using nationally
representative survey data collected from April 2012 through January 2013. For 46 percent of
SNAP recipients, the primary grocery retailer is a supercenter, for 43 percent it is a supermarket,
for 3 percent it is another kind of store, and for 8 percent it is unknown.19 The corresponding
values for all US households are 45 percent, 44 percent, 4 percent, and 7 percent. As with primary
stores, the distribution of alternate store types is nearly identical between SNAP recipients and the
population as a whole. SNAP recipients’ choice of store type is also nearly identical to that of
low-income non-recipients.
   The online appendix presents analogous evidence on choice of retail chain using the same data
as Ver Ploeg et al. (2015). We find that SNAP participation is not strongly related to households’
choice of retail chain.
   Appendix A and appendix table 1 present the results of a longitudinal analysis of the relation-
ship between SNAP participation and choice of retailer using data from the Nielsen Homescan
Consumer Panel. For the full sample of households, we find that SNAP participation is associated
with a statistically insignificant increase of 0.4 percentage points (or 0.7 percent of the mean) in the
share of spending devoted to the primary retailer. For households whose primary retailer is a gro-
cery store, we find a statistically significant increase of 1.1 percentage points (2.2 percent). Section

  19 Administrative data show that 84 percent of SNAP benefits are redeemed at supercenters or supermarkets (Castner

and Henke 2011).

                                                       11
4.4 shows that our main conclusions are not sensitive to allowing for these estimated changes in
retail choice.



3     Retailer data and definitions

3.1        Household purchases and characteristics

We obtained anonymized transaction-level data from a large U.S. grocery retailer with gasoline sta-
tions on site. The data comprise all purchases in five states made using loyalty cards by customers
who shop at one of the retailer’s stores at least every other month.20 We refer to these customers
as households.
    The loyalty card is used to deliver and track promotions (Holmes 2011). Communication
with the retailer indicates that at least 90 percent of purchases involve the use of a loyalty card,
consistent with the magnitude reported by Andreyeva et al. (2013), who also conduct research
using loyalty-card data from a grocery retailer.
    We observe 6.02 billion purchases made on 608 million purchase occasions by 486, 570 house-
holds from February 2006 through December 2012. We exclude from our analysis the 1, 214
households who spend more than $5,000 in a single month.
    For each household, the retailer provided us with characteristics including the age and gender of
adult household members, the median years of schooling of adult household members, an indicator
for the presence of children, a categorical measure of household income, and ZIP code. These
are based on a combination of sources, including information supplied by the household when
obtaining the loyalty card, information purchased from third parties, and information imputed
from Census statistics for the local area. We use these data in robustness checks and to explore
heterogeneity in our estimates. We match ZIP codes to counties and states using federal data
files.21


   20 The retailer also provided us with data on the universe of transactions at a single one of the retailer’s stores. In the

online appendix we show that our estimates of the MPCF are similar between our baseline panel and this alternative
panel.
    21 Weassign ZIP codes to counties and states using the crosswalk for the first quarter of 2010 from
US Department of Housing and Urban Development (2017). We assign each ZIP code to the county that
contains the largest fraction of the ZIP code’s residential population, breaking ties at random.

                                                             12
    For each item purchased, we observe the quantity, the pre-tax amount paid, a flag for the use
of WIC, and the dollar amount of coupons or other discounts applied to the purchase.
    For each purchase occasion, we observe the date, a store identifier, and a classification of the
store into a retailer division, which is a grouping based on the store’s brand and distribution geogra-
phy. We also observe a classification of the main payment method used for the purchase, defined as
the payment method accounting for the greatest share of expenditure. The main payment method
categories include cash, check, credit, debit, and a government benefit category that consists of
SNAP, WIC, cash benefits (e.g., TANF) delivered by EBT card, and a number of other, smaller
government programs.
    For purchase occasions in March 2009 and later, we further observe the exact breakdown of
spending according to a more detailed classification that itemizes specific government programs.
These data indicate that, excluding WIC transactions, SNAP accounts for 99.3 percent of expendi-
tures classified as a government benefit.
    We classify a purchase occasion as a SNAP purchase occasion if the main payment method is a
government benefit and WIC is not used. Using the detailed payment data for purchase occasions
in March 2009 and later, we calculate that SNAP is used in only 0.23 percent of the purchase
occasions that we do not classify as SNAP purchase occasions. Appendix table 2 shows that our
key results are not sensitive to excluding from the sample any household that ever uses WIC.
    We define a SNAP month as any household-month with positive total spending across SNAP
purchase occasions.22 Of the household-months in our panel, 7.7 percent are SNAP months. Of
the households in our panel, 42.9 percent experience at least one SNAP month, and 21.6 percent
experience at least two consecutive SNAP months.23
    SNAP penetration is lower in the retail panel than in the US as a whole. Calculations in the
online appendix show that an average of 14.5 percent of US households were on SNAP during the
months of the retail sample period. The fraction of households on SNAP is similar when focusing
only on the counties of residence of the households in the retail panel. A possible explanation is

   22 Using our detailed payment data for March 2009 and later, we can alternatively define a SNAP month as any

month in which a household uses SNAP. This definition agrees with our principal definition in all but 0.27 percent of
household-months.
   23 Calculations in the online appendix show that in the 2008 Survey of Income and Program Participation, house-

holds are on SNAP in 9.0 to 11.9 percent of survey months, and 17.2 to 21.7 percent of households are on SNAP at
some point during the panel.

                                                         13
that households in the retail panel have higher-than-average income. Consistent with this, we show
in the online appendix that retail panelists live in ZIP codes with higher income than the average
in their counties of residence.


3.2     Product characteristics

The retailer provided us with data on the characteristics of each product purchased, including an
indicator for whether the product is store-brand, a text description of the product, and the product’s
location within a taxonomy.
    We classify products as SNAP-eligible or SNAP-ineligible based on the retailer’s taxonomy
and the guidelines for eligibility published on the USDA website.24 Among all non-fuel purchases
in our data, 71 percent of spending goes to SNAP-eligible products, 25 percent goes to SNAP-
ineligible products, and the remainder goes to products that we cannot classify.25
    We use our detailed payment data for purchases made in SNAP months in March 2009 or
later to validate our product eligibility classification. Among all purchases made at least partly
with SNAP in which we classify all products as eligible or ineligible, in 98.6 percent of cases the
expenditure share of SNAP-eligible products is at least as large as the expenditure share paid with
SNAP. Among purchases made entirely with SNAP, in 98.7 percent of cases we classify no items
as SNAP-ineligible. Among purchases in which all items are classified as SNAP-ineligible, in
more than 99.9 percent of cases SNAP is not used as a payment method.


3.3     Shopping effort

For each household and month we compute the store-brand share of expenditures and the share
of purchases for which coupons are redeemed for both SNAP-eligible and SNAP-ineligible pur-
chases.26 We adjust these measures for the composition of purchases as follows. For each item

   24 Grocery and prepared food items intended for home consumption are generally SNAP-eligible (FNS 2017a).

Alcohol, tobacco, pet food, and prepared food intended for on-premise consumption are SNAP-ineligible (FNS 2017a).
   25 Using the Nielsen Homescan Consumer Panel data that we describe in appendix A, we calculate that the share

of SNAP-eligible spending among all classified non-fuel spending is at the 15th percentile of the top 20 grocery retail
chains by total sales.
   26 We treat these shares as undefined whenever the household has a nonpositive SNAP-eligible or SNAP-ineligible

expenditure in a given month. In the small number of cases in which product returns lead to shares above one or below
zero, we truncate the relevant share to lie between zero and one.

                                                         14
purchased, we compute the store-brand share of expenditure among other households buying an
item in the same product category in the same retailer division and the same calendar month and
week. The expenditure-weighted average of this measure across purchases by a given household
in a given month is the predicted store-brand share, i.e. the share of expenditures that would be
store-brand if the household acted like others in the panel who buy the same types of goods. Like-
wise, we compute the share of purchases by other households buying the same item in the same
retailer division, month, and week in which a coupon is redeemed, and compute the average of this
measure across purchases by a given household in a given month to form a predicted coupon use.
We subtract the predicted from the actual value of each shopping effort measure to form measures
of adjusted store-brand share and adjusted coupon redemption share.
    Nevo and Wong (2015) find that the store-brand share and rate of coupon redemption rose
along with other measures of shopping effort during the Great Recession, reflecting households’
greater willingness to trade time for money. The store brand is comparable to the national brand
in many categories (Bronnenberg et al. 2015), but comparison shopping requires time and effort.
Likewise, redeeming coupons requires keeping track of them and bringing them to the store if they
have been mailed to the home. As in Nevo and Wong (2015), we use these measures as proxies for
the overall level of shopping effort, which we do not observe directly.
    In SNAP-eligible product categories, the average store-brand price is $0.63 below the average
non-store-brand price of $3.34. In SNAP-ineligible product categories, the average store-brand
price is $1.21 below the average non-store-brand price of $8.07. The average coupon redeemed
delivers savings of $1.01 in SNAP-eligible categories and $1.53 in SNAP-ineligible categories.27


3.4     Monthly spending and benefits

For each household in our panel, we calculate total monthly spending on SNAP-eligible items,
fuel, and SNAP-ineligible items excluding fuel. We calculate each household’s total monthly
SNAP benefits as the household’s total spending across all SNAP purchase occasions within the
month.28 The online appendix compares the distribution of SNAP benefits between the retail panel
   27 These calculations are performed at the level of the store division, product category and week, weighting by total

expenditures, and excluding the top and bottom 0.1 percent of observations for each respective calculation.
   28 Our concept of total SNAP benefits has a correlation of 0.99 with the exact amount of SNAP spending calculated

using detailed payment information in SNAP months March 2009 and later.

                                                          15
and the administrative data for the Rhode Island Retailer.
    Our data corroborate prior evidence (e.g., Hoynes et al. 2015) that, for most households, SNAP
benefits do not cover all SNAP-eligible spending. For 94 percent of households who ever use
SNAP, average SNAP-eligible spending in non-SNAP months exceeds average SNAP benefits in
SNAP months. SNAP-eligible spending exceeds SNAP benefits by at least $10 in 93 percent
of SNAP months and by at least 5 percent in 92 percent of SNAP months. Appendix table 2
reports estimates of key parameters for the subset of households for whom, according to various
definitions, SNAP benefits are inframarginal to total food spending.


3.5        SNAP adoption

Motivated by the analysis in section 2.5, we define a SNAP adoption as a period of six or more
consecutive non-SNAP months followed by a period of six or more consecutive SNAP months. We
refer to the first SNAP month in an adoption as an adoption month. We define a SNAP adopter as a
household with at least one SNAP adoption. Our panel contains a total of 24,456 SNAP adopters.29
    Panel A of figure 4 shows the share of SNAP adopters with positive SNAP spending in each
of the 12 months before and after a household’s first SNAP adoption. Panel B of figure 4 shows
average SNAP benefits before and after adoption. Following adoption, the average household re-
ceives just over $200 in monthly SNAP benefits. For comparison, the average US SNAP benefit
per household in fiscal 2009, roughly at the midpoint of our sample period, was $276 (FNS 2016a).
The average benefit in fiscal 2008 was $227 (FNS 2016a). The online appendix reports that the
average SNAP benefit among SNAP adopters is 82 percent of the average benefit among demo-
graphically similar households in publicly available administrative records. The online appendix
also compares the distribution of benefits between the two sources.
    We conduct the bulk of our analysis using the sample of SNAP adopters. Appendix table 2
presents our key results for a broader sample and for a more stringent definition of SNAP adoption.



   29 Toassess the potential for false positives in our definition of SNAP adoption, we identified the set of all cases
in which a household exhibits six or more consecutive SNAP months with SNAP spending at or below five dollars,
followed by six or more consecutive SNAP months with spending above five dollars. Such cases are likely not true
adoptions but could arise if households’ propensity to spend SNAP at the retailer fluctuates sufficiently from month to
month. We find no such cases in our data. When we increase the cutoff to ten dollars, we find one such case.

                                                         16
3.6     Retailer share of wallet

Spending patterns suggest that panelists buy a large fraction of their groceries at the retailer. Mabli
and Malsberger (2013) estimate average 2010 spending on food at home by SNAP recipients of
$380 per month using data from the Consumer Expenditure Survey.30 Hoynes et al. (2015) find
that average per-household food expenditures are 20 to 25 percent lower in the Consumer Expendi-
ture Survey than in the corresponding aggregates from the National Income and Product Accounts.
Bee et al. (2015) estimate a gap of 14 percent for expenditures on food-at-home. In the six months
following a SNAP adoption, average monthly SNAP-eligible spending in our data is $469. Like-
wise, Mabli and Malsberger (2013) estimate average 2010 spending on food at home by eligible
nonparticipants of $292, and we find that average monthly SNAP-eligible spending in our data is
$355 in the six months prior to a SNAP adoption.
    Panelists also seem to buy a large fraction of their gasoline at the retailer: average monthly fuel
spending at the retailer is $97 in the six months following SNAP adoption, as compared to Mabli
and Malsberger’s (2013) estimate of $115 for SNAP recipients in 2010.
    Survey data from the retailer do not suggest that SNAP use is associated with an increase in the
retailer’s share of overall category spending. During the period June 2009 to December 2011, the
retailer conducted an online survey on a convenience sample of customers. The survey asked:

       About what percentage of your total overall expenses for groceries, household sup-
       plies, or personal care items do you, yourself, spend in the following stores?

Respondents were presented with a list of retail chains including the one from which we obtained
our data. Excluding responses in which the reported percentages do not sum to 100, we observe at
least one response from 961 of the households in our panel. Among survey respondents that ever
use SNAP, the average reported share of wallet for the retailer is 0.61 for those surveyed during
non-SNAP months (N = 311 survey responses) and 0.53 for those surveyed during SNAP months
(N = 80 survey responses).31
    In appendix table 2 we verify that our results are robust to restricting attention to households


   30 Our own calculations from the data used by Ver Ploeg et al. (2015) imply average monthly food-at-home spending

of $379 for SNAP recipients and $371 for SNAP recipients shopping primarily at supermarkets.
   31 The difference in means is statistically significant (t = 2.15, p = 0.032).



                                                        17
with relatively few supermarkets in their county, for whom opportunities to substitute across re-
tailers are presumably more limited.



4       Descriptive evidence

4.1     Marginal propensity to consume out of SNAP benefits

4.1.1    Trends in spending before and after SNAP adoption

Figure 5 shows the evolution of monthly spending before and after SNAP adoption for our sam-
ple of SNAP adopters. Each plot shows coefficients from a regression of spending on a vector
of indicators for months relative to the household’s first SNAP adoption. Panel A shows that
SNAP-eligible spending increases by approximately $110 in the first few months following SNAP
adoption. Recall from figure 4 that the average household receives monthly SNAP benefits of
approximately $200 following SNAP adoption. Taking the ratio of the increase in spending to
the benefit amount, we estimate an MPCF out of SNAP benefits between 0.5 and 0.6. The online
appendix shows that the increase in SNAP-eligible spending at adoption is greatest for those house-
holds who experience the greatest increase in SNAP benefits, and that SNAP-eligible expenditures
decline significantly on exit from the program. The online appendix also presents a decomposi-
tion exercise showing that the increase in spending at adoption is due both to an increase in the
frequency of shopping trips and to an increase in the amount of spending per trip.
    To address the possibility that the increase in spending is due to short-term stockpiling of non-
perishables, the online appendix shows that the increase in spending at adoption is similar for both
perishable and non-perishable items.
    Panel B shows that SNAP-ineligible spending increases by approximately $5 following SNAP
adoption, implying an MPC of a few percentage points. The increase in SNAP-ineligible spending
is smaller in both absolute and proportional terms than the increase in SNAP-eligible spending. The
online appendix shows directly that the share of spending devoted to SNAP-eligible items increases
significantly following SNAP adoption. This finding is not consistent with the hypothesis that
SNAP leads to a proportional increase in spending across all categories due to substitution away
from competing retailers. Consistent with an important role for SNAP, the online appendix also


                                                 18
shows that the increase in spending at adoption is concentrated in the early weeks of the month,
when SNAP benefits are typically spent.
   Following the analysis in section 2.2, trends in spending prior to adoption should provide a
sense of the influence of changes in contextual factors on spending. Panel A shows very little trend
in SNAP-eligible spending prior to SNAP adoption. Panel B shows, if anything, a slight decline in
SNAP-ineligible spending prior to adoption, perhaps due to economic hardship. Neither of these
patterns seems consistent with the hypothesis that the large increase in SNAP-eligible spending
that occurs at SNAP adoption is driven by changes in contextual factors.
   The trends in SNAP-eligible spending prior to SNAP adoption documented in figure 5 appear
quantitatively reasonable given the trends in in-state earnings and number of children documented
in figure 1. The estimates underlying panel A of figure 1 imply a decline in in-state earnings of
$95.91 between the fourth and first quarter prior to SNAP adoption. The estimates underlying
panel A of figure 5 imply a decline in SNAP-eligible spending of $3.24 between the first three
pre-adoption months and the last three pre-adoption months. The ratio of these values implies an
MPCF out of in-state earnings of 0.034, on the low end of the range for the MPCF out of cash
reported by Hoynes and Schanzenbach (2009). Moreover, the estimates underlying panel B of
figure 1 imply an increase in the number of children under five years old of 0.025 between the
first and last three pre-adoption months. If, as a rough guide, we take Lino’s (2017) estimate
that an additional child aged 0 to 2 costs $134 in monthly food expenditures for a low-income,
single-parent household, the trends are mutually consistent with an MPCF out of in-state earnings
of 0.069, well within the range for the MPCF out of cash reported by Hoynes and Schanzenbach
(2009).
   The preceding analysis of trends is informal and does not account for the evolution of program
participation before and after SNAP adoption. The online appendix presents a formal analysis
using the approach proposed in Freyaldenhoven et al. (2018) to control explicitly for confounding
trends in in-state earnings and number of children. This approach yields an estimated MPCF out
of SNAP of 0.49. The confidence intervals on the MPCF out of in-state earnings and the effect of
children on food spending are wide and include reasonable values.




                                                19
4.1.2   Timing of program exit due to certification period lengths

Figure 6 shows the evolution of monthly spending during a monthly clock that begins at SNAP
adoption and resets every six months. Panels A and B show that SNAP participation and benefits
fall especially quickly in the first month of the clock, consistent with the finding in section 2.3
that SNAP spell lengths tend to be divisible by six months. Participation and benefits also fall
more quickly in the sixth month, perhaps reflecting error in our classification of adoption dates.
The online appendix presents analogues of these plots constructed using administrative data for the
Rhode Island Retailer.
    Panel C of figure 6 shows that the pattern of SNAP-eligible spending closely follows that of
SNAP benefits. Benefits decline by about $12 more in the first month of the cycle than in the
second. Correspondingly, SNAP-eligible spending declines by $6 to $7 more in the first month
than in the second. Taking the ratio of these two values implies an MPCF out of SNAP benefits
between 0.5 and 0.6, consistent with the evidence in figure 5.32


4.1.3   Legislated benefit changes

Figure 7 plots the evolution of SNAP benefits and SNAP-eligible spending around the legislated
benefit changes described in section 2.4. Panel A shows the evolution of SNAP benefits in admin-
istrative data. Panel B shows the evolution of SNAP benefits and SNAP-eligible spending in the
retail data, comparing likely SNAP recipients to likely non-recipients. Both plots show increases
in benefits corresponding to the implementation dates of the Farm Bill and ARRA, respectively.33
Panel B further shows that the SNAP-eligible spending of likely SNAP recipients increases rela-
tive to that of likely non-recipients around the periods of benefit increases. The online appendix
reports the results of a differences-in-differences analysis of these benefit increases in the spirit of
Bruich (2014) and Beatty and Tuttle (2015). We estimate an MPCF out of SNAP benefits of 0.53,
and if anything a negative effect of benefit expansions on SNAP-ineligible spending. The online
appendix reports on the fit of the estimated differences-in-differences model to the plot in panel B
   32 The online appendix shows that patterns similar to those in figure 6 obtain for those SNAP adopters who exhibit

a period of six consecutive non-SNAP months after initial exit from SNAP, for whom short-run “churn” off of and
back on to SNAP (Mills et al. 2014) is less likely to be a factor.
   33 The increase in benefits in September 2008, before the implementation of the Farm Bill, appears to be due to

emergency SNAP benefits issued in response to Hurricane Ike. See, for example, Center for Public Policy Priorities
(2008).

                                                         20
of figure 7, and on the effect of aggregating the data to the store-month level on the precision of
the estimates.


4.2       Marginal propensity to consume food out of cash

Two existing pieces of evidence suggest that SNAP recipients’ MPCF out of cash is much below
the values of 0.5 to 0.6 that we estimate for the MPCF out of SNAP.
    The first is that, for the average SNAP recipient, food at home represents only 18 percent of
total expenditure (Mabli and Malsberger 2013). Engel’s Law (Engel 1857; Houthakker 1957)
holds that the budget share of food declines with total resources, and hence that the budget share
exceeds the MPCF. Engel’s Law is not consistent with a budget share of 0.18 and an MPCF of 0.5
to 0.6.
    The second is that existing estimates of the MPCF out of cash for low-income populations are
far below 0.5. Castner and Mabli (2010) estimate an MPCF of 0.07 for SNAP recipients. Hoynes
and Schanzenbach (2009) estimate an MPCF of 0.09 to 0.10 for populations with a high likelihood
of entering the Food Stamp Program. Assessing the literature, Hoynes and Schanzenbach (2009)
note that across “a wide range of data (cross sectional, time series) and econometric methods”
past estimates of the MPCF out of cash income are in a “quite tight” range from 0.03 to 0.17 for
low-income populations.
    For more direct evidence on the MPCF out of cash for the SNAP recipients in our sample,
we study the effect on spending of the large changes in gasoline prices during our sample period.
These changes provide an attractive source of variation in disposable income because gasoline
prices vary at high frequency and the demand for gasoline is relatively price-inelastic in the short
run (Hughes et al. 2008). Disadvantages are that fuel prices may affect the relative price of goods,
including food (e.g., Esmaeili and Shokoohi 2011), may affect shopping behavior directly through
effects on transportation costs (Ma et al. 2011), and may have a different psychological status than
other income shocks (Hastings and Shapiro 2013).
    Panel A of figure 8 shows the time-series relationship between gasoline prices and fuel expendi-
ture for SNAP adopters at different quartiles of the distribution of average fuel expenditure. Those
households in the upper quartiles exhibit substantial changes in fuel expenditure when the price of



                                                21
gasoline changes. For example, during the run-up in fuel prices in 2007—part of an upward trend
often attributed to increasing demand for oil from Asian countries (e.g., Kilian 2010)—households
in the top quartile of fuel spending increased their spending on fuel by almost $100 per month.
Households in lower quartiles increased their fuel spending by much less.
     Panel B of figure 8 shows the time-series relationship between gasoline prices and SNAP-
eligible expenditure for the same groups of households. The relationship between the two series
does not appear consistent with an MPCF out of cash income of 0.5 to 0.6. For example, if
the MPCF out of cash income were 0.5 we would expect households in the top quartile of fuel
spending to decrease their SNAP-eligible spending significantly during the run-up in fuel prices in
2007. In fact, we see no evidence of such a pattern, either looking at the top quartile in isolation,
or comparing it to the lower quartiles.
     The absence of a strong response of SNAP-eligible spending to fuel prices is consistent with
prior evidence of a low MPCF out of cash. It is not consistent with the hypothesis that changes in
income drive large changes in the retailer’s share of wallet, as such income effects would lead to a
relationship between gasoline prices and measured SNAP-eligible spending.


4.3     Quantitative summary

Table 1 presents two-stage least squares (2SLS) estimates of a series of linear regression models.
In each model the dependent variable is the change in spending from the preceding month to the
current month. The endogenous regressors are the change in SNAP benefits and the change in
the additive inverse of fuel spending. The coefficients on these endogenous regressors can be
interpreted as MPCs out of SNAP and cash, respectively. Each model includes calendar month
fixed effects. Household fixed effects are implicit in the first-differencing of the variables in the
model.
     All models use the interaction of the change in the price of regular gasoline and the house-
hold’s sample-period average monthly number of gallons of gasoline purchased as an excluded
instrument. This instrument permits estimating the MPC out of cash following the logic of figure
8.
     Models (1), (2), and (3) of table 1 use the change in SNAP-eligible spending as the dependent



                                                 22
variable. The models differ in the choice of excluded instruments for SNAP benefits. In model (1),
the instrument is an indicator for whether the month is an adoption month. In model (2), it is an
indicator for whether the month is the first month of the six-month SNAP clock. These instruments
permit estimating the MPCF out of SNAP following the logic of figures 5 and 6, respectively. In
model (3), both of these instruments are used.
   Estimates of models (1), (2), and (3) indicate an MPCF out of SNAP between 0.55 and 0.59 and
an MPCF out of cash close to 0. In model (3), confidence intervals exclude an MPCF out of SNAP
below 0.57 and an MPCF out of cash above 0.1. In all cases, we reject the null hypothesis that
the MPCF out of SNAP is equal to the MPCF out of cash. We also reject the null hypothesis that
the MPCF out of SNAP is equal to the budget share of food for SNAP households of 18 percent
estimated in Mabli and Malsberger (2013).
   Model (4) parallels model (3) but uses SNAP-ineligible spending as the dependent variable.
We estimate an MPC out of SNAP of 0.02 and an MPC out of cash of 0.04. We cannot reject the
hypothesis that these two MPCs are equal.
   Appendix table 2 shows that the main conclusion from table 1, that the MPCF out of SNAP
exceeds the MPCF out of cash, is robust to a number of changes in sample and specification,
such as excluding households for whom SNAP benefits may not be economically equivalent to
cash, excluding households with low pre-adoption SNAP-eligible spending, restricting to single-
adult households to limit the role of intra-household bargaining, focusing on SNAP exit instead of
SNAP adoption, and excluding households who adopted SNAP during the Great Recession.
   The online appendix reports that the implied MPCF out of SNAP is slightly higher in the house-
hold’s first SNAP adoption than in subsequent SNAP adoptions. We cannot reject the hypothesis
that the MPCF is equal between first and subsequent adoptions, and the MPCF out of SNAP does
not differ meaningfully according to the SNAP penetration in the household’s local area. The on-
line appendix also reports estimates of the MPCF out of SNAP and cash for various demographic
groups.




                                                 23
4.4    Sensitivity to assumptions about retailer share of spending

Table 2 presents estimates of the regression model in column (1) of table 1 under alternative as-
sumptions about the share of SNAP-eligible spending that each household devotes to the retailer.
In column (1) of table 2 we assume that each household devotes all SNAP-eligible spending to the
retailer in all months. Here the estimates are identical to those in column (1) of table 1.
   In column (2) we assume that each household devotes 82 percent of spending to the retailer
in all months. This value is obtained as the ratio of average SNAP benefits in the retail sample to
average SNAP benefits in demographically similar households in administrative data, as presented
in the online appendix. The MPCF out of SNAP is unchanged because both SNAP benefits and
SNAP-eligible spending are scaled in proportion. (The MPCF out of cash increases in absolute
value because we do not similarly scale fuel expenditures.)
   In columns (3) and (4) we assume that the retailer’s share of SNAP-eligible spending is greater
by 1.1 percentage points and 2.0 percentage points, respectively, when a household is on SNAP
than when it is not. These values are obtained as the point estimate and upper bound of the 95%
confidence interval, respectively, from a panel regression of the primary retailer’s share of wallet on
SNAP status in the Neilson Homescan Consumer Panel data, as reported in column (2) of appendix
table 1. The estimated MPCF out of SNAP falls to 0.56 and 0.54, respectively, and remains easily
distinguishable from the MPCF out of cash, both statistically and economically.
   In column (5) we ask how strong a relationship between SNAP participation and retailer market
share is needed to maintain the hypothesis of fungibility. Specifically, we assume that households
devote 82 percent of SNAP-eligible spending to the retailer when on SNAP, and set the correspond-
ing share for households not on SNAP to be the largest value such that we can no longer reject the
null hypothesis that the MPCF out of SNAP is equal to the MPCF out of cash. This implies a
change of 14.9 percentage points in the retailer’s share of SNAP-eligible spending.
   In the online appendix, we show that the estimated MPCF out of SNAP based on the legislative
benefit changes illustrated in figure 7 is not sensitive to assumptions about the effect of SNAP
participation on the retailer’s share of spending analogous to those in table 2. The reason is that
the research design illustrated in figure 7 exploits variation in benefits rather than participation.




                                                  24
5     Model and tests of fungibility
Table 1 may be thought of informally as testing the hypothesis of fungibility while maintaining
that all households share a common, linear consumption function. Here we show formally how to
test for fungibility under weaker assumptions on the consumption function.


5.1       Model

In each month t ∈ {1, ..., T }, household i receives SNAP benefits bit ≥ 0 and disposable cash
income yit > 0. The household chooses food expenditure fit and nonfood expenditure nit to solve


                                               max Ui ( f , n; ξit )                                   (1)
                                                 f ,n
                                          s.t. n ≤ yit − max (0, f − bit )


where ξit is a preference shock and Ui () is a utility function strictly increasing in f and n. The
variables (bit , yit , ξit ) are random with support Ωi .

Assumption 1. For each household i, optimal food spending can be written as


                                              fit = fi (yit + bit , ξit )                              (2)


where fi () is a function with range [0, yit + bit ].

A sufficient condition for assumption 1 is that, for each household i, at any point (b, y, ξ ) ∈ Ωi the
function Ui ( f , y + b − f ; ξ ) is smooth and strictly concave in f and has a stationary point f ∗ > b.
Then optimal food spending exceeds the level of SNAP benefits even if benefits are disbursed as
cash, so the “kinked” budget constraint in (1) does not affect the choice of fit .
    For each household and month, an econometrician observes data ( fit , bit , yit , zit ), where zit is a
vector of instruments. A concern is that ξit is determined partly by contextual factors such as job
loss that directly affect yit and bit .

Assumption 2. Let νit = (yit + bit ) − E (yit + bit |zit ). For each household i, the instruments zit
satisfy
                                                 (ξit , νit ) ⊥ zit .                                  (3)

                                                         25
Proposition 1. Under assumptions 1 and 2, for each household i


                                          E ( fit |zit ) = ϕi (E (yit + bit |zit ))                             (4)


for some function ϕi ().

Proof. Let Pi denote the CDF of (ξit , νit ). Then
                                          ˆ
                      E ( fit |zit ) =            fi (E (yit + bit |zit ) + νit , ξit ) dPi (ξit , νit |zit )
                                          ˆ  Ωi

                                      =           fi (E (yit + bit |zit ) + νit , ξit ) dPi (ξit , νit )
                                             Ωi
                                      = ϕi (E (yit + bit |zit )) ,


where the first equality follows from assumption 1 and the second from assumption 2. See Blundell
and Powell (2003, p. 330).

Example. (Cobb-Douglas) Suppose that for each household i there is θi ∈ (0, 1) such that:
                                             
                                             ( f − ξ )θi (n + ξ )1−θi , if f ≥ ξ ≥ −n
                                             
                         Ui ( f , n, ξ ) =                                                                      (5)
                                             −∞,
                                             
                                                                                    otherwise

with θi (y + b) > (b − ξ ) and (1 − θi ) (y + b) > ξ at all points in Ωi . Then assumption 1 holds with


                                        fi (yit + bit , ξit ) = θi (yit + bit ) + ξit .                         (6)


and, under assumption 2, proposition 1 applies with


                                 ϕi (E (yit + bit |zit )) = αi + θi E (yit + bit |zit )                         (7)


for αi ≡ E (ξit ).

Remark 1. In his study of a child tax credit in the Netherlands, Kooreman (2000) assumes a ver-
sion of (6), which he estimates via ordinary least squares using cross-sectional data under various
restrictions on αi , θi , and ξit .

                                                                26
5.2      Testing for fungibility
                                                                  γ
Index a family of perturbations to the model by γ. Let fit be food spending under perturbation γ,
with
                                        γ
                                       fit = fi (yit + bit , ξit ) + γbit                              (8)

for fi () the function defined in assumption 1. We may think of γ as the excess sensitivity of food
spending to SNAP benefits. The null hypothesis that the model holds is equivalent under (8) to
γ = 0.
   Let Yit = E (yit + bit |zit ) and Bit = E (bit |zit ) and observe that, following proposition 1,

                                γ       γ     
                              fit − E fit |Yit = γ (Bit − E (Bit |Yit )) + eit ,                       (9)


where E (eit |Yit , Bit ) = 0. The nuisance terms ϕi () have been “partialled out” of (9) as in Robinson
                                                                   γ        γ   
(1988). The target γ can be estimated via OLS regression of fit − E fit |Yit on (Bit − E (Bit |Yit )).

Remark 2. It is possible to allow for measurement error in fit that depends on (yit + bit ). Say that
for known function µ (), unknown function λit (), and unobserved measurement error ηit indepen-
dent of zit we have that measured food spending fˆit follows


                                 µ fˆit = µ ( fit ) + λit (yit + bit , ηit ) .
                                       
                                                                                                      (10)

                             γ                                                       γ          γ
Then under perturbations µ fit = µ ( fit )+γbit an analogue of (9) holds, replacing fit with µ fit .
Examples include additive measurement error, where µ () is the identity function, and multiplica-
tive measurement error, where µ () is the natural logarithm. The latter case has a simple interpreta-
tion as one in which the econometrician observes spending at a single retailer whose share of total
household food spending is given by exp (λit (yit + bit , ηit )). Appendix table 2 presents estimates
corresponding to this case.

Remark 3. The reasoning above is unchanged if bit and yit are each subject to an additive measure-
ment error that is mean-independent of zit . In this case, we can simply let Yit and Bit represent the
conditional expectations of the corresponding mismeasured variables.




                                                      27
5.3    Implementation and results

With (9) in mind, estimation proceeds in three steps:
                                                                                        
   Step 1. Estimate (Yit , Bit ) from (yit , bit , zit ), yielding estimates Ŷit , B̂it .
                                                                                                                    
                            γ                                γ                            \ γ     
                                                                                                          \
   Step 2. Estimate E fit |Yit , E (Bit |Yit ) from fit , Ŷit , B̂it , yielding estimates E fit |Yit , E (Bit |Yit ) .
                                                                       
                                   γ    \    γ      
                                                                 \
   Step 3. Estimate γ from fit − E fit |Yit , B̂it − E (Bit |Yit ) , yielding estimate γ̂.
            γ
   We let fit be SNAP-eligible spending, bit be SNAP benefits, and yit be the additive inverse of
fuel spending. We let the instruments zit be given by the number of SNAP adoptions experienced
by household i as of calendar month t, and the product of the average price of regular gasoline with
the household’s average monthly number of gallons of gasoline purchased.
   In step 1, we estimate (Yit , Bit ) via first-differenced regression of (yit + bit ) and bit on zit .
                                                                       γ                 
   In step 2, we consider four specifications for estimating E fit |Yit , E (Bit |Yit ) . In the first, we
                                                           γ
estimate these via first-differenced regression of fit and B̂it on Ŷit , pooling across households. In
                                                                            γ
the second, we estimate these via first-differenced regression of fit and B̂it on Ŷit , separately by
                                                                                        γ
household. In the third, we estimate these via first-differenced regression of fit and B̂it on a linear
spline in Ŷit with knots at the quintiles, separately by household. In the fourth, we estimate these
                                                       γ
via locally weighted polynomial regression of fit and B̂it on Ŷit , separately by household. Thus,
the first specification implicitly treats ϕi as linear and homogeneous across households, the second
treats ϕi as linear and heterogeneous across households, and the third and fourth allow ϕi to be
nonlinear and heterogeneous across households.
                                                                                                  
                                                                  γ       γ
   In step 3, we estimate γ via first-differenced regression of fit − E \                    \
                                                                        fit |Yit on B̂it − E (B   |Y )
                                                                                                it it .

   Table 3 presents the results. Across all four specifications, our estimates of γ are greater than
0.5, and in all cases we can reject the null hypothesis that γ = 0 with a high level of confidence. The
online appendix presents simulation evidence on the size of these tests and presents estimates using
an alternative method of computing standard errors. Appendix table 2 presents a range of robust-
ness checks for the test in the fourth column of table 3, including one in which we deseasonalize
the dependent variable.
   The estimated value of γ of 0.58 in column (1) of table 3 is similar to the difference between
the estimated MPCF out of SNAP and the estimated MPCF out of cash of 0.59 in column (1) of




                                                     28
table 1, where we also impose a linear, homogeneous consumption function.34 Allowing for het-
erogeneous, linear consumption functions in column (2) leads to a similar estimate that is slightly
larger in magnitude. Allowing for heterogeneous, nonlinear consumption functions in columns (3)
and (4) leads to meaningfully larger estimates of γ, possibly indicating that the effect of SNAP on
food spending is greater at points on the consumption function where the effect of cash income is
smaller.



6      Interpretation
We hypothesize that households treat SNAP benefits as part of a separate mental account that is
psychologically earmarked for spending on groceries. In this section we discuss results of qualita-
tive interviews conducted at a food pantry in Rhode Island. We then present quantitative evidence
on changes in shopping effort at SNAP adoption. Finally, we present a parametric model that
quantifies the potential roles of mental accounting and short-run time preference in explaining our
findings.


6.1     Qualitative interviews with SNAP-recipient households

As part of preparation related to a Rhode Island state proposal to pilot a change to SNAP benefit
distribution, RIIPL staff conducted a series of qualitative interviews at a large food pantry in Rhode
Island in May, July, and August 2016. Interviewees were approached in the waiting room of the
pantry and were offered a $5 gift card to a grocery retailer in exchange for participating. Interviews
were conducted in English and Spanish. Interviewees were not sampled scientifically. Interviews
were conducted primarily to inform the implementation of the pilot program and the responses
should not be taken to imply any generalizable conclusions. We report them here as context for
our quantitative evidence.
     Of the 25 interviews conducted, 19 were with current SNAP recipients. Of these, all but three
reported spending non-SNAP funds on groceries each month, with an average out-of-pocket spend-

    34 The specifications in table 3 do not include any controls for calendar month whereas those in table 1 include
calendar month indicators. This affects precision. Removing calendar month indicators from the specification in
column (1) of table 1 causes the standard error on the estimated difference in MPCFs to increase from 0.05 to 0.15.
The latter value is close to the standard error of 0.16 on the estimate of γ in column (1) of table 3.

                                                        29
ing of $100 for those reporting positive out-of-pocket spending.
    Each interviewee was asked the following two questions, which we refer to as SNAP and
CASH:

            (SNAP) Imagine that in addition to your current benefit, you received an extra
       $100 in SNAP benefits at the beginning of the month. How would this change the
       way that you spend your money during the month? [emphasis added]
            (CASH) Imagine that you received an additional $100 in cash at the beginning
       of the month. How would this change the way that you spend your money during the
       month? [emphasis added]

Of the 16 SNAP-recipient interviewees who report nonzero out-of-pocket spending on groceries,
14 chose to answer questions SNAP and CASH.
    Interviewers recorded verbal responses to each question as faithfully as possible. The most
frequently occurring word in response to the SNAP question is “food,” which occurs in 8 of the
14 responses. Incorporating mentions of specific foods or food-related terms like “groceries,” the
fraction mentioning food rises to 10 out of 14 responses. The word “food” occurs in 3 of the 14
responses to CASH; more general food related terms occur in 5 of the 14 responses to CASH.
    Several responses seem to suggest a difference in how the household would spend $100 depend-
ing on the form in which it arrives. For example, in response to question SNAP one interviewee
said “[I would] buy more food.” In response to CASH the same interviewee said “[I would buy]
more household necessities.” Another interviewee said in response to SNAP that “[I would buy]
more food, but the same type of expenses. If I bought $10 of sugar, now [I would buy] 20.” In
response to CASH, the same interviewee said that “[I would spend it on] toilet paper, soap, and
other necessary home stuff, or medicine.” A third interviewee said in response to SNAP that “I
would buy more food and other types of food...” and in response to CASH that “I could buy basic
things that I can’t buy with [SNAP].”35
    Some responses suggest behavior consistent with inframarginality. For example one intervie-
wee’s answer to SNAP included the observation that “I would probably spend $100 less out of
pocket,” although this interviewee also mentions increasing household expenditures on seafood
   35 The  bracketed term is a translation for the Spanish word cupones. This word is literally translated as “coupons”
but is often used to refer to SNAP. See, for example, Project Bread (2016).

                                                         30
and produce. Another interviewee answered SNAP with “[I] would spend all in food, and also buy
soap [and] things for [my] two kids.”


6.2   Quantitative evidence on shopping effort

If SNAP recipients consider SNAP benefits to be earmarked for food, they may view a dollar saved
on food as less valuable than a dollar saved on nonfood purchases. To test this hypothesis, we study
the effect of SNAP on shopping effort.
   Figure 9 shows the evolution of the adjusted store-brand share before and after SNAP receipt
for our sample of SNAP adopters. Each plot shows coefficients from a regression of the adjusted
store-brand share on a vector of indicators for months relative to SNAP adoption. Among SNAP-
eligible items, panel A shows a trend towards a greater store-brand share prior to SNAP adoption,
perhaps reflecting the deterioration in households’ economic well-being that normally triggers
entry into a means-tested program. Once households adopt SNAP, there is a marked and highly
statistically significant drop in the store-brand share. Because we have adjusted the store-brand
share for the composition of purchases, this decline is driven not by changes in the categories of
goods purchased, but by a change in households’ choice of brand within a category.
   Panel B of figure 9 shows an analogous plot for SNAP-ineligible items. The adjusted store-
brand share of SNAP-ineligible expenditure rises before SNAP adoption and does not decline
significantly following adoption. In regression analysis presented in the online appendix, we con-
fidently reject the hypothesis that the change in adjusted store-brand share at SNAP adoption is
equal between SNAP-eligible and SNAP-ineligible products.
   Figure 10 shows analogous evidence for coupon use. Following SNAP adoption, the average
adjusted coupon redemption share declines for both SNAP-eligible and SNAP-ineligible products,
but the decline is more economically and statistically significant for SNAP-eligible products than
for SNAP-ineligible products. Because we have adjusted the coupon redemption share for the
basket of goods purchased, these patterns are not driven by changes in the goods purchased, but
rather by households’ propensity to redeem coupons for a given basket of goods. In regression
analysis presented in the online appendix, we reject the hypothesis that the change in the adjusted
coupon redemption share at SNAP adoption is equal between SNAP-eligible and SNAP-ineligible



                                                31
products. The online appendix also reports regression analysis using an alternative measure of
coupon redemptions that exploits data on the set of coupons mailed to individual households.
   The observed changes in shopping effort have a small effect on total spending. Recall that in
SNAP-eligible product categories, the average store-brand price is $0.63 below the average non-
store-brand price of $3.34. A one-percentage-point decrease in the store-brand share therefore
increases the price of the average product by $0.0063. Even aggregating up to the monthly level,
the price impact likely amounts to only a few dollars. Similar reasoning implies that the observed
decline in coupon redemptions has a small effect on total spending.


6.3   Quantitative model of psychological forces

We now specify a model to quantify the potential role of mental accounting and short-run time
preference in explaining our findings. In the model, a household makes choices over the month
about how to allocate spending between food and nonfood consumption. To connect the model
to the evidence in section 6.2, we also allow that the household makes a choice about how much
effort to devote to shopping. Greater effort carries a linear cost (which may be thought of as the
value of time), but reduces the price paid per unit consumption. The household’s intrinsic utility
from consumption takes a log-linear form.
   We model mental accounting, following Farhi and Gabaix (2015), as a disutility of spending
an amount that differs from an exogenous default. We model short-run time preference, following
Laibson (1997), as a present-bias that leads to meaningful time discounting even within the month.
In the online appendix we further allow, following Liebman and Zeckhauser (2004), that receipt of
an in-kind benefit may lead the household to misperceive the price of food.
   Formally, consider a single household in a single month that is divided into two or more periods
indexed by w ∈ {1, ...,W }. In each period the household chooses food consumption fw , nonfood
                                 f
consumption nw , and the effort sw and snw devoted, respectively, to shopping for food and nonfood
purchases. Greater effort carries a linear cost of c > 0 per unit, and results in lower prices for a
given amount of consumption, or, equivalently, greater effective consumption for a given amount
                                                                                      f
of expenditure. Specifically, the price of food consumption in period w is given by d sfww and the
                                               n
                                                s
price of nonfood consumption is given by d nww , where d (x) = x−ρ and ρ ≥ 0 is a parameter.



                                                32
    Letting bw and yw denote the amount of SNAP benefits and cash, respectively, available at the
end of period w, we suppose that
                                             (                              !        )
                                                                        f
                                                                     sw
                    bw = bw−1 − min bw−1 , d                                    fw                                            (11)
                                                                     fw
                                                      (                                               !                   )
                                                                                              f
                                        snw
                                              
                                                                                             sw
                    yw   = m + yw−1 − d       nw − max d                                                  fw − bw−1 , 0
                                        nw                                                   fw

where b0 ≥ 0 is the monthly SNAP benefit, y0 = 0 is cash holdings, and m > 0 is a per-period
cash income. We assume that the household cannot borrow between periods and ends the month
penniless (respectively, bw , yw ≥ 0 for all w and bW = yW = 0).
    The household’s per-period felicity function is given by

                                                                                        
                      v fw , nw , swf , snw = θ ln ( fw ) + (1 − θ ) ln (nw ) − c swf + snw .                                 (12)


Maximization of the undiscounted sum of felicities in (12) subject to the constraints in (11) can be
thought of as a neoclassical benchmark.36 We depart from this benchmark in allowing, following
Farhi and Gabaix (2015), that the household has a target level of food spending and that a gap
between actual and target levels of spending causes a loss of utility of κ ≥ 0 per dollar. We assume
that the target level of food spending is given by θW m + b0 , which corresponds to spending the
Cobb-Douglas share θ of cash income, plus all of SNAP benefits, on food. This specification is
post hoc but captures the idea that households may think of SNAP as “food money.”
    We also allow, following Laibson (1997), that future felicity is discounted by a factor β ∈ [0, 1].
Combining these two departures means that in any period w0 the household acts to maximize the
objective

                                                                                        
                                                   1w>w0
                                         ∑     β           v       fw , nw , swf , snw                                        (13)
                                        w≥w0
                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                  f
                                            1w>w0                                            sw
                                   − κβ               θW m + b0 − ∑ d                                     fw
                                                                                 w           fw

   36 If y> 0 and m = 0, this benchmark is a special case of the model in section 5, where we set the preference shock
          0
ξit = 0 and think of the monthly utility function Ui () as the maximum undiscounted sum of felicities attainable for
given total monthly food and nonfood expenditure.

                                                                   33
where the final term captures the role of mental accounting. The absolute value penalty for de-
viations from the target spending is chosen for analytical convenience. Note that, in principle,
households are psychologically penalized for spending either more or less than their target. In
practice, because the target is above the neoclassical benchmark, only the penalty for spending
below the target is relevant for our calculations.
   We set W = 2 so that cash payments arrive biweekly, which is the modal frequency reported
in Burgess (2014). We set the discount factor β to match the daily decline in log caloric intake in
Shapiro (2005, table 1, column 2), translated into a decline over two-week periods. The estimated
value of β is 0.94.
   We set b0 for households on SNAP equal to the average SNAP benefit in our sample of
SNAP adopters in the six months following adoption. We then compute the average SNAP-
eligible spending for SNAP adopters in the six months following adoption f 1 and choose m so
that f 1 / (2m + b0 ) = 0.18, where 0.18 is the expenditure share of food at home for SNAP re-
cipients reported in Mabli and Malsberger (2013, figure 2). Given m, we choose θ to equal the
ratio of monthly SNAP-eligible spending prior to adoption f 0 to total monthly cash income, i.e.
                                                           
θ = f 0 /2m. We choose f 0 so that the difference f 1 − f 0 is equal to b0 times the MPCF out of
SNAP estimated in column 3 of table 1.
   We set the elasticity of prices paid with respect to shopping effort ρ = 0.085, the midpoint of
the range reported in Aguiar and Hurst (2007, p. 1548) for their primary measure of shopping
effort. We set the cost c of shopping effort to (1/80). If we interpret shopping effort in units
of hours per period, this can be interpreted as saying that one hour is equivalent hedonically to
an increase in both food and nonfood consumption of (1/80) log points, as would be the case if
c reflected the value of time for a household earning all consumption through a forty-hour work
week.                                         −1   
                                                  f
                                                        sn −1
   The level of shopping effort in period w, d sfww , d nww   , corresponds to the effective
consumption delivered by a given level of expenditure on food or nonfood categories. As we do
not observe this directly, we follow Nevo and Wong (2015) in treating our observable measures
of shopping effort as proxy variables. We assume, in particular, that the store-brand share in each
period is proportional to the level of shopping effort. If this assumption fails to hold, we may
think of the model’s predictions for shopping effort as qualitative. The online appendix presents


                                                     34
sensitivity analysis with respect to our choice of proxy for shopping effort and our choice of value
for the parameter ρ.
   Given the values of the other parameters, we set the value of κ so that the model’s predictions
for monthly food expenditure while on SNAP match the observed value f 1 . Implicitly, this means
that the model’s predictions will also match the observed MPCF out of SNAP. The estimated value
of κ is 0.000174. At this value, the household would, at the start of the month, be willing to reduce
food and nonfood consumption by 0.84 percent (0.0084 log points) in all periods in order to avoid
the disutility associated with being $100 further from her target food spending at the end of the
month.
   We solve the model as follows. If either there are no SNAP benefits or food expenditure is
below the psychological default θW m + b0 , we can solve for shopping effort in each period in
closed form by exploiting necessary conditions for a local optimum. We can then solve for food
and nonfood consumption in the first and second periods numerically.
   Table 4 presents the results. Column (1) presents empirical counterparts to model outputs.
Column (2) presents the model’s implications under the neoclassical benchmark. The remaining
columns add, respectively and cumulatively, short-run time preference and mental accounting.
   The first row of table 4 shows the MPCF out of SNAP. The estimated value is 0.59. As ex-
pected, the neoclassical benchmark in column (2) fails to replicate the high MPCF, implying in-
stead a much smaller value of 0.15.
   Adding short-run time preference in column (3) does not meaningfully change the prediction.
In principle, short-run time preference could lead to a high MPCF as the household tries to exhaust
SNAP benefits early in order to consume more in the first period. In practice, SNAP benefits
account for a small enough share of total food spending that this force is unimportant quantitatively.
In particular, because the Cobb-Douglas share θ of first-period resources is close to the value b0
of SNAP benefits, even a household who saves nothing between periods will exhibit an MPCF out
of SNAP that is close to the neoclassical benchmark. As a result, there is no value of β for which
the short-run time preference model can account for the observed MPCF.
   Finally, adding mental accounting in column (4) mechanically delivers the observed MPCF of
0.59, as the household strives to reach its default level of spending. (Recall that the parameter κ is
chosen to match the observed MPCF.)


                                                 35
    The second and third rows of table 4 show, respectively, the percent change in effective shop-
ping effort for food and nonfood. Both the neoclassical benchmark in column (2) and the model
with short-run time preference in column (3) fail to predict that shopping effort declines more for
food than for nonfood purchases, as we observe in figure 9. Instead, these models predict equal
declines in shopping effort for the two groups of products. By contrast, the mental accounting
model in column (4) correctly predicts a greater decline in shopping effort for food than nonfood
products. This finding is not mechanical, as we did not use the data on store-brand shares to fit
model parameters.
    To summarize, we find that neither the neoclassical benchmark nor a model with short-run
time preference can rationalize the observed MPCF out of SNAP. A model with mental accounting
can fit the observed MPCF and also matches patterns in shopping effort that were not used to
fit the model. As an additional piece of evidence on the mental accounting channel, the online
appendix shows that the MPCF out of SNAP is slightly larger for households who exhibit a greater
correlation between octane choice and the price of regular gasoline, which Hastings and Shapiro
(2013) argue can be explained by mental accounting. The online appendix also shows that the
MPCF out of SNAP is slightly larger for households who concentrate a greater share of their
spending in the early portion of the month.



7    Conclusions
We use data from a novel retail panel to study the effect of the receipt of SNAP benefits on house-
hold spending behavior. Novel administrative data motivate three approaches to causal inference.
We find that the MPCF out of SNAP benefits is 0.5 to 0.6 and larger than the MPCF out of cash. We
argue that these findings are not consistent with households treating SNAP funds as fungible with
non-SNAP funds, and we support this claim with formal tests of fungibility that allow different
households to have different consumption functions.
    We speculate that households treat SNAP benefits as part of a separate mental account. Re-
sponses to hypothetical choice scenarios in qualitative interviews suggest that some households
plan to spend SNAP benefits differently from cash. Quantitative evidence shows that, after SNAP
receipt, households reduce shopping effort for SNAP-eligible products more so than for SNAP-


                                                36
ineligible products. A post-hoc model of mental accounting based on Farhi and Gabaix (2015)
matches these facts, whereas other psychologically motivated departures from the neoclassical
benchmark do not.
    A large MPCF out of SNAP has potentially important aggregate implications. The 2009 Amer-
ican Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA) increased SNAP benefits because these “are spent
quickly and have a multiplicative effect on total economic activity” (Economic Research Service
2016). A large MPCF out of SNAP further implies that SNAP benefit increases have an especially
large effect on spending in the food retail sector (Beatty and Tuttle 2015). Indeed, consistent with
the evidence in Bruich (2014), the expiration of the ARRA benefit increases in 2013 was often
cited in the business press as a factor in declining grocery sales during that period.37
    The possibility that households treat SNAP benefits as part of a separate mental account from
cash is relevant for recent policy proposals to exclude unhealthy items (such as sugar-sweetened
beverages) from SNAP eligibility. Because most SNAP recipients spend some of their own money
on food each month, traditional demand theory predicts that such exclusions will affect the mode of
payment used to purchased different foods and beverages, but not the actual amounts of these foods
and beverages that households consume (Schanzenbach 2013). By contrast, if excluding an item
from SNAP eligibility causes the household to treat spending on the item as coming from a cash
account rather than a SNAP account, such an exclusion could affect the household’s choices (Tuttle
2016). How item exclusions and other policy changes affect the mental accounting of benefits and
spending therefore seems an important topic for future empirical and theoretical research.




   37 Major (2014) cites “a drop in SNAP benefits for its low-income customers” as a factor in Walmart’s 2013 sales
drop, and Walmart’s own annual report cites “the reduction in government food benefits” (Walmart 2014). Similar
discussion can be found in the press surrounding smaller, regional chains (Driggs 2014) and discount retailers (Pro-
gressive Grocer 2015). Food retailers and manufacturers lobby regarding SNAP (Merlin 2012), including for benefit
expansions (Tuttle 2012). See also the discussion in Bruich (2014, footnote 2).

                                                        37
References
Abeler, Johannes and Felix Marklein. 2017. Fungibility, labels, and consumption. Journal of the
       European Economic Association 15(1): 99-127.
Afridi, Farzana. 2010. Child welfare programs and child nutrition: Evidence from a mandated
       school meal program in India. Journal of Development Economics 92(2): 152-165.
Aguiar, Mark and Erik Hurst. 2005. Consumption versus expenditure. Journal of Political Econ-
       omy 113(5): 919-948.
Aguiar, Mark and Erik Hurst. 2007. Life-cycle prices and production. American Economic Review
       97(5): 1533-1559.
Aker, Jenny C. 2017. Comparing cash and voucher transfers in a humanitarian context: Evidence
       from the Democratic Republic of Congo. The World Bank Economic Review 31(1): 44-70.
Andreyeva, Tatiana, Joerg Luedicke, Kathryn E. Henderson, and Amanda S. Tripp. 2012. Grocery
       store beverage choices by participants in federal food assistance and nutrition programs.
       American Journal of Preventive Medicine 43 (4): 411-418.
Andreyeva, Tatiana, Joerg Luedicke, Amanda S. Tripp, and Kathryn E. Henderson. 2013. Ef-
       fects of reduced juice allowances in food packages for the Women, Infants, and Children
       Program. Pediatrics 131(5): 919-927.
Banks, James, Richard Blundell, and Sarah Tanner. 1998. Is there a retirement-savings puzzle?
       American Economic Review 88(4): 769-788.
Beatty, Timothy K. M. and Charlotte J. Tuttle. 2015. Expenditure response to increases in in-
       kind transfers: Evidence from the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program. American
       Journal of Agricultural Economics 97(2): 390-404.
Beatty, Timothy K. M., Laura Blow, Thomas F. Crossley, and Cormac O’Dea. 2014. Cash by any
       other name? Evidence on labeling from the UK Winter Fuel Payment. Journal of Public
       Economics 118: 86-96.
Bee, Adam, Bruce D. Meyer, and James X. Sullivan. 2015. The validity of consumption data:
       Are the Consumer Expenditure Interview and Diary Surveys informative? In C. Carroll, T.
       Crossley, and J. Sabelhaus (eds.), Improving the Measurement of Consumer Expenditures:
       204-240. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.


                                              38
Benhassine, Najy, Florencia Devoto, Esther Duflo, Pascaline Dupas, and Victor Pouliquen. 2015.
       Turning a shove into a nudge? A “labeled cash transfer” for education. American Economic
       Journal: Economic Policy 7(3): 86-125.
Bitler, Marianne P. 2015. The health and nutrition effects of SNAP: Selection into the program and
       a review of the literature on its effects. In J. Bartfeld, C. Gundersen, T. Smeeding, and J.
       P. Ziliak (eds.), SNAP Matters: How Food Stamps Affect Health and Well Being: 134-160.
       Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Blundell, Richard and James L. Powell. 2003. Endogeneity in nonparametric and semiparametric
       regression models. In M. Dewatripont, L. P. Hansen, and S. J. Turnovsky (eds.), Advances
       in Economics and Econometrics: Theory and Applications, Eighth World Congress 2: 312-
       357. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bronnenberg, Bart J., Jean-Pierre Dube, Matthew Gentzkow, and Jesse M. Shapiro. 2015. Do
       pharmacists buy Bayer? Informed shoppers and the brand premium. Quarterly Journal of
       Economics 130(4): 1669-1726.
Browning, Edgar K. and Mark A. Zupan. 2004. Microeconomics: Theory and Applications. 8th
       ed. Hoboken: Wiley.
Burgess, Matt. 2014. How frequently do private businesses pay workers? Bureau of Labor
       Statistics Beyond the Numbers 3(11). Accessed at <https://www.bls.gov/opub/btn/volume-
       3/pdf/how-frequently-do-private-businesses-pay-workers.pdf> on May 7, 2017.
Card, David and Michael Ransom. 2011. Pension plan characteristics and framing effects in
       employee savings behavior. Review of Economics and Statistics 93(1): 228-243.
Castner, Laura and James Mabli. 2010. Low-income household spending patterns and measures
       of poverty. Washington, DC: Mathematica Policy Research.
Castner, Laura and Juliette Henke. 2011. Benefit redemption patterns in the Supplemental Nu-
       trition Assistance Program. Nutrition Assistance Program Report Series, USDA Food and
       Nutrition Service Office of Research and Analysis.
Center for Public Policy Priorities. 2008. Emergency food stamps for Hurricane Ike victims.
       Accessed at <library.cppp.org/files/8/Ike%20Food%20Stamps%20flyer.pdf> on November
       1 2017.
Collins, Ann M., Ronette Briefel, Jacob Alex Klerman, Anne Wolf, Gretchen Rowe, Chris Logan,


                                                39
       Ayesha Enver, Syeda Fatima, Anne Gordon, and Julia Lyskawa. 2016. Summer Electronic
       Benefit Transfer for Children (SEBCT) Demonstration: Summary Report. Accessed at
       <http://www.fns.usda.gov/sites/default/files/ops/sebtcfinalreport.pdf> on January 5, 2016.
Congressional Budget Office. 2013. Federal means-tested programs and tax credits. Accessed at
       <https://www.cbo.gov/sites/default/files/113th-congress-2013-2014/graphic/43935-means-
       tested-infographic0.pdf> on May 5, 2016.
DellaVigna, Stefano, Attila Lindner, Balázs Reizer, and Johannes F. Schmieder. 2017. Reference-
       dependent job search: Evidence from Hungary. Quarterly Journal of Economics 132(4):
       1969-2018.
DellaVigna, Stefano. Structural behavioral economics. 2017. In preparation for D. Bernheim,
       S. DellaVigna, and D. Laibson (eds.) Handbook of Behavioral Economics. Amsterdam:
       Elsevier.
Driggs, Joan. 2014. Optimistic outlook. Progressive Grocer 93(4).
Engel, Ernst. 1857. Die Productions- und Consumtionsverhältnisse des Königreichs Sachsen.
       Zeitschrift des statistischen Bureaus des Königlich Sächsischen Ministerium des Inneren
       8-9: 1-54.
Economic Research Service, US Department of Agriculture. 2016. Accessed at
       <https://www.ers.usda.gov/topics/food-nutrition-assistance/supplemental-nutrition-assistance-
       program-snap/arra/> on October 19, 2017.
Einav, Liran, Ephraim Leibtag, and Aviv Nevo. 2010. Recording discrepancies in Nielsen Home-
       scan data: Are they present and do they matter? Quantitative Marketing and Economics
       8(2): 207-239.
Esmaeili, Abdoulkarim and Zainab Shokoohi. 2011. Assessing the effect of oil price on world food
       prices: Application of principal component analysis. Energy Policy 39(2): 1022-1025.
Fan, Jianqing and Irene Gijbels. 1996. Local Polynomial Modelling and Its Applications. London,
       UK: Chapman and Hall.
Farhi, Emmanuel and Xavier Gabaix. 2015. Optimal taxation with behavioral agents. NBER
       Working Paper No. 21524.
Farhi, Emmanuel and Xavier Gabaix. 2017. Optimal taxation with behavioral agents. NBER
       Working Paper No. 21524.


                                               40
Feldman, Naomi E. 2010. Mental accounting effects of income tax shifting. The Review of Eco-
       nomics and Statistics 92(1): 70-86.
FNS. 2012. Building a healthy America: A profile of the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Pro-
       gram. Accessed at <https://fns-prod.azureedge.net/sites/default/files/BuildingHealthyAmerica.pdf>
       on November 5, 2017.
———. 2014. FNS Handbook 501, Chapter 5. Accessed at
       <http://www.fns.usda.gov/sites/default/files/FNSHANDBOOK_501_Chap5_4_2014_new.pdf>
       on January 5, 2016.
———. 2016a. Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program. Accessed at
       <http://www.fns.usda.gov/pd/supplemental-nutrition-assistance-program-snap> on May 25,
       2016.
———. 2016b. Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP): Eligibility. Accessed at
       <http://www.fns.usda.gov/snap/eligibility> on January 5, 2016.
———. 2017a. Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP): Eligible Food Items. Ac-
       cessed at
       <http://www.fns.usda.gov/snap/eligible-food-items> on January 14, 2017.
———. 2017b. Cost of Living Adjustment Information. Accessed at
       <https://www.fns.usda.gov/snap/cost-living-adjustment-cola-information> on November 21,
       2017.
Fox, Mary Kay, William Hamilton, and Biing-Hwan Lin. 2004. Effects of food assistance and
       nutrition programs on nutrition and health: Volume 3, literature review. U.S. Department
       of Agriculture, Economic Research Service.
Freyaldenhoven, Simon, Christian Hansen, and Jesse Shapiro. 2018. Pre-event trends in the panel
       event-study design. Brown University Working Paper, January 2018.
Ganong, Peter and Pascal Noel. 2016. How does unemployment affect consumer spending? Har-
       vard University Working Paper, January 2016.
Ganong, Peter and Pascal Noel. 2017. Consumer spending during unemployment: Positive and
       normative implications. Harvard University Working Paper, April 2017.
Garasky, Steven, Kassim Mbwana, Andres Romualdo, Alex Tenaglio, and Manan Roy. 2016.
       Foods typically purchased by Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) house-


                                              41
       holds. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Food and Nutrition Service.
Gelman, Michael, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, Shachar Kariv, Dmitri Koustas, Matthew D. Shapiro,
       Dan Silverman, and Steven Tadelis. 2017. The response of consumer spending to changes
       in gasoline prices. NBER Working Paper No. 22969.
Gough, Margaret. 2013. How do unemployment and recessions affect time in food preparation and
       food expenditures within the family? Population Association of America Annual Meeting
       Conference Paper.
Hastings, Justine S. and Jesse M. Shapiro. 2013. Fungibility and consumer choice: Evidence from
       commodity price shocks. Quarterly Journal of Economics 128(4): 1449-1498.
Heath, Chip and Jack B. Soll. 1996. Mental budgeting and consumer decisions. Journal of Con-
       sumer Research 23(1): 40-52.
Hines, James R. and Richard H. Thaler. 1995. Anomalies: The Flypaper Effect. The Journal of
       Economic Perspectives 9(4): 217-226.
Holmes, Elizabeth. 2011. Why pay full price? Stores give discounts, sneak peeks, secret sales;
       just hand over personal data. Wall Street Journal May 5, 2011. Accessed at
       <https://www.wsj.com/articles/SB10001424052748703834804576301221367302288> on
       October 27, 2017.
Houthakker, Hendrik S. 1957. An international comparison of household expenditure patterns,
       commemorating the centenary of Engel’s law. Econometrica 25(4): 532-551.
Hoynes, Hilary W., Leslie McGranahan, and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach. 2015. SNAP and
       food consumption. In J. Bartfeld, C. Gundersen, T. Smeeding, and J. P. Ziliak (eds.), SNAP
       Matters: How Food Stamps Affect Health and Well Being: 107-133. Stanford: Stanford
       University Press.
Hoynes, Hilary W. and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach. 2009. Consumption responses to in-kind
       transfers: Evidence from the introduction of the Food Stamp Program. American Economic
       Journal: Applied Economics 1(4): 109-139.
Hoynes, Hilary W. and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach. 2016. US food and nutrition programs.
       In R. Moffit (ed.), Economics of Means-Tested Transfer Programs in the United States,
       Volume I: 219-302. Chicago; London: The University of Chicago Press.
Hughes, Jonathan E., Christopher R. Knittel, and Daniel Sperling. 2008. Evidence of a shift in the


                                               42
       short-run price elasticity of gasoline demand. Energy Journal 29(1): 113-134.
Inman, Robert P. 2008. The Flypaper Effect. NBER Working Paper No. 14579.
Islam, Mahnaz and John Hoddinott. 2009. Evidence of intrahousehold Flypaper Effects from a
       nutrition intervention in rural Guatemala. Economic Development and Cultural Change
       57(2): 215-238.
Jacoby, Hanan G. 2002. Is there an intrahousehold ’Flypaper Effect’? Evidence from a school
       feeding programme. The Economic Journal 112: 196-221.
Johnson, Lyndon B. 1964. Remarks upon signing the Food Stamp Act. Accessed at
       <http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/ws/?pid=26472> on May 5, 2016.
Kendall, Maurice, Alan Stuart, and Keith Ord. 1983. The Advanced Theory of Statistics. 4th ed.
       London and High Wycombe: Charles Griffin Limited, Volume 3: 485-493.
Ketcham, Jonathan D., Nicolai V. Kuminoff, and Christopher A. Powers. 2016. Choice incon-
       sistencies among the elderly: Evidence from plan choice in the Medicare Part D program:
       Comment. American Economic Review 106(12): 3932-3961.
Kilian, Lutz. 2010. Explaining fluctuations in gasoline prices: A joint model of the global crude
       oil market and the US retailer gasoline market. The Energy Journal 31(2): 87-112.
Kilts Center for Marketing. 2016. Consumer panel dataset manual. The Kilts Center Archive of
       The Nielsen Company.
Klerman, Jacob A. and Caroline Danielson. 2011. The transformation of the Supplemental Nutri-
       tion Assistance Program. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 30 (4): 863-888.
Kooreman, Peter. 2000. The labeling effect of a child benefit system. American Economic Review
       90(3): 571-583.
Kooreman, Peter, Bertrand Melenberg, Henriëtte M. Prast, and Nathanaël Vellekoop. 2013. Fram-
       ing effects in an employee savings scheme: A non-parametric analysis. IZA Discussion
       Paper No. 7154.
Laibson, David. 1997. Golden eggs and hyperbolic discounting. Quarterly Journal of Economics
       112(2): 443-477.
Li, Yiran, Bradford Mills, George C. Davis, and Elton Mykerezi. 2014. Child food insecurity
       and the food stamp program: What a difference monthly data make. Social Service Review
       88(2): 332-348.


                                               43
Liebman, Jeffrey B. and Richard J. Zeckhauser. 2004. Schmeduling. Harvard University Working
       Paper, October 2004.
Lino, Mark, Kevin Kuczynski, Nestor Rodriguez, and TusaRebecca Schap. 2017. Expenditures
       on children by families, 2015. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Center for Nutrition Policy
       and Promotion, Miscellaneous Report Number 1528. Accessed at
       <https://www.cnpp.usda.gov/sites/default/files/crc2015_March2017.pdf> on December 4,
       2017.
Lusk, Jayson L. and Kathleen Brooks. 2011. Who participates in household scanning panels?
       American Journal of Agricultural Economics 93(1): 226-240.
Ma, Yu, Kusum L. Ailawadi, Dinesh K. Gauri, and Dhruv Grewal. 2011. An empirical investiga-
       tion of the impact of gasoline prices on grocery shopping behavior. Journal of Marketing
       75: 18-35.
Mabli, James and Rosalie Malsberger. 2013. Recent trends in spending patterns of Supplemen-
       tal Nutrition Assistance Program participants and other low-income Americans. Monthly
       Labor Review, September, 2013.
Major, Meg. 2014. Planetary shifts. Progressive Grocer 93(3).
Mankiw, Gregory N. 2000. Principles of Microeconomics. Boston: Cengage Learning.
Merlin, Michelle. 2012. Farm bill still hanging: More than 70 groups lobby on food stamps.
       OpenSecrets.org. Accessed at
       <http://business.time.com/2012/07/09/food-stamps-more-benefit-to-big-food-than-to-the-poor/>
       on October, 2017.
Milkman, Katherine L. and John Beshears. 2009. Mental accounting and small windfalls: Ev-
       idence from an online grocer. Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 71(2):
       384-394.
Mills, Gregory, Tracy Vericker, Heather Koball, Kye Lippold, Laura Wheaton, and Sam Elkin.
       2014. Understanding the rates, causes, and costs of churning in the Supplemental Nutrition
       Assistance Program (SNAP) - Final report. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Food and
       Nutrition Service.
Moffitt, Robert. 1989. Estimating the value of an in-kind transfer: The case of food stamps.
       Econometrica 57(2): 385-409.


                                               44
Muth, Mary K., Peter H. Siegel, and Chen Zhen. 2007. Homescan data description. Excerpted
       from the ERA Data Quality Study Design. Accessed at
       <http://qed.econ.queensu.ca/jae/2007-v22.7/hausman-leibtag/Homescan-data.pdf> on Oc-
       tober 19, 2017.
Nevo, Aviv and Arlene Wong. 2015. The elasticity of substitution between time and market goods:
       Evidence from the Great Recession. NBER Working Paper No. 21318.
Nord, Mark and Mark Prell. 2011. Food security improved following the 2009 ARRA increase in
       SNAP benefits. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service.
Progressive Grocer. 2015. Top women in grocery. Progressive Grocer 94(6).
Project Bread. 2016. Can I Get SNAP? Accessed at
       <http://www.gettingfoodstamps.org/espanol/canigetsnap.html> on January 7, 2016.
Rainwater, Lee, Richard P. Coleman, and Gerald Handel. 1959. Workingman’s Wife: Her Person-
       ality, World and Life Style. New York: Oceana Publications.
Ratcliffe, Caroline, Signe-Mary McKernan, and Sisi Zhang. 2011. How much does the Supple-
       mental Nutrition Assistance Program reduce food insecurity? American Journal of Agri-
       cultural Economics 93(4): 1082-1098.
Rhode Island Department of Labor and Training. 2016. 2016 UI and TDI Quick Reference. Ac-
       cessed at
       <https://web.archive.org/web/20160104022814/http://www.dlt.ri.gov/lmi/news/quickref.htm>
       on December 22, 2016.
Robinson, Peter M. 1988. Root-N-consistent semiparametric regression. Econometrica 56(4):
       931-954.
Schanzenbach, Diane Whitmore. 2002. What are food stamps worth? Princeton University Indus-
       trial Relations Section Working Paper No. 468.
———. 2013. Proposals to ban purchase of sugary drink with food stamps won’t work. The
       Christian Science Monitor. Accessed at
       <https://www.csmonitor.com/Commentary/Opinion/2013/0313/Proposals-to-ban-purchase-
       of-sugary-drink-with-food-stamps-won-t-work> on October 19, 2017.
Scherpf, Erik and Benjamin Cerf. 2016. Local labor demand and program participation dynamics:
       evidence from New York SNAP administrative records. Center for Administrative Records


                                                45
       Research and Applications, U.S. Census Bureau. Working Paper 2016-10. Accessed at
       <https://osf.io/q559t/> on October 3, 2017.
Shapiro, Jesse M. 2005. Is there a daily discount rate? Evidence from the food stamp nutrition
       cycle. Journal of Public Economics 89(2-3): 303-325.
Shi, Xinzheng. 2012. Does an intra-household flypaper effect exist? Evidence from the edu-
       cational fee reduction reform in rural China. Journal of Development Economics 99(2):
       459-473.
Thakral, Neil and Linh T. Tô. 2017. Daily labor supply and adaptive reference points. Harvard
       University Working Paper, November 2017.
Thaler, Richard H. 1999. Mental accounting matters. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making
       12(3): 183-206.
Thompson, Samuel B. 2011. Simple formulas for standard errors that cluster by both firm and
       time. Journal of Financial Economics 99(1): 1-10.
Trippe, Carole and Daisy Ewell. 2007. An analysis of cash food expenditures of food stamp
       households. Washington, DC: Mathematica Policy Research.
Tuttle, Brad. 2012. Food stamps: More benefit to big food than to the poor. Time Magazine.
       Accessed at <http://business.time.com/2012/07/09/food-stamps-more-benefit-to-big-food-
       than-to-the-poor/> on October 19, 2017.
Tuttle, Charlotte. 2016. The stimulus act of 2009 and its effect on food-at-home spending by SNAP
       participants. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service, Economic Re-
       search Report Number 213. Accessed at
       <https://www.ers.usda.gov/webdocs/publications/74686/60328_err213.pdf?v=42613> on Oc-
       tober 19, 2017.
US Census Bureau. 2010. County Business Patterns. Accessed at
       <http://www.census.gov/data/datasets/2010/econ/cbp/2010-cbp.html> on June 15, 2016.
———. 2016. Accessed at
       <http://www.census.gov/quickfacts/table/PST045215/00> on May 5, 2016.
US Department of Housing and Urban Development. 2017. HUD USPS ZIP code crosswalk files.
       Accessed at
       <https://www.huduser.gov/portal/datasets/usps_crosswalk.html> on November 16, 2017.


                                               46
Ver Ploeg, Michele, Lisa Mancino, Jessica E. Todd, Dawn Marie Clay, and Benjamin Scharadin.
         2015. Where do Americans usually shop for food and how do they travel to get there?
         Initial findings from the National Household Food Acquisition and Purchase Survey. U.S.
         Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service.
Walmart Annual Report. 2014. Accessed at <https://cdn.corporate.walmart.com/66/e5/
         9ff9a87445949173fde56316ac5f/2014-annual-report.pdf> on October 19, 2017.
Wilde, Parke E. 2001. The food stamp benefit formula: Implications for empirical research on
         food demand. Journal of Agricultural and Resource Economics 26(1): 75-90.
Wilde, Parke E. and Christine Ranney. 1996. The distinct impact of food stamps on food spending.
         Journal of Agricultural and Resource Economics 21(1): 174-185.
Wilde, Parke E., Lisa M. Troy, and Beatrice L. Rogers. 2009. Food stamps and food spending: An
         Engel function approach. American Journal of Agricultural Economics 91(2): 416-430.
Yen, Steven T., Margaret Andrews, Zhuo Chen, and David B. Eastwood. 2008. Food Stamp
         Program participation and food insecurity: An instrumental variables approach. American
         Journal of Agricultural Economics 90(1): 117-132.


A      SNAP and Retailer Choice: Additional Empirical Evidence
       from the Nielsen Homescan Consumer Panel
This appendix investigates the longitudinal relationship between retailer choice and SNAP partic-
ipation using data from the Nielsen Homescan Consumer Panel (NHCP).38 Our discussion of the
NHCP draws heavily on Bronnenberg et al. (2015).
     We obtained data from the NHCP from the Nielsen Company (US), LLC and marketing
databases provided by the Kilts Center for Marketing Data Center at the University of Chicago
Booth School of Business39 . The data comprises more than 119 million shopping trips made by
158,830 households from January 2004 to June 2015. Panelist households are given an optical
scanner and are asked to scan the barcode of every consumer packaged good they purchase, re-
gardless of the store where it was purchased.40 Einav et al. (2010) study the accuracy of the
recorded data.
     Nielsen recruits its panelists by direct mail and through internet advertising, and they provide
incentives to recruit and keep consumers on the panel. Muth et al. (2007) and Kilts Center for
   38 Copyright 2017, the Nielsen Company. The conclusions drawn from Nielsen data are those of the researchers

and do not reflect the views of Nielsen. Nielsen is not responsible for and was not involved in analyzing and preparing
the results reported herein.
   39 Information on the data is available at http://research.chicagobooth.edu/nielsen/.
   40 Beginning in 2007, a subset of panelists are asked to itemize purchases of products (e.g., produce) that do not

have a barcode. We exclude these products from all of our calculations.

                                                         47
Marketing (2016) describe the recruitment process in more detail. Lusk and Brooks (2011) study
the representativeness of the panel.
      For each product purchased on each shopping trip, we observe the date, the universal product
code (UPC) if it has one, the transaction price, the quantity of items purchased, an identifier for
the store chain in which the purchase was made, and the total expenditure on the item. We classify
products as SNAP-eligible or SNAP-ineligible based on a product taxonomy and the guidelines for
eligibility published on the USDA website (FNS 2017a).
      For each household, we identify a primary retailer, defined as the retail chain at which the
household has the largest total expenditure on SNAP-eligible items across the entire period for
which the household is observed in the data. We then compute, for each household and quarter,
the share of SNAP-eligible expenditure devoted to the household’s primary retailer in the average
month.
      We obtained from the Nielsen Company a quarterly supplement from the Homescan Panel
Omnibus Survey. The supplement is available for the fourth quarter of 2010 and for every other
quarter from the fourth quarter of 2011 to the second quarter of 2015. It contains panelists’ answers
to the following question:

          Are you or anyone in your household currently using or have you ever used food
      stamps, which includes food stamp card or voucher or cash grant from the state for
      food (also known as Supplemental Nutritional Assistance Program (SNAP), Electronic
      Debit Card (EBT card))?
          Please read all response options then select the one that best describes you.
          1) Currently using food stamps
          2) Have used food stamps, but not currently using them.
          3) Have never used food stamps.

We compute an indicator for current SNAP participation equal to 1 if the household’s answer is
“currently using food stamps” and 0 otherwise.
      Appendix table 1 presents estimates from a series of panel regressions. In each regression,
the dependent variable is the share of SNAP-eligible spending devoted to the primary retailer. The
independent variable of interest is the indicator for SNAP participation. All models include both
household and calendar quarter fixed effects. In column (1), we use our full sample. In columns
(2), (3), and (4) we restrict attention to households whose primary retailer is, respectively, a grocery
store chain, a discount store or warehouse club chain, or something else.
      Column (1) reports that, for the full sample, we estimate an economically small and sta-
tistically insignificant relationship between SNAP participation and the share of SNAP-eligible
spending devoted to the primary retailer. Column (2) reports that, for households whose primary
retailer is a grocery store chain, the share of SNAP-eligible expenditures going to the household’s
primary retailer is greater by 1.1 percentage points in quarters in which the household is on SNAP.
Columns (3) and (4) reports that, for households whose primary retailer is a discount store or ware-
house club chain, and for households whose retailer is neither a grocery store chain, nor a discount
store or warehouse club chain, the share of SNAP-eligible expenditures going to the household’s
primary retailer is lower by 1.1 percentage points quarters in which the household is on SNAP. The
coefficients in columns (2) through (4) are statistically significant.



                                                  48
                                                        Table 1: Estimated marginal propensities to consume
                                                                               (1)                 (2)                 (3)                (4)
                                                                          SNAP-eligible       SNAP-eligible       SNAP-eligible      SNAP-ineligible
                                                                            spending            spending            spending           spending
                        MPC out of
                           SNAP benefits                                       0.5891             0.5495              0.5884               0.0230
                                                                              (0.0074)           (0.0360)            (0.0073)             (0.0043)
                              cash                                            -0.0019            -0.0013             -0.0020               0.0421
                                                                              (0.0494)           (0.0494)            (0.0494)             (0.0688)
                        p-value for equality of MPCs                           0.0000             0.0000              0.0000               0.7764
                        Instruments:
                        Change in price of regular gasoline                     Yes                 Yes                 Yes                  Yes




49
                        ×(Household average gallons per month)
                        SNAP adoption                                           Yes                No                  Yes                  Yes
                        First month of SNAP clock                               No                 Yes                 Yes                  Yes
                        Number of household-months                            2005392            2005392             2005392              2005392
                        Number of households                                   24456              24456               24456                24456
     Notes: The sample is the set of SNAP adopters. The unit of observation is the household-month. Each column reports coefficient estimates from a 2SLS regression,
     with standard errors in parentheses clustered by household and calendar month using the method in Thompson (2011). All models are estimated in first differences
     and include calendar month fixed effects. Endogenous regressors are SNAP benefits and the additive inverse of fuel spending; coefficients on these regressors
     are reported as marginal propensities to consume. The “price of regular gasoline” is the quantity-weighted average spending per gallon on regular grade gasoline
     among all households before any discounts or coupons. “Household average gallons per month” is the average monthly number of gallons of gasoline purchased by
     a given household during the panel. “SNAP adoption” is an indicator for whether the month is an adoption month as defined in section 3.5. “First month of SNAP
     clock” is an indicator equal to one in the first month of a six-month clock that begins in the most recent adoption month. The indicator is set to zero in the first six
     months (inclusive of the adoption month) following the most recent adoption, in any month after the first 24 months (inclusive of the adoption month) following
     the most recent adoption, and in any month for which there is no preceding adoption.
                                  Table 2: Sensitivity of estimated MPCF to assumptions about retailer share of spending
                                                                         (1)         (2)           (3)             (4)                 (5)
                                                                                   SNAP-eligible spending across all retailers
                              MPCF out of
                                 SNAP benefits                         0.5891       0.5891          0.5609           0.5380          0.1316
                                                                      (0.0074)     (0.0074)        (0.0075)         (0.0075)        (0.0089)
                                   cash                               -0.0019      -0.0023         -0.0018          -0.0014          0.0055
                                                                      (0.0494)     (0.0602)        (0.0606)         (0.0609)        (0.0661)
                              p-value for equality of MPCs        0.0000     0.0000      0.0000                      0.0000          0.0532
                              Assumed retailer share of SNAP-eligible spending when household is:
                                   Not on SNAP                     1.000      0.820       0.809                      0.800            0.671
                                   On SNAP                         1.000      0.820       0.820                      0.820            0.820
                              Basis for assumed effect of SNAP      No         No       Homescan                   Homescan          Impose




50
                              on retailer share of spending       effect     effect   point estimate              upper bound      fungibility
                              Number of household-months         2005392 2005392        2005392                     2005392         2005392
                              Number of households                24456      24456        24456                      24456            24456
     Notes: The sample is the set of SNAP adopters. The unit of observation is the household-month. Each column reports coefficient estimates from a 2SLS regression,
     with standard errors in parentheses clustered by household and calendar month using the method in Thompson (2011). All models are estimated in first differences
     and include calendar month fixed effects. Endogenous regressors are SNAP benefits and the additive inverse of fuel spending; coefficients on these regressors are
     reported as marginal propensities to consume. Excluded instruments are the product of the price of regular gasoline and household average gallons per month, and
     an indicator for SNAP adoption, as in column (1) of table 1. In each column, the dependent variable is total SNAP-eligible spending across all retailers, computed
     by dividing SNAP-eligible spending at the retailer by the “on SNAP” share in SNAP months and the “not on SNAP” share in other months. In column (1) we
     assume that all households devote all SNAP-eligible spending to the retailer in all months. In column (2) we assume that all households devote a constant share of
     SNAP-eligible spending to the retailer, with the share given by the ratio of average SNAP benefits between retailer and administrative data in online appendix table
     3. In columns (3) through (5) we assume the same share of spending in SNAP months as in column (2). In columns (3) and (4) we assume that the difference in the
     share of spending between SNAP months and non-SNAP months is equal to the point estimate and upper bound of the 95 percent confidence interval, respectively,
     of the effect of SNAP participation on the share of spending devoted to the primary retailer in column (2) of appendix table 1. In column (5) we assume that the
     share of spending in non-SNAP months is the largest value such that we cannot reject the null hypothesis of an equal MPCF between SNAP and cash.
                                                                        Table 3: Tests of fungibility
                                                                                           Consumption function:
                                                                    Linear,         Linear,             Nonlinear,            Nonlinear,
                                                                 homogeneous heterogeneous            heterogeneous         heterogeneous
                                                                                                    (Linear spline with   (Local regression)
                                                                                                  knots at the quintiles)
                          Excess sensitivity                        0.5809          0.6166                0.7296                0.8819
                          to SNAP benefits (γ̂)                    (0.1631)        (0.1809)              (0.1826)              (0.0824)
                          p-value for γ=0                           0.0006          0.0010                0.0001                0.0000
                          [bootstrap p−value]                      [0.0000]        [0.0000]              [0.0000]              [0.0000]
                          Number of household-months                 1944056               1944056                    1944056                      1936594
                          Number of households                        23708                 23708                      23708                        23617




51
     Notes: The sample is the set of SNAP adopters that purchase fuel at least once. The unit of observation is the household-month. The table presents estimates of
                                                                                                                           γ
     the excess sensitivity γ to SNAP benefits using the three-step procedure described in section 5.3. Let fit be SNAP-eligible spending, bit be SNAP benefits, and
     yit be the additive inverse of fuel spending. Let zit be a vector consisting of the number of SNAP adoptions experienced by household i as of calendar month
     t, and the product of the average price of regular gasoline with the household’s average monthly number of gallons of gasoline purchased. First, we estimate
     Yit = E (yit + bit |zit ) and Bit = E (bit |zit ) via pooled first-differenced regression of (yit + bit ) and bit on zit , respectively, producing estimates Ŷit , B̂it . Next, we
                                                                                                                       
                     γ                                                                              γ   
                                                                                                                \
     estimate E f |Yit , E (Bit |Yit ) via four different methods, producing estimates E \
                    it                                                                              f |Yit , E (B
                                                                                                   it               |Y )
                                                                                                                  it it . In the first column, we estimate these via first-differenced
                      γ                                                                                                                                     γ
     regression of fit and B̂it on Ŷit , pooling across households. In the second column, we estimate these via first-differenced regression of fit and B̂it on Ŷit , separately
                                                                                                  γ
     by household. In the third column, we estimate these via first-differenced regression of fit and B̂it on a linear spline in Ŷit with knots at the quintiles, separately by
                                                                                                       γ
     household. In the fourth column, we estimate these via locally weighted linear regression of fit and B̂it on Ŷit , separately by household, with Gaussian kernel and
                                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                         γ       γ     
                                                                                                                                                                        \
     the rule-of-thumb bandwidth proposed by Fan and Gijbels (1996). Finally, we estimate γ via first-differenced regression of f − E \       itf |Yit on B̂it − E (B
                                                                                                                                                       it                  it |Yit ) ,
     reporting in parentheses the asymptotic standard errors clustered by household and calendar month using the method in Thompson (2011). We report two p−values
     for the hypothesis that γ = 0. The first p−value is based on the asymptotic standard errors; the second p−value (in brackets) is based on a nonparametric bootstrap
     over households with 30 replicates. In each replicate, we sample households with replacement, to match the original sample size, and compute all three steps of the
     estimation procedure. Missing values in the fourth column are due to a small number of cases in which the rule-of-thumb bandwidth is ill-defined.
                                       Table 4: Quantitative implications of psychological departures from fungibility
                                                                                  (1)              (2)        (3)                         (4)
                                                                                Observed                  Simulated
                            MPCF out of SNAP                                             0.5884              0.1454        0.1454   0.5912
                                                                                        (0.0061)            (0.0006)      (0.0005) (0.0065)
                            Relative change in effective shopping effort for
                               Food                                                      -0.0263             -0.0064       -0.0065 -0.0232
                                                                                        (0.0013)            (0.0000)      (0.0000) (0.0003)
                               Nonfood                                                   -0.0008             -0.0064       -0.0064 -0.0032
                                                                                        (0.0039)            (0.0000)      (0.0000) (0.0001)
                            Short-run time preference (Laibson 1997)                         -                  No           Yes          Yes




52
                            Mental accounting (Farhi and Gabaix 2015)                        -                  No           No           Yes
     Notes: Column (1) shows empirical estimates for the sample of SNAP adopters. Columns (2) through (4) show analogues computed from the model described in
     section 6.3. In column (2) we set κ = 0 and β = 1. In column (3) we set κ = 0 and we set β so that the decline in food consumption between the first and second
     half of the month equals that implied by the estimated daily decline in caloric intake in table 1, column (2) of Shapiro (2005), assuming a constant daily rate of
     decline and that each period w consists of 15 days. In column (4) we set β as in column (3) and we set κ so that the MPCF out of SNAP equals the observed MPCF
     from column (1). The observed
                                 f
                                 MPCF out of SNAP is the estimate from column (3) of table 1. The simulated MPCF out of SNAP is the difference in total monthly
     food expenditure ∑w fw d sfww with and without SNAP, divided by the amount of SNAP benefits b0 for SNAP recipients. The observed relative change in effective
     shopping effort for food (nonfood) items is the estimated effect of SNAP on the adjusted store-brand share for SNAP-eligible (SNAP-ineligible) purchases, as
     shown in the online appendix, divided by the expenditure-weighted average store-brand share of SNAP-eligible (SNAP-ineligible) purchases in the six months prior
                                                                                                                                           f          −1
     to adoption. The simulated relative change in effective shopping effort for food is the ratio of the effective shopping effort ∑w fw d sfww / ∑w fw     with SNAP to
     the effective shopping effort without SNAP, less one. The simulated relative change in effective shopping effort for nonfood is defined analogously. Standard errors
     in parentheses are obtained via a nonparametric bootstrap over households with 30 replicates. In each bootstrap replicate, we draw households with replacement
     to match the size of the main sample, and recompute all empirical objects. We also draw a value of the daily decline in caloric intake from a Gaussian distribution
     with mean given by the point estimate in table 1, column (2) of Shapiro (2005) and standard deviation given by the standard error in table 1, column (2) of Shapiro
     (2005).
        Figure 1: In-state earnings and number of children before and after SNAP adoption
                 Panel A: In-state earnings and unemployment insurance benefits




                                                                         650
                        Average monthly in−state earnings and UI benefits ($)
                        400     450        500       550      600




                                                                                −4                      0                  4
                                                                                      Quarters relative to SNAP adoption


                                              Panel B: Number of children under five years of age
                                                    .24
                         Number of children under five years of age
                        .16       .18         .2          .22




                                                                                −12                    0                   12
                                                                                      Months relative to SNAP adoption



Notes: Data are from Rhode Island administrative records from October 2004 through June 2016. See
section 2.1 for details on sample definition and variable construction. Each panel plots coefficients from a
regression of the dependent variable on a vector of lead and lagged indicators for periods relative to SNAP
adoption, defined as the first period in which the household receives SNAP. The period immediately prior to
adoption (“-1”) is the omitted category. Each regression includes time period fixed effects, household fixed
effects, and indicators for observations more than one year before or after adoption. In panel A, a time period
is a calendar quarter and the unit of analysis is a household-quarter. In panel B, a time period is a month
and the unit of analysis is the household-month. In both panels, the error bars are ±2 coefficient standard
errors and standard errors are clustered by household. Dotted lines show the sample mean of the dependent
variable across observations within one year (4 quarters or 12 months) of SNAP adoption. Each coefficient
series is shifted by a constant so that the observation-count-weighted mean of the regression coefficients is
equal to the sample mean of the corresponding dependent variable.



                                                                                                 53
                                                    Figure 2: Distribution of lengths of SNAP spells




                                 .25       .2
                   Fraction of SNAP spells
                        .1       .15
                                 .05
                                 0




                                                0          6       12         18          24    30     36
                                                                   SNAP spell length (months)


Notes: Data are from Rhode Island administrative records from October 2004 through June 2016. See
section 2.1 for details on sample definition and variable construction. The plot shows a histogram of the
distribution of SNAP spell lengths, where a spell is defined as a set of consecutive months in which the
household is entitled to a SNAP benefit in each month according to state program records. Spells longer
than 36 months are excluded from the sample.




                                                                           54
                                    Figure 3: Inferring SNAP adoption from single-retailer data




                   Pr(SNAP adoption within two months of transition)
                        .2       .4        .6      .8         1




                                                                       1    2     3     4     5       6       7      8    9    10   11     12
                                                                                        Radius of transition period (months)

                                                                           All households
                                                                           Households who mainly spend SNAP at the Rhode Island Retailer



Notes: Data are from Rhode Island EBT transaction records from September 2012 through October 2015.
See section 2.1 for details on sample definition and variable construction. The figure plots the fraction of
transition periods of a given radius in which the household newly enrolled in SNAP within two months of
the start of SNAP spending at the Rhode Island Retailer. We define new enrollment as the receipt of at least
$10 in SNAP benefits following a period of at least three consecutive months with no benefit. A transition
period of radius K is a period in which a household exhibits K consecutive months without SNAP spending
at the Rhode Island Retailer followed by K consecutive months with SNAP spending at the Rhode Island
Retailer. Households who mainly spend SNAP at the Rhode Island Retailer are those who spend at least half
of their total EBT expenditures between September 2012 and October 2015 at the Rhode Island Retailer.




                                                                                                     55
                 Figure 4: SNAP use and benefits before and after SNAP adoption
                                      Panel A: SNAP use




                                                                   1
                    Share of households with positive SNAP spending
                   0        .2        .4        .6       .8




                                                                       −12                     0                 12
                                                                              Months relative to SNAP adoption


                                                                             Panel B: SNAP benefits
                                             200
                   Monthly SNAP benefit (dollars)
                   50        100          1500




                                                                       −12                     0                 12
                                                                              Months relative to SNAP adoption


Notes: The sample is the set of SNAP adopters. Panel A plots the share of households with positive SNAP
spending in each of the 12 months before and after the household’s first SNAP adoption. Panel B plots the
average SNAP benefit in each of the 12 months before and after the first SNAP adoption.




                                                                                         56
                  Figure 5: Monthly expenditure before and after SNAP adoption
                                Panel A: SNAP-eligible spending




                                    500
                     Monthly expenditure (dollars)
                        400         350  450




                                                     −12                           0                 12
                                                                  Months relative to SNAP adoption


                                                           Panel B: SNAP-ineligible spending
                                    200
                     Monthly expenditure (dollars)
                        100         50   150




                                                     −12                           0                 12
                                                                  Months relative to SNAP adoption



Notes: Each figure plots coefficients from a regression of SNAP-eligible or SNAP-ineligible spending on
a vector of lead and lagged indicators for month relative to the household’s first SNAP adoption, with the
month prior to SNAP adoption (“-1”) as the omitted category. The unit of observation for each regression
is the household-month and the sample is the set of SNAP adopters. Error bars are ±2 coefficient standard
errors. Standard errors are clustered by household. Each regression includes calendar month fixed effects,
household fixed effects, and two indicators for observations before and after 12 months of SNAP adoption.
The dotted lines show the sample mean of household monthly expenditure across observations within 12
months of SNAP adoption. Each coefficient series is shifted by a constant so that the observation-count-
weighted mean of the regression coefficients is equal to the sample mean of the corresponding dependent
variable.



                                                                             57
                                                                           Figure 6: Participation, benefits, and spending over the six-month SNAP clock
                                                                                                          Panel A: SNAP use




                                                                                                           −.08          −.06        −.04      −.02
                                                                                                      Change in share of households using SNAP
                                                                                                                              −.1
                                                                                                                                                      7,13,..   8,14,..        9,15,..       10,16,..    11,17,..                                             12,18,..
                                                                                                                                                                          Months following SNAP adoption


                                                                            Panel B: SNAP benefits                                                                                                                                             Panel C: SNAP-eligible spending




                                              −5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   −2




58
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          −4




                                                −10
                                                                                                                                                                                                        −8      −6




                                 −15
                                                                                                                                                                                              −10




                           Change in monthly SNAP benefits ($)
                                                                                                                                                                                          Change in monthly SNAP−eligible spending ($)




                                              −20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 −12




                                                                 7,13,..    8,14,..        9,15,..       10,16,..    11,17,..                                              12,18,..                                                      7,13,..   8,14,..        9,15,..       10,16,..    11,17,..   12,18,..
                                                                                      Months following SNAP adoption                                                                                                                                         Months following SNAP adoption



     Notes: Each figure plots coefficients from a regression of the dependent variable on a vector of indicators for the position of the current month in a monthly clock
     that begins in the most recent adoption month and resets every six months or at the next SNAP adoption, whichever comes first. So, for example, the first month
     of the clock corresponds to months 7, 13, 19, etc. following SNAP adoption. The unit of observation for each regression is the household-month. The sample is
     the set of SNAP adopters. Error bars are ±2 coefficient standard errors. Standard errors are clustered by household. Each regression includes calendar month fixed
     effects. The omitted category consists of the first six months (inclusive of the adoption month) after the household’s most recent SNAP adoption, all months after
     the first 24 months (inclusive of the adoption month) following the household’s most recent adoption, and all months for which there is no preceding adoption. In
     panel A, the dependent variable is the change in an indicator for whether the household-month is a SNAP month. In panel B, the dependent variable is the change
     in monthly SNAP benefits. In Panel C, the dependent variable is the change in monthly SNAP-eligible spending.
      Figure 7: Monthly SNAP benefits and SNAP-eligible spending around benefit changes
                         Panel A: Administrative data for retailer states
                                                                                                        Farm Bill           ARRA




                              Average monthly SNAP benefit per household (dollars)
                                                                                     300
                                                                                     280
                                                                                     260
                                                                                     240
                                                                                     220




                                                                                     Jan−2008           Oct−2008           Apr−2009              Dec−2009



                                                                                                Panel B: Retailer data
                                                                                                      Farm Bill           ARRA




                                                                                                                                                   380
                                                                                     550
                              Monthly SNAP−eligible spending (dollars)




                                                                                                                                                         Monthly SNAP benefits (dollars)
                                                                                                                                                   350
                                                                                     520




                                                                                                                                                   320
                                                                                     490




                                                                                                                                                   290
                                                                                     460




                                                                                                                                                   260
                                                                                     430




                                                                                     Jan−2008         Oct−2008         Apr−2009              Dec−2009

                                                                                                 SNAP−eligible spending      SNAP benefits



Notes: Panel A plots the average monthly SNAP benefit per household between January 2008 and December 2009
from administrative data. The series was obtained by weighing the average monthly SNAP benefit per household
for each state (according to data from the United States Department of Agriculture Food and Nutrition Service via
http://www.fns.usda.gov/sites/default/files/pd/SNAPZip69throughCurrent.zip as of May 2017) by
the number of retailer households with at least one SNAP month. Panel B plots coefficients from a regression of
SNAP benefits and SNAP-eligible spending on interactions between the share of calendar months between February
2006 and December 2007 during which each household used SNAP and calendar month indicators, with the January
2008 interaction normalized to zero. The sample includes all households in the retailer panel with at least one SNAP
month. The unit of observation is the household-month and only months from January 2008 to December 2009 are
included in the regression. Error bars and shaded region represent ±2 coefficient standard errors. Standard errors are
clustered by household. Each regression includes household and calendar month fixed effects. Each coefficient series
is seasonally adjusted by subtracting from each coefficient the corresponding coefficient from an auxiliary regression
of the dependent variable on interactions between the share of months between February 2006 and December 2007
during which each household used SNAP and year and seasonal month indicators. The auxiliary regressions include
household, year, and seasonal month fixed effects and are estimated using only data from January 2010 to December
2012. Each coefficient series is shifted by a constant so that the observation-count-weighted mean of the regression
coefficients is equal to the sample mean of the corresponding dependent variable among households who used SNAP
in every month between February 2006 and December 2007. In both panels, vertical lines at October 2008 and April
2009 denote the implementation dates of changes in SNAP benefits due to the Farm Bill and American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act (ARRA), respectively.


                                                                                                                  59
                                                  Figure 8: Monthly expenditure and the price of gasoline
                                                                 Panel A: Fuel spending



                                 300
                                                        Fourth quartile
                                                        Third quartile
                                                        Second quartile

                  Monthly expenditure (dollars)
                                                        First quartile

                     100         0 4  200
                  Price of gasoline
                   2        3
                                                  6




                                                            7




                                                                              8




                                                                                       9




                                                                                                      0




                                                                                                                1




                                                                                                                         2




                                                                                                                                 12
                                          b0




                                                        n0




                                                                          n0




                                                                                   n0




                                                                                                   n1




                                                                                                            n1




                                                                                                                     n1




                                                                                                                             ec
                              Fe




                                                       Ja




                                                                         Ja




                                                                                  Ja




                                                                                                 Ja




                                                                                                           Ja




                                                                                                                    Ja




                                                                                                                             D
                                                                                       Transaction month


                                                                  Panel B: SNAP-eligible spending
                                 600




                                                        Fourth quartile
                                                        Third quartile
                                                        Second quartile
                  Monthly expenditure (dollars)
                                          500




                                                        First quartile
                  300        400   4 200
                  Price of gasoline
                   2        3
                                                  6




                                                            7




                                                                              8




                                                                                       9




                                                                                                      0




                                                                                                                1




                                                                                                                         2




                                                                                                                                 12
                                          b0




                                                        n0




                                                                          n0




                                                                                   n0




                                                                                                   n1




                                                                                                            n1




                                                                                                                     n1




                                                                                                                             ec
                              Fe




                                                       Ja




                                                                         Ja




                                                                                  Ja




                                                                                                 Ja




                                                                                                           Ja




                                                                                                                    Ja




                                                                                                                             D




                                                                                       Transaction month



Notes: Panel A plots average monthly fuel spending by quartile of average monthly fuel spending. Panel
B plots average monthly SNAP-eligible spending by quartile of average monthly fuel spending. The unit
of observation is the household-month and the sample is the set of SNAP adopters who ever purchase fuel.
The lower portion of both plots shows the price of gasoline, computed as the quantity-weighted average
spending per gallon on regular grade gasoline among all households before any discounts or coupons.




                                                                                           60
                    Figure 9: Store-brand share before and after SNAP adoption
                                  Panel A: SNAP-eligible products




                                   .345
                     Adjusted store−brand share
                        .335       .33  .34




                                                  −12                           0                 12
                                                               Months relative to SNAP adoption


                                                        Panel B: SNAP-ineligible products
                                   .24
                     Adjusted store−brand share
                        .23        .225 .235




                                                  −12                           0                 12
                                                               Months relative to SNAP adoption



Notes: Each figure plots coefficients from a regression of adjusted store-brand share of expenditures on a
vector of lead and lagged indicators for month relative to the household’s first SNAP adoption, with the
month prior to SNAP adoption (“-1”) as the omitted category. The unit of observation for each regression
is the household-month and the sample is the set of SNAP adopters. Error bars are ±2 coefficient standard
errors. Standard errors are clustered by household. Each regression includes calendar month fixed effects,
household fixed effects, and two indicators for observations before and after 12 months of SNAP adoption.
The dotted line shows the sample mean of the store-brand share of expenditure across observations within
12 months of SNAP adoption. Each coefficient series is shifted by a constant so that the observation-
count-weighted mean of the regression coefficients is equal to the sample mean of the store-brand share of
expenditure in the given SNAP eligibility group.



                                                                          61
                                  Figure 10: Coupon use before and after SNAP adoption
                                             Panel A: SNAP-eligible products




                                      .028
                     Adjusted coupon redemption share
                           .024       .022.026




                                                        −12                           0                 12
                                                                     Months relative to SNAP adoption


                                                              Panel B: SNAP-ineligible products
                                      .056
                     Adjusted coupon redemption share
                          .052        .05.054




                                                        −12                           0                 12
                                                                     Months relative to SNAP adoption



Notes: Each figure plots coefficients from a regression of the adjusted coupon redemption share on a vector
of lead and lagged indicators for month relative to the household’s first SNAP adoption, with the month
prior to SNAP adoption (“-1”) as the omitted category. The unit of observation for each regression is
the household-month and the sample is the set of SNAP adopters. Error bars are ±2 coefficient standard
errors. Standard errors are clustered by household. Each regression includes calendar month fixed effects,
household fixed effects, and two indicators for observations before and after 12 months of SNAP adoption.
The dotted line shows the sample mean of the share of purchases using a coupon across observations within
12 months of SNAP adoption. Each coefficient series is shifted by a constant so that the observation-count-
weighted mean of the regression coefficients is equal to the sample mean of the share of purchases using a
coupon in the given SNAP eligibility group.



                                                                                62
Appendix Table 1: Relationship between SNAP status and primary retailer share of expenditures
in the Nielsen Homescan Consumer Panel
                                           Share of SNAP-eligible expenditure in primary retailer
                                              (1)       (2)            (3)              (4)
 Primary retailer type                        All    Grocery Discount store or        Other
                                                                warehouse club
 On SNAP                                    0.0035    0.0111        -0.0106          -0.0112
                                           (0.0036) (0.0044)        (0.0063)         (0.0211)
 Number of households                        4407      2904           1345             158
 Number of household-quarters               24198     16058           7309              831
 Dependent variable:
  Mean                                      0.515       0.512           0.535             0.398
  Within-household standard deviation       0.177       0.175           0.175             0.222
Notes: Data come from the Nielsen Homescan Consumer Panel and the Homescan Panel Omnibus
Survey, as described in appendix A. The unit of observation is the household-quarter. Standard
errors in parentheses are clustered by household. Each column reports results from a linear regres-
sion with household and calendar quarter fixed effects. The dependent variable, “Share of SNAP-
eligible expenditure in primary retailer,” is the share of SNAP-eligible spending at the household’s
primary retailer, defined as the retail chain in which the household spends the most on SNAP-
eligible items across all quarters in which the household is observed in the Nielsen Homescan
Consumer Panel. Column (1) includes all households regardless of the primary retailer. Columns
(2) to (4) restrict the sample, respectively, to households whose primary retailer is a grocery store
chain, a discount store or warehouse club chain, or another type of retailer. The key independent
variable, “On SNAP”, is an indicator for whether the household reports being on SNAP in the
current quarter. Household-quarters with missing values of the “On SNAP” indicator are excluded
from the sample. Households are included in the sample if they report being on SNAP in at least
one survey response and report not being on SNAP in at least one survey response.




                                                 63
                      Appendix Table 2: Results for alternative samples and specifications
                                                                      MPCF out of           p-values for        Number of
                                                                     SNAP     cash             tests of      household-months
                                                                    benefits                 fungibility       (households)
                      (1)     Baseline                               0.588        -0.002       0.0000             2005392
                                                                    (0.007)      (0.049)       0.0000             (24456)
                      (2)     All households with at least 2         0.589        0.018        0.0000            8586958
                              consecutive SNAP months               (0.007)      (0.049)       0.0000            (104719)
                      (3)     9-month SNAP                           0.571        0.009        0.0000             1079284
                              adoption definition                   (0.011)      (0.055)       0.0000             (13162)
                      (4)     12-month SNAP                          0.565        0.008        0.0000             668710
                              adoption definition                   (0.014)      (0.053)       0.0000             (8155)
                      (5)     SNAP exit instead of SNAP              0.594        0.011        0.0000             1329056
                              adoption                              (0.010)      (0.047)       0.0017             (16208)
                      (6)     Below-median number of                 0.602        0.011        0.0000             984574
                              supermarkets in county                (0.009)      (0.053)       0.0000             (12007)
                      (7)     Average SNAP-eligible spending         0.575        -0.000       0.0000             1664272
                              exceeds average SNAP benefit          (0.007)      (0.048)       0.0000             (20296)
                      (8)     Average SNAP-eligible spending         0.584        -0.001       0.0000             1162842
                              exceeds average SNAP benefit          (0.009)      (0.046)       0.0000             (14181)
                              by at least $100
                      (9)     Average SNAP-eligible spending         0.523        -0.003       0.0000             1129304
                              exceeds CEX average                   (0.008)      (0.047)       0.0000             (13772)
                     (10)     Households with only one adult         0.579        0.010        0.0000             350058
                                                                    (0.016)      (0.064)       0.0000             (4269)
                     (11)     Households never on WIC                0.544        0.004        0.0000             1159480
                                                                    (0.008)      (0.043)       0.0000             (14140)
                     (12)     Exclude recession adopters             0.579       -0.000        0.0000             1425160
                                                                    (0.006)      (0.052)       0.0000             (17380)
                     (13)     Dependent variable in                  0.584        0.003        0.0000             2003876
                              natural logarithm                     (0.008)      (0.015)       0.0000             (24456)
                     (14)     Dependent variable                     0.503       0.006         0.0000             2005392
                              deseasonalized                         0.007       0.026         0.0000             (24456)

Notes: Specification (1) corresponds to baseline results presented in the body of the paper. The first and second columns of numbers report
coefficients and standard errors from the third column of table 1. The third column of numbers reports two p−values. The upper p−value is for the
test of the hypothesis that the MPCFs in the first two columns are equal. The lower p−value is for the test of the hypothesis that γ = 0 from the
specification in the fourth column of table 3. The final column of numbers reports the sample size corresponding to the specifications in the first two
columns. Specification (2) repeats specification (1) using the sample of all households with at least 2 consecutive SNAP months. Specification (3)
repeats specification (1) defining SNAP adoption as a period of nine or more consecutive non-SNAP months followed by a period of nine or more
consecutive SNAP months. Specification (4) repeats specification (1) defining SNAP adoption as a period of twelve or more consecutive non-SNAP
months followed by a period of twelve or more consecutive SNAP months. Specification (5) repeats specification (1) but removes the “first month
of SNAP clock” instrument and replaces the “SNAP adoption” instrument with an indicator for SNAP exit, where SNAP exit is defined as the
first month of a period of six consecutive non-SNAP months that follow six consecutive SNAP months. The sample is the set of all households
that exhibit such an exit. Specification (6) repeats specification (1) using the sample of SNAP adopters for whom the number of supermarkets in
the county of residence is below the median for SNAP adopters. Data on the number of supermarkets come from US Census Bureau (2010). A
supermarket is defined as a supermarket or other grocery store; the category excludes convenience stores. Specification (7) repeats specification (1)
using the sample of SNAP adopters for whom average SNAP-eligible spending in non-SNAP months exceeds the average SNAP benefit in SNAP
months. Specification (8) repeats specification (1) using the sample of SNAP adopters for whom average SNAP-eligible spending in non-SNAP
months exceeds the average SNAP benefit in SNAP months by at least $100. Specification (9) repeats specification (1) using the sample of SNAP
adopters that have an average monthly SNAP-eligible spending of at least $292 in the six months before adoption, where $292 is the 2010 estimated
average monthly spending on food at home by eligible nonparticipants in Mabli and Malsberger (2013). Specification (10) repeats specification (1)
using the sample of SNAP adopters for which there is only one adult in the household. Specification (11) repeats specification (1) using the sample
of SNAP adopters who never use WIC in any transaction. Specification (12) repeats specification (1) using the sample of SNAP adopters who did
not adopt SNAP during the Great Recession (December 2007 - June 2009). Specification (13) repeats specification (1) except that the dependent
variable is the natural logarithm of SNAP-eligible spending. The MPCFs are the average marginal effects implied by the estimates. Specification
(14) repeats specification (1) except that the dependent variable is deseasonalized separately by each household. The season considered is the
month. We adopt the additive classical decomposition using a centered moving average as in Kendall et al. (1983, pp. 485-493).




                                                                         64
