NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SECONDARY PHARMACEUTICAL PATENTING:
A GLOBAL PERSPECTIVE
Bhaven N. Sampat
Kenneth C. Shadlen
Working Paper 23114
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23114

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2017

We appreciate ESRC grant (ES/K010999/1) The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Bhaven N. Sampat and Kenneth C. Shadlen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Secondary Pharmaceutical Patenting: A Global Perspective
Bhaven N. Sampat and Kenneth C. Shadlen
NBER Working Paper No. 23114
January 2017
JEL No. I18,O3
ABSTRACT
Pharmaceutical firms’ use of secondary patents to extend periods of exclusivity generates
concerns among policymakers worldwide. In response, some developing countries have
introduced measures to curb the grant of these patents. While these measures have received
considerable attention, there is limited evidence on their effectiveness. We follow a large sample
of international patent applications in the US, Japan, the European Patent Office, and
corresponding filings in three developing countries with restrictions on secondary patents, India,
Brazil, and Argentina. We examine cross-country comparisons of primary vs. secondary grant
rates, consider the differential fates of “twin” applications filed in multiple countries, and
undertake detailed analyses of patent prosecution in the three developing countries. Our analyses
indicate that measures to restrict secondary patents in developing countries are having limited
impact. In none of these three countries are specific policies toward secondary patents the
principal determinant of grant rates. Our analyses also suggest the importance of other procedural
aspects of patent systems, beyond the formal policies targeting secondary applications, that affect
outcomes for these applications in developing countries.

Bhaven N. Sampat
Department of Health Policy and Management
Columbia University
600 West 168th Street, 6th Floor
New York, NY 10032
and NBER
bns3@columbia.edu
Kenneth C. Shadlen
Department of International Development
London School of Economics
and Political Science (LSE)
k.shadlen@lse.ac.uk

Secondary Pharmaceutical Patenting: A Global Perspective
1. Introduction
Taking out multiple patents on different aspects of a drug in order to cordon off competitors is
standard practice in pharmaceuticals. In addition to primary patents, firms commonly attempt to
acquire ​secondary
​
patents on alternative forms of molecules, different formulations, dosages, and
compositions, and new uses. Devising patenting strategies to extend periods of protection is an
essential aspect of “life cycle management” in the pharmaceutical industry (Burdon and Sloper
2003; Howard 2007; European Commission 2009; Sternitzke 2010; Ellery and Hansen 2012;
Kapczynski et al. 2012). This paper discusses policy challenges raised by secondary patenting,
provides comparative data on secondary patent grant rates, and evaluates the effectiveness of
restrictions on secondary patents in developing countries.
While firms increasingly attempt to obtain secondary patents, policymakers have grown
concerned about their effects, since they can extend periods of exclusivity beyond the dates in
which protection would otherwise lapse if the only protection came from the primary patent on
the molecule. Some have argued that patents on alternative molecular forms, formulations, or
uses are of lower “quality” than primary patents too, in that they are less likely to be novel or
manifest inventive step (Correa 2007; Kesselheim 2007; Eisenberg 2008). And as with more
general debates over patent quality (Jaffe and Lerner 2004; de Rassenfosse et al 2016; GAO
2016), there are concerns that patent offices worldwide may erroneously grant secondary
applications that don’t warrant patentability, but once granted restrict competition.
Secondary patents are a particular source of concern in developing countries, where
pharmaceutical patenting is new. The World Trade Organization’s (WTO) 1995 Agreement on
Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) required developing countries to
change their patent laws to be more like those in developed countries. Prior to TRIPS few
developing countries allowed pharmaceutical products to be patented. Doing so is now
obligatory for nearly all WTO members.1
While TRIPS universalizes pharmaceutical patenting, some developing countries have exploited
flexibilities built into the agreement to try to limit the grant of secondary patents. Three
prominent examples of countries doing so are India, Brazil, and Argentina. Fearing the effects
that secondary patents might have on pharmaceutical markets and access to medicines, and
worried by the difficulties of circumventing or removing patents once granted, each of these
countries introduced provisions to restrict secondary patenting.
These countries’ approaches toward secondary patents have been championed by academics,
civil society groups and non-governmental organizations, and cited as models to be emulated
(Reichman 2009; Kapczynski 2013; South Centre 2011; UNAIDS 2011). They have also been
criticized by the pharmaceutical industry as unfair limitations on their abilities to obtain patents
Thirty-four WTO members classified as “Least Developed Countries” are exempted from this
obligation until 2033. Before TRIPS many developing countries allowed for process patents in
pharmaceuticals, but not product patents.
1

(PhRMA 2016).2​ Though there are policy concerns, and some data that many secondary patents
are issued in developing countries (Abud et al 2015 ,Correa et al 2011), there is little evidence on
the share of secondary applications granted and the effectiveness of countries’ specific
restrictions.
This paper evaluates the effects of measures to limit secondary patents in India, Brazil, and
Argentina on patent office outcomes in these countries. We do so in three ways. First, we
compare differences between primary and secondary patent grant rates in these countries to
differences in three patent offices (the U.S., EPO, and Japan) that do not have measures toward
secondary patents. If the developing country policies are functioning effectively, we should
observe differences across countries in the differential grant rates between primary and
secondary patents. Second, we compare grant rates for secondary patents in developing countries
for “twins,” the same applications filed in different jurisdictions. Exploiting the twins nature of
international patent applications is increasingly common for developed countries (Jensen et al
2006; Hopkins et al 2007; Lemley and Sampat 2012; Webster et al 2014; de Rassenfosse et al
2016; Christie et al 2016), but few analyses have done so for developing countries (Sampat and
Amin 2013; Sampat and Shadlen 2015a). Third, since grant rates may be a blunt indicator of
policy effectiveness, we provide data on the details of patent prosecution for secondary patent
applications filed in the developing countries. This allows us to examine the role that the specific
policies are having, in relation to other influences on secondary patenting grant rates. These final
analyses build on and extend recent work in the U.S. that uses prosecution history data to get
“inside the black box” of patent examination, to provide insights on the functioning of patent
systems, beyond what can be learned from grant rates alone (Drahos 2010; Lemley and Sampat
2012; Carley et al 2015; Frakes and Wasserman forthcoming).
We find that developing countries’ measures to restrict secondary patents are having less impact
than one might expect from the considerable attention (positive and negative) they attract.
Neither India nor Brazil exhibit lower grant rates for secondary patents than for primary patents,
which is a differential that we would expect to observe if these countries’ measures were having
their intended impact. These results are robust across the overall sample, and the sets of twin
applications. Though we do observe this differential in Argentina, detailed analyses of
prosecution suggest that in none of these three countries are specific policies toward secondary
patents the principal determinant of grant rates. In investigating this, we find suggestive evidence
that long patent office backlogs in the developing countries give applicants time to learn about
the importance and quality of their applications, leading them to abandon applications deemed
not worth pursuing.
In the following section we provide a general overview of the challenges posed by secondary
patents globally, discuss why secondary patenting is a particularly salient policy issue in
developing countries where pharmaceutical patents are new, and describe the policies that India,
Brazil, and Argentina have enacted to limit the grant of such patents. In Section 3 we discuss the
data sources we use to provide comparative evidence on secondary patent grant rates and to
​One of the controversial aspects of the proposed Trans-Pacific Partnership had been the
prohibition on national restrictions on some forms of secondary patents.
2

2

assess the roles played by the developing countries’ restrictions. In Section 4 we present our
empirical results, examining cross-national grant rates, grant rates for “twin” applications, and
detailed analyses of secondary patent prosecution. Section 5 discusses these results. Section 6
synthesizes the main findings of the paper, addresses the limitations of the study, and points to
avenues for future research.
2. Secondary Patents and Public Policy
Secondary patents can restrict competition, deny consumers the benefit of generic entry, and thus
allow for supra-competitive prices. While this is true of all patents, the grant of secondary
patents draws particular criticism from those who believe they represent less research investment
than novel molecules, and thus do not warrant patent protection (Correa 2007; Correa 2014).
Related to this, because applications for secondary patents are typically filed after applications
for primary patents, and patents last twenty years from the date of application, secondary patents,
if granted, can potentially extend periods of market exclusivity. Pharmaceutical firms use
secondary patents to retain exclusive rights to valuable, revenue-generating drugs for as long as
possible, a strategy that has been attributed to the high costs of research and development, the
low success rate in creating products that work in the lab and clinic and can gain regulatory
approval, and the fact that significant portions of available patent periods will ordinarily have
lapsed before successful products ever get on the market (European Commission 2009). While in
industry the use of secondary patents to extend periods of market exclusivity is referred to as
“life cycle management” (e.g. Burdon and Sloper 2003, Ellery and Hansen 2012), critics use the
more pejorative term “evergreening” (Rathod 2010; Correa 2014).
Even in the absence of specific policies targeting secondary patents, legal scholars believe that
conventional patent standards, that an invention must be novel and demonstrate inventive step (in
the USA, be “non-obvious”) ought to make secondary patent applications more difficult to obtain
(Eisenberg 2008). But there is also concern that resource-constrained patent offices commonly
grant low “quality” patents (Jaffe and Lerner 2004), i.e. patents that do not satisfy conventional
patent standards and that, with more rigorous scrutiny, would have been rejected. Some have
argued that the U.S. patent system is particularly permissive, on account of the incentives facing
examiners to grant patents and its unique continuation practice that can reward applicants who
are persistent (Lemley and Moore 2004; Amin and Kesselheim 2012), though the US is not alone
in being criticized in this regard (Moir 2013). The perception that the lax application of
traditional patent standards can contribute to excessive granting of low-quality secondary patents
in developing countries is widespread too (Drahos 2008; Drahos 2010; Correa 2007; Correa
2014; Reichman 2009, Löfgren and Williams 2013).
One way to address the problems that may be created by the granting of secondary patents is to
invalidate them via litigation, as is common in the U.S. and many developed countries (Hemphill
and Sampat 2011). In developing countries, however, smaller markets and greater resource and
information asymmetries between patent holders and potential challengers make this a less
attractive solution (Sampat and Shadlen 2015a). Rather than relying on litigation to invalidate
low-quality secondary patents after they have been issued, countries implementing new patent
laws under TRIPS have been encouraged to introduce measures to address secondary patents at
the point of examination. Such measures try to limit the grant of secondary patents in the first
3

place, reflecting a belief that, in the language of Drahos (2008), prevention is better than
treatment.3​ Although secondary patents in pharmaceuticals (and other fields) may be more
vulnerable to rejection or invalidation under traditional patentability standards (e.g. novelty and
inventive step) as noted above, this approach reflects a concern that ordinary examination
practices are not enough, and additional restrictions specifically targeting secondary patents are
needed.
The three most prominent attempts to limit secondary patents at the point of examination are in
India, Brazil, and Argentina. India took full advantage of the transitional provisions in TRIPS,
which allowed countries to wait until 2005 to begin granting pharmaceutical patents.
Accordingly, India began accepting applications in 1995, when TRIPS formally came into effect,
though these were held waiting in a “mailbox” until 2005. In the final amendments to its new
TRIPS-compliant patent law in early 2005, as the country began to examine pharmaceutical
patent applications, India introduced Section 3(d), a provision that was explicitly designed to
minimize the grant of secondary patents (Basheer and Reddy 2008; Kapcyznksi 2009).
According to Section 3(d), new forms of known substances are not eligible for protection unless
the applicant can demonstrate increased “efficacy.”4
Brazil introduced pharmaceutical patents in 1997, and in 2001 the new patent law was reformed
to condition the grant of drug patents not only on the approval of the Brazilian patent office
(INPI), but also on the “prior consent” of the Ministry of Health’s surveillance agency
(ANVISA). When the system was put in place there was confusion about how exactly the health
agency would carry out its new task. ANVISA subsequently decided to use its authority to try to
limit the grant of secondary patents. The health agency created its own intellectual property
division, and developed its own examination guidelines, more restrictive than INPI’s,
specifically targeting secondary patents (Basso 2006; Silva 2008; Shadlen 2011; Correa 2014).
Under the arrangements that were in place until 2012, the examination process began at the
patent office. When INPI determined that the patent should not be granted, then the application
was rejected and the process ended. However, when INPI determined that the patent should be
Another reason why secondary patenting has particular salience in developing countries relates
to the timing of TRIPS implementation. Because of the transition provisions in TRIPS, countries
were not required to grant patents with priority dates (first global filing date) before 1995. This
means that for many drugs that were launched in the 1990s and 2000s, primary patents are not
eligible, despite the global spread of pharmaceutical patenting, and the only patent protection
available in developing countries would be via secondary patents (Sampat and Shadlen 2015b).
This transitional feature heightened the stakes of policy choices about secondary patents.
3

Section 3(d) was a surprise to most observers, including the pharmaceutical industry. It has
since been the source of much controversy. The provision was (unsuccessfully) challenged in the
Indian Supreme Court by Novartis, following the Indian Patent Office’s rejection of a secondary
patent on a cancer drug “Gleevec” (imatinib mesylate). The Novartis case galvanized opposition
to 3(d) from the transnational pharmaceutical industry, and also vigorous defense of the
provision from civil society organizations, health activists, and international organizations.
4

4

granted, the application was passed to ANVISA for the health agency’s examination team to
make its own judgment. If ANVISA issued its consent, INPI then granted the patent; if ANVISA
withheld its consent, INPI was prohibited from granting the patent (notwithstanding its original
favorable evaluation). The Prior Consent system was revised in 2012, reversing the order of
operation, but the core feature of Brazil’s system – pharmaceutical patents need to be approved
by both the INPI and ANVISA to be granted – remains in place.5
In Argentina, pharmaceutical products became patentable in 2000. In 2002, the patent office
issued new examination guidelines that barred patents on one type of secondary patent, those
claiming second medical uses. Then, in 2012, the patent office issued new and significantly more
restrictive guidelines that instruct examiners to reject most forms of secondary pharmaceutical
patents. Argentina’s approach toward secondary patents differs from that of India and Brazil in
terms of coverage. For most of the period in our analysis, the prohibition on second medical uses
is the sole measure designed to limit secondary patents. The more restrictive guidelines are only
in place for applications examined as of May 2012.
As discussed above, these provisions have received considerable attention, but little research has
been conducted on their effects. Berndt and Cockburn (2014), for example, assume that Section
3(d) is restricting patent grants in India but their research design does not allow them to not
provide direct evidence on this. Basso (2006), Shadlen (2011) and Barbosa (2013) analyze the
conflict between INPI’s and ANVISA’s approaches to secondary patents in Brazil, but without
systematically assessing the effects of the dual examination arrangements on patent grant
outcomes. Other academics have expressed concerns that patent examiners in developing
countries, tied into global examination networks, working under severe resource constraints, and
facing pressures to clear the large inflow of applications, may not effectively enforce laws and
guidelines and there may be significant gaps between laws on the books and patent prosecution
in practice (Kapycynski 2009; Drahos 2010). Yet there is little direct evidence of this either.
Drahos (2010) shows how the transnational integration of patent offices generates a common
“interpretive examination culture,” but the analysis does not provide data on convergence in
terms of patent office outcomes.
A previous study examining Indian and Brazilian patent applications on about 150 drugs
launched between 1996 and 2004 with at least one U.S. patent, found these provisions were
rarely used (Sampat and Shadlen 2015a). However, that work focused on a small number of
applications with various special characteristics (including that they tended to be older
applications, and they were associated with “successful” drugs already on the market that had
U.S. patents). Moreover, that study was only able to ensure similarity of applications for a small
number of cases, making comparing grant rates on secondary patents difficult. Most importantly,
by focusing only on India and Brazil there was no baseline against which to assess grant rates for
secondary patents. Nor do we know much about the Argentinean approach. One earlier study has
examined secondary patenting in Argentina (Correa et al, 2011), but because this paper focuses
the new workflow, pharmaceutical patent applications are first sent to ANVISA: if
ANVISA rejects, the examination process is to end there; if ANVISA approves, the application
is then examined by INPI.
5

​Under

5

only on granted patents it cannot provide insight into how the patent office’s approach to
secondary applications functions.
In this paper we use a novel dataset of international patent applications, code each application as
primary or secondary, and identify outcomes in each of the developing countries, and, as a basis
for comparison, in three developed country patent offices. In addition to providing descriptive
results on cross-national grant rates for secondary patents, we examine the effectiveness of the
restrictions in Argentina, Brazil, and India in several different ways. The following section
describes the dataset and research strategy.
3. Data
PCT applications and coding
The majority of global pharmaceutical patent applications are filed through the Patent
Cooperation Treaty (PCT), which allows single applications to be deposited in multiple
jurisdictions after undergoing preliminary analysis by an International Searching Authority. Our
analysis focuses on grant rates for “national phase” applications in each country – the U.S.,
Europe,​ 6​ Japan, Brazil, and India – that emanate from PCT applications. In the case of the one
non-PCT member, Argentina, we use the Argentinian equivalents of “national phase” filings.7
Using the World Intellectual Property Organization’s Patent Statistics database, we identified all
PCT applications filed between 2000 and 2002 that had at least one International Patent
Classification of A61K or C07D, the main classes associated with drugs. From these, we focused
on applications that were filed (either as original filings or as national phase filings through the
PCT) at the US, European and Japanese patent offices. Applying these criteria left 15,815
applications. We focused on the years 2000 to 2002, to allow a long window to observe
outcomes. (Otherwise, many applications would remain pending, especially in the developing
countries with large patent office backlogs.) Another benefit of focusing on this time period is
that the Indian and Brazil national phase applications from PCT applications filed during these
years would have been submitted before Section 3(d) was introduced or ANVISA’s secondary
patent restrictions were fully implemented, and before the most restrictive Argentinian guidelines
were enacted, limiting the effect of selective filing on our results.
Since our research involved working with individual applications, to keep the analyses
manageable we further restricted the set to those filed between January and July. Patent
classifications are known to be noisy. Scanning this set revealed it contained many applications
that were not actually for pharmaceuticals; we consulted the Thomson Reuters “Chemical Patent

Because of a shared European patent office, the EPO, we refer to “Europe” as if it were a
country.
6

the Appendix we describe the steps taken to map PCT applications to their national versions,
and our approach for determining the outcome of each national application.
7

​In

6

Index” (CPI) code for each application and used these codes to narrow to true pharmaceuticals,
resulting in a final set of 5,193 applications.8
In some of our analyses, we will examine matched “twin” applications, i.e. the same PCT
applications that have national phase entries in each of the PCT countries (and equivalent
national applications in the non-PCT country, Argentina). While the specific claims filed in
individual jurisdictions vary slightly, by and large these applications are substantively similar, if
not always “identical” twins.
For our analyses we will need to know which of the PCT applications (and by extension, the
national phase filings that result) include primary claims or only secondary claims. We had a
pharmaceutical patent attorney code each of the applications, using a coding guide adapted from
Hemphill and Sampat (2011). The Appendix includes the first pages of the coding guide. About
8 percent of the applications contained only process claims. We dropped these, since our focus is
on product patenting. Of the remaining 4,765 applications, roughly 38 percent were coded as
including a novel active ingredient claim and thus were classified as “primary,” and 62 percent
had no novel active ingredient claims and were classified as “secondary.”
National outcomes
We collected information on whether each PCT application was filed and granted in each
country. For the 5 PCT members, we collected information on any national phase applications
filed in these patent offices via the PCT. Since Argentina is not a member of the PCT, there we
focus on any national applications that are equivalents of the PCT applications. For expositional
convenience, though with a slight abuse of terminology, we refer to all of these, including those
filed in Argentina, as “national phase” applications. We determined whether each of the national
phase applications was granted in each country, as of 2015. In cases where a given PCT spawned
more than one application (including, for example, through “continuation” and “divisional”
applications) we determined whether any of the applications were granted.9
For the three developing countries we recorded outcomes beyond overall grant rates, to
distinguish between applications that were rejected, abandoned or withdrawn, and those still
pending. In India and Brazil, we also collected detailed information on prosecution histories,
including, for those that were not granted, the specific reasons for non-grant (India) and role of
ANVISA in the process (Brazil). In Argentina we examined the fate of use patents and
distinguished between those applications reviewed before and after the patent office’s new
The CPI codes are based on expert coding of the applications. Each application can have many
CPI codes. We restricted the set of patent applications to those with at least one “B”
(Pharmaceutical) coding, dropping 826 applications. Among the remaining applications, we also
determined which were likely biotechnology-related (those coded as B04-E, F, G or D05-H). We
also dropped these applications (about a third of the total) since our focus here is on small
molecule drugs where secondary patents are more prevalent and regarded as potentially
important impediments to competition among multiple suppliers.
8

9

These “child” applications contain subject matter from previously-filed “parent” applications.
7

examination guidelines came into effect. This additional information helps us better understand
the role of the countries’ approaches toward secondary patents in determining outcomes for the
national phase applications.
It is important to emphasize what this sample excludes. In focusing on national phase
applications, we are not including the underlying priority applications on which the PCT was
based. This is not an issue for developing countries, since almost all applications are filed there
based on the PCT, but for the US, EPO, and Japan only applications filed via the PCT are in our
sample.10
Application importance
In addition to any laws or policies regarding secondary patents, applicants’ levels of effort in
pursuing patent protection also may influence national outcomes. This varies with the
importance of the invention, based on information at the time of filing and information that
accumulates over time.
One measure of importance is family size: the number of countries in which an application is
filed, based on data from to the Derwent World Patents Index (DWPI). Family size is a
commonly used measure of invention importance, based on the expectation firms will file their
more important inventions more broadly (Lanjouw et al 1998).
Given long patent office backlogs and slower prosecution in developing countries (Schultz and
Madigan 2016), most applications may not be examined until well after they were filed and even
granted in many developed countries,​ ​we can also look at a measure of importance further into
the lifecycle, whether the patent was granted in the U.S., and, if so, if it was renewed. For
national phase applications filed and granted at the USPTO, we also collected information from
the USPTO on they were renewed (as of October 2015) or allowed to lapse (USPTO, 2015).This
allows us to distinguish, among the applications in our sample that were filed at the USPTO,
between those never granted, those granted but allowed to lapse (reflecting diminished
importance and effort over time), and those granted and maintained (reflecting the greatest
degree of importance and effort).
Table 1 provides basic descriptive data for the full sample. Of the 4,765 PCT applications, 62
percent are secondary. Recall that our sample is based on PCT applications with original
(priority) or national phase filings in the U.S., EPO, and Japan. About two thirds of the PCTs had
national phase applications in the U.S., over 90 percent in Japan, and nearly all in Europe. The
share with national phase applications is much lower in the developing countries (24 percent in
India, 35 percent in Brazil, and 20 percent in Argentina). On average the applications in our set
In practice, almost all PCT applications filed at the EPO "go national" in the EPO through the
PCT. This is because applications from member countries that are filed at the EPO automatically
receive new "Euro-PCT" application numbers. About a quarter of PCT applications filed through
the US go national in the US via the PCT (typically these are based on provisional priority
applications in the U.S. that are then abandoned), and the analogous figure is 55 percent for
Japan.
10

8

were filed in nine countries. And for the 3,184 PCT with US national applications, 29 percent
were granted and renewed to date.
– Table 1 –
4. Secondary Pharmaceutical Patenting
We use these data in four ways. First, we consider how secondary patent grant rates vary across
countries, conditional on filing and by the two measures of invention importance. Doing so
provides us with a baseline for understanding these countries’ grant rates, and a point of
departure for our subsequent focus on the effectiveness of specific instruments to restrict
secondary patents. Second, we examine cross-country differentials between grant rates for
primary vs. secondary patents. If national restrictions on secondary patents are functioning
effectively, we should see a larger “difference in differences” between primary and secondary
grant rates in countries with such restrictions than in countries without. Third, we examine the
fate of the same applications filed in different countries. This analysis of “twins” allows us to
control for applicants’ propensity to file different applications in different countries, and thus
make sure that the results we observe reflect differences in how countries treat secondary
applications rather than the characteristics of the applications filed nationally. Fourth, we provide
detailed analyses of secondary patent prosecution outcomes in the three developing countries,
extending our focus beyond grant rates. Doing so provides a complementary “bottom up” lens on
the specific roles played by these countries’ measures to restrict secondary patents.
Cross-national Comparisons of Grant rates
Of the 2,964 secondary applications, 971 had national phase filings in Brazil through the PCT,
641 in India, 2,047 in the US, 2,956 in the EPO, and 2,735 in Japan, and 444 had equivalents
filed in Argentina. Figure 1(a) shows grant rates for secondary applications in each country,
conditional on filing. We count a PCT application as “granted” in a country if any national phase
application (including continuations or divisionals) is granted. The U.S. grants about half of the
secondary applications, roughly the same as in Europe. Surprisingly in view of the controversy
surrounding Indian restrictions on secondary patenting, India is the median country in terms of
granting secondary patents; Japan has a much lower grant rate than India. The lowest grant rates
are in Argentina and Brazil.
– Figure 1 –
Grant rates are the result of several factors, including the types of applications filed in a country,
patent laws and guidelines, how laws and guidelines are enforced, and patent office processing
speed. We will consider the role these factors may have in explaining overall trends in more
detail below. For now, a simpler explanation for differences may be that applicants try harder on
some applications than others. To examine whether the differences across countries reflect only
applicant effort, we examined how grant rates vary across the family size distribution.
Figure 2 shows that grant rates increase with family size in all countries. However, the gradient
is notably less steep in the South American countries. If we focus on the top decile of the family
size distribution (applications filed in 25 or more countries), several things stand out. The EPO
9

has the highest grant rate for these important applications (90 percent), followed by the US
(granting 81 percent). India is still the median, though the grant rate at the top of the distribution
is nearly 60 percent (compared to the 42 percent that we saw above, for all Indian applications).
Even at the top of the distribution, only 15 percent of secondary applications filed in Argentina,
and 8 percent filed in Brazil, were granted.
– Figure 2 –
Family size is a measure of application importance at the time the application is filed. A
complementary measure is U.S. maintenance status, which can shine a light on importance as
applicants obtain additional information after original filing decisions are made. Applications
that are granted in the U.S. and maintained there are likely to be ones that drug companies most
care about, for these applications are likely to be associated with drugs that have passed product
development and perhaps even market entry tests. Figure 3 shows grant rate in the five other
countries based on U.S. maintenance status.
Again we see sharp gradients, with applications granted in the U.S. and maintained having much
higher grant rates in other countries than applications that are not granted, or granted and allowed
to lapse. As with the family size, the basic rank ordering of countries by grant rate of secondary
applications is similar at the top of the distribution to what we saw in Figure 1. Effort appears to
matter in Argentina and Brazil, as elsewhere, but even for these applications that are granted and
maintained in the U.S., grant rates in the two South American countries are low.
– Figure 3 –
The data presented so far suggest that secondary patents are easiest to obtain in the U.S. and
Europe and hardest in Argentina and Brazil, with India and Japan in between, and that in all
countries more important inventions, by either measure of importance, fare better. However, the
fact that differences across countries in grant rates for secondary patents persist, even for the
most important inventions, calls for further explanation.
Understanding the Differences in Developing Countries
Differences in national grant rates, overall and conditioned on importance, may not necessarily
tell us about the permissiveness of each country towards secondary applications, or, for the
countries with restrictions, their effectiveness. There are other reasons that grant rates may vary,
including the speed by which applications are examined and other attributes of national patent
offices, and the efforts that applicants make (on account of the economic importance of
particular markets, for example, or new information obtained about a drug’s promise).
One way to account for country-specific factors that affect outcomes is to compare differences in
secondary grant rates to differences in primary grant rates. Even if we saw differential grant rates
by type of application, it would be important to compare these to differential grant rates in
countries without specific restrictions on secondary patents, since secondary patents may be
more vulnerable to rejection anyhow (through novelty and inventive step), even absent specific
policies targeting them. That is, it is useful to look at the difference in differences: comparing the
10

difference between secondary and primary grant rates between countries that do and do not have
specific restrictions. Comparing Figures 1(a) and 1(b) allows us to do this. Here we see that
neither India nor Brazil has a lower secondary grant rate than a primary grant rate, an
observation that is not what we would expect if restrictions targeting secondary patents were
effective. By contrast in Argentina there is a 7 percentage point differential, which is greater than
that in two of the developed country patent offices (EPO and JPO) but much smaller than that in
the U.S.11
Beyond differences in national characteristics of patent systems, which the comparison to
primary patents aims to account for, another issue that may bias cross-country comparisons is
that not all the PCT applications are filed in all countries. As a result, the outcomes may be
reflecting as much about characteristics of the applications filed in each country as the countries’
examination practices. To provide better comparability, Figures 1(c) and 1(d) show analogous
data for “twin” applications where the same PCT is filed in all six countries. For secondary
twins, in 1(c) we see the same patterns: grant rates are highest in the EPO and US and lowest in
Argentina and Brazil, with India and Japan in the middle. What about the difference in
differences? Among this set of twins, primary applications fare better than secondary
applications in each of the developed countries, with the largest differential in the U.S.
More strikingly, in two of the three countries which have explicit restrictions on secondary
patents, there is little evidence that secondary applications fare worse than primary applications
do: in India the difference is much smaller than in the developed countries, while in Brazil the
primary and secondary grant rates are identical. In Argentina, however, the grant rate for
secondary patents remains much lower than that of primaries in this twins sample too, suggesting
its policies towards secondary patent applications may be achieving their objectives.
This twins analysis focuses on the smaller number of applications that went national in all PCT
countries using the PCT and had an equivalent Argentinian filing. This may also introduce bias,
since for applications originating from the U.S. in particular, firms often do not use the PCT to
go national, and as result the set of twins in Figures 1(c) and 1(d) does not include many of the
US-origin applications (see Table 1 and related discussion).12
To eliminate this bias, we can consider only twins filed via PCT in the three developing
countries, regardless of how they went national in the developed countries. In India and Brazil
almost all applications filed by multinationals go national via PCT, and in Argentina as national
equivalents filed after the main application is filed globally. We identified 501 twin applications
that were filed in each of these countries. Figure 1(e) and 1(f) show outcomes. Argentina and
Brazil have low grant rates for both types of patents, with India considerably higher, and among
the three countries only Argentina shows a sharp difference between primary and secondary
grant rates. As in all of the analyses above, neither Brazil nor India seem to discriminate much
11

We find similar results in a regression framework, as reported in the Appendix.

This is not an issue in the difference-in-difference analyses over the whole sample reported
immediately above.
12

11

between primary and secondary patent applications, suggesting their policies may be having little
direct effect.
Limiting the sample to twins filed in all six jurisdictions, or the broader set filed in each of the
three developing countries, facilitates cross-country comparison. But there is a trade-off: the
applications filed in multiple countries are a select set, so results from this set may be less
generalizable.13 While this would be a problem if we saw conflicting results, the main results are
robust to whether we look at all applications (the most general set, with the largest sample size)
and the two sets of twin applications (the most comparable applications, but a select set, with
smaller sample sizes). In neither India nor Brazil is there evidence that policies regarding
secondary patent matter much (based on raw differences, or differences-in-differences when
comparing to other countries without these policies). In Argentina, however, there is evidence
more suggestive of effectiveness.
Detailed Analyses of Secondary Patent Prosecution
Grant rates on secondary patents may be problematic as indicators of the effectiveness of
developing country policies. They are driven by other features of national patent systems and
based on different sets of national filings. We tried to account for these issues using the
difference-in-difference and twins approaches, respectively. A different “bottom up” way to
assess the effects of the three developing countries’ approaches to secondary patents is to
examine the details of patent prosecution. This approach has the advantage of allowing us to see
exactly what roles the policy provisions may have had in the prosecution of the applications, and
to better understand other influences on national grant rates for secondary patents.
We determined whether applications filed in these three countries were granted, pending,
rejected, or abandoned or withdrawn by the applicant. For the rejected Indian applications we
determined the grounds cited by the patent office. In particular, we noted whether the specific
provision targeting secondary patents, Section 3(d), was cited by examiners, and if so whether it
was cited alone or along with other substantive grounds for rejection. For the Brazilian filings, in
addition to outcomes at the patent office, we collected information on any role ANVISA had in
​To examine how select, we compared the twins to other secondary applications on several
dimensions: patent application family size, (the number of countries where the application was
filed, from DWPI), the number of claims in the PCT application, PCT filing year, the number of
forward citations to the WO application (from DWPI), and whether granted and maintained in
the U.S. For the 151 secondary twins-filed in all six countries, family size was the only variable
significantly different than those for all other secondary applications (17.4 countries for the
twins, 8.2 for the others; p<.001). For the 223 twins filed in the three developing countries, the
results were similar, with only family size significantly different (17.1 vs. 8.02; p<.001).
Unsurprisingly the twin applications were thus filed more broadly, but do not appear that
different based other observable characteristics. However, for some of the measures (forward
cites, and share granted and maintained in US) the twins do appear slightly more “valuable”
(even if the difference is not significant at conventional levels). Of course it is also possible that
they are different on unobservables, which is why it is important to interpret results from these
analyses together with those from the other complementary approaches.
13

12

the examination process. For applications filed in Argentina, we looked specifically at
applications for “second uses,” prohibited as of 2002, and distinguished between those examined
before and after the patent office’s more restrictive guidelines were introduced in 2012.14
Figure 4(a) shows detailed outcomes for secondary applications in India. The grant rate is 40
percent, similar to what we saw above. A small share (5 percent) remains pending in India.
Roughly 27 percent were withdrawn or abandoned before examination. For these applications,
prosecution could not directly have been affected by Section 3(d). Of the 194 applications that
the Indian Patent Office rejected, roughly 28 percent of the full set, nearly three quarters of these
did not make any mention of 3(d). Instead, these applications were rejected typically for failing
to satisfy conventional patentability grounds, such as novelty and inventive step. Forty-eight
applications (7 percent of the full set, one quarter of the rejected applications) were rejected on
grounds including Section 3(d), though the reasons cited for rejection in nearly all of these cases
included conventional patentability grounds too. Thus there is reason to believe that these
applications may have been rejected even in the absence of Section 3(d). Only two applications
for secondary patents were rejected solely on 3(d) grounds. These data do more than reinforce
our previous findings that 3(d)’s contribution to the overall outcomes for secondary patents filed
in India is less substantial than many expect; they also suggest that, even for rejected
applications, 3(d) plays a small independent role.
– Figure 4 –
Figure 4(b) shows detailed outcomes in Brazil. As all of the cross-national analyses have
revealed, Brazil has a low grant rate: only 5 percent of applications for secondary patents in
Brazil were granted. Eleven percent of the applications remain pending in Brazil, reflecting the
country’s substantial backlog. The modal outcome in Brazil is withdrawal before the completion
of examination, an outcome experienced by nearly 60 percent of the applications. Applications in
Brazil are withdrawn overwhelmingly because the applicant stopped paying fees, before the
application underwent substantive examination. Withdrawal, and not rejection, is the main
explanation for Brazil’s low grant rate.
Prior Consent rejections are rare: only 19 of the secondary applications (10 percent of rejected
applications, and 2 percent of the full set) were rejected after being handled by ANVISA.
Moreover, since we code Prior Consent rejections liberally, including in this category any
Our analyses are based on all national phase applications filed in each country that emanate
from our original set of PCT applications, and that some PCTs have multiple national phase
applications. From the 2,964 secondary PCT applications in our sample, this approach yields 697
applications in India, 972 in Brazil, and 533 in Argentina. While we calculated grant rates above
based on whether any of the national applications were granted, here we examine outcomes for
all national phase applications, since we are calculating a range of outcomes (beyond whether
“any national phase granted”) that may vary within individual PCT applications. For example, if
one PCT was linked to four national phase applications in a country, in the earlier analyses we
classified the PCT as granted in the country if any of the four applications were granted, while
here we treat each of the four as discrete applications with their own outcomes.
14

13

application that was seen by ANVISA that was later rejected by INPI or withdrawn, these figures
actually overstate the role of the patent examiners in the health agency. Of the 19 Prior Consent
rejections, only four were under the old workflow, where the application was first approved by
INPI before being reviewed by ANVISA. Of the remaining 15 under the new workflow, where
applications go to ANVISA first, only one was denied consent by ANVISA.15​ In sum, looking at
the entirety of secondary applications filed in Brazil in our dataset, in only one half of one
percent of these (5 of 972) did an application end up either rejected or withdrawn following
ANVISA’s denial of consent.
Figure 4(c) shows detailed outcomes for Argentina. As in Brazil the grant rate is low, at just 7
percent. The rejection rate is low, too, at roughly 10 percent. Here too, in fact more than in the
other countries, withdrawal before substantive examination is the dominant outcome.
Unlike 3(d) and Prior Consent, which target broad classes of secondary patents, the Argentinian
policy during most of the period under study focused on one type of secondary patent: second
uses. Unfortunately we do not have information on specific grounds for rejection in Argentina,
so our ability to evaluate the role of this specific provision is limited. However, our application
codings (see Appendix) allow us to identify applications that ​only have use claims. None of the
73 pure use applications filed in Argentina were granted, suggesting that the 2002 restriction was
effective. However, since pure use applications account for only 15 percent of the secondary
applications in Argentina the specific provisions cannot be the main explanation for the low
grant rate.16
What about the new, more restrictive examination guidelines effective introduced in 2012, which
target a broader range of secondary patents? Of the 533 secondary applications filed in
Argentina, 137 were examined under the new guidelines. The grant rate for secondary patent
applications fell from 9 percent to less than 1 percent after the new guidelines. While in part this
reflects censoring (newer applications are more likely to be pending) it is notable that the grant
rate for primary applications fell by much less, from 14 to 10 percent. This suggests the new
guidelines may be having an effect as well. But since only a quarter of the secondary
applications in our sample were examined after the new guidelines were introduced, they cannot
be the main explanation for Argentina’s low grant rate either.
A salient feature in each country is withdrawal of applications before substantive examination. In
a final set of analyses, focusing on secondary applications that were withdrawn in India, Brazil,
and Argentina, we determined U.S. status of the matched twin application (for the applications
that had national phase filings in the U.S.). As Figure 5 shows, in each country withdrawn
applications are disproportionately those that did not get granted in the U.S. or were granted and
Of the remaining applications, some received ANVISA’s consent but were later rejected by
INPI or withdrawn, and some were withdrawn before ANVISA could make a judgement.
15

It is possible that the provision was used to remove pure use claims from patents whose other
claims were granted. In Argentina, as in the other countries, we cannot example claim narrowing
with the data currently available, but hope to look at this in future research.
16

14

not renewed: 78 percent in India, 84 percent in Brazil, and 76 percent in Argentina. Given the
preponderance of withdrawn applications among the non-grants in these countries, particularly in
Argentina and Brazil, this suggests that an important feature of the grant rate for secondary
patents in developing countries is learning that applications are not successful or worth pursuing
even in the U.S. The lag between global filing and examination in the developing countries may
serve as a filter, a point to which we return below.17
– Figure 5 –
5. Discussion
The data reveal considerable heterogeneity in cross-national grant rates on secondary patents.
The U.S. and European patent offices have the highest grant rates. Brazil and Argentina have the
lowest grant rates, Japan and India are in the middle. This clustering is consistent throughout all
of the analyses, looking at the full set of secondary applications, at segments stratified according
to various measures of importance, and the twin applications filed in all six countries.
The primary aim of the analyses was to assess the effectiveness of developing countries’ specific
instruments to restrict secondary patents. Evidence from both the comparative grant rates and
detailed analyses of patent prosecution points to the limited direct effects of these measures in
India and Brazil.
However, the explanations for why Section 3(d) and Prior Consent are having only small direct
roles may be different in the two countries. In India, both the lack of difference in
primary-secondary grant rates, and the low utilization of pure 3(d) rejection are consistent with a
standard account of institutional weakness in developing countries: formal rules are often not
consistently enforced (Levitsky and Murillo 2009). The patent office operates under severe
resource constraints, and is faced with the challenge of working through substantial quantities of
applications on new, previously unpatentable subject matter. Moreover, India’s patent examiners
are tied into global networks, through training and via reliance on foreign databases and
prosecution materials (Kapcyznksi 2009; Drahos 2010; Sampat and Amin 2013). Such
conditions, may limit the extent to which examiners employ Section 3(d) in the course of
evaluating pharmaceutical patent applications.
Another explanation for the limited role played by Section 3(d) might be that the scope for
independent action of this provision may be constrained. Nearly all rejections in our dataset that
cited Section 3(d) also gave other grounds for denying the patents. Although Section 3(d) was
involved in these rejections, this specific provision may not have been needed to reject these
Since Japan has a formal deferred examination system applications there may also benefit from
post-application learning (Yamauchi and Nagaoka 2015). Consistent with this, of those granted
and renewed in the U.S. 70 percent are granted in Japan, compared to just 28 percent of those
granted but not renewed in the U.S. This suggests that the high non-grant rate in Japan too may
reflect withdrawal of applications deemed no longer worth pursuing, though absent detailed
outcome data in Japan it is difficult to test this directly.
17

15

applications, which were rejected on other grounds too. To the extent that 3(d) is similar, in
terms of the sorts of applications it is used to reject, to conventional patentability criteria, such as
lack of novelty or inventive step, then the limited role played by 3(d) per se becomes less
surprising.​ 18
Brazil’s measures to restrict secondary patenting also appear to have had a limited direct effect.
Though Brazil has a low grant rate, the differences between primary and secondary grant rates
are indistinguishable, and our detailed analyses revealed negligible involvement by ANVISA.
Difficulties of inter-agency coordination, often cited as a factor complicating enforcement (e.g.
Dimitrov 2009) could provide one explanation for this surprising finding. The Prior Consent
system relies on the participation of two separate state agencies, and disagreements between
INPI and ANVISA over Brazil’s approach to pharmaceutical patents have been intense (Shadlen
2011; Kunisawa 2009). However, these disagreements and conflicts cannot account for the
finding the finding that the effects of ANVISA on patenting outcomes are so small. Examination
in Brazil is sequential, not simultaneous; minimal coordination is required. For most of
applications in our dataset, prosecuted under the old workflow, all the work was done by INPI
itself. Few of these applications ever cleared the first hurdle at INPI to be passed to ANVISA,
but rather they were rejected or withdrawn while still at the patent office. For reasons explained
above, the backlog at the patent office seems like a better explanation of limited role of ANVISA
than problems with inter-agency coordination.19
In Argentina, unlike in either of the other developing countries, we do see differences in
primary-secondary grant rates. The analyses of prosecution details also suggest that both the
prohibitions on second use patents and the more restrictive examination guidelines that came into
place in 2012 may be having their intended impact. One explanation for this is that Argentina’s
approach is comparatively easier to employ. It does not rely on application of a different sort of
patentability criteria (as in India) or the participation of multiple agencies (as in Brazil), but
simply constitutes instructions to patent examiners for how to go about rejecting secondary
patents using traditional patentability criteria (e.g. lack of novelty or inventive step).
However effective Argentina’s policies toward secondary patents may have been, since only a
minority of the applications in our dataset was subject to these measures they cannot explain the
whole story. As in Brazil, one explanation for the low overall grant rate seems to be slow
prosecution and applicants’ decisions to give up on applicants they deem to be less important. In
Argentina this effect may be bolstered by a policy aimed specifically at clearing the backlog. The
patent office often issues requirements that applicants report on the status of applications filed
abroad. If firms fail to respond, the pending applications are converted to abandoned or
withdrawn.
This explanation would raise the broader question about why 3(d) is so controversial if its
scope is small.
​Now that ANVISA sees applications first, under the new workflow, it will become more
involved. It is important to keep in mind the important difference in the pool of applications
ANVISA would have seen under the old workflow (applications approved by INPI) and under
the new workflow (all applications for pharmaceutical patents).
18

19

16

Another part of the story in Argentina is that, even before the new guidelines formally came into
place they may have informed examiner practice. That is, the official establishment of new
guidelines in 2012 may have reflected a new approach to examination that had already been
adopted. Whereas in India and Brazil laws on the books have had limited direct impacts on
patent prosecution in practice, in Argentina changes in patent prosecution in practice may have
later been codified in laws on the books.
6. Conclusion
In this paper we used novel data on a large sample of filings emanating from PCT applications in
three developed countries and three developing countries with restrictions on secondary
patenting. We coded the applications as secondary (or primary) and identified a large set of
“twin” filings across multiple jurisdictions to compare grant rates and evaluate restrictions
toward secondary patents. We also examined the details of patent prosecution in the three
developing countries to better understand the role of specific arrangements toward secondary
patents, alone and in comparison to other influences on patenting outcomes.
We found considerable differences in cross-national grant rates for secondary patents, despite the
harmonization aimed for by TRIPS. Conditional upon filing, grant rates for secondary patents in
the six countries ranged from 5 percent (Brazil) to 52 percent (U.S.). In all countries grant rates
are higher for applications filed more broadly and (in all countries but the U.S.) for applications
more vigorously pursued in the U.S., indicating grant rates reflect the extent of applicant effort in
pursuing the applications. But even for these more important applications, differences in grant
rates of secondary patents persist. These findings suggest that more attention be paid to
differences in countries’ pharmaceutical patent systems, to look “inside the black box” of patent
examination to try to understand how countries’ patent systems function in practice.
We did not find much evidence that developing countries’ policies to restrict secondary patents
are driving outcomes. In the case of two countries, India and Brazil, the policies seem to be
having little effect at all: grant rates for secondary patents are not lower than grant rates for
primary patents in these countries, which they should be if policies designed specifically to
achieve that outcome were working, and the detailed analyses of patent prosecution also reveal
Section 3(d) and Prior Consent to be playing only limited direct roles. Argentina’s measures to
restrict secondary patents appear to be more effective: grant rates for secondary patents are
considerably lower than those for primary patents, patents on second medical use are not granted,
and the secondary patent grant rate following the introduction of the new guidelines has further
declined. But the overall impact on secondary patenting outcomes of Argentina’s measures is
small: the bulk of applications in our sample (pre-2012, non-use applications) were not subject to
either the prohibition on second use patents or the new examination guidelines.
The detailed analyses also illustrated the potentially important role of other features of countries’
patent systems. In all three countries large backlogs of applications and timing of TRIPS
implementation contribute to delays in initiating examination, so that it often does not begin until
information from developed country offices has become available. In this context, if
resource-contained patent offices were inclined to rubber stamp developed country actions, as
17

some previous analysts have suggested (Drahos 2010), this would lead to high grant rates for
secondary applications. But our analyses suggests another effect of the backlog: the delays they
introduce may serve as a filter, leading firms to abandon less important applications based on
information from other countries. That is, they may unintentionally mimic features of deferred
examination systems, leading to lower grant rates.
One implication of our analyses is thus that administrative and procedural features of patent
systems may play important roles in patent prosecution, and may actually exert a greater
influence on grant rates than laws on the books per se. Although this is consistent with recent
work on the USPTO (Lemley and Sampat 2012; Frakes and Wasserman forthcoming), since this
was not the main focus of our research, more work is needed to examine exactly how these
features influence outcomes in developing countries.
While we found minimal direct effects of countries’ provisions toward secondary patents, there
may be more indirect effects that our data do not capture. In India, it is possible that 3(d)
influences prosecution by affecting how examiners apply other aspects of the patent law. That is,
Section 3(d) might alter Indian patent examiners’ overall approach to assessing applications and
using conventional patentability criteria, such that applications rejected on grounds above and
beyond 3(d) might not be rejected at all if not for this distinct provision in Indian patent law. And
in Brazil, prior to the introduction of the new workflow in 2012, it is possible that ANVISA’s
participation in examination may have created incentives for rejection at the patent office. INPI
examiners knew that favorable decisions would subsequently be scrutinized by counterparts at
ANVISA while rejections and other applications without a decision would not be.
Another potential indirect effect is on selective filing. We believe this is likely limited given the
timing of when the applications were filed and when the policies were introduced. A similar
possibility is selective withdrawal of secondary applications in response to countries’ policies
toward these types of applications, though we showed above that most withdrawal in India,
Brazil, and Argentina is for applications that were revealed to be not worth renewing even in the
U.S. While we do not view this particular indirect effect as being important, we cannot rule it out
completely.
There are other limitations as well. While our analysis focuses on grant rates, it is possible that
the main impact of the provisions is on narrowing claims in granted patents, or that the
provisions matter most for specific kinds of secondary patents. It is also likely that there are
changes over time. Our research focuses on applications filed from 2000-2002, for reasons
discussed. But as with all policies it is possible that there are implementation lags, and that
countries’ measures to restrict secondary patents matter more for more recently filed
applications. Another limitation, reflecting the difficulty of obtaining reliable data on patent
prosecution in developing countries, is that we focus on a relatively small set of developing
countries. Extending to a broader set of comparable countries, including those without
restrictions is also a promising avenue for future research.
The universalization of pharmaceutical patenting through TRIPS generated significant
controversy. The spread of secondary patenting has been the subject of particular concern among
18

academics, activists, and policymakers, based on fears that such patents may restrict competition
and thus inhibit access to medicines. Despite the attention that secondary patenting has received,
we know little about what is happening on the ground. Our analyses provide the first
cross-national comparative data on secondary patent grant rates, and on the actual impact of
policies aiming to restrict them in developing countries. They reveal surprising but robust
patterns of cross-national differences in grant rates. Subject to the limitations listed above, the
analyses also suggest that the restrictions in developing countries are having limited direct effect.
From a methodological perspective, they also point to the benefits of combining
application-level analyses with prosecution details to understand the functioning of patent
systems and the impact of patent policies.

References
Abud, M.J., Hall, B., Helmers, C., 2015. An Empirical Analysis of Primary and Secondary
Pharmaceutical Patents in Chile. PLoS ONE 10, e0124257. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0124257
Amin, T., Kesselheim, A.S., 2012. Secondary patenting of branded pharmaceuticals: a case study of
how patents on two HIV drugs could be extended for decades. Health Aff (Millwood) 31,
2286–2294. doi:10.1377/hlthaff.2012.0107
Basheer, S., Reddy, P., 2008. The “Efficacy” of Indian Patent Law: Ironing out the Creases in Section
3(d) (SSRN Scholarly Paper No. ID 1086254). Social Science Research Network, Rochester,
NY.
Barbosa, D.B. 2013. Patents and the Emerging Markets of Latin America: Brazil. In Emerging
Markets and the World Patent Order, edited by Frederick M. Abbott, Carlos M. Correa, and Peter
Drahos, 135–51. Edward Elgar Publishing.
Basso, M., 2006. Intervention of health authorities in patent examination: the Brazilian practice of the
prior consent. International Journal of Intellectual Property Management 1, 54–74.
doi:10.1504/IJIPM.2006.011022
Berndt, E.R., Cockburn, I.M., 2014. The Hidden Cost Of Low Prices: Limited Access To New Drugs
In India. Health Aff 33, 1567–1575. doi:10.1377/hlthaff.2013.130
Burdon, M., Sloper, K., 2003. The art of using secondary patents to improve protection. J. Med.
Mark. 3, 226–238. doi:10.1057/palgrave.jmm.5040125
Carley, M., Hedge, D., Marco, A., 2015. What Is the Probability of Receiving a U.S. Patent. Yale J.L.
& Tech. 17, 203.

19

Christie, A.F., Dent C., Liddicoat, J. 2016. The Examination Effect: A Comparison of the Outcome of
Patent Examination in the US, Europe and Australia. John Marshall Review of Intellectual
Property Law 16, 21-43.
Correa, C.M., 2014. Tackling the Proliferation of Patents: How to Avoid Undue Limitations to
Competition and the Public Domain (No. Research Paper 52). South Centre.
Correa, C.M., 2007. Guidelines for the Examination of Pharmaceutical Patents: Developing a Public
Health Perspective. ICTSD.
Correa, C.M., Balleri, C., Giulietti, M., Lavopa, F., Musetti, C., Palopoli, G., Pippo, T., De la Puente,
C., Lowenstein, V., 2011. Patentes, suministro de medicamentos y protección de la Salud
Pública; Patents, supply of medicines and protection of public health. Rev. argent. salud publica
2, 19–27.
de Rassenfosse, G., Jaffe, A., Webster, E., 2016. Low-quality Patents in the Eye of the Beholder:
Evidence from Multiple Examiners (No. w22244). National Bureau of Economic Research,
Cambridge, MA.
Dimitrov, M., 2009. Piracy and the State: The Politics of Intellectual Property Rights in China.
Cambridge University Press.
Drahos, P., 2010. The Global Governance of Knowledge: Patent Offices and Their Clients.
Cambridge University Press.
Drahos, P., 2008. “Trust Me”: Patent Offices in Developing Countries. American Journal of Law &
Medicine 34, 151.
Duggan, M., Garthwaite, C., Goyal, A., 2016. The Market Impacts of Pharmaceutical Product Patents
in Developing Countries: Evidence from India †. American Economic Review 106, 99–135.
doi:10.1257/aer.20141301
Dutfield, G., Suthersanen, U., 2005. Harmonisation or differentiation in intellectual property
protection? The lessons of history. Prometheus 23, 131–147. doi:10.1080/08109020500085528
Eisenberg, R.S., 2008. Pharma’s Nonobvious Problem. Lewis & Clark L. Rev, Articles 12, 375–430.
Ellery, T. Hansen, N. 2012. Pharmaceutical Lifecycle Management: Making the Most of Each and
Every Brand. Wiley.
European Commission, 2009. Pharmaceutical Sector Inquiry Report.
Frakes, M., Wasserman, M., forthcoming. Is the Time Allocated to Review Patent Applications
Inducing Examiners to Grant Invalid Patents?: Evidence from Micro-Level Application Data.
Review of Economics and Statistics.

20

GAO, 2016. Patent Office Should Define Quality, Reassess Incentives, and Improve Clarity (No.
GAO-16-490). Government Accountability Office, Washington, D.C.
Hemphill, C.S., Sampat, B.N., 2011. When Do Generics Challenge Drug Patents? Journal of
Empirical Legal Studies 8, 613–649. doi:10.1111/j.1740-1461.2011.01235.x
Hopkins, M.M., Mahdi, S., Patel, P., Thomas, S.M., 2007. DNA patenting: the end of an era? Nature
Biotechnology 25, 185–187. doi:10.1038/nbt0207-185
Howard, L., 2007. Use of Patents in Drug Lifecycle Management. Journal of Generic Medicines 4,
230–236. doi:10.1057/palgrave.jgm.4950065
Jaffe, A.B., Lerner, J., 2004. Innovation and Its Discontents: How Our Broken Patent System is
Endangering Innovation and Progress, and What to Do About It. Princeton University Press.
Jensen, P.H., Palangkaraya, A., Webster, E., 2006. Disharmony in international patent office
decisions. Federal Circuit Bar Journal 15, 679–704.
Kapczynski, A., 2013. Engineered in India: Patent Law 2.0. New England Journal of Medicine 369,
2163–2163. doi:10.1056/NEJMc1311602
Kapczynski, A., 2009. Harmonization and its Discontents: A Case Study of TRIPS Implementation in
India’s Pharmaceutical Sector. California Law Review 97, 1571–1649.
Kapczynski, A., Park, C., Sampat, B., 2012. Polymorphs and Prodrugs and Salts (Oh My!): An
Empirical Analysis of “Secondary” Pharmaceutical Patents. PLoS ONE 7, e49470.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0049470
Kesselheim, A.S., 2007. Intellectual property policy in the pharmaceutical sciences: The effect of
inappropriate patents and market exclusivity extensions on the health care system. The AAPS
Journal 9, E306–E311. doi:10.1208/aapsj0903033
Kunisawa, V.Y.M., 2009. Patenting Pharmaceutical Inventions on Second Medical Uses in Brazil.
The Journal of World Intellectual Property 12, 297–316. doi:10.1111/j.1747-1796.2009.00362.x
Lanjouw, J.O., Pakes, A., Putnam, J., 1998. How to Count Patents and Value Intellectual Property:
The Uses of Patent Renewal and Application Data. The Journal of Industrial Economics 46,
405–432. doi:10.1111/1467-6451.00081
Lemley, M.A., Moore, K.A., 2004. Ending Abuse of Patent Continuations. Boston University Law
Review 84, 63–118. doi:10.2139/ssrn.462404
Lemley, M.A., Sampat, B., 2012. Examiner Characteristics and Patent Office Outcomes. Review of
Economics and Statistics 94, 817–827. doi:10.1162/REST_a_00194
Lemley, M., Sampat, B.N., 2008. Is the Patent Office a Rubber Stamp? Emory Law Journal 58, 181-.
21

Lerner, J., 2000. 150 Years of Patent Protection (Working Paper No. 7478). National Bureau of
Economic Research.
Levitsky, S., Murillo, M.V., 2009. Variation in Institutional Strength. Annual Review of Political
Science 12, 115–133. doi:10.1146/annurev.polisci.11.091106.121756
Löfgren, H., Williams, O.D., 2013. The New Political Economy of Pharmaceuticals: Production,
Innnovation and TRIPS in the Global South. Palgrave Macmillan.
Maskus, K.E., 2000. Intellectual Property Rights in the Global Economy. Institute for International
Economics, Washington, DC.
Moir, H.V.J., 2013. Empirical Evidence on the Inventive Step. European Intellectual Property Review
35, 246–252.
PhRMA. 2016. Special 301 Submission 2016.
http://phrma-docs.phrma.org/files/dmfile/special-301-review.pdf
Rathod, S.K. 2010. Ever-Greening: A Status Check in Selected Countries. Journal of Generic
Medicines 7, 227-242.
Reichman, J.H., 2009. Intellectual Property in the Twenty-First Century: Will the Developing
Countries Lead or Follow? Houston Law Review 46, 1115–1185.
Sampat, B.N., Amin, T., 2013. How Do Public Health Safeguards in Indian Patent Law Affect
Pharmaceutical Patenting in Practice? Journal of Health Politics, Policy, and Law 38, 735–55.
Sampat, B.N., Shadlen, K.C., 2015a. Drug patenting in India: looking back and looking forward.
Nature Reviews Drug Discovery 14, 519–520.
Sampat, B.N., Shadlen, K.C., 2015b. TRIPS Implementation and Secondary Pharmaceutical Patenting
in Brazil and India. St Comp Int Dev 50, 228–257. doi:10.1007/s12116-015-9181-7
Shadlen, K.C., 2011. The Political Contradictions of Incremental Innovation: Lessons from
Pharmaceutical Patent Examination in Brazil. Politics & Society 39, 143–174.
doi:10.1177/0032329211402601
Schultz, M. and Madigan, K. 2016. “The Long Wait for Innovation: The Global Patent Pendency
Problem.” Center for the Protection of Intellectual Property.
http://cpip.gmu.edu/wp-content/uploads/2016/10/Schultz-Madigan-The-Long-Wait-for-Innovatio
n-The-Global-Patent-Pendency-Problem.pdf
Silva, H.M., 2008. Avaliação da análise dos pedidos de patentes farmacêuticas feita pela Anvisa no
cumprimento do mandato legal da anuência prévia. ENSP, Rio de Janeiro.

22

South Centre, 2011. The Doha Declaration on TRIPS and Public Health Ten Years Later: The State of
ImplementationPolicy Brief 7, November 2011.
Sternitzke, C., 2010. Knowledge sources, patent protection, and commercialization of pharmaceutical
innovations. Research Policy 39, 810–821. doi:10.1016/j.respol.2010.03.001
UNAIDS, 2011. Doha+10 TRIPS flexibilities and access to antiretroviral therapy: Lessons from the
past, opportunities for the future.
USPTO, 2015. Maintenance Fee Register.
https://www.google.com/googlebooks/uspto-patents-maintenance-fees.html#1981-present
USTR, n.d. Special 301 [WWW Document]. URL
https://ustr.gov/issue-areas/intellectual-property/Special-301 (accessed 7.28.16).
Webster, E., Jensen, P.H., Palangkaraya, A., 2014. Patent examination outcomes and the national
treatment principle. The RAND Journal of Economics 45, 449–469.
doi:10.1111/1756-2171.12053
Yamauchi, I. and Nagaoka, S. 2015. An Economic Analysis of Deferred Examination System:
Evidence from a Policy Reform in Japan. International Journal of Industrial Organization 39:
19–28. doi:10.1016/j.ijindorg.2015.01.003.

23

Table 1: Descriptive statistics for the 4,765 PCT applications in the sample

Appendix
Coding Guide
A coding guide was provided to the coder to categorize the 5,193 PCT applications. It is adapted
from a guide designed by Scott Hemphill that was used to code US patent grants (Hemphill and
Sampat 2011). Below, we excerpt the first page of the coding guide.
General​: We want to code the information in the published application (the WO document). To do
so, click through the link provided for each application, which will take you to the Google
transcription of the application. (This is useful since Google typically does translation for us, and
the layout is pretty clean.) If you need the actual PDF file, you can access it through the
PatentScope and/or Espacenet links provided in the Google patent file. We anticipate you will use
information in the independent and dependent claims for the coding, supplemented by information
in the title, abstract, description as needed. If you use any information beyond this please indicate
this in the notes field.
Coding​: Our main goal is to code applications by type. There are five broad categories of claims. A
patent can, and often does, include more than one category of claims:
● A: active ingredient (see specific descriptions of A1-A4 below)
● B: formulation or composition
● C: method of use
● D: other, but related to the drug
● E: biologic
For each
​ patent, indicate ​all categories that apply to a patent. For active ingredient claims, we want
to distinguish the four subcategories:
● A1: active ingredient.
● A2: is for polymorphs or other crystal forms.
● A3: is for enantiomers or other isomers.
● A4: salt, metabolite, or intermediate. Also pre-metabolites and derivatives
Identifying National Phase Application Numbers and Outcomes
EPO, JPO, and US
We obtained EPO, JPO, and US national phase numbers from the WIPO Statistical Database, the
same source we used to construct the basic dataset.
We also obtained outcomes data from PATSTAT. For a random sample of 100 applications, we
verified these sources provided essentially identical grant rate information as was determinable
from the EP Register, the JPO Website, and USPTO Public PAIR. The U.S. grant rate calculated
from PATSTAT is based on all grants from a given priority, so includes grants to all “child”
applications (continuations) which we also verified against PAIR.
India
We obtained national phase applications in India from PatentScope, and Indian outcomes from the
IPO Website. Any granted ​ application was classified as ​Granted. We considered an Indian
application
​
to be ​Abandoned/Withdrawn if the status on the IPO website is withdrawn without
stated reason, or withdrawn under 11(B)4. Section 11(B)4 withdrawals are those where no request
1

​

for examination was made. Given the time elapsed since filing, we assume that applications “Not
Yet Published” were withdrawn before examination. We also grouped Section 9(1) Abandonments
as withdrawals: these are cases where a complete specification was not filed.
We classify applications as ​Rejected if they were abandoned under Section 21(1). Section 21(1)
abandonments are typically those where there was a failure to respond to objections in a FER within
the time limits prescribed. Our logic here is that these applications were abandoned because of the
examiner’s objections. It is also possible that the lack of response was for other reasons (e.g. the
firm went out of business, the technology no longer interesting to the firm, or problems with the
application were discovered at another patent office). Accordingly our analysis overstates rejection
rates. Refusals through Controller decisions (including those indicated as Section 15 and 16
rejections) were also classified as rejections. Refusals through Controller Decisions result when a
controller is unsatisfied with an applicant’s response to the FER and/or the Controller refuses an
application where there is a pre-grant opposition. As discussed more below, we focus on these
Rejected cases when we examine how 3(d) is affecting rejection rates.
We classified any application that was Awaiting Examination or Under Examination as ​Pending.
The majority of these ​Pending applications are Awaiting Examination. Given that RFE must be
filed by now we could have also grouped these with withdrawn applications. Doing so would not
affect calculation of grant rate or our assessment of the role 3(d).
How might 3(d) affect whether or not an application is granted? In the process described above,
3(d) could directly lead to rejections in three main ways: (1) The examiner raises 3(d) in an FER,
resulting in abandonment of the application, or (2) The controller raises 3(d) on reviewing
arguments from response to FER, generating a rejection, or (3) A pre-grant opposition raises 3(d)
objections, which are upheld in a Controller Report rejecting the application. Importantly,
withdrawals of applications before RFEs are filed cannot be directly due to 3(d), since there are no
examination documents prior to RFEs.
To examine the direct role of 3(d) in rejections, we collected information from FER and Controller
Reports for applications that have rejections on the merits on the role of 3(d). This set includes all
non-granted applications, except those withdrawn before a request for examination was made. For
each of these “Rejected” applications we determined if 3(d) was listed as a reason for rejection, and,
if so, if this was​ the only grounds for rejection: We thus further categorize the ​Rejected applications
as: ​Rejected, No 3(d); Rejected 3(d) Only; Rejected 3(d) Plus.
Brazil
We obtained Brazilian national phase application numbers from the Derwent World Patents Index
(and verified against information from PATSTAT). We obtained Brazilian outcomes by searching
the INPI website. We dropped a small number of applications where PCT information on the
national website did not match the original PCT number.
Classifying outcomes in Brazil is complicated because of the nature of Brazil’s pharmaceutical
patent system. As discussed in the text, Brazil has a shared examination system, with
pharmaceutical patent applications examined by both the National Institute for Industrial Property
(INPI) and the Ministry of Health’s health surveillance agency (ANVISA). Pharmaceutical patents
can only be granted if both INPI and ANVISA approve. From 2001 to 2012 INPI would examine
applications first, and only if it approved the application (i.e. issued a technical report indicating
that the application fulfilled the criteria for patentability in the patent law) would it be sent to
2

ANVISA for subsequent review. As of May 2012 the workflow was inverted, such that INPI
immediately forwards all pharmaceutical patent applications to ANVISA, where they are reviewed
and then returned to INPI for subsequent examination.
To track outcomes, and to see ANVISA’s role in outcomes, we searched all applications at both
INPI and ANVISA. The INPI website provides data on each transaction that occurs at the patent
office during the course of examination, allowing us to determine if applications were granted,
rejected, withdrawn or abandoned, or still pending. While it is possible to know if an application
was sent to ANVISA in the course of examination, from the INPI website alone it is not possible to
determine what actions were taken by the examiners at the health agency. To overcome this
constraint we also consulted two ANVISA documents that indicate the actions that the health
agency has taken on each application it has received under the old workflow (through May 2012)
and the new workflow (since May 2012). Using data from these two sources we determined
whether Brazilian patent applications were granted, rejected, abandoned/withdrawn, or pending, and
ANVISA’s role.
Granted patents were approved by INPI and ANVISA. Applications with non-grant final
determinations may be rejected or abandoned/withdrawn. For applications rejected by INPI, we
determined whether the application was rejected by INPI alone or whether ANVISA was involved.
Applications rejected solely by INPI are recorded as ​Rejected, INPI. The category
Abandoned/Withdrawn refers to applications that were classified as “arquivado​” by INPI, ordinarily
on account of applicants not paying fees, never requesting examination in the first place, or not
responding to INPI communication regarding non-substantive aspects of the application
(“exigência”). When applicants fail to respond to substantive objections (“ciência”) these are
classified as ​Rejected, INPI.
Neither ​Rejected INPI nor ​Abandoned/Withdrawn categories involve ANVISA directly. ​Rejected,
PC refers to applications with final determinations of either reject or abandoned/withdrawn that, at
some point in the process, were received by ANVISA. ​Rejected, PC includes applications initially
approved by the INPI and sent to ANVISA, but where ANVISA did not consent to a grant and the
INPI subsequently rejected the application. This category also includes applications: (1) initially
approved by the INPI and sent to ANVISA, but where in the course of ANVISA examining the
application became “arquivado” at INPI, (2) where ANVISA finished its examination and denied
consent, but rather than being rejected by INPI it ended abandoned or withdrawn; and (3)
applications under the new workflow that ANVISA approved but were either rejected at INPI or
abandoned/withdrawn before INPI made a final decision. Thus if an application was received by
ANVISA at any point in the process and ended with a non-grant final determination it is classified
as ​Rejected, PC.
Pending applications lack final determination. For applications filed under this old workflow, this
includes a handful of so-called “frozen” applications (Shadlen 2011) where ANVISA denied
consent but INPI did not issue a verdict and the application remained at the patent office, neither
granted, rejected, nor abandoned/withdrawn.
The interpretation of pending applications is complicated by the introduction of the new workflow
in 2012, whereby pharmaceutical patent applications go to ANVISA before INPI examines them.
Pending applications may be: at ANVISA awaiting initial examination having been approved by
INPI (old workflow), at INPI awaiting final determination after having been returned with a
negative ruling by ANVISA (old workflow), at ANVISA awaiting initial examination (new
3

workflow), at INPI awaiting examination having been returned with ANVISA’s consent (new
workflow).
Argentina
For Argentina, we used information from PATSTAT on all national filings, linked via priority
numbers. Recall that Argentina is not a PCT country, so there are no “national phase” filings.
We obtained from the Argentinian patent office a dataset of all patent applications filed in
Argentina from 2000-2005, with bibliographic and priority details, as well as information on final
status. We then matched these against the Argentinian application numbers in PATSTAT to
determine which of the applications in our sample were filed in Argentina. For Argentina we have
four outcomes: ​Granted, ​Rejected, ​Abandoned/Withdrawn, and ​Pending. The Argentine patent
office reports three different non-grant outcomes: abandoned, voluntary withdrawal, and forced
withdrawal. Despite the seemingly self-explanatory labels, these do not map systematically on to
different situations, and their use tends to be inconsistent as well, so to avoid misinterpretation we
combine these three into the single category of ​Abandoned/Withdrawn. (Of these secondary
applications filed in Argentina that we classify as abandoned/withdrawn, just under two thirds of
were “forced withdrawal” and just under one third “abandoned,” with less than 5 percent “voluntary
wiithdrawal.”)
For the subset of analyses where we consider the effects of Argentina’s new examination
guidelines, we used the date of the patent office decision. After the new guidelines were introduced
in May 2012, all examination decisions were to be made in conformity with these new rules,
including applications where examination had already commenced. As our data from the patent
office include the dates of the patent office’s decisions (not just the dates decisions were
communicated to applicants, but the decisions themselves), we identify applications with decision
dates after 8 May 2012 and distinguish these as being treated under the new guidelines. All Pending
applications are, by definition, part of the new guidelines subset too.

4

Regression models
As a complement to the graphical presentation in the paper, we also examined the main questions in
the paper in a regression framework. Doing so allows us to control for application specific
characteristics, and facilitates inference testing.
We estimated linear probability models relating the probability that an application i filed in country
j is granted, with heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors, clustered on the PCT application.
Model 1 examines differences in secondary patent grant rates by country. It is the regression analog
of Figure 1(a) in the paper, but also controls for PCT filing year, the number of claims in the PCT
application, family size, and whether their are any domestic inventors. The estimation sample
includes 9,794 observations for the 2,964 secondary applications, one for each national filing in the
US, EPO, Japan, India, Brazil, and Argentina. It shows that relative to the reference category, US
applications, secondary grant rates are significantly lower in Japan, Brazil, India, and Argentina,
with the largest differences in Brazil and Argentina. But there is no statistically significant
difference between the U.S. and EPO. For each of the developing countries, we can reject the
hypotheses that the grant rate is the same as in the US and EPO at the 1 percent level. We cannot
reject the null that the Indian rate is equivalent to Japan (p=.59), but we can reject this for Brazil
and Argentina (grant rate equivalent to Japan) each at the 1 percent level. Consistent with what we
saw in the figures, the grant rate increases with family size. And we also see evidence here that
having domestic inventors increases the grant rate, consistent with the idea of “home country bias”
in international patenting (Jensen et al, 2006). But even after controlling for these factors, the
patterns and magnitudes of differences in secondary grant rates between countries are similar to
what Figure 1(a) showed. One thing to note is that the differences between India and Japan are less
pronounced after controlling for family size, which we also saw in Figure 2 in the paper.
Model 2 is the main difference-in-difference model, the regression analog of comparing 1(a) and
1(b) in the paper. Here, the estimation sample includes all applications, primary and secondary. The
model allows for differences in primary and secondary grant rates to vary by country. Only three
countries have a significant difference in grant rates between primary and secondary patents: the US
(where secondary patents have a 22 percentage point lower grant rate), Argentina (where secondary
patents have a 8 percentage point lower grant rate), and India (where secondary patents have a 6
percentage point ​higher grant rate). As in the Figures in the text, there is no evidence that the gap
between secondary and primary grant rates is differentially larger in India or Brazil than in the
developed countries. For Argentina, the gap is significantly lower than that in the EPO (p<.01) and
Japan (p<.05).
Model 3 is estimated over secondary applications only, and includes application specific fixed
effects. These fixed effects absorb any unobserved differences across applications, i.e. the
coefficients on the country specific grant rates are based on within-application variation. (Of the
variables listed above, the only one with within application variation, other than the country
dummies, is the indicator for whether the application is domestic.) Note that unlike the secondary
twins analyses from Figures 1(c) and 1(e) of the paper, identification here comes not from
applications filed in ​all countries, but from grant rates for any applications filed in multiple
countries. The overall patterns across countries are similar to those observed from Model 1.
Secondary grant rates are significantly lower than the reference category (the US) in Japan, India,
Brazil, and Argentina, each at the 1 percent level. (However there is no significant difference
between the US and EPO.) The secondary patent grant rate is lowest in Brazil, followed by
Argentina, then India. There is no statistically significant difference between the Argentinian and

5

Brazilian grant rates (p=.07), but each have significantly lower grant rates than India at the 1
percent level.

EP
JP
BR
IN
AR
PCT Year 2001
PCT Year 2002
Number of Claims
Family size
Any Domestic Inventor

(1)
Granted
0.00594
(0.624)
-0.235​***
(0.000)
-0.584​***
(0.000)
-0.224​***
(0.000)
-0.553​***
(0.000)
-0.0295​*
(0.042)
-0.0161
(0.239)
-0.000332
(0.129)
0.0265​***
(0.000)
0.0922​***
(0.000)

Secondary, US
Secondary, EP
Secondary, JP
Secondary, BR
Secondary, IN
Secondary, AR
Constant
Observations

0.289​***
(0.000)
9794

PCT fixed effects
No
p-values in parentheses
*​
​p < 0.05, **​
​ ​p < 0.01, ***​
​ ​p < 0.001

6

(2)
Granted
-0.205​***
(0.000)
-0.427​***
(0.000)
-0.815​***
(0.000)
-0.501​***
(0.000)
-0.696​***
(0.000)
-0.00462
(0.678)
0.0269​**
(0.009)
-0.000338​*
(0.033)
0.0276​***
(0.000)
0.0985​***
(0.000)
-0.216​***
(0.000)
-0.00327
(0.813)
-0.0239
(0.073)
0.0123
(0.294)
0.0552​*
(0.044)
-0.0758​***
(0.000)
0.470​***
(0.000)
16174

(3)
Granted
0.0157
(0.256)
-0.208​***
(0.000)
-0.505​***
(0.000)
-0.146​***
(0.000)
-0.468​***
(0.000)

No

Yes

0.509​***
(0.000)
9794

