                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        MEASURING LOAN OUTCOMES AT POSTSECONDARY INSTITUTIONS:
              COHORT REPAYMENT RATES AS AN INDICATOR OF
           STUDENT SUCCESS AND INSTITUTIONAL ACCOUNTABILITY

                                        Tiffany Chou
                                        Adam Looney
                                        Tara Watson

                                      Working Paper 23118
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23118


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   February 2017




We thank Federal Student Aid for sharing data and are grateful for constructive conversations
with staff of the Department of Treasury, Department of Education, and the Council of Economic
Advisers. The authors were affiliated with the U.S. Department of Treasury during the time of
drafting. Watson was also affiliated with Williams College. The findings and conclusions
expressed are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the U.S.
Treasury, any other institution, or the National Bureau of Economic Research. All errors our
own.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Tiffany Chou, Adam Looney, and Tara Watson. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Measuring Loan Outcomes at Postsecondary Institutions: Cohort Repayment Rates as an Indicator
of Student Success and Institutional Accountability
Tiffany Chou, Adam Looney, and Tara Watson
NBER Working Paper No. 23118
February 2017, Revised February 2017
JEL No. H52,I22,I23

                                          ABSTRACT

Low- and middle-income college borrowers often struggle with economic opportunity and loan
burdens after leaving school. However, some institutions, including some non-selective schools,
do a good job of providing economic mobility to low-income students. This implies that there is
scope for a policy to redirect loan dollars – and therefore students – from low-performing schools
to higher-performing ones. Here we define a particular metric of institutional loan performance,
the cohort repayment rate, and describe its distribution. We demonstrate that the cohort repayment
rate is correlated with other institutional outcomes of interest, and thus could be used as an
institutional accountability tool.

Tiffany Chou                                    Tara Watson
Office of Economic Policy                       Department of Economics
1500 Pennsylvania Ave                           Williams College
Washington, DC 20220                            24 Hopkins Hall Drive
Tiffany.Chou@treasury.gov                       Williamstown, MA 01267
                                                and NBER
Adam Looney                                     tara.watson@williams.edu
Office of Tax Analysis
Department of the Treasury
1500 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20220
looney@gmail.com
                                                                                                                   2


*Chou and Looney are at the U.S. Department of Treasury. Watson is at Williams College. The
findings and conclusions expressed are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily
represent the views of the U.S. Treasury or any other institution.

I. Overview/Intro

Despite significant increase in the cost of college attendance over the past decade, a high-quality
college degree remains one of the best economic investments a young person can make. 1
Workers with a Bachelor’s degree (and no graduate degree) typically earn 68 percent more than
high school graduates, and have lower unemployment. 2 A more educated population has broad
social benefits including better heath, lower crime rates, less dependence on public programs, a
more informed electorate, and so on. Access to college is also a key way to promote economic
opportunity. Children from the bottom fifth of the income distribution have a 41 percent chance
of reaching the top two quintiles as adults if they have a college degree, but only a 14 percent
chance if they did not finish college. 3




The federal student loan program is one of the primary ways the federal government supports
access to higher education for low- and middle-income families. These funds can be used at any
institution participating in the federal loan program, including public, non-profit, and for-profit
schools, and for certificate programs, undergraduate degrees, and graduate programs. Today,
there are 41.5 million borrowers with outstanding federal loans totaling $1.26 trillion. 4 Many of
these borrowers would have been unable to attend college in the absence of the federal loan
program.




Despite the significant benefits of higher education and of the federal student loan program,
many students struggle to repay their loans. For example, 13.4 percent of borrowers entering

1
  For example, at public four-year schools, published tuition as increased 3.5 percent per year between Fall 2006 and
Fall 2016. College Board (2016). Trends in College Pricing 2016. https://trends.collegeboard.org/college-
pricing/figures-tables/average-rates-growth-published-charges-decade.
2
  BLS (2015). Earnings and unemployment rates by educational attainment, 2015.
http://www.bls.gov/emp/ep_chart_001.htm.
3
  Haskins (2008). https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2016/07/02_economic_mobility_sawhill_ch8.pdf.
4
  Federal Student Aid Portfolio Summary, 2016 Q3.
https://studentaid.ed.gov/sa/sites/default/files/fsawg/datacenter/library/PortfolioSummary.xls.

                                                         2
                                                                                                            3


repayment in 2009 had defaulted as of 2011. 5 Student loans cannot be discharged in bankruptcy,
and defaulting on federal student loans may result in serious consequences for borrowers,
including damaged credit, wage garnishment, and offsets of tax refunds and Social Security
payments. Even for borrowers who do not default, outstanding loan balances may cause other
financial hardships or make it difficult to reach other economic goals.




Problems in the repayment of student loans have prompted many to declare that there is a student
loan crisis. However, if there is a crisis, it is concentrated among students at low-quality
institutions, who are less likely to complete a degree and - even if they do graduate - are less
likely to have earnings high enough to repay their loans. The evidence suggests that institutional
quality matters for economic success. 6 Moreover, as we will show in this paper, students from
lower-income families that attend higher-performing schools do nearly as well as their higher-
income peers, suggesting that the characteristics of the institution affect outcomes above and
beyond what would be predicted based on the backgrounds of their students. This is the case
even at quality non-selective institutions.




However, problems of loan repayment are exacerbated by the fact that low-income students
disproportionately attend low-quality institutions, rely more on loans to finance their educations,
and are less able to rely on their families for help with loan repayment when their institutions fail
to deliver an adequate education. Thus, it is disadvantaged students that face the most significant
hardships as the result of borrowing to attend institutions with poor repayment rates.




Student loan policy has taken a two-pronged approach to addressing the problem of high default
rates. One approach is to provide more flexibility for borrowers to repay their loans over a


5
  https://ifap.ed.gov/eannouncements/092816CDRNationalBriefings3YR.html. The cohort default rate excludes
PLUS loans.
6
  Hoxby (2015). “Computing the Value-Added of American Postsecondary Institutions.”
https://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-soi/15rpcompvalueaddpostsecondary.pdf. Goodman, Hurwitz, and Smith (2015).
“College Access, Initial College Choice and Degree Completion.”
http://scholar.harvard.edu/files/joshuagoodman/files/collegetypequality.pdf.

                                                      3
                                                                                                         4


longer period of time—with interest—to address defaults arising from temporary hardships, like
unemployment. For instance, income-driven repayment (IDR) programs, which allow monthly
payments to fluctuate according to student earnings, can help reduce student financial hardship
and student loan default. The Obama administration has taken significant steps to raise
availability, awareness, and enrollment in IDR programs. It is now the case that 24 percent of
borrowers and 40 percent of outstanding Direct loans are enrolled in IDR. 7 Borrowers may also
go into deferment or forbearance on their loans, both of which halt loan payments temporarily.




The second approach is to strengthen the accountability systems that govern the institutions and
borrowers that participate in the federal loan program. For instance, after high default rates in
the late 1980s, Congress enacted new rules related to how much institutions could rely on federal
dollars (the so-called 85/15 rule), imposed “cohort default rate” limitations on the eligibility of
institutions with high student default rates to participate in the loan program, and required
mandatory garnishment of the wages of defaulted student loan borrowers.




Unfortunately, these accountability measures have eroded over time, both as the result of direct
legislative changes and because of economic forces and incentives. For instance, the original
85/15 rules, which required that at least 15 percent of an institution’s financing come from
outside of the federal aid system—i.e. that at least some share of students pay with their own
money—was revised to 90/10. Similarly, the cohort default rate rules have become less effective
over time. Many institutions have become adept at helping students enroll in deferment or
forbearances during the original two-year monitoring period, delaying but not necessarily
reducing the incidence of poor outcomes.




Indeed, as more borrowers enroll in IDR plans, default rates will fall regardless of whether a
school is offering economic opportunity to their students or whether those students will repay

7
 Refers to only Direct loan borrowers in Income-Contingent, Income-Based, Pay As You Earn, REPAYE. Federal
Student Aid Direct Loan Portfolio by Repayment Plan, 2016 Q3.
https://studentaid.ed.gov/sa/sites/default/files/fsawg/datacenter/library/DLPortfoliobyRepaymentPlan.xls.

                                                    4
                                                                                                        5


their loan obligations. As a result, default-based metrics will no longer be a useful tool to hold
institutions accountable for providing a quality product for their students with federal dollars. A
significant number of institutions rely on the federal loan program to serve disadvantaged
students, but many of these institutions consistently ask borrowers to take on more debt than they
are likely to be able to repay, harming both students and taxpayers. The current system does
little to ensure that federal loan dollars flow to institutions that serve disadvantaged students
well, and this will become a more significant challenge as IDR enrollment rises.




There is a strong justification for using institution-based repayment metrics to promote
institutional quality. As shown in this paper, institutions do have predictable outcomes for their
students above and beyond what would be expected based on background characteristics of the
students. Schools that yield poor outcomes for low-income students also tend to yield poor
outcomes for high-income students, and a low-income student attending a higher-quality school
has better outcomes than a low-income student attending a low-quality school. Thus, the degree
to which institutions promote economic success and social mobility varies substantially, even
among less selective institutions.




In this report, we argue that an institutional cohort repayment rate – which we define as the
fraction of a cohort’s initial principal that is repaid within five years after leaving school – is a
good indicator of student outcomes, institutional quality, and the return on federal loan dollars.
This repayment rate also has other benefits: it is difficult to game or manipulate, it is
straightforward to measure, and it directly corresponds to the federal investment in the loan.




In this report, we show that low- and middle-income borrowers generally struggle with economic
opportunity and loan burdens. However, some institutions, including some non-selective
schools, do a good job of providing economic mobility to low-income students. This implies
that there is scope for a policy to redirect loan dollars – and therefore students - from low-
performing schools to higher-performing ones. We then define and discuss our proposed cohort


                                                   5
                                                                                                   6


repayment rate metric, including what the distribution of cohort repayment rates currently looks
like. Finally, we demonstrate that the cohort repayment rate is correlated with other institutional
outcomes of interest, such as economic opportunity and cohort default rates, and thus could be
used as an institutional accountability tool.   We conclude with a brief discussion of other
considerations for institutional accountability in general.




I.     Low- and middle-income borrowers struggle with economic opportunity and with
       loan burdens




College is a good investment for the majority of students, but not all colleges yield good
economic outcomes for the majority of their students. In some cases, students borrow to attend
college but fail to complete a degree, or they complete a degree that does not translate into a
good job. In this section, we will show that student borrowers from low-income families have
worse economic prospects and loan outcomes, on average, than those from high income families.




To perform the analysis, we match tax data with a 4 percent sample of the Department of
Education’s National Student Loan Data System (see Appendix for details) and other publicly
available institutional data. We limit the sample to dependent undergraduates (so we are able to
observe parental income). We examine student loans starting repayment in 2004-2009, which are
the most recent cohorts with five years of post-school repayment data.




Many dependent undergraduate student borrowers from families with income below $30,000
struggle in the labor market after leaving school. Only half earn more than $25,000 five years
after entering repayment (typically five years after leaving school) and only 58.6 percent earn
more than $25,000 even ten years after entering repayment. These students, with earnings below
$25,000 ten years after leaving school and with minimal family resources to draw upon, are
likely to face significant challenges with loan repayment.


                                                  6
                                                                                                  7




Figure 1 details labor market outcomes for student borrowers by family income. Students from
low-income families tend to have worse labor market outcomes than those from higher-income
families. Five years after starting repayment (typically five years after leaving school), low-
income undergraduate borrowers are less likely to be employed and tend to earn less than their
higher-income peers. For example, 12 percent of students from families earning $15,000-
$30,000 are not employed five years after leaving school and another 36 percent are working but
earn below $25,000. In contrast, only 8 percent of students from families earning $75,000-
$100,000 are not employed and 27 percent are earning below $25,000.




                                                 7
                                                                                                                       8




To some extent, poor economic outcomes for low-income borrowers are related to poor
completion rates. 8 Of all low-income dependent students who borrowed to attend college and
had loans entering repayment between 2004 and 2009, only 68.3 percent completed at least a two
year degree and 52.5 percent completed a four-year degree. High-income student borrowers
have a 64 percent chance of completing a four-year degree.




Although low-income borrowers are less likely to complete a degree, even those that do
complete face greater challenges in the labor market than higher-income completers. Among
borrowers who complete a four-year degree at a four-year institution and are from families with
income under $30,000, about 61.8 percent earned more than $25,000, and 25.9 percent earned
more than $50,000. In comparison, about 71.7 percent of completers from higher income
families earned over $25,000 and 33.7 percent earned more than $50,000. Poor labor market
outcomes mean students are less likely to be able to repay their loans. 9




Given that disadvantaged students tend to have worse post-college employment outcomes and
that employment outcomes are a strong predictor of loan repayment, it is not surprising that there
are substantial differences in loan outcomes between borrowers from higher- and lower-income
families. The median low-income dependent borrower has repaid none of their original balance
after 5 years, while the median borrower from a higher-income family has repaid about 19.0
percent.


8
  Completers tend to have higher earnings. For example, among borrowers that attended a 4-year institution, 61.8
percent of those who completed a four-year degree earned more than $25,000 five years after leaving school versus
41.6 percent among those that did not complete any degree.
9
  For example, the median dependent student employed 3 years after entering repayment has repaid 20.3 percent of
their total loan balance five years after entering repayment, but the typical student who was not employed that year
owed about 1.4 percent more than their original balance because the capitalization of interest accrual outpaced
repayment.

                                                          8
                                                                                                                   9




Though multiple factors are at work, differences in economic outcomes after college are an
important part of the story. For instance, among low-income borrowers with similar
employment and earnings outcomes as typical higher-income borrowers, repayment rates were
about 9.8 percent. This implies that roughly half of the gap in repayment rates could be
associated with differences in employment outcomes. 10 Figure 2 shows that the relationship
between employment and loan repayment holds overall and for borrowers from low-income
families in particular.




Low-income borrowers face a one-two punch: they both have worse labor market outcomes on
average, and they tend to have less family wealth on which to rely when they face earnings
shocks. The combination of low earnings and low family income presents a big obstacle to


10
  Specifically, this comparison uses the Dinardo, Fortin, and Lemiuex (1996) decomposition of repayment rates
using propensity-score reweighting based on the employment and earnings characteristics to compare differences in
the two groups of borrowers. In this context, the reweighting is intended to allow the comparison in outcomes of the
two groups among borrowers with similar economic characteristics.

                                                         9
                                                                                                           10


repaying debt. Figure 3 shows that students from low-income families have substantially worse
student loan outcomes than those from higher-income ones. Of the lowest income borrowers
(those with family incomes under $30,000, representing about 27.5 percent of all dependent
borrowers) entering repayment between 2004 and 2009, almost 27.0 percent default within 5
years, and half (50.1 percent) are negatively amortized. In other words, the typical borrower
from a low-income family has not repaid a dollar of total balance after five years. These
statistics are vastly different than the outcomes for higher-income borrowers. 11




11
  Among higher-family-income borrowers, only 12.7 default within 5 years and 32.9 percent are negatively
amortized.

                                                      10
                                                                                                   11




II.    Some institutions are better than others at providing economic mobility to low-
       income students

Poor post-college earnings outcomes for low-income students reflect, in part, the quality of the
institutions they attend. While some low-income students attend institutions with strong post-
college outcomes, most do not. For example, suppose we rank schools by the “economic
opportunity” they offer, defined here as the fraction of students who earn $25,000 or more 10
years after enrollment according to data from the College Scorecard. Low-income students who
attend these high economic opportunity schools tend to have high earnings and strong labor
market outcomes, as shown in Figure 4. Among borrowers who attended institutions in the top
(borrower-weighted) decile of institutions for economic opportunity, 72.1 percent of low-income
students end up earning more than $25,000 compared with 31.6 percent of those who attend the
lowest-opportunity schools. In fact, low-income students at the highest-opportunity institutions
do better than high-income students who attend middling or low-opportunity schools (see Figure
5).




                                                11
                                                                                                    12




Of course, without major investments to address the issue of weak high school preparation in
many low-income communities, it is unreasonable to expect that most students with low family
incomes could attend the most selective institutions in the country. In fact, only 8.1 percent of
low-income borrowers attend schools in the top decile of opportunity compared to 16.7 percent
of borrowers from families with income over $50,000. As a result, although borrowers from
lower-income families make up 26.5 percent of all dependent undergraduate borrowers, they
make up only 16.1 percent of borrowers at top-decile schools and nearly half of borrowers at the
bottom-decile schools (see Figure 6).




                                                12
                                                                                                          13




Nevertheless, there are less selective and open admission institutions with good earnings
outcomes; many of these do serve substantial numbers of low-income students. For example, in
the middle of the opportunity distribution (40th to 60th percentile), 25.5 percent of student
borrowers come from low-income families and about 53.4 achieve earnings above $25,000 by
5 years after leaving school. Compared to the lowest-opportunity-decile schools, borrowers in
this middle-opportunity range are almost four times as likely to achieve earnings of $50,000 or
more (17.6 percent versus 4.7 percent). And most institutions in this middle range are not very
selective: more than half of borrowers in this range attend institutions that admit more than 85
percent of applicants or are open enrollment, and an additional 42 percent attend modestly
selective schools, which accept between 75 and 85 percent of applicants. 12




It is not the case that schools with higher earnings would necessarily translate into better loan
repayment, because other factors, like the level of debt incurred, may differ across institutions.

12
     We use Barron’s measure of selectivity, published in Barron’s Profiles of American Colleges, 2009.

                                                          13
                                                                                                  14


For example, if students at high-opportunity institutions leave school with much higher loan
burdens but relatively smaller income gains, then their loans may be more difficult to repay than
smaller loans from lower quality institutions. As it turns out, debt levels are somewhat different
between low- and high-opportunity schools, but these differences pale in comparison to the
associated earnings differences. Figure 7 shows that median debt is noticeably higher at high-
opportunity schools (top panel), but the debt-to-earnings ratio is relatively similar across types of
schools (bottom panel). Thus, students at high-quality, expensive schools may be in a better
position to repay their loans.




                                                 14
                                                                                                    15


The result is that institutions with high levels of economic opportunity also tend to have better
repayment outcomes among their students. This is also true for low-income students in
particular (see Figure 8). Among borrowers from families with incomes under $30,000, those at
high-opportunity schools are less likely to default, less likely to be negatively amortized, and
tend to have made more progress repaying debt than low-income students from lower-
opportunity schools.




                                                 15
                                                                                                    16


Redirecting federal dollars to institutions that offer economic mobility to their low-income
students would improve student outcomes and protect taxpayers. A well-designed student loan
accountability system would do just that. We argue below that a cohort-based repayment rate is
a promising metric that could be part of such a system.




III.    The institutional cohort repayment rate




To assess the degree to which students from an institution succeed in repaying their loans, we
consider a cohort – loans taken to attend a given institution that enter repayment in a given year.
This is very similar to the definition of cohort used in the existing “cohort default rate” (CDR)
rules. However, instead of looking at the share of loans that default in a fixed window, the
cohort repayment rate is the amount of principal repaid by Year 5 of repayment, relative to the
amount of principal owed at the start of repayment. We separate undergraduate and graduate
loans into distinct ‘cohorts’, for reasons discussed below. The cohort repayment rate is
represented by the following formula:




where    is the institution,   is the set of (undergraduate) loans that entered repayment in fiscal
year t from school s,          is the principal outstanding upon entering repayment, and
is the outstanding principal at the end of fiscal year t+5. Note that repayment rates can be
negative, meaning there is more principal owed after five years of repayment than when the loan
originally entered repayment due to capitalized interest.




We define the cohort repayment rate in this way because it allows us to use standard loan
amortization formulas to gauge whether the cohort is, as a whole, on track to repay in a given
time. Figure 9 shows the amount of principal that would remain at the end of each repayment



                                                 16
                                                                                                                 17


year for a loan with a fixed interest rate and loan term. 13 For a standard 10-year repayment plan,
at Year 5, $0.60 would still be owed for each dollar of principal originally borrowed. In other
words, 40 percent of principal has been repaid by Year 5. If the term were 20 years instead, the
repayment rate would be around 15 percent. The amortization curves also allow us to link a
repayment rate at Year 5 with a particular loan term -- a cohort repayment rate of 15 percent
means the cohort, as a whole, is unlikely to completely repay before 20 years. The 20-year
timeline is important because for many IDR borrowers, any remaining balance is forgiven after
20 years and absorbed as a loss by taxpayers. 14




The choice of measuring repayment at Year 5, as opposed to Year 3 as is done in the CDR rules,
removes some of the noise in the outcome metric but also increases the time between when the
loan is originated and when outcomes are observed. In other words, at Year 5, there is a larger
difference between the amortization curves than at Year 3, so it is easier to distinguish

13
   Assuming a 6.8 percent annual interest rate. A lower interest rate shifts the amortization curves downward so the
principal remaining at Year 5 is lower (and thus the repayment rate at Year 5 is higher).
14
   The “correct” term length for a student loan is subject to debate. Some argue that because human capital pays off
over an entire working life, the term should be the borrower’s remaining working life, which may be much longer
than 20 years. Others would argue that borrowers should not be expected to still be repaying student loans well into
adulthood because they may have other economic goals to meet (e.g., children ’s education, buying a house, saving
for retirement).

                                                        17
                                                                                                  18


performing and non-performing schools. However, because schools have to wait longer to see
results in the outcome metric, they may be less inclined to make quality improvements today.




Though the repayment rate is fairly easy to conceptualize and calculate, there are some subtleties
specific to federal student loans that need to be addressed before policy implementation. Here,
we take the straightforward approach of including all loans in the repayment cohort, including
those that are in deferment, forbearance, or default; using just the principal balance; and
assuming a 15 percent repayment target, but future policy-makers may wish to consider metrics
which make adjustments for these issues. We discuss these issues in the Appendix.




There are several good reasons to use a five-year cohort repayment rate for loan accountability
purposes:




It is not based on student loan defaults. The cohort default rate (CDR) is currently used as the
primary loan accountability metric. Defaults are an important indicator of distress and may
cause significant harm to students. IDR plans minimize the risk of default by allowing students
to pay less than the standard monthly payment when their incomes are low, making it a valuable
safety net for students facing idiosyncratic shocks. However, such plans also mask systematic
loan repayment problems at the institution level. Going forward, the CDR metric will be an
increasingly unreliable indicator of whether an institution is providing economic opportunity to
its students and reliable stewardship of federal loan dollars.




It is more difficult to manipulate than simpler binary measures. Since the introduction of
the College Scorecard in 2015, students can easily access information about institutional quality
and cost, including loan repayment information. 15 The Scorecard’s repayment rate metric is the
fraction of students that pay down total balance within three years. Because this metric relies on

15
     https://collegescorecard.ed.gov/

                                                 18
                                                                                                                    19


a discrete threshold, it is easier to manipulate and less well-suited for a broad-based
accountability system. By contrast, to manipulate a repayment rate target of, for example, 15
percent, schools would have to provide funds to pay down $0.15 for every dollar borrowed.




It considers loan outcomes after a five year window, which is a good indicator of long-run
loan outcomes. Preliminary analysis using borrower-level data suggest that early-stage
outcomes of loans map into long-run outcomes. Due to limitations with the borrower-level data,
we can only look at loan status, broadly defined, rather than the numerical repayment rate. 16
Nevertheless, Figure 10 shows that loan status after five years is a strong indicator of where the
loan will stand after fifteen years. The left panel shows the final outcome of loans, conditional
on status at Year 3 while the right panel is conditional on Year 5 status. The left column within
each panel shows that outcomes after 15 years for loans that are performing early on (meaning
they are either positively amortized or paid off entirely) while the right column is the outcomes
for loans that are not performing (either negatively amortized or defaulted) early on. 17




16
   The primary limitation of using these data for loan-level analysis of long-term outcomes is that consolidation
loans are not well-tracked for older student loan cohorts, so we may not be able to accurately link the dollar balance
on the consolidation loan back to the original loan. For general loan statuses, such as defaulting or being paid off,
this is less of an issue, since we can “pass back” those outcomes to the original loan when we see it on a
consolidation loan.
17
   Note that “default” and “paid off” are terminal statuses, meaning that once a loan has reached either status, it is
always in that status in all future periods. However, Figure 10 is not driven by such loans; we can omit them and it
would remain virtually unchanged.

                                                          19
                                                                                                                  20




First, early and late loan outcomes are highly correlated -- nearly 90 percent of loans that are
performing early on will still be performing at Year 15 (colored green) while 10 percent would
have fallen into one of the two non-performing categories (colored red). Similarly, loans that
failure to perform early on are very likely to be in one of the non-performing statuses at Year 15.
Second, outcomes at Year 5 are somewhat better predictors of final outcomes than outcomes at
Year 3. For Year 3, 9.5 percent of early-performing loans eventually fail to perform and 34
percent of early failures end up performing. In aggregate, 21 percent of loans overall will be
misclassified based on their Year 3 outcome. For Year 5, 8 percent of early performers fail and
25 percent of failures recover, so only 15 percent of loans would be misclassified.




While we do not have reliable data on long-run loan repayment for institutions, these loan-level
results suggest that observing repayment at Year 5 may be more predictive than at Year 3. 18



18
     The correlation between a three-year cohort based repayment rate and our preferred five-year rate is 0.96.

                                                           20
                                                                                                                 21


And, as we mentioned earlier, the amortization curves show a much larger spread between Year
5 repayment rates than Year 3 ones, so it is easier for quality schools to distinguish themselves.




It directly incentivizes the repayment of student debt. The cohort repayment rate is a direct
indication of whether student debt is repaid in a timely manner by students who borrow to attend
an institution. Unlike other measures, it more accurately captures taxpayer risk because large-
dollar loans are implicitly given more emphasis than small dollar loans within an institution.
Timely repayment is fundamentally of interest for both students and taxpayers.




It is closely correlated with institutional outcomes of interest. As we will discuss in a
subsequent section, the cohort repayment rate is correlated with existing institutional metrics,
including the Scorecard repayment rate, Scorecard debt-to-earnings ratios, and economic
opportunity.




IV.        The distribution of repayment rates




In this section, we document the distribution of cohort repayment rates across types of
institutions. These data were provided to us by Federal Student Aid (FSA) and cover all loans
entering repayment in fiscal year 2009. 19 As in the definition above, loans are attributed to the
school and academic degree level (i.e., undergraduate or graduate) for which they were
originated, and parent borrowers are treated separately. Technical details and additional
discussion of the cohort repayment rate are included in the appendix.




We focus on the 2009 cohort entering repayment for data availability reasons. Though 2009 was
a particularly challenging time to leave school given the extremely weak labor market,

19
     A loan enters repayment when the borrower leaves school, regardless of whether they have earned a degree.

                                                          21
                                                                                                                22


preliminary evidence suggests that more recent cohorts are performing similarly. 20 Therefore,
the characteristics and distributions of cohort repayment rates presented below are probably not
driven by macroeconomic factors that were unique to 2009.




Undergraduate repayment. Figure 11 shows the distribution of institutional repayment rates
for undergraduate loans entering repayment in 2009. The typical institution has a cohort
repayment rate of 22 percent, meaning that undergraduates in aggregate have repaid 22 percent
of the initial principal after 5 years. This repayment rate corresponds to each student at the
institution smoothly amortizing over 15 years, though of course in reality it represents a mix of
students paying more and less.




20
  The median 3-year repayment rate for the 2009 undergraduate cohort is 21.7, compared to the 3-year repayment
rate for the 2011 undergraduate cohort of 22.7. The correlation between institutional repayment rates for the two
cohorts is 0.83, suggesting that institutional repayment rates have a fair degree of persistence.

                                                        22
                                                                                                    23


The bars of the Figure 11 histogram are colored to reflect the repayment term associated with
that five-year repayment rate. To the left side, five percent of institutions have cohort repayment
rates below zero – signified by dark red - meaning that the cohort in aggregate owes more after
five years than they did when leaving school. These bars combine with those in lighter red to
show the 32 percent of institutions that have repayment rates below 15 percent, meaning their
borrowers are paying down less in aggregate than would be expected on a 20-year repayment
plan. Half of the figure is green, meaning these institutions have repayment rates of 20 percent
or higher, which would be consistent with a repayment term of 15 years or less.




By Sector and Level. Figures 12 and 13 show the distribution of cohort repayment rate by
institutional sector and level. Looking first at the less than four-year schools in Figure 12, we
can see a clear sectoral difference in the distribution of repayment rates. Among the sub-
baccalaureate schools, public institutions have the best repayment rates, followed by for-profits
and then private non-profits. For almost all community college borrowers attend schools with
positive repayment rates, and about 25 percent of borrowers in this sector attend schools with a
15-20 percent repayment rate. For-profit schools have somewhat worse repayment rates, with
about 20 percent at schools with a 0-5 percent repayment rate and a non-trivial share at schools
with negative repayment. With the exception of a few schools, private non-profit schools tend to
have worse repayment rates than community colleges. However, this sector is relatively small
with only 155 institutions and 1.3 percent of all undergraduate borrowers in this particular
cohort, so they have a limited impact on borrower outcomes as a whole.




                                                 23
                                                                                                   24




Among four-year schools, cohort repayment rates in general are better than at the less than four-
year schools, but the sectoral pattern is quite different (see Figure 13). At Bachelors-granting
institutions, public and private non-profit schools both tend to have relatively good repayment
rates. Both sectors have a small share of students attending schools with low repayment, but in
general, their students are making progress toward repaying their loans. Among for-profit
schools, there are almost no schools with repayment rates above 20 percent, though many
students attend for-profit school in the 15 to 20 percent range. Many for-profit borrowers attend
schools with low, and even negative, repayment rates.




                                                24
                                                                                                  25




The distributions in these figures show what cohort repayment rates look like for particular types
of schools, but schools and sectors vary dramatically in size, and thus contribute differentially to
the repayment picture as a whole. Figure 14 shows the sectoral decomposition within each
decile of cohort repayment rate. The typical school has a repayment rate of about 22 percent,
which places them in the fifth or sixth decile. First, all six sectors appear to have some poor
performers. In the lowest three deciles of repayment, the distribution is about evenly divided
between less than four year (shown in the lighter hatched pattern) and four year schools (in
darker solid pattern), and skewed toward for-profit schools (in green). Though low repayment
tends to be more of an issue at for-profit and two year schools, all sectors have some low
repayment institutions - the problem is not exclusive to any particular sector.




                                                 25
                                                                                                  26




Second, the middle of the distribution, which has moderate repayment rates, also has substantial
numbers of borrowers from across sectors. This suggests that borrowers at low repayment
schools may be able to shift to better repayment schools without having to change the type of
school they are attending. There are a substantial number of two-year schools, for example, with
average or slightly above average repayment rates, so improving repayment among the bottom
decile may not require shifting borrowers to four-year programs.




Finally, the top three deciles in terms of repayment are dominated by public and private non-
profit four-year institutions. These schools are more selective than schools in the rest of the
distribution, and repayment is both a function of the school quality and the types of borrowers
that attend. There are few two-year schools and almost no for-profit schools among institutions
with very high repayment rates.




Graduate repayment. So far, we have focused on the repayment outcomes of undergraduate
loans at each institution; this is where policy interest in borrowing, repayment, and access tends


                                                 26
                                                                                                                27


be focused. However, an institutional accountability program would also have to consider how
to address graduate borrowing, so we also discuss graduate loans in this section. 21 Figure 15
shows the distribution of repayment rates among graduate loans for those schools with graduate
borrowers. 22 Overall, graduate repayment is somewhat better than undergraduate repayment –
only 21 percent of graduate borrowers went to schools with poor repayment rates (in red),
compared to 32 percent of undergraduate borrowers. However, the repayment rates are not
dramatically different – the typical graduate repayment rate is about 24 percent, compared to 22
percent for a typical undergraduate loan. Sixty percent of the histogram is green, so most
graduate borrowers are from schools making good repayment progress.




Even more than for undergraduate degrees, ownership control of the institution is closely related
to graduate repayment rates. Figure 16 shows that nearly all borrowers at for-profit graduate
schools attend institutions with poor graduate repayment rates. In other words, the for-profit
graduate sector suffers from consistently poor graduate loan performance.

21
   The considerations about borrowing, repayment, and access are also different for graduate programs, and that may
change how policymakers set a target repayment rate for these loans.
22
   This includes Grad PLUS loans. Grad PLUS loans are excluded from cohort default rates.

                                                        27
                                                                                                  28




While graduate loans tend to have better repayment rates than undergraduate ones, the
relationship between graduate and undergraduate repayment (within schools that have both types
of borrowers) also matters for the design of an institutional accountability program. A school
may perform differently depending on whether the graduate and undergraduate loans are pooled
together in a repayment cohort (so one type of borrower may compensate for poor performance
among the other type) or whether undergraduate and graduate borrowers are judged separately.
Somewhat surprisingly, graduate borrowers tend to have lower repayment rates than
undergraduates at such schools. On our data, nearly 70 percent of institutions with both types of
borrowers had less repayment progress among graduate students than among undergraduates. It
is sensible to considering treating undergraduates separately from graduates for accountability
purposes.




Parent repayment. The parents of dependent undergraduate students are also allowed to
borrow to pay for college. Figure 17 shows the distribution of cohort repayment rates for Parent
PLUS loans. Overall, cohort repayment rates for Parent PLUS are concentrated around 15-20



                                               28
                                                                                                                  29


percent but there is a significant tail of negative cohort repayment rates, meaning parent
borrowers at these institutions owe more at Year 5 than at the start of repayment.




Low repayment rates on Parent PLUS are due in part to the fact that these loans “enter
repayment” at origination but can be deferred while the student is enrolled. Student-based loans,
in contrast, do not “enter repayment” until the student has ceased enrollment. Since loans in
deferment continue to accrue interest even though the parent is not making payment, Parent
PLUS loans will mechanically have larger balances and lower repayment rates at any fixed year
of repayment than the student-based loans. This timing issue, in addition to other considerations
for Parent PLUS loans, would need to be addressed in any institutional accountability proposal. 23
An accountability proposal that does not include Parent PLUS should address the risk that
institutions may push low-income families into the more expensive Parent PLUS market to avoid
facing penalties.




23
   Parent PLUS loans are fundamentally different from other student loans. Repayment is typically tied to the
financial situation of the parents rather than the economic outcome of the student, and the parent is not the one
receiving the education that is being financed. A cohort repayment rate for parent loans could be timed differently
or have different repayment targets to account for these issues.

                                                         29
                                                                                                  30




For parent loans, most for-profit institutions are in the bottom deciles of repayment. Very few
parent borrowers in the for-profit sector have successful loan outcomes. Public and private non-
profit institutions fare better, as shown in Figure 18.




V.     How do cohort repayment rates relate to other institutional outcomes?




Cohort default rate. The primary metric by which we currently evaluate loan accountability is
the cohort default rate. When institutions have a cohort default rate exceeding 30 percent for
three consecutive years or 40 percent in a given year, they risk losing eligibility for Direct Loans
and/or Pell grants. 24 As is evident from Figure 19, very few institutions exceed a CDR of 40


24
  http://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-
idx?c=ecfr&SID=89d5048ebca12c33e51192c59f9901ea&rgn=div8&view=text&node=34:3.1.3.1.34.14.39.7&idno=
34.

                                                  30
                                                                                                                   31


percent. Somewhat more exceed 30 percent, and most of these have below-average repayment
rates. 25 In addition, it is clear from the graph below that even many institutions with moderate
default rates have low repayment levels, suggesting their students are struggling to repay their
loans even if they are not defaulting. For example, around 130 schools have CDRs of 20
percent, but about 50 of these schools have “red” cohort repayment rates, meaning we would not
expect those loans to be repaid after 20 years.




As noted above, CDR will become an increasingly ineffective tool to monitor institutional
student loan performance as IDR becomes more prevalent. More flexible repayment plans –
which protect borrowers from defaulting in the case idiosyncratic earnings shocks or
systematically low earnings – require a new approach for holding schools accountable.




25
   Some schools with very high default rates also appear to have favorable repayment rates. This relationship
generally arises for one of two reasons. First, some institutions, like community colleges, have very polarized
outcomes in which borrowers either repay relatively small balances quickly (e.g. if they get a job) or quickly default
(if they do not). Second, recovery rates on smaller, defaulted loans are often high, because the law requires wage
garnishment and the offset of tax refunds, including, for instance, EITC and child tax credit refunds. Hence, a
borrower that quickly defaults may appear to have a high repayment rate because these collections have reduced the
balance or paid it off entirely.

                                                         31
                                                                                                                 32


Scorecard repayment. Loan repayment is included on the College Scorecard, but the metric is
slightly different than the one we use here. On the Scorecard, loan repayment is measured as the
share of a cohort that has repaid at least a dollar. 26 By comparison, our measure captures the
degree of repayment progress, not the share of borrowers that has made any progress. 27
Figure 20 shows that the two measures are correlated: schools with a high Scorecard repayment
tend to have made good progress repaying their student debt. 28 There is also noticeable variation
in Scorecard repayment among schools with nominally similar cohort repayment rates. For
example, among the 1,025 schools with 0-15 percent cohort repayment rates, the median
Scorecard repayment rate is 43 percent, the 25th percentile is 35 percent and the 75th percentile is
50 percent. In other words, at schools with “poor” cohort repayment rates, some may be judged
to have passable Scorecard repayment rates since many student have reduced balances within 5
years. However, borrowers at these schools are making minimal repayment progress, meaning
they may be accumulating significant amounts of interest.




26
   Data Documentation for College Scorecard (Version: January 2017).
https://collegescorecard.ed.gov/assets/FullDataDocumentation.pdf.
27
   The College Scorecard’s repayment measure also excludes loans that are defaulted, in in-school deferment, or in
military deferment from the cohort and measures progress relative to total balance, not principal.
28
   The overall correlation is 0.83.

                                                        32
                                                                                                                    33




Debt versus earnings. Students should be asked to take on loan debt only when it is reasonable
to expect them to repay that debt given their likely earnings. Taking on a high amount of debt to
attend an expensive school is often a smart financial decision if that institution is likely to
provide substantial economic opportunity. Similarly, attending a school that typically produces
low or modest earnings could be a worthwhile investment if the debt incurred is sized
appropriately.

Figure 21 shows the relationship between median debt incurred by borrowers at an institution
and mean earnings ten years after starting school. The dashed line represents the amount of debt
that would be affordable (meaning a 20 year payment would take up less than 10 percent of
mean discretionary earnings) at that given level of earnings. 29 Institutions to the left of the line
have earnings so low that it would not be reasonable to expect a typical student from one of these
schools to repay their debt without financial hardship. To the right of the line, borrowers tend to
make enough that even high debt amounts may be affordable. It is clear that any given level of
expected future earnings, institutions ask their students to take on very different levels of debt.




29
  This construction is very similar to the definition of “partial financial hardship” used in IDR plans, except with a
20-year payment instead of a 10-year one. In both cases, “discretionary earnings” refers to earnings above 1.5 times
the federal poverty line, where we assume a single-person household for simplicity.

                                                          33
                                                                                                    34




The figure also shows that schools with excessive levels of debt relative to earnings struggle to
repay. The red dots are schools where cohort repayment rates are low (below 15 percent), and
most of these schools are to the left of the line. While there are some institutions that have poor
repayment despite reasonable debt-to-earnings ratios, high levels of debt relative to earnings are
generally associated with students struggling to repay.




Institutional opportunity. Repayment rates are also related to the degree of economic
opportunity. Figure 22 shows that schools with higher cohort repayment rates offer more
economic opportunity to both low- and high-income attendees. Students from families below
$30,000 have about a 58 percent chance of earning at least $25,000 if they attend a middle-tier
school, compared to a 45 percent chance at a low-tier one.



                                                 34
                                                                                                 35




The economic opportunity for low-income students associated with high-repayment schools
translates directly into better loan outcomes for low-income students. At the worst performing
schools, low-income students are very likely to default. This can be seen in Figure 23.
Approximately 20 percent of low-income borrowers at a median repayment school default,
compared to nearly 34 percent of low-income borrowers at the lowest repayment schools.
Higher-income students tend to have better repayment success at every type of school, and have
a similarly-sized decline in defaults between the lowest and median deciles. Figure 24 shows a
similar pattern with aggregate repayment rates: outcomes for low-income borrowers are better at
higher-repayment schools.




                                               35
     36




36
                                                                                                  37


In sum, both low- and high-income students have better repayment outcomes at schools with
better cohort repayment. Unfortunately, low-income students are disproportionately served by
institutions with low cohort repayment rates (see Figure 25). Among undergraduate borrowers
who started repayment in 2004-2009, there are about 3.2 students from families earning over
$30,000 for each student from a family earning under $30,000. At low-repayment schools, this
ratio is much lower, implying that a disproportionate share of low-income students are enrolled
at these institutions. Schools with higher repayment tend to have higher ratios, meaning they
enroll a disproportionate share of higher-income students. Policy that successfully encouraged
low-income students to attend schools with higher repayment would likely improve both
economic opportunity and loan outcomes for this group.




VI.    Conclusion




Institutional accountability in the federal student loan program has been weak and is increasingly
obsolete in light of income-driven repayment policies. This paper has introduced a cohort
repayment rate as an alternative metric that could be used in an institutional accountability
program for student loans. The cohort repayment rate is relatively easy to construct, addresses
some of the shortcomings of using loan default as the metric, and could be used to encourage
institutions to improve.



                                                37
                                                                                                    38


One area of particular concern is the low-performing loans in the for-profit sector. Many
institutions in this sector systematically ask students to take on more debt than they are likely to
be able to repay. The rapid growth of low-quality, high-cost post-secondary programs in this
sector is symptomatic of incentive misalignment between schools, on the one hand, and students
and taxpayers on the other. Some of the existing accountability rules, such as gainful
employment, specifically apply to this sector, but these emphasize sanctions for extreme cases
rather than broad-based accountability. Furthermore, it is important to remember that there are
institutions in all sectors that have poor repayment outcomes.




We see many advantages to using a repayment-based metric for a loan accountability program.
However, there are some schools that provide valuable, high quality education without
commensurate high earnings in the labor market. For example, some institutions serve highly
disadvantaged students who earn more than they would have without college education but still
have inadequate income to repay their loans. Other schools cater to students who choose to enter
careers that are socially valuable but not particularly well-paid. Many community colleges admit
students who are uncertain about their path and face a high risk of non-completion, but these
institutions are providing a valuable service by helping students learn through experience
whether college is right for them.




A loan accountability policy should consider these complexities and should couple
accountability with financial support for institutions that serve the greater good. In situations
where there is a high probability ex ante that a student will not be able to repay a federal student
loan, it is incumbent on federal policy to support the education through grants or steer the student
towards a different educational path. Low-income students, because they tend to have low future
earnings and have few means of dealing with income uncertainty, are disproportionately
burdened by weak institutional accountability rules.




                                                 38
                                                                                                   39


Some have suggested that income-driven repayment plans serve many of these same goals
because those with poor labor market outcomes eventually have their loans forgiven. It is true
that IDR protects students from the serious consequences of default, and it is an important safety
net. However, IDR does not address institutional quality issues, and indeed may make it easier
for low-quality institutions to ask their students to borrow excessively. An optimal policy will
preserve IDR while limiting the ability of low-quality institutions to ask their students to borrow
funds they will never be able to repay.




                                                39
                                                                                                 40



Data Appendix

Analysis using the 4 percent sample of the National Student Loan Data System (NSLDS)

The analysis in Sections II-III and Figures 22-25 were done using a 4% sample of loans from the
Department of Education’s National Student Loan Database (NSLDS). This sample allows us to
track, for each borrower, all loans entering repayment in each year and the status of those loans
(e.g., default or the total balance), which is then aggregated and examined five years after
entering repayment. The analysis for dependent, undergraduate borrowers are specifically for
the cohorts that entered repayment between 2004 and 2009.

Figure 10 was also constructed using the 4% sample of NSLDS, but uses the 1999 repayment
cohort instead. Because consolidation tracking is imperfect for loans going this far back, we
cannot accurately calculate the amount of principal repaid for all original loans. This is why
Figure 10 shows relatively coarse loan outcomes rather than exact repayment rates.




Technical details about the cohort repayment rate

This section provides additional details and discussion about the cohort repayment rate discussed
in Sections IV and onward. These data were generated by Federal Student Aid at the
institutional level using the universe of loans, not a 4% sample.

1. Defining the loan cohort

   The 2009 repayment cohort is the set of all student-borrower loans that entered repayment in
   fiscal year 2009 (October 1, 2008 – September 31, 2009) that were not cancelled. This
   includes all deferred and defaulted loans and excludes Parent PLUS loans. Loans that have a
   zero balance upon entering repayment are excluded. Year 5 balance is defined as the
   outstanding balance as of July 2014. Year 0 balance is defined as the balance upon entering
   repayment. Institutions are defined by their six-digit OPEID. Loans are associated with the
   academic level for which they were originated, meaning graduate and undergraduate loans
   for the same borrower would be correctly associated with the underlying schools attended.

                                                40
                                                                                                  41


2. Timing of capitalized interest

   Loans originated to students usually go through a period of “in-school” status where the loan
   is accruing interest but the borrower is not required to make payments. Once the loan exits
   “in-school” and enters repayment, the accrued interest is supposed to be capitalized. The
   timing of when servicers capitalize accrued interest may vary, which changes the
   denominator of the repayment rate. To the extent that this varies due to practices of the loan
   servicer, this will add noise to the repayment metric since servicers are randomly assigned to
   loans. Alternatively, the repayment rate could be calculated based on total outstanding
   balance, rather than just outstanding principal.

3. Deferments and forbearances

   Borrowers on federal student loans can go into forbearance or deferment, thus pausing
   payment on their loan. Some types of deferments and forbearances reflect poor economic
   situations which, if they were persistent at an institution, we should include in an institutional
   accountability measure, while other types of deferment reflect students going back to school
   or serving in the military, which may be less attributable to institutional conduct. To some
   extent, prolonging repayment because the borrower returned to school is already captured by
   choosing a long 20-year term for the repayment rate target. We would want to avoid the
   loophole that allows schools to just put non-performing loans into forbearance during the
   monitoring window. Note that excluding in-school deferments may not improve an
   institution’s cohort repayment rate – a borrower who goes on to graduate school may have
   made more repayment progress on their loan than the typical borrower, so omitting the
   graduate student’s loan would actually lower an institution’s cohort repayment rate.

4. Defaults

   To the extent that defaulted borrowers fail to make timely progress on their loan, defaults
   would already be included in the repayment rate. However, policymakers may put further
   weight on defaults in an accountability program precisely because the consequences for
   defaulting are much more severe than not making progress repaying principal.




                                                41
                                                                                                  42


5. Loan consolidation

Multiple federal student loans can be consolidated into a single loan to make it easier for
borrowers to manage payments. The repayment rates discussed here are calculated after linking
consolidation loans back to their original loans. Insofar as loans can be linked in this manner, it
is straightforward to make pro rata assignments of the consolidation loan’s outstanding balances
back to the original.




                                                 42
