NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CHALLENGES IN CONSTRUCTING A SURVEY-BASED WELL-BEING INDEX
Daniel J. Benjamin
Kristen Cooper
Ori Heffetz
Miles S. Kimball
Working Paper 23111
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23111

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2017

We are grateful for NIH/NIA grants R01-AG040787 to the University of Michigan, and R01AG051903 to the University of Southern California, and to the Michigan Institute for Teaching
and Research in Economics for financial support; to Alberto Bisin, Angus Deaton, Marc
Fleurbaey, and Arthur Stone for helpful comments and discussion; and to Tuan Anh Viet
Nguyen, Rebecca Royer, and Robbie Strom for outstanding research assistance. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Daniel J. Benjamin, Kristen Cooper, Ori Heffetz, and Miles S. Kimball. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Challenges in Constructing a Survey-Based Well-Being Index
Daniel J. Benjamin, Kristen Cooper, Ori Heffetz, and Miles S. Kimball
NBER Working Paper No. 23111
January 2017
JEL No. C43,C83,D11,I31
ABSTRACT
Many in both government and academia are showing renewed interest in developing new
measures of national well-being. A new measure that goes “beyond GDP” to comprehensively
capture non-market goods could be a useful supplement to traditional economic indicators for
guiding policy and more accurately tracking welfare. But how should national well-being be
conceptualized in theory? How could it be measured in practice? How could it be constructed in a
systematic and politically neutral way? These questions should be approached by economists
with the same level of care that has been taken in the theoretical and practical development of
GDP.
In this short paper, we focus on one conceptual framework (Benjamin, Heffetz, Kimball, and
Szembrot, 2014), which uses self-reported responses to subjective well-being (SWB) and stated
preference (SP) survey questions to construct an index of well-being. We briefly review the
framework and highlight challenges in the first two steps a government agency would need to
take before conducting the SWB and SP surveys: (1) formulating a set of aspects of well-being
that is theoretically valid and can be measured accurately via surveys; and (2) choosing and
interpreting the surveys’ response scales.

Daniel J. Benjamin
Center for Economics and Social Research
University of Southern California
635 Downie Way, Suite 312
Los Angeles, CA 90089-3332
and NBER
daniel.benjamin@gmail.com

Ori Heffetz
S.C. Johnson Graduate School of Management
Cornell University
324 Sage Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853
and NBER
oh33@cornell.edu

Kristen Cooper
324 Frost Hall
255 Grapevine Road
Wenham, MA 01984
kristen.cooper@gordon.edu

Miles S. Kimball
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
and NBER
mkimball@umich.edu

Challenges in Constructing a Survey-Based Well-Being Index
By DANIEL J. BENJAMIN, KRISTEN B. COOPER, ORI HEFFETZ, AND MILES KIMBALL

*

in the theoretical and practical development of

Benjamin: Center for Economic and Social Research,

University of Southern California, 635 Downey Way, Suite 312,

GDP.

Dauterive Hall, Los Angeles, CA 90089 (email: djbenjam@usc.edu).

In this short paper, we focus on one

Cooper: Department of Economics and Business, Gordon College,
255

Grapevine

Road,

kristen.cooper@gordon.edu).

Wenham,

MA

01984

(email:

Heffetz:

Samuel

Curtis

Johnson

conceptual framework (Benjamin, Heffetz,
Kimball, and Szembrot, 2014; hereafter

Graduate School of Management, Cornell University, 324 Sage Hall,
Ithaca, NY 14853 and Department of Economics, Hebrew University

BHKS), which uses self-reported responses to

of Jerusalem (email: oh33@cornell.edu). Kimball: Department of

subjective well-being (SWB) and stated

Economics, University of Colorado Boulder, 256 UCB, Boulder, CO,
80309-0256 (email: miles.kimball@colorado.edu). We are grateful

preference (SP) survey questions to construct

for NIH/NIA grants R01-AG040787 to the University of Michigan,

an index of well-being. We briefly review the

and R01-AG051903 to the University of Southern California, and to
the Michigan Institute for Teaching and Research in Economics for

framework and highlight challenges in the

financial support; to Alberto Bisin, Angus Deaton, Marc Fleurbaey,

first two steps a government agency would

and Arthur Stone for helpful comments and discussion; and to Tuan
Anh Viet Nguyen, Rebecca Royer, and Robbie Strom for outstanding

need to take before conducting the SWB and

research assistance.

SP surveys: (1) formulating a set of aspects of

Many in both government and academia are

well-being that is theoretically valid and can

showing renewed interest in developing new

be measured accurately via surveys; and (2)

measures of national well-being. A new
measure

that

goes

“beyond

GDP”

choosing

to

and

interpreting

the

surveys’

response scales.

comprehensively capture non-market goods

We focus on constructing a personal well-

could be a useful supplement to traditional

being (PWB) index and do not address here

economic indicators for guiding policy and

the problem of interpersonal aggregation of

more accurately tracking welfare. But how

PWB indices into a measure of national well-

should national well-being be conceptualized

being.

in theory? How could it be measured in

Among

existing

approaches

to

aggregation, we believe that recent research

practice? How could it be constructed in a

on methods that aggregate ordinal utilities is

systematic and politically neutral way? These

the most promising (for example, approaches

questions should be approached by economists

building on money-metric utilities as in

with the same level of care that has been taken

Fleurbaey and Blanchet, 2013).

1
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2900774

I. Theoretical Framework

We proposed replacing the vector of M

A consensus is emerging that well-being is

consumption goods, c, with a vector of J

multi-dimensional (Stiglitz, Sen, and Fitoussi,

“fundamental aspects of well-being,” w. These

2009), and evidence suggests that—despite

aspects are the final goods that people

earlier hopes—it is unlikely to be fully

ultimately care about (i.e., consumption goods

captured by a single catch-all measure such as

are now treated as intermediate goods in the

a happiness or life-satisfaction question (e.g.,

production of aspects of well-being, à la

Benjamin, Heffetz, Kimball, and Rees-Jones,

Lancaster, 1966). The aspects may be

2012). But if the levels of each dimension of

objective (directly measurable) or subjective

well-being can be measured, and if the relative

(self-reported), and objective measures might

importance

be

eventually be available for some of the now-

estimated, then an index may be constructed

subjective aspects (e.g., biometrics for certain

that could track well-being.

health aspects and even emotional states). In

of

each

dimension

can

To this end, in BHKS we proposed a simple

the implementation we discuss here, the levels

framework that interprets well-being as

of w are measured with SWB surveys, so the

preference satisfaction and uses standard

aspects are either inherently subjective or

utility theory to derive a PWB index. Our

subjective perceptions of objective aspects.

approach is analogous to the theory behind the

We discuss objective aspects further in section

measurement of aggregate consumption. That

IV.

theory starts with a utility function u(c)

Because the aspects are not traded in

defined over a consumption vector for M

markets, price data are unavailable and

goods. A traditional aggregate consumption

different individuals may have different

index,

#
"$% 𝑝" 𝑐" ,

marginal rates of substitution (MRSs) across

weights each good’s

the aspects. Nevertheless, a PWB index can be

consumption, 𝑐" , by its price held fixed at a
baseline level, 𝑝" .

constructed using each individual’s MRSs for

In the face of small

the aspects as weights. Specifically, the index

changes in consumption, changes in the index

is given by PWB ≡

approximate changes in utility (up to a
multiplicative
)* 𝒄

#
"$% ),
-

constant):

#
"$% 𝑝"

∆𝑐" ∝

)* 𝒘
8
9$% )67

𝑤9 , where the

marginal utilities (MUs) are defined relative to

∆𝑐" ≈ ∆𝑢.

an arbitrary numeraire aspect. Small changes
in this PWB index provide a first-order
approximation to changes in the individual’s
2

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2900774

(ordinal) utility (even if the individual’s
preferences are non-linear).
Figure 1 shows examples of potential SWB
questions for measuring the levels of two
aspects of well-being, related to happiness and
meaningfulness. Figure 2 shows an example
stated

preference

survey

question

for

measuring the MRS between these aspects.
Both are taken from an ongoing project of
ours that attempts a large-scale web survey
implementation of the BHKS framework.
Figure 2. A sample SP survey question.
II. Challenge #1: Formulating the Set of
Aspects
Within our theoretical framework, any set of
J aspects of well-being can be used for the
index as long as it satisfies two properties:
comprehensiveness and non-overlappingness.
To implement the framework with surveys,
every aspect in the set must also satisfy a
third, cognitive, requirement: accessibility.
Comprehensiveness means that the set
covers all aspects of well-being that matter to
the individual. This is a counterpart to the
requirement that expenditure-based indices
such as GDP cover all potential types of
spending (e.g., both goods and services).

Figure 1. Two sample SWB survey questions.

Non-overlappingness means that each of the
aspects in the set has its own distinct
contribution to preferences. For GDP, if the
value of restaurant meals and the value of
3

alcoholic beverages were independently added

implicit in GDP construction that (i) we have

up, then the value of alcohol consumed in

access to accurate consumption (quantity) data

restaurants

and (ii) market prices reflect consumers’ true

would

be

double-counted.

Similarly, a PWB index will suffer from a

MUs.

double-counting problem if an ultimate object

Existing research suggests that survey-based

of desire that enters preferences once is

measures

counted more than once. For example, if “how

accessibility in systematic ways, for example

much you like your life” and “how much you

due to their apparent sensitivity to contextual

enjoy your life” appear as two different

details such as question order. The reasons for

aspects in the set and get equally high

such sensitivity, its practical implications, and

marginal utilities, but mean the same thing to

potential solutions are still actively researched

people and enter their preferences once, then

and hotly debated (e.g., Deaton and Stone,

only one of these aspects should be in the set.

2016, and the comment and authors’ response

The solution in the case of GDP is to define

of

well-being

may

violate

in the same journal issue).

the expenditure categories so that they are

Social-desirability reporting biases may also

conceptually distinct. In BHKS we proposed,

pose a challenge to accessibility: when asked

but did not test, a method of detecting

about “dirty” preferences (e.g., racism),

conceptual overlap between aspects based on

people may consciously or unconsciously

the idea that the sum of MUs for two

launder their responses. It is sometimes argued

overlapping aspects will exceed the MU of an

that such laundered preferences are more

aspect generated by concatenating the two.

relevant for normative purposes, in which case

We hope that such a method could be applied

the resulting MUs should be used in the PWB.

to prune the set. If pruning cannot eliminate

In other cases, it may be possible to find a

overlap

jeopardizing

related aspect of well-being that is socially

comprehensiveness, it is worth exploring ways

acceptable enough to mitigate the bias. For

to adjust the index for the remaining overlap.

example, one can ask about “you feeling

without

Accessibility means that respondents can

powerful” rather than “you having power over

accurately introspect and report about (i) their

other people.”

own level of an aspect of well-being, 𝑤9 , and
(ii) how it affects their welfare,

)* 𝒘
)6;

To date, we have relied on introspection to
assess whether aspects are accessible, but we

. These

requirements are analogous to the assumptions
4

would like to see a more systematic

Therefore, perhaps surprisingly, in theory it

examination.

does not matter what response scale we

The challenge of formulating the aspect set

choose for an aspect—a 0-10 scale, a 0-100

poses several tradeoffs. In BHKS, we scoured

scale,

an

amount-of-smileyness

scale,

the economics, psychology, and philosophy

whatever—as long as it is the same response

literatures for lists of what matters to people,

scale in the SWB and SP surveys (as in

and we came away with over 100 aspects.

Figures 1 and 2) and the respondent uses the

Since BHKS, we have further expanded our

response scale the same way in both surveys.

set to over 2000 (!) potential aspects of well-

Indeed, the theory allows for different scales

being. Having such a large set likely improves

for different aspects, and for different

comprehensiveness but exacerbates overlap.

respondents to use the same scale differently.

Beginning with such a relatively exhaustive

In practice, a respondent may not always

set, we plan to learn through empirical testing

use the response scale the same way across the

which potential aspects have low enough MUs

SWB and SP surveys. For example, if

or are duplicative enough that little is lost by

respondents are uncomfortable with numbers,

omitting them. One would wish to end up with

they may be less attentive to the magnitudes

an aspect set that is small enough that every

of the tradeoffs in the SP survey than to the

survey respondent can answer questions about

numerical levels in the SWB survey. This

all aspects in the set on each survey occasion.

could lead to both noisier responses and

Then, individual-level MRSs can be estimated

systematic biases in the MRS estimates.

and

preference

fully

An individual’s shifts in scale use over time

set

are another concern. If a change in a reported

necessitates pooling data within groups of

𝑤9 reflects a shift in scale use rather than an

respondents, and such pooling is only justified

actual change in the aspect level, then the

theoretically if respondents within each group

resulting change in the index will be

have homogeneous MRSs.

misinterpreted as a change in well-being.

accommodated.

heterogeneity
A

larger

aspect

Systematically studying possible shifts in

III. Challenge #2: Choosing the Response

scale use and developing ways of correcting

Scales
)* 𝒘
8
9$% )67

for them is a high priority. One approach
𝑤9 , the units of 𝑤9

would be to find aspects of well-being that can

cancel out when 𝑤9 is multiplied by its MU.

be measured biometrically and compare them

In the index,

5

to survey measures over time. In another

three that seem especially important but that

undertested approach, respondents in a panel

we are not as far along in thinking through.

would rate aspects of well-being not only in

One open question is how to decide at what

their own current lives but also in hypothetical

level of generality to specify the aspects, e.g.,

situations that are held fixed across survey

“your health” vs. components of health. We

occasions. Finally, it is worth exploring

conjecture that it matters because there may be

whether changes in a respondent’s scale use

a “part-whole bias”: the sum of the MUs

across two survey occasions could be detected

estimated for an aspect’s components may

by comparing the change in her reported

exceed the MU estimated for the aspect

aspect level with her answer to a direct

considered holistically. We suspect that a

question about the change.

reasonable rule of thumb is to try to specify

One reason a respondent might shift scale

aspects such that they have estimated MUs of

use is to deal with the ceiling on a scale. This

the same order of magnitude, but this issue

issue has received too little attention. Scales

and potential solutions require study.

can be designed to reduce top-coding issues

Second, in the preamble of the SP survey

by, say, labeling the top of the scale

questions we have explored (see Figure 2), we

“extremely happy” rather than “very happy.”

ask respondents to imagine that a few aspects

Figure 1 shows our approach of labeling the

of well-being change while all others are held

top of the scale “the highest you can imagine

constant. A potential problem is what we call

in anyone’s life.” It remains to be investigated

irrepressible imputation: when one aspect is

how effective this labeling scheme is in

varied, respondents may impute variation in a

reducing top-coding.

related aspect, in spite of explicit instructions
not to do so. For example, when asked to

IV. Discussion

imagine that “your sense that your life is

Given space constraints, we have focused

meaningful

on the issues that seem most pressing to
address

before

governments

can

and

has

value”

increases,

respondents might think that “how happy you

begin

feel” also increases. Such imputation might

collecting data that can eventually be used for

occur because the respondent believes that one

constructing theoretically valid well-being

causes the other or because they are highly

indices. Yet we are also concerned about

correlated in everyday experience. If such

many other issues. Here we briefly mention

imputation

6

occurs,

then

we,

the

econometricians, will obtain a biased estimate

Choose?”

American

of the aspect’s MU.

102(5), 2083–2110.

Economic

Review,

Finally, if policy-makers desire to assess

Benjamin, Daniel J., Ori Heffetz, Miles S.

both objective and subjective dimensions of

Kimball, and Nichole Szembrot. 2014.

well-being (as in Stiglitz, Sen and Fitoussi,

“Beyond

2009), how can objective measures of aspects

Toward Well-Being Indices Based on Stated

of well-being best be incorporated into a PWB

Preference.” American Economic Review,

index? Objective measures are attractive

104(9), 2698–2735.

because they eliminate the need for eliciting

Happiness

and

Satisfaction:

Deaton, Angus, and Arthur Stone. 2016.

the aspect’s level on the SWB survey. But

“Understanding

they introduce a new problem for the SP

measure of life evaluation: how responses

survey:

matter.” Oxford Economic Papers, 68 (4),

to

correctly

evaluate

tradeoffs

involving an objective aspect, respondents

context

effects

for

a

861–870.

must be able to make accurate judgments

Fleurbaey, Marc, and Didier Blanchet.

3

about how the objective units (e.g., µg/m of

2013. Beyond GDP: Measuring Welfare and

PM2.5 air pollution) relate to their well-being.

Assessing Sustainability. Oxford University

To conclude, while we share the enthusiasm

Press.

of many in government and academia for

Lancaster,

Kelvin

J.

1966.

“A

New

national well-being measurement, and while

Approach to Consumer Theory” Journal of

we think there is a promising roadmap, we

Political Economy, 74 (2), 132–157.

agree with the conclusion of recent reports

Stiglitz, Joseph E., Amartya Sen, and Jean-

such as Stone and Mackie (2013) that many

Paul

obstacles remain. Finding ways to overcome

Commission

them seems to us an exciting and important

Economic

research agenda.

Progress. Commission on the Measurement
of

REFERENCES

Fitoussi.

2009.

on

the

Report

Measurement

Performance

Economic

by

Performance

and
and

the
of

Social
Social

Progress. www.stiglitz-sen- toussi.fr.

Benjamin, Daniel J., Ori Heffetz, Miles S.

Stone, Arthur A., and Christopher Mackie,

Kimball, and Alex Rees-Jones. 2012.

eds.

“What Do You Think Would Make You

2014.

Subjective

Well-Being:

Measuring Happiness, Suffering, and Other

Happier? What Do You Think You Would

7

Dimensions

of

Experience.

National

Academies Press.

8

