                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              WHO BECOMES A POLITICIAN?

                                        Ernesto Dal Bó
                                        Frederico Finan
                                          Olle Folke
                                        Torsten Persson
                                        Johanna Rickne

                                      Working Paper 23120
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23120


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2017




We thank participants in numerous seminars and conferences for their helpful comments, and
Josh Halberstam, Richard Öhberg, Daniele Paserman, Mikael Persson, Martín Rossi and Juan
Vargas for their discussions of the paper. We gratefully acknowledge financial support from the
Torsten Söderberg Foundation and the Swedish Research Council. Jonas Allerup, Johan Arntyr,
Sirus Dehdari, Johannes Hermle, Roza Khoban, and Elin Molin provided excellent research
assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Ernesto Dal Bó, Frederico Finan, Olle Folke, Torsten Persson, and Johanna Rickne.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Who Becomes a Politician?
Ernesto Dal Bó, Frederico Finan, Olle Folke, Torsten Persson, and Johanna Rickne
NBER Working Paper No. 23120
February 2017
JEL No. H10,H70,J45,P16

                                          ABSTRACT

Can a democracy attract competent leaders, while attaining broad representation? Economic
models suggest that free-riding incentives and lower opportunity costs give the less competent a
comparative advantage at entering political life. Moreover, if elites have more human capital,
selecting on competence may lead to uneven representation. This paper examines patterns of
political selection among the universe of municipal politicians and national legislators in Sweden,
using extraordinarily rich data on competence traits and social background for the entire
population. We document four new facts that together characterize an “inclusive meritocracy.”
First, politicians are on average significantly smarter and better leaders than the population they
represent. Second, this positive selection is present even when conditioning on family (and hence
social) background, suggesting that individual competence is key for selection. Third, the
representation of social background, whether measured by parental earnings or occupational
social class, is remarkably even. Fourth, there is at best a weak tradeoff in selection between
competence and social representation, mainly due to strong positive selection of politicians of
low (parental) socioeconomic status. A broad implication of these facts is that it is possible for
democracy to generate competent and socially-representative leadership.

Ernesto Dal Bó                                   Torsten Persson
University of California, Berkeley               Torsten and Ragnar Soderberg Chair in
Haas School of Business                           Economic Science
545 Student Services Building #1900              Institute for International Economic Studies
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900                          Stockholm University
and NBER                                         SE-106 91 Stockholm
dalbo@haas.berkeley.edu                          SWEDEN
                                                 and NBER
Frederico Finan                                  Torsten.Persson@iies.su.se
Department of Economics
University of California                         Johanna Rickne
508-1 Evans Hall #3880                           The Swedish Institute for
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880                           Social Research (SOFI)
and NBER                                         Stockholm University
ffinan@econ.berkeley.edu                         johanna.rickne@sofi.su.se

Olle Folke
Department of Government
Uppsala University
Box 514
751 20 Uppsala
Sweden
olle.folke@statsvet.uu.se
1       Introduction
The identity of politicians influence which policies get selected, how well they are
implemented, and who benefits from them.1 This is undisputable for autocracies
where rulers face few constraints. But it is also true for representative democracies,
as policy platforms do not constitute complete enforceable contracts. Most voters
would therefore like to elect highly able policymakers for choosing and implementing
policies to attain a given objective (throughout, we use “able” and “competent”
interchangeably). As a collective, voters may also want to elect policymakers who
represent diverse interests, so that government will pursue broad objectives.
    Whether representative democracy can deliver both high-ability politicians and
broad representation is unclear. Visibly inept leaders are elected around the world.
Moreover, economic models of politics hold that lower opportunity costs give the less
able a comparative advantage at entering public life (Caselli and Morelli 2004) and
that this effect may be compounded by free-riding incentives (Messner and Polborn
(2004), see also Olson (1965)). But even if it is possible to select competent politi-
cians, doing so may make it harder to ensure broad representation when competence
is unequally distributed. Related to this, a number of scholars have argued that
electoral systems shape the tradeoff between accountability – a driver of selection –
and representation.2
    To better understand political selection, and the potential tradeoffs it entails,
we need to thoroughly describe selection patterns and analyze their determinants.
Unfortunately, insufficient data has made it difficult to carry out these tasks.

Three data limitations First, any study of political selection should account for
candidate entry and screening by voters or parties. To study candidate screening, one
needs information on both elected and non-elected politicians. While information on
the former is sometimes available, information on the latter is remarkably sparse. A
few studies have tried to tackle this limitation to advance our knowledge of candidate
selection.3 Unfortunately, this literature does not address candidate entry, which
    1
     See for example Osborne and Slivinski (1996), Besley and Coate (1997), Pande (2003), Chat-
topadhyay and Duflo (2004), Jones and Olken (2005), Washington (2008), Besley, Montalvo, and
Reynal-Querol (2011), Meyersson (2014).
   2
     A common idea is that plurality rule fosters better accountability, while proportional repre-
sentation fosters better representation (Myerson 1993; Persson and Tabellini 2003; Powell 2000;
Taagepera and Shugart 2000).
   3
     Examples include: Besley, Pande, and Rao (2005), Ferraz and Finan (2009), Galasso and
Nannicini (2011), Beath, Christia, Egorov, and Enikolopov (2014), Jia, Kudamatsu, and Seim
(2015), Tillmann (2014) Folke and Rickne (2016).


                                                1
requires information on those who never attempted to enter into politics.
    Second, the relevant theory stresses the quality of political selection. But how
to measure ability? Absent direct data on the underlying intelligence or personality
of politicians, the existing empirical literature has relied on education or pre-office
income (Dal Bó, Dal Bó, and Snyder 2009; Ferraz and Finan 2009; Merlo, Galasso,
Landi, and Mattozzi 2010; Galasso and Nannicini 2011; Besley and Reynal-Querol
2011; Gagliarducci and Paserman 2012). While correlated with ability, these proxies
also likely reflect luck or social class.
    Third, representation is hard to measure. Previous work has relied on measures
like occupation. However, occupation is coarse: many politicians may be lawyers,
but if values and loyalties depend on social background one would like to know
if they were brought up as elite or working class. This requires difficult-to-obtain
intergenerational information.
    In sum, we know of no research that analyzes selection based on a comprehensive
bundle of traits that accurately reflect the ability and representativeness of politi-
cians.

Sweden as a test bed Our study overcomes these limitations by using fine-grained
administrative data from Sweden. Clearly, conclusions based on evidence from a sin-
gle country cannot be extrapolated to the rest of the world, though we take a (very
limited) step towards comparisons by studying different Swedish jurisdictions. But
Sweden is of interest for both its commonalities and differences with other countries.
Its politics is based on proportional-representation elections, the most common form
in the world. Sweden is also a quintessential advanced democracy. It has remained
stable and fully democratic with a top score on the 20-step Polity-IV scale since
1917, a full century during which other states gradually moved towards democracy.
Sweden is thus an institutional exemplar many countries around the world may be
approaching. When debating the value of democracy it is natural to ask if a demo-
cratic transition can improve the ability and representativeness of leaders. If Sweden
displayed incompetent and unrepresentative leaders, advocates of democratization
may have to resort to different arguments.

Data Our data allow us to undertake the most thorough description to date of
basic political selection patterns based on rich measures of individual ability and
social background. The ability measures include evaluations of IQ and leadership
potential for the 1951-1980 cohorts, done by the military on the full male population,
and an estimate of individual earning capacity for the full population stemming from
a fully saturated Mincer regression developed by Besley, Folke, Persson, and Rickne

                                          2
(2016). Our social-background data entails reliable intergenerational information,
namely social class as reflected in parental incomes and occupations (a traditional
approach in sociology).
    We study not only national members of parliament (MPs), but also politicians
in municipalities – which provide the bulk of public services – to take advantage of
large numbers and within-country variation.

Positive selection? We uncover new statistics on political selection for Sweden
as a whole. Standard models of occupational choice predict adverse selection: able
people with higher private incomes and more promising careers face a higher cost to
enter public life. Nevertheless, we document strong positive selection along all ability
measures even though politicians have substantially higher pre-office incomes – hence,
higher opportunity costs – than the general population. Selection monotonically
improves from those nominated but not elected, to rank-and-file elected municipal
council members, to mayors, and finally to MPs. Mayors and MPs are as positively
selected as members of elite occupations in the private and public sectors.

Elitism vs. meritocracy? In a world where ability correlates positively with
socioeconomic status, the strong positive selection we document could reflect very
different regimes. One possibility, “elitism,” is that rich families have privileged ac-
cess to political power. Then, selection based on privilege will yield an accidentally
competent political class. Another possibility, “exclusive meritocracy,” is that poli-
tics selects the competent, which makes the political class (accidentally) elitist. The
third possibility, “inclusive meritocracy,” is that politics select competent politicians
broadly representative of all social backgrounds.
    To determine which one of these regimes prevails, we ask whether political se-
lection is driven mostly by social origin or by individual traits. Politicians turn out
to be positively selected, not only relative to the population, but also relative to
their own siblings who share their social background. This strong role for individual
ability rules out the pure elitist regime. To discriminate between different meritoc-
racies, we examine the social origin of politicians. While politicians themselves are
disproportionately high-earning, their parents’ social class and earnings approximate
a perfect replica of the entire population. This pattern does not look accidental: dif-
ferent political parties represent different segments of the income distribution in a
way that reflects their policy stance.

How is inclusive meritocracy achieved? Swedish politics attracts competent
people who are not restricted to the scions of elite families. Two facts could conspire

                                           3
against this outcome. First, competence correlates positively with social class, so one
should expect a tradeoff between competence and representation. Second, politicians
have high pre-office earnings and the higher opportunity costs should push toward ad-
verse selection on competence. How can inclusive meritocracy emerge? We answer
this question in two ways. First although ability rises with socioeconomic status
on average, politicians remain highly able when recruited from low socioeconomic
backgrounds. In fact, relative to their own social class, politicians from lower so-
cial backgrounds are even more strongly selected than politicians from higher social
backgrounds. This mitigates the tradeoff between competence and representation.
Second, an analysis of party screening and individual incentives to self-select into pol-
itics yields some suggestive take-aways. Parties appear to promote more competent
individuals to higher ranks regardless of their social class. In addition, pecuniary con-
siderations appear to matter for self-selection decisions, but a combination of strong
intrinsic motivation and high wages for full-time positions preserves the incentives
of able individuals to enter politics.

Organization of paper In the next section, we offer background information
on the Swedish political system. Section 3 describes our data and their sources. In
Section 4, we present results on political selection in terms of competence. In Section
5, we explore the social background of politicians and characterize Swedish politics
as an inclusive meritocracy where selection on competence goes together with broad
social representation. Section 6 briefly discusses the drivers of inclusive meritocracy:
how competence and inclusivity go together, and forces shaping selection such as
individual incentives and party screening. Section 7 concludes. Auxiliary material is
collected in a Supplementary Appendix.


2     Background
Sweden’s electoral system Sweden has three administrative levels of govern-
ment. Every four years (three years prior to 1994), elections are run for 290 munici-
palities, 20 counties, and the nation. All elections take place on the same day with a
turnout between 80 and 90 percent. In each election, citizens cast a separate party
ballot, a ranked list with a large number of candidates. This system elects a total
of 349 MPs, 1,100 county-council members, and 13,000 municipal-council members.
Our paper is focused on the first and third groups.
    In Sweden’s proportional-representation (PR) system, seat shares in the munic-
ipal councils and the national parliament closely trace the vote shares of political


                                           4
parties. Until 1998, seats for each party were allocated from the top of the ballot.
Since 1998, voters can also cast an optional preference vote for one candidate. But
this reform has only allowed a handful of politicians from lower ranks to bypass the
party’s list order and win a seat.4
    Based on the distribution of council or parliament seats, a ruling majority (or
minority) is formed. These often form within the left bloc (Social Democrats, Left
Party, and Green Party) or the center-right bloc (Conservatives, Center Party, Lib-
eral Party, and Christian Democrats). Occasionally, the largest local party in a mu-
nicipality wins more than half of the seats and rules on its own. In our time period,
two anti-immigration parties (New Democracy, in the 90s, and Sweden Democrats,
in the 00s) have also been represented, but these are rarely part of governing ma-
jorities. Local parties (running only in one municipality) also exist, but usually hold
less than 5 percent of the seats.

Members of parliament (MPs) All members of the national parliament are
full-time politicians, who spend much of their time in the parliament’s various com-
mittees. The members are elected to office in one of 21 constituencies, where most of
the members still have their residence. They are nominated on the constituency bal-
lot of their political party, often after an earlier career in municipal politics. Among
the parliamentarians elected in 2010, 72 percent had been elected to a municipal
council for the same party at some point after 1982.

Municipal governance The council is the only directly elected body in each
municipality. It has a board – the local analog of the national cabinet – to which
members are appointed by the governing coalition to mirror the seat distribution.
The largest party in the coalition selects the chair: henceforth, the “Mayor.” The
political opposition usually appoints an executive as well, the “Vice Mayor.”
    The mayor holds an important office: municipalities play a crucial role as service
providers in the economy, spending about 25 percent of Sweden’s GDP and employing
20 percent of its workforce. Municipal politicians are responsible for the areas of K-
12 education, child care, elderly care, and local infrastructure, and finance these
commitments through a local income tax of around 20 percent.
    Ruling over the Swedish welfare state used to be a Social Democratic prerog-
ative. But in the past few decades, political competition has grown substantially
more intense. This can be illustrated by the changing proportion of left-bloc local
   4
    This reflects voter “abstention” from the optional vote, a concentration of votes for candidates
at the top of the ballot, and high thresholds. See Folke, Persson, and Rickne (2015) for a thorough
analysis of the preference-vote system and its consequences.


                                                 5
governments over time: it increased from 31 percent in 1991 to 73 percent in 1998,
only to fall back down to 59 percent in 2002 and 41 percent in 2006.

Running for local office Depending on municipality size (from 2,558 to 780,817
inhabitants), local party members are divided into “clubs,”like the women’s and
youth clubs. A citizen who enters politics becomes a party member and joins one or
several clubs. All routes to office go through existing parties (short of forming a new
party). Local parties compose their municipal electoral ballots without interference
of the central party. A local political career may reach the top of the local party
hierarchy – for the largest majority and minority parties, becoming mayor or vice
mayor – or in a few cases a national parliamentary seat.
    Sweden has a strong normative tradition of so-called “leisure politicians”, where
local political service is a spare-time activity complementing one’s work in the regular
labor market. Consequently, almost all elected council members receive only piece-
rate compensation for time spent in meetings.5 Previous research has also shown no
indirect monetary gains to winning a seat in a municipal assembly (Lundqvist 2013).
But the mayor is a full-time political employee, and in most municipalities the vice
mayor also gets a part-time salary. The mayor’s wage, determined by the municipal
council, is typically in the top 5 percent of the Swedish earnings distribution. Beyond
this economic return, becoming a mayor is associated with high social status and
substantial political power.
    Monetary costs to running for local office are minimal. All candidates run on a
party ballot, and campaign finance is mostly paid by tax money channeled to parties
rather than candidates. Individual campaigns for preference votes are modest, with
the vast majority spending less than 600 USD at the municipal level. Even these
small costs are usually paid by the party or by outside donors, rather than by the
individual herself (SOU 2007).
    A qualitative literature on Swedish politics suggests that key motives to enter
politics are intrinsic concerns with policy, or a desire for social interaction in policy
circles (Karlsson 2001). However, pecuniary concerns are also present, especially
when experienced leisure politicians contemplate full-time appointments (Dahl 2011).

Voter preferences and selection Swedish citizens value a competent and socially
representative political class. When asked about their party choice, voters have
  5
     This part-time arrangement may at first seem odd to the reader. However, part-time polit-
ical service is quite common throughout the world. For example, state legislators in a number
of US states only serve around half time on average with quite a modest compensation – see
http://www.ncsl.org/research/about-state-legislatures/full-and-part-time-legislatures.aspx


                                              6
ranked politician competence among the top three reasons for the past decades, along
with ideology and issue voting (Statistics Sweden 2010). When asked about what
social dimensions merit influential positions, voters rank gender fist, closely followed
by age, social group, and geographic area (Djerf-Pierre and Niklasson 2010).
    As for representation, left-bloc parties traditionally represent blue-collar workers,
while center-right parties represent white-collar workers. In a recent survey of newly
elected politicians, 48 percent of Social Democrats saw themselves as working class,
and 42 percent as middle class. Among Conservatives, 5 percent saw themselves as
working class, 42 percent as middle class, and the rest as upper class. Outside these
two large parties, the Center party has traditionally represented farmers and people
in rural areas. Within parties, social representation is advanced via strategies to
increase representation of women, foreign-born, and the young (Freidenvall 2006).


3     Data
To characterize political selection, we assemble (to our knowledge) the most detailed
and comprehensive data set to date. In this section we briefly summarize our sources,
key variables, and sample definitions.

Sources Our empirical analysis is based on individual-level data from various
sources. Our first dataset contains all elected and non-elected individual candidates
that ran for national or municipal political office during the period of 1982-2010,
over 200,000 unique individuals. Prior to each election, each political party must
report its ordered list, with a personal identification code for each listed politician.
These lists are kept by Statistics Sweden and, in some cases, regional electoral au-
thorities. After each election, another record is created with a complete list of all
elected politicians from each party. Altogether, our sample has about 50,000 elected
individuals.
    We link these data on politicians to several administrative registers from Statistics
Sweden for the whole population (aged 16 and above). For most variables, our data
holds annual records from 1979 to 2012 for the entire population, approximately
14 million unique men and women. These data contain detailed demographic and
background information (e.g., age, sex, education level, and occupation), as well as
earnings. Given this information, we can precisely characterize how the personal
traits of politicians relate to those in the entire population.
    We use the Multigenerational Register to identify siblings and parents. We use
only biological parents and as the data begins in 1979 we face a natural truncation.


                                           7
Nevertheless, for politicians elected after 2000, we observe the father’s income in
1979 for 77 percent of the sample, and the mothers income for 86 percent of the
sample.
    Various types of annual earnings for the entire population are available from the
Swedish Tax Authority. We also have universal annual information about individual
sector of employment for the whole period. However, occupation is only recorded on
a yearly basis from 2003. To bridge this gap, we complement the occupation data
with earlier information from Censuses (done every five years).
    Our last piece of individual-level data come from the Swedish Defense Recruit-
ment Agency. Military enlistment tests measure the mental capacities of Swedish
men (see further below). Although a mandatory draft was instituted in 1901, full
records are only kept for cohorts born 1951 and onward. For quality reasons, we also
truncate the data for men born after 1980. For these 30 cohorts, enlistment rates
were around 90 percent.
    Electoral results are linked to our dataset at the municipal level from records
kept by the Swedish Electoral Agency. These give us the vote shares for every party
in every election. Data on the party that appointed the mayor was obtained from
Kfakta, a database collected by Leif Johansson (Department of Political Science,
University of Lund).

The enlistment procedure The enlistment process for military service spans two
days and evaluates a person’s medical status, physical fitness, and cognitive abilities.
About 75 percent of the men in our sample who took the test did so at 18, while
about 25 percent took it at 19 (less than 0.5 percent were below 18 or above 19).
Since enlistment generally occurs in the year of high-school graduation, test scores
are not influenced by university training. As tests were high-stakes – better results
gave more rewarding military placements – data quality is considered high. Takers
were not informed of their precise results.
   We use two scores from the enlistment procedure – the cognitive score and the
leadership score. Each of these is standardized to a scale from 1 to 9.

Cognitive score Cognitive ability is scored from a written test, assessing ability
in problem solving, induction capacity, numerical, verbal, spatial, and technology
comprehension (Ståhlberg-Carlstedt and Sköld 1981). Army expert Berit Carlstedt
(2000) argues that the Swedish enlistment test is a good measure of general intelli-
gence. This differentiates it from others, such as the US Armed Forces Qualification
Test, which focuses more on “crystallized” intelligence, i.e., teachable skills. We can
thus think of the cognitive score as an IQ test score. The (stanine) scale is such

                                           8
that a 5 is reserved for the middle 20 percentiles of the test population, while 6, 7,
and 8, are given to the next 17, 12, and 7 percentiles, and the top score of 9 to the
uppermost 4 percentiles (scoring below 5 is symmetric).6

Leadership score Individuals who score a 5 or higher on the cognitive test go
through an in-depth evaluation for a possible military leadership position. Trained
psychologists administer a semi-structured interview to determine a 1-9 leadership
score. Before the interview, the psychologist sees information about the conscript’s
cognitive test, physical endurance, muscular strength, school grades, and answers to
70-80 questions about friends, family, and hobbies, etc. The exact interview manual
is classified information, but the test is known to evaluate a conscript’s personality
in civilian life, and his ability to handle military functions. Specifically, the score
summarizes four personality traits: social maturity, psychological energy, intensity,
and emotional stability. These are closely related to the well-known big-5 personality
traits (extraversion, consciousness, openness, conscientiousness, and neuroticism) –
see the Supplementary Appendix, Table B.1.

Education Educational attainment of all individuals is reported by Swedish schools
and universities, and records are kept by Statistics Sweden. For people migrating
into Sweden later in life, information on schooling is collected through surveys and
education levels are categorized into a Swedish standard. These categories are easily
translated into years of education.

Income We use a measure of annual disposable income, constructed from individ-
ual tax records (there is no joint family taxation) including all income sources and
government transfers (wages and in-kind benefits from jobs, pensions, transfers and
subsidies, business income, capital income, sickness and parental-leave benefits, etc.).

Earnings score If ability is priced in the market, it shows up in earnings. Earnings
may also reflect a number of other personal characteristics, however, such as educa-
tion, choice of employment, or time and place of employment. To get at a measure
of relative earnings power that more likely reflects personal ability, we construct an
earnings score following the approach of Besley, Folke, Persson, and Rickne (2016).
These authors use residuals from a Mincer equation, defined over a large set of so-
cioeconomic characteristics. As estimating a fully saturated model with millions of
   6
    In terms of standard deviations, scores translate as follows 1: below -1.75, 2: -1.75 to -1.25, 3:
-1.25 to -0.75, 4: -0.75 to -0.25, 5: -0.25 to 0.25, 6: 0.25 to 0.75, 7: 0.75 to 1.25, 8: 1.25 to 1.75,
and 9: above 1.75.

                                                  9
observations is computationally challenging, we estimate the Mincer equation year
by year. Specifically, we estimate:

                      yi,m,t = f (agei,t , educi,t , empli,t ) + αm + εi,m,t ,                   (1)

where the dependent variable yi,m,t is the disposable income for person i in munici-
pality m in year t. Among the independent variables, agei,t is a set of age indicators
(over 5-year intervals), educi,t is a binary indicator for tertiary education, and empli,t
is a set of indicators for 15 activity codes.7 The function f represents a full set of
age-education-employment interactions. The regression also includes municipality
fixed effects αm to capture systematic income differences across regions, or urban
and rural areas. This flexible specification allows for different age-earnings profiles
across occupational sectors and education levels. For each individual, we compute
residuals εi,m,t for each available panel year, and then average across years. This
“individual fixed effect” is our earnings score.
    To minimize measurement error and endogeneity, we drop observations for full-
time politicians, both in office and after exiting office. We estimate equation (1)
separately by gender and retirement status (age over 65 or not) in order not to con-
found the competence measure with the substantial labor-market differences across
these groups.8
    Does the earnings score measure a competence for politics rather than just ability
to generate market income? Besley, Folke, Persson, and Rickne (2016) address that
question and show that earnings scores are indeed correlated with cognitive and
leadership ability as well as various measures of political and policy success.
   7
     These are the same as the European NACE code and international ICIC code, namely: “Agri-
culture, hunting and forestry”, “Fishing”, “Mining and quarrying”, “Manufacturing”, “Electricity,
gas and water supply”, “Construction”, “Wholesale and retail trade; repair of motor vehicles,
motorcycles and personal and household goods”, “Hotels and restaurant”, “Transport, storage
and communication”, “Financial intermediation”, “Real estate, renting and business activities”,
“Public administration and defense; compulsory social security”, “Education”, “Health and social
work” and “Other community, social and personal service activities”. Two categories, “Activities
of households” and “Extra-territorial organization and bodies” have less than 30 individual-year
observations in them. Because of this, we add the former to “Other community, social and per-
sonal service activities”, and the latter to “Public administration and defense; compulsory social
security.”
   8
     For example, women take on the bulk of parental leave and care activities that raise the gender
pay gap when couples have children. As for retirement, there are plenty of senior politicians. Mincer
equations of retired and working people differ as retirees do not have a current employment sector.
We compute the income residuals of retirees based on the main sector of employment in their
working-life.



                                                 10
Summary statistics Table 1 reports means of the four ability variables for politi-
cians and the entire population (subject to availability) pooling the election years
of 1991, 1994, 1998, 2002, 2006 and 2010 (the patterns we document below remain
current: they do not change if we focus on the most recent year). For municipalities,
we distinguish between the nominated (but non-elected), elected, and mayors. We
also include information on national MPs. Compared to the population, Swedish
politicians under-represent women and the foreign born. Of mayors, less than 30
percent are women and less than 3 percent foreign born. We do not address these
important forms of under-representation any further. But the most striking point of
the data is a main topic in our analysis: Swedish politicians are positively selected
based on all four ability measures. The progression of mean cognitive and leader-
ship scores from nominated to elected to mayor to MP suggests increasing rates of
positive selection.

                                 [Table 1 about here]

    Table B.2 in the Supplementary Appendix shows pair-wise correlations between
our competence measures for the Swedish male population in 2011. All measures
are positively correlated, but not very highly. Years of schooling has correlations of
0.51, 0.30 and 0.076 with the cognitive, leadership, and earnings scores, respectively.
While the best measure of competence is an open issue, these simple correlations
highlight the hazards of relying solely on years of schooling as a metric of ability. The
leadership score and the cognitive score have a correlation of 0.34, and the earnings
score has correlations of 0.20 and 0.17 with the leadership and cognitive scores,
respectively. Our different measures thus appear to capture different dimensions of
ability.


4     Competence
In this section, we rely on the universe of municipal and national politicians to answer
the question whether selection on competence is positive or – as theory would have
us expect – adverse. Our first contribution is to compare the ability characteristics
of politicians to those of the general population. We study the four different ability
dimensions introduced in Section 3. To repeat, the education and earnings scores
are available for the full population, while the cognitive and leadership scores are
available only for men.




                                           11
Leadership and cognitive scores The top-left graph in Figure 1 shows over-
lapped histograms for the leadership scores of the general (male) population, three
categories of municipal politicians – nominated but not elected, elected, and mayors
– and MPs. A clear pattern of positive selection emerges. Leadership scores of the
nominated look quite close to those of the population but with a slight shift to the
right – scores above the population mean of 5.3 are more highly represented among
nominated politicians than in the general population.9 For elected politicians, the
shift to the right is stronger, and even more so for mayors and MPs. For example,
mayors have more than a full additional point – 70 percent of a population standard
deviation – higher leadership scores than the population (henceforth, σ denotes a
population standard deviation).

                                      [Figure 1 about here]

    The top-right graph shows a similar result for the cognitive score. Politicians
score higher than the average Swede, more strongly so when elected to office, and
particularly so when selected for top-municipal office and parliament. Mayors score
1.3 points (0.68σ) higher than the average person, while MPs score 1.6 points (around
0.84σ) higher than the average person.

Earnings scores The bottom-left graph in Figure 1 displays the distributions of
the earnings score. The nominated display a small shift to the right – their mean
score is higher by 0.19σ. The elected show a clearer shift, with a 0.58σ difference.
The earnings score of mayors and MPs surpass that of the population by a full σ,
and 1.4σ, respectively.
    The earnings score evidence is important for three reasons. First, it includes
both females and males. The strong positive selection is present for both genders
and, if anything, female politicians are more strongly selected than males, especially
at higher offices like mayor and MP (see Figure A.1 in the Supplementary Appendix).
Second, strong positive selection on intelligence and leadership alone might just re-
flect a lower opportunity cost for those who become politicians. But the opposite
seems to be true: politicians have higher earnings scores as well as actual (pre-office)
earnings – see Figure 3 below. Third, previous empirical work that proxies politician
qualifications through education reports high levels of achievement, at least for may-
   9
    Because of the large sample, all differences across groups reported in this subsection are strongly
statistically significant, with p-values below 0.001. A similar pattern holds in other sections of the
paper unless noted otherwise.




                                                  12
ors and national legislators, easily above the general population.10 But if access to
higher education is limited to the social elites, then educational attainment becomes
a poor marker of positive political selection. Our earnings-score results show positive
selection even after conditioning on education level and sector of employment.

Education The distribution of education attainment over seven levels (in the bot-
tom right of Figure 1) shows a similar pattern, with politicians under-represented at
the bottom two levels, and over-represented at higher levels. As reported in Table 1,
the nominated have one more year of education than the average Swede, while elected
politicians and mayors have roughly an additional year and a half. MPs have almost
three years of schooling above the population average. In contrast to the other ability
measures, this distribution for politicians does not first-order stochastically dominate
the distribution for the population: politicians are sightly under-represented at the
highest level, which includes PhDs and makes up a minimal share of the population.
In other words, politicians are positively selected in terms of education levels and
years, but have fewer doctoral-type degrees. In the remainder of the paper, we focus
on the three non-education measures of competence.
    The key takeaway from these graphs is a strong pattern of positive selection
in Swedish politics, which gets more positive at higher political ranks. This flies
in the face of the argument that the more competent face higher opportunity cost
of entering public life, and shows that incompetent politicians are less common as
leadership positions become more important.

Politicians vs. high-status professions To gain an additional perspective on se-
lection, we also compare politicians to members of Swedish elite occupations, known
for attracting talented people. Table 2 shows our competence measures, as well as
earnings, for the four categories of politicians, CEOs, lawyers, medical doctors, and
academic social scientists. The positive selection among CEOs increases with com-
pany size. Elected politicians have cognitive and leadership scores similar to CEOs
with 10-25 employees, a group which is also comparable in size. Mayors have exactly
the same scores as CEOs in companies with 25-250 employees, even though may-
ors earn substantially less. Parliamentarians have leadership and cognitive scores in
between CEOs in companies with 25-250 employees and those in companies above
250 employees. Lawyers and academic social scientists outscore CEOs and mayors
  10
     See for example Ferraz and Finan (2009) on Brazilian mayors, Merlo, Galasso, Landi, and
Mattozzi (2010), Galasso and Nannicini (2011) and Gagliarducci and Paserman (2012) on Italian
legislators, Dal Bó and Rossi (2011) on Argentine legislators, or Dal Bó, Dal Bó, and Snyder (2009)
on U.S. legislators.


                                                 13
in terms of cognitive ability. Medical doctors – a highly prestigious profession in
Sweden associated with excellence – clearly show the highest cognitive scores of all.
Academic economists and political scientists have the most years of education, rank
second and third in cognitive scores, but have among the lowest leadership scores.

                                 [Table 2 about here]

   The patterns in the table make intuitive sense. Academics are smart, but lack
leadership, and as a result they accumulate the most years of education, but neither
lead organizations nor make life-or-death decisions. Mayors, MPs and CEOs are
marginally less smart, substantially less educated, but have higher leadership scores
and, fittingly, do lead public and private organizations.

Positive selection beneath the aggregate Although we find evidence of strong
positive selection in the aggregate, one may be concerned that this is an artifact
of the selection patterns of a few large municipalities. To examine this possibility,
we compare the traits of elected politicians to those of the average person in their
respective municipalities. Overall, few municipalities exhibit negative selection, and
the vast majority of municipalities select positively: 96 percent of municipalities on
the cognitive score, 86 percent on the leadership score, and more than 99 percent on
the earnings score. In Dal Bó, Finan, Folke, Persson, and Rickne (2016), we provide
a more detailed analysis of the selection patterns across municipalities.


5     Social Representation
Section 4 showed a strong positive selection of politicians, and increasingly so at
higher political office. But this pattern could reflect very different selection regimes.
Perhaps Swedish politics is elitist rather than meritocratic, with heirs of rich families
getting privileged access to political power as well as to education and earning op-
portunities. Under such “elitism,” the competence of politicians is a side effect and
does not play a preeminent role in selection. Alternatively, under “exclusive meri-
tocracy,” those from more advantaged social classes still acquire stronger abilities,
but it is those abilities rather than privilege that helps them enter politics.
   However, in this section we establish that Swedish reality is better described
by a third regime: “inclusive meritocracy.” In this account positive selection on
competence goes together with inclusive social representation.



                                           14
5.1     Elitism or meritocracy?
When studying selection on competence and social representation, we first rule out
the elitist account. The latter would imply, first, that if factors like wealth shape
selection, then family background should be crucial for selection. Second, conditional
on family background, ability should matter little. Addressing empirically these two
implications, we show that the elitist account is untenable.

Politicians and their siblings Figure 2 compares the distribution of competence
traits of elected politicians with that of their siblings. To ease comparison with
Figure 1, we also include the full population distribution. Clearly, elected politicians
have markedly higher cognitive and leadership scores than their siblings, as well as
higher earnings scores.
    We can also compare the difference in selection between politicians and siblings
to the difference between politicians and the population. The difference vs. siblings
for leadership scores is equal to 78 percent of the gap vs. the population – for
cognitive and earnings scores, the respective numbers are 70 and 74 percent. These
numbers strongly indicate that ability, and not family background, is the key selection
criterion.11 A similar look at mayors and MPs in Figure 2 confirms that politicians
at higher levels are also drawn from a different ability distribution than their siblings.
                                     [Figure 2 about here]
    Figure 3 further illustrates how individual traits beyond family background shape
political selection. It classifies politicians by their percentile in the income distribu-
tion, compared to the population in their own birth cohort and gender. By definition,
the population would display a perfect uniform distribution with a density of 0.05
for each 5-percentile bin. The left graph in each row shows that politicians (elected,
mayors and MPs) are disproportionately drawn from higher income percentiles. (In-
cidentally, but also importantly, this indicates that more able people face higher
opportunity costs from entering politics, which would encourage adverse selection.)
But the distribution in the right panel for politician siblings is much more similar to
the uniform population distribution.
                                     [Figure 3 about here]
    Overall, these patterns indicate that an individual’s own ability traits matter for
his/her political fortunes, and rule out the pure elitist account.
  11
     Although politicians tend to be born first more often than their non-politician siblings, this
difference in birth order does not explain the pattern in Figure 2. Our ability measures are only
marginally different for first-born versus later-born.

                                                15
5.2     Inclusive meritocracy
Politicians and their parents Next, we directly examine the relevance of social
background, and show that it does not matter much for aggregate political selection.
Measuring social background by parental income and occupational status (see below),
we find that politicians do not come disproportionately from elites.12
    For politicians in the most recent decade of our data, we find their parents’
incomes and occupations in the earliest year(s) of our data.13 We use the full
population data to allocate individuals into bins comprising five percentiles of the
annual-earnings distribution within each gender and birth year. We then compute
the proportion of fathers of politicians with 1979 incomes within each 5-percentile
bin. These proportions are shown in the top row of Figure 4. Recall from the first
column of Figure 3 that for politicians own incomes these distributions are skewed to
the right reflecting a striking over-representation of high earnings. But for the same
politicians’ fathers, the distribution has a much more uniform shape. This is true es-
pecially among elected councilors, whose fathers are almost perfectly representative
of the population. (The corresponding figure for mothers’ earnings can be found in
the Supplementary Appendix, Figure A.2.) A similar – albeit less perfect – pattern
of broad representation of parental backgrounds is present among mayors and MPs.

                                     [Figure 4 about here]

Politicians, CEOs, and medical doctors Again, it is valuable to compare politi-
cians with other elite professions. To do so, the bottom row of Figure 4 repeats the
same exercise as in the top row, but for fathers of medical doctors (left graph) and
CEOs of firms with different size (two right-most graphs). These figures show that
the 1979 earnings for fathers of doctors and CEOs are much more skewed to the right
than the earnings for fathers of politicians, especially for doctors and large-company
  12
     Summary statistics for parental incomes together with the four competence measures and the
measures of social class appear in the Supplementary Appendix Table B.4.
  13
     As stated before, for politicians elected after 2000, we observe the father’s income in 1979 for
77 percent of the sample, and the mother’s income for 86 percent of the sample. For those elected
in 2010 we match over 90 percent of politicians. Since the match is less than perfect, one might be
concerned about sample selection bias. Compared to the matched politicians, the politicians whose
fathers’ 1979 income are missing tend to be slightly less competent, although only differences in
education levels and cognitive scores are statistically significant. It is reasonable to assume that
the fathers of these unmatched politicians came from lower social classes, since ability is largely
hereditary and positively correlated with social class. Then we are underestimating the share of
politicians that come from humbler origins, a bias which works against finding broad representation.



                                                 16
managers. Naturally, the earnings of the doctors and CEOs themselves (not shown)
are also very much skewed to the right.
    We can summarize the evidence from Figure 4 in a different way. As measured
by intergenerational earnings, social mobility into a political career seems to be high
in absolute as well as relative terms, when compared to doctors and CEOs.

Politicians in different parties The evidence so far concerns elected politicians
from all parties. In Figure 5, we replicate Figure 4 for those elected to municipal
councils in the three largest parties, the Social Democrats, the Conservatives, and the
Center (agricultural) party. As the left column shows, politicians in all parties come
disproportionately from the top part of the income distribution, though more so in
the Conservatives than in the Social Democrats or the Center party. In the three right
graphs, however, we clearly see representation of different social backgrounds. High-
income earners are over-represented among the fathers of Conservatives and middle-
income earners among fathers of Social-Democrats. Finally, low-income earners are
overrepresented among fathers of Center-party politicians, who are often farmers (on
average, 40 percent as opposed to 5 percent in other parties) with relatively low
earnings.

                                    [Figure 5 about here]

    Figure 5 makes clear how parties represent different parts of the (parental) income
distribution. The aggregation of these diverging party representations renders the
almost perfect representation of parental incomes in the top left panel of Figure 4
for all elected municipal politicians. Of course, this illustrates the presumption that
different parties represent different interests – at least in polities with a multi-party
system where the left-to-right dimension is important.

Social class While informative, parental income only captures one aspect of so-
cial status. Thus, we also consider data on parental social class as determined by
occupational status whenever this information is available. Figure A.3 in the Sup-
plementary Appendix compares distributions of social class for politician parents
and the population.14 That figure corroborates our previous finding: politicians are
highly representative of the population. The only notably over-represented social
  14
    The class division corresponds closely to the EGP social-class scheme (Erikson and Goldthorpe
1992) which has been used by Lindgren, Oskarsson, and Dawes (2016) in their recent study of
representation in Sweden. We define six classes as: (1) non-skilled manual workers, (2) skilled
manual workers, (3) lower non-manual workers, (4) farmers, (5) intermediate non-manual workers,
and (6) higher non-manual workers. We are grateful to Martin Hallsten for sharing his STATA

                                               17
class is farmers, which reflects the historical role of the Center party. We also see
some under-representation of skilled manual workers.
    If parental human-capital investments shape individual competence, a strictly
meritocratic system might still favor elites. Meritocracy could then favor the compe-
tent within a family, but still be elitist across families as per the exclusive-meritocracy
description. However, our finding that different social classes are evenly represented
rejects this interpretation. Instead, Sweden’s political system is both meritocratic
and broadly representative, as per the inclusive-meritocracy description.


6     Drivers of competence and representation
In this section we address potential drivers of Sweden’s inclusive meritocracy. Two
facts stand in the way of such a regime. First, (as we will document) ability cor-
relates positively with social class. Thus one might expect competence to be in
tension with inclusivity. Second, more able people have higher earnings and hence
face higher opportunity costs. This should make positive selection on competence
difficult in the first place. The first subsection examines whether there are signs
of a tradeoff between competence and inclusive social representation by examining
cross-sectional patterns of municipal politicians. The second subsection examines
patterns of selection by socioeconomic status in the aggregate. In that subsection we
explain why there is only a weak tradeoff between competence and inclusivity, and
why inclusive meritocracy is feasible. The third and fourth subsections answer the
question of how is positive selection on competence feasible in the first place, given
that the competent face higher opportunity costs.

6.1     Is there a competence-representation tradeoff ?
In order to characterize local selection and representation, we compare politicians in
each council to their municipal population according to a simple index. Let x denote
either a measure of competence or social class with K categories. We can write this
index as
                                    XK           K
                                                 X
                             Sx =       pk,c k −   pk,m k ,
                                      k=1          k=1

code with us. We are forced to drop the category of “self-employed” because of data constraints.
The data are again from 1979, and 54 percent of the politicians nominated in 2010 have a father
for which we can define socioeconomic status.




                                              18
where pk,c is the proportion of council members in each category k, and pk,m is the
corresponding proportion in the municipal population. The intuition is simple. If
the trait distribution in a municipality has support from 1 to 9 with a mean of 5, and
politicians are positively (negatively) selected on competence, their scores on average
are higher (lower) than 5, giving a positive (negative) selection index. Analogously
for the case of social class, when this index is zero for a municipality, all its social
classes are represented among politicians in proportion to their population prevalence
(or excess representation of lower classes balances out excess representation of higher
classes). We use this index to gauge municipal selection along each of our ability
variables – namely IQ, leadership, and earnings score – and social class variables -
standardized parental income or occupational status.
    In Figure 6, we plot the relationship between competence and representation for
our various indices. We also include the corresponding regression line, estimated
slope coefficient for each of these six relationships. The estimated slopes are all
positive, suggesting a tradeoff.

                                    [Figure 6 about here]

    But the slope coefficients are small. For parental social class, the strongest rela-
tionship suggests that a 1σ higher over-representation of upper social classes is asso-
ciated with a 0.15σ higher cognitive score among elected municipal politicians. For
the two other competence measures, the relationships are much weaker. For parental
income, the strongest relationship suggests that a 1σ larger over-representation of
high parental income is associated with a 0.15σ higher average earnings score. For
the cognitive and leadership scores, the estimates are of even smaller magnitudes
and not statistically significant.15 Overall, these correlations suggest a weak tradeoff
between competence and social background.

6.2     Selection by socioeconomic background
The flat tradeoff between competence and social representation shown in the last
subsection may be surprising, given the problems to disentangle innate ability and
parental background. Despite Sweden’s comparatively uniform education system,
parental background likely shapes measured ability via socialization and home re-
sources. If (i) competence correlates positively with socioeconomic status, we should
observe a steep tradeoff unless (ii) stronger positive selection compensates for lower
  15
    Admittedly, measurement error could be attenuating these estimates. While this is a potential
concern, recall that we find support for an inclusive meritocracy even at the aggregate level.


                                               19
averages in lower socioeconomic groups. To understand the flat tradeoff, and how
inclusive meritocracy is feasible, we investigate statements (i) and (ii) by parental
socioeconomic background.

Competence and socioeconomic status For each of our three ability measures,
Figure 7 plots the average ability for both the population and each category of
politicians (nominated, elected, mayors, MPs) who belong in each quartile of the
parental income distribution. The plot suggests that condition (i) holds: there is
a positive relationship between parental economic background and ability in the
population. For example, among citizens with parents in the bottom income quartile,
average leadership scores are 5.1, versus 5.64 among those with parents in the top
income quartile, a difference of about 0.3σ. The analogous inter-quartile distances
for the cognitive and earnings scores are 0.45σ and 0.16σ, respectively.16

                                      [Figure 7 about here]

Ability selection by parental background The main reason why inclusive mer-
itocracy is feasible, and why the tradeoff may appear flat, is that qualification (ii)
holds: positive selection on ability is stronger in lower social classes, which mitigates
the ability cost of recruiting politicians from those classes. Consider cognitive scores:
politicians with fathers in the top income quartile outscore the general population
with fathers in the same quartile by 0.39σ. But elected councilors with fathers in the
bottom income quartile outscore the population with fathers in the same quartile
by 0.50σ. Figure 7 shows that this pattern is even more pronounced among mayors
and MPs. If a politician of humble origin makes it that high, then that politician is
very strongly selected. Supplementary Appendix Figure A.4 shows similar patterns
relying on father’s occupational social class.
    One striking aspect of these figures is the remarkable stability of positive selection
out of all father’s income levels and social classes. What defeats the tradeoff between
competence and inclusivity is the fact that every class has competent people, and
the strong positive selection washes out average ability differences.
  16
    The differences may be kept from becoming larger by the facts that the education system in
Sweden is entirely financed by the public sector, that admission to higher education is entirely based
on high-school grades, and that education traditionally has been provided in roughly equal quality
across the country.




                                                 20
6.3    Individual self-selection
As shown before in Figure 3, the competent face higher opportunity costs. How, then,
are the competent attracted into politics? One possibility is that in Sweden pecuniary
incentives do not matter. In this section, we further investigate the potential drivers
of political selection with the guidance of a simple model of pecuniary and intrinsic
incentives. The model and its predictions are presented in Section C of the Online
Appendix.

Material vs. intrinsic motives In our model, material motives make wages in
office, chances of accessing power, and age-earnings progression in a person’s occu-
pation relevant for selection. In the data, we indeed find evidence that material
incentives help shape self-selection. The competence of top politicians is higher in
municipalities with higher remunerations for mayors and vice-mayors, relative to
municipal average earnings (Supplementary Appendix Figure A.5). Also, the com-
petence of top politicians is higher in parties with a higher probability of filling these
full-time political positions (Supplementary Appendix Table B.3). Lastly, politicians
with occupations with steeper age-earnings profiles are less positively selected out of
their own occupation than politicians with flatter age-earnings profiles (Supplemen-
tary Appendix Figure A.6). This is not only consistent with the model’s notion of
opportunity cost. To the extent that the types of jobs held by parents and children
are positively correlated, the finding also helps explain the better selection for politi-
cians with low socioeconomic backgrounds discussed in the previous subsection. All
three findings are consistent with material motives being relevant for political self-
selection, which then re-emphasizes the question: how are the competent attracted
into politics?
    Full-time political positions are very well paid in Sweden, which appears rele-
vant given the evidence in Supplementary Appendix Figure A.5. But politicians in
local parties with close to zero probabilities to land full-time political jobs are still
considerably smarter than the average citizens in the corresponding municipality
(Supplementary Appendix Table B.3). According to our simple model, this aspect
of the data is only consistent with strong intrinsic motives to serve in politics.

6.4    Party Screening
The next step in the Swedish selection process is that parties screen those individuals
who self-select into politics. One way parties do this is by observing their members
compete in coming up with good arguments and policy proposals. Such competition
may well result in positive selection if more able politicians win out in the tournament

                                           21
and climb to the top of the party. Alternatively, party constituencies (e.g., the youth
branch, the female branch, associated unions, etc.) can select and promote the more
able to higher positions in the party list.
    As mentioned in Section 2, qualitative work in political science suggests that
Swedish political parties actively screen and promote candidates. While we do not
strive to identify the exact mechanisms, we now present some quantitative evidence
that parties gradually promote the more competent to higher positions.

Selection and list rank We consider all party lists in all municipalities, and all
electoral periods within our sample. From these, we compute an ability index for
all candidates with a certain list rank, for each rank between 1 and 8. The left-
column graphs in Figure 8 show how ability varies by rank for the cognitive score,
the leadership score, and earnings score. Starting at the top (list rank 1), all measures
more or less steadily decline as we move down the list, with the clearest pattern for
the earnings score. In particular, the top-ranked politician has significantly higher
ability than every other rank for all three ability measures.
    Parties thus seem to screen and promote more able people towards progressively
higher positions on their ballots. Given this positive screening, an improvement of
those who self-select into political service will typically translate into higher compe-
tence of elected politicians.
                                 [Figure 8 about here]
    The middle-column graphs show the promotion patterns by socioeconomic back-
ground. In particular, the black (gray) dots refer to politicians whose fathers’ incomes
were below (above) the median. If anything, the competence-promotion gradient is
steeper for politicians from lower social classes. Thus it seems that party screening
is one of the mechanisms behind the broad representation we observe.
    Finally, we might suspect that the motives for positive screening are stronger
with stiffer political competition as measured by electoral win margins. The right-
most graphs in Figure 8 suggest that positive party screening is indeed stronger in
municipalities with stiffer political competition (the gray dots).
    All in all, healthy political parties – that can offer positive screening to society –
appear to be an important component of Sweden’s inclusive meritocracy in politics.


7     Conclusion
Research in political economics offers theoretical arguments and empirical evidence
for the notion that leaders matter, and that societies benefit from an able and broadly

                                           22
representative leadership. While democracy may be better suited than other political
systems to promote representation, it is not clear that it can deliver both able and
representative leadership. To shed light on this, we analyze political selection in
Sweden, a paradigmatic advanced democracy. We use rich information on ability
traits and social background for the universe of national and municipal politicians
and the entire Swedish population.
    We uncover four facts. (1) Politicians are strongly positively selected for all ability
measures, despite their facing higher opportunity costs, with a monotonic relation
between ability and political power. (2) Positive selection is present even conditional
on social and family background: in other words, individual ability matters greatly
for selection. (3) Representation of social background, whether measured by parental
earnings or social class, is very even. (4) At most, there is a weak tradeoff in selection
between ability and inclusive social representation.
    Democracy can thus promote competent leadership, which stems from inclusive
meritocracy, rather than from pure elitism or an exclusive meritocracy where the
privileged have an upper hand. In Sweden, political parties attract the competent and
promote the best to higher ranks, quite independently of social class. As a result, the
Swedish system produces plenty of well-selected politicians from low socioeconomic
backgrounds. While further research into this process is beyond the scope of our
study, a few elements appear to matter. One is a combination of well-paid full time
positions and strong intrinsic motivation to serve in uncompensated ones; another is
party governance in reasonable health working within an electoral system allowing
parties to represent various segments of society; and a third is availability of talent
across social classes (which may, in turn, reflect universal high-quality education).
    Although we cannot easily extrapolate to the rest of the world, our four facts al-
leviate concerns that political systems encouraging broad representation necessarily
select mediocre leaders. Some of the patterns we find may still be specific to Swedish
political (and societal) institutions. Data permitting, it would thus be very interest-
ing to carry out a comparative analysis of other countries with similar or dissimilar
political systems.
    Our findings suggest that we may have to rethink models of political selection
and recruitment. Standard models, which focus on opportunity costs and material
motives for holding office, cannot explain positive selection of the type we uncover.
The data seem to support a richer view, where intrinsic as well as material motives
shape entry into politics. Also, political parties clearly play an active role in selecting
candidates, and our results suggest that candidate ability is an important element
in this calculus.
    Future work should extend the analysis in several dimensions. There is room for


                                            23
more comprehensive modelling and testing of hypotheses on individual motives in
self-selection (the supply of politicians) and on the precise ways parties and voters
screen (the demand side). In addition, future research should attempt to quantify
intrinsic motivation, and its impacts on selection and performance. Finally, it would
be valuable to study how the competence and representativeness of political leaders
leave a mark on policy outcomes.




                                         24
References
 Beath, A., F. Christia, G. Egorov, and R. Enikolopov (2014). Electoral rules and
    the quality of politicians: Theory and evidence from a field experiment in
    afghanistan. Working Paper 20082, National Bureau of Economic Research.
 Besley, T. and S. Coate (1997). An economic model of representative democracy.
    The Quarterly Journal of Economics 112 (1), 85–114.
 Besley, T., O. Folke, T. Persson, and J. Rickne (2016). Gender quotas and the crisis
    of the mediocre man: Theory and evidence from sweden. Mimeo, Stockholm
    and Uppsala Universities.
 Besley, T., J. G. Montalvo, and M. Reynal-Querol (2011). Do educated leaders
    matter? Economic Journal 121 (554), F205–227.
 Besley, T., R. Pande, and V. Rao (2005). Political selection and the quality of gov-
    ernment: Evidence from south india. Center Discussion Papers 921, Economic
    Growth Center, Yale University.
 Besley, T. and M. Reynal-Querol (2011). Do democracies select more educated
    leaders? American Political Science Review 105 (3), 552–556.
 Carlstedt, B. (2000). Cognitive Abilities. Aspects of Structure, Process and Mea-
    surement. Dissertation, University of Gothenburg.
 Caselli, F. and M. Morelli (2004). Bad politicians. Journal of Public Eco-
    nomics 88 (3-4), 759–782.
 Chattopadhyay, R. and E. Duflo (2004). Women as policy makers: Evidence from
   a randomized policy experiment in india. Econometrica 72 (5), 1409–1443.
 Dahl, S. (2011). Efter folkrörelsepartiet: Om aktivism och politiska kur-
   somläggningar i tre svenska riksdagspartier (Life after the popular parties:
   About activism and political re-directions of three parties with parliamentary
   representation). Dissertation, Stockholm University, Stockholm Studies in Pol-
   itics 140.
 Dal Bó, E., P. Dal Bó, and J. Snyder (2009). Political dynasties. Review of Eco-
    nomic Studies 76 (1), 115–142.
 Dal Bó, E., F. Finan, O. Folke, T. Persson, and J. Rickne (2016, September).
    Who Becomes a Politican? Working Paper Series 1133, Research Institute of
    Industrial Economics.



                                        25
Dal Bó, E., F. Finan, and M. Rossi (2013). Strengthening state capabilities: The
   role of financial incentives in the call to public service. The Quarterly Journal
   of Economics 128 (3), 1169–1218.
Dal Bó, E. and M. Rossi (2011). Term Length and the Effort of Politicians. Review
   of Economic Studies 78 (4), 1237–1263.
Delfgaauw, J. and R. Dur (2007). Signaling and screening of workers’ motivation.
   Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 62 (4), 605–624.
Djerf-Pierre, M. and B. Niklasson (2010). Vem vill ha jämställdhet? (who wants
   gender equality?). In S. Holmberg and L. Weibull (Eds.), Det våras för poli-
   tiken: trettiotvå artiklar om politik, medier och samhälle (Springtime for poli-
   tics: thirty-two articles about politics, the media, and society. Oxford University
   Press.
Erikson, R. and J. Goldthorpe (1992). The constant flux: a study of class mobility
   in industrial societies. Clarendon Press.
Ferraz, C. and F. Finan (2009). Motivating politicians: The impacts of monetary
   incentives on quality and performance. NBER Working Papers 14906, National
   Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Folke, O., T. Persson, and J. Rickne (2015). Preferential voting, accountability
   and promotions into political power: Evidence from sweden. American Political
   Science Review , Forthcoming.
Folke, O. and J. Rickne (2016). The glass ceiling in politics formalization and
   empirical tests. Comparative Political Studies, 567–599.
Francois, P. (2000). ’Public service motivation’ as an argument for government
   provision. Journal of Public Economics 78 (3), 275–299.
Freidenvall, L. (2006). Vägen till varannan damernas. kvinnorepresentation, kan-
   didaturval och kvotering i svensk politik 1970-2002 (the road to “zippered
   lists”. female representation, candidate choice and quotas in swedish politics
   1970-2002). Technical report, Stockholms Universitet.
Gagliarducci, S. and M. D. Paserman (2012). Gender interactions within hierar-
  chies: Evidence from the political arena. Review of Economic Studies 79 (3),
  1021–1052.
Galasso, V. and T. Nannicini (2011). Competing on good politicians. American
   Political Science Review 105 (1), 79–99.



                                        26
Jia, R., M. Kudamatsu, and D. Seim (2015). Political selection in china: The
    complementary roles of connections and performance. Journal of the European
    Economic Association 13 (4), 631–668.
Jones, B. F. and B. A. Olken (2005). Do leaders matter? national leadership
   and growth since world war ii. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 120 (3),
   835–864.
Karlsson, D. (2001). Ny som förtroendevald i kommuner och landsting (new to
   local politics). In Att vara med på riktigt demokratiutveckling i kommuner och
   landsting (To participate for real - democratic developments in municipalities
   and counties). SOU 2001:48, Swedish Government White Paper.
Lindgren, K.-O., S. Oskarsson, and C. Dawes (2016). Can political inequalities be
   educated away? evidence from a swedish school reform. American Journal of
   Political Science, Forthcoming.
Lundqvist, H. (2013). Is it worth it? on the returns to holding political office.
   Working Papers 2013/14, Institut d’Economia de Barcelona (IEB).
Merlo, A., V. Galasso, M. Landi, and A. Mattozzi (2010). The labor market of
  italian politicians. In T. Boeri, A. Merlo, and A. Prat (Eds.), The Ruling Class:
  Management and Politics in Modern Italy. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Messner, M. and M. K. Polborn (2004). Paying politicians. Journal of Public Eco-
  nomics 88 (12), 2423–2445.
Meyersson, E. (2014). Islamic rule and the empowerment of the poor and pious.
  Econometrica 82 (1), 229–269.
Myerson, R. (1993). Incentives to cultivate favored minorities under alternative
  electoral systems. American Political Science Review 87 (4), 856–869.
Nilsson, P. J. (2014). Alcohol availability, prenatal conditions, and long-term eco-
   nomic outcomes. Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.
Olson, M. (1965). The logic of collective action: Public goods and the theory of
   groups. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Osborne, M. and A. Slivinski (1996). A model of political competition with citizen-
   candidates. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 111 (1), 65–96.
Pande, R. (2003). Can mandated political representation increase policy influ-
   ence for disadvantaged minorities? theory and evidence from india. American
   Economic Review 93 (4), 1132–1151.



                                       27
Persson, T. and G. Tabellini (2003). The Economic Effects of Constitutions. MIT
   Press.
Powell, G. B. (2000). Elections as Instruments of Democracy - Majoritarian and
   Proportional Visions. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press.
SOU (2007). Ett decennium med personval (Lessons from a Decade of Preference
  Voting). Swedish Government White Paper: 68.
Ståhlberg-Carlstedt, B. and P. Sköld (1981). Inskrivningsprov 80 - testmanual
    (enlistment test 80 - testing manual). Report CH 55001-H7, National Defense
    Research Establishment Report.
Statistics Sweden (2010). Åttapartivalet 2010, allmänna valen valundersökningen
   (the eight parties election 2010, general election, electoral study). Official
   Statistics Sweden Report.
Taagepera, R. and M. Shugart (2000). Seats and Votes: The Effects and Determi-
   nants of Electoral Systems. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press.
Tillmann, P. (2014). Entry into electoral races and the quality of representation.
    Unpublished, University of Rochester.
Washington, E. L. (2008). Female socialization: How daughters affect their legis-
  lator fathers. American Economic Review 98 (1), 311–32.




                                      28
8      Figures




    Figure 1: Distribution of ability measures in the population and among politicians

Notes: The figure shows comparisons of the distribution of the ability variables among the Swedish
working-age population (18 or older) and four categories of politicians: nominated– but non-elected
– to a municipal council, elected to a municipal council, mayors, and members of parliament (MPs).
The two enlistment scores are shown in the top figures; the bottom left figure shows earnings score,
and the bottom right education level. Education level is coded into seven groups based on the
formal categorization of Statistics Sweden, namely less than 9 years, 9 years of primary education,
2-year secondary education, 3-year secondary education, tertiary education (less than three years),
tertiary education (at least three years) and research degree (licentiate or Ph.D.) All figures are
created with pooled individual level data for election years in the 1990s and 2000s (1991, 1994, 1998,
2002, 2006 and 2010). For the cognitive and leadership scores, the sample is restricted to men in
the 1951-1980 cohorts. Based on a Kolmogorov-Smirnov test, we can reject that the distributions
are the same for each panel and for every pair of categories.


                                                 29
Figure 2: Distribution of ability measures among elected politicians, their siblings, and
the population

Notes: The figure compares the distributions of our ability variables for three categories of politi-
cians (elected to a municipal council, mayors, and members of parliament) and their siblings. The
two enlistment scores are shown in the first two columns, the earnings score in the third column.
Only politicians with at least one sibling are included. All figures are created with pooled individual
level data for election years in the 1990s and 2000s (1991, 1994, 1998, 2002, 2006 and 2010). For
the cognitive and leadership scores, the sample is restricted to men in the 1951-1980 cohorts.




                                                  30
Figure 3: Distribution of elected politicians and their siblings across the percentiles of
population income

Notes: The figure compares the distribution of annual labor incomes of three categories of politicians
(elected to a municipal council, mayors, and parliamentarians) to that of their respective siblings.
Data from the years 2003, 2007 and 2011 for the adult population (18 or older) was used to compute
the percentiles of annual earnings in the population. The proportion of individuals who fall into
each 5-percentile bracket is shown in the histograms. The income percentiles are calculated by birth
year and gender. Only politicians with at least one sibling are included.




                                                 31
Figure 4: Distribution of elected politicians and their fathers across the percentiles of
population income

Notes: The figure shows the distribution of income among fathers to three types of politicians
(elected to a municipal council, mayors, and parliamentarians) and three types of other elite oc-
cupations (doctors and CEOs of small or medium, and large enterprises) in 2003, 2007 and 2011.
The proportion of individuals who fall into each 5-percentile bracket is shown in the histograms.
The income percentiles are calculated by birth year and gender. Data from year 1979 were used to
compute the percentiles of annual earnings for the fathers. Fathers are only included if they are of
adult age in year 1979 (18 or older), and politicians are only included if we can find an earnings
observation for their father in that year.




                                                32
Figure 5: Distribution of elected politicians and their fathers across the percentiles of
population income

Notes: The figure shows distributions of elected politicians (left) and their fathers (right) across the
percentiles of the Swedish income distribution. The income percentiles are calculated by birth year
and gender. The top (middle/bottom) figure includes politicians elected to a municipal assembly
seat for the Social Democrats (Conservative/Center) party. See the notes for Figure 4 for details
on the data used.


                                                  33
    Figure 6: Correlations between municipal indices of representation and selection

Notes: The figure shows the relationships between competence selection indices (y-axis) and repre-
sentation indices (x-axis). The representation index is the average among politicians’ parents minus
the average of the parents of the adult population (18 or older) in the same municipality. Social
class of the parents in the left column of graphs is measured through parental income, and in the
right column through parental occupational status. Parental income is measured by the income
percentile by gender and birth year of each parent in 1979. Parental social class is measured in 1980
and is given the values 1-6 as: (1) Non-skilled manual; (2) Skilled manual; (3) Lower non-manual;
(4) Farmer; (5) Intermediary non-manual; and (6) Higher non-manual. We only include the parent
in the highest annual earnings percentile, or social class (either the mother or the father). The unit
                                                  34
of observation is the municipality and election period. Each dot in the scatter plots corresponds
to the average among 1156 municipality-election values. The regression line shows the estimated
slope coefficient from an OLS regression of the selection index on the representation index. The
slope coefficient is displayed below each graph. Standard errors are reported in parentheses, and
beta is the normalized relationship in terms of standard errors. The data include all elections from
1998-2010. For the leadership and cognitive scores, data is restricted to men in the 1951-1980
cohorts.
Figure 7: Average ability measures for politicians and general population by father’s
income quartile

Notes: The figure shows average ability for four types of politicians (nominated – but not elected
– to a municipal council, elected to a municipal council, mayors, and parliamentarians) and the
working-age population, by income quartile of each individual’s father (x-axis), measured in the
year 1980. The data are pooled for all politicians elected in the 2000s (2002, 2006 and 2010), and
the general population is also sampled in these same years. For the cognitive and leadership scores,
the sample is restricted to men in the 1951-1980 cohorts.




                                                35
Figure 8: Average ability by party list rank, divided by parental social background and
municipal political competition.

Notes: The figure shows the averages of three ability variables by ballot rank. The top (mid-
dle/bottom) graph shows the means for leadership score (cognitive score/residual earnings mea-
sure). The data come from elections held during 1991-2010 (1991, 1994, 1998, 2002, 2006 and
2010). In the left column of plots, the black dots show the mean of the competence variable for the
politicians in each ballot rank, and the vertical lines running through each dot denote 95% confi-
dence intervals. In the middle column of plots, similar means and confidence intervals are shown,
but the politician observations are split by whether their fathers have incomes below or above the
median father in the population. The black dots show the summary statistics for the politicians
with low-income fathers, and the gray dots show the statistics for the politicians with high-income
fathers. In the right column of plots, similar means and confidence intervals are reported for two
groups of municipality-election observations, split36by the median of political competition. Political
competition is computed as the win margin of the majority bloc of parties, left or center-right.
The black dots show the summary statistics for the politicians in low-competition contexts, and
the gray dots show the statistics for the politicians in high-competition contexts. For the cognitive
and leadership scores, the sample is restricted to men in the 1951-1980 cohorts.
9       Tables

                 Table 1: Summary statistics for the population and politicians

                                            Population                                  Politicians
                                      Mean           Std. Dev.        Nominated         Elected      Mayors       MPs
 Women                                 51.0             50.0            39.9             40.8         24.9        42.2
 Age                                   48.4             18.9             50.3            50.8         52.5         49.6
 Foreign born (%)                      13.7             34.4             7.4              5.8          2.6         4.1
 Leadership score (1-9)                 5.3              1.7              5.6             5.9         6.5           6.8
 Cognitive score (1-9)                  5.1              1.9              5.6             6.0         6.4           6.7
 Years of education                    11.7              3.0            12.8             13.1         13.2         14.5
 Earnings score (z-score)              0.05             0.94            0.18             0.55         0.97        1.33
 Observations                       42,096,789                         236,950          79,463       1,569        2,086
Notes: This table reports descriptive statistics on social attributes and on the various measures of competence. These
statistics were computed for the Swedish working-age population (18 or older), and for politicians, pooling individual
level data for election years in the 1990s and 2000s (1991, 1994, 1998, 2002, 2006 and 2010). For the cognitive and
leadership scores, the sample is restricted to men in the 1951-1980 cohorts. Politicians are divided into four hierarchical
categories: nominated (but not elected) for a municipal assembly seat, elected for a municipal assembly seat, mayor,
and member of (national) parliament.




                                                          37
                           Table 2: Ability by selected elite occupations

                                        Leadership       Cognitive      Earnings        Years of      Labor
                                          score            score        earnings       schooling      score       Obs
 Nominated to mun. council                   5.5             5.5           0.07           13.6       286.2       24535
 Municipal councilors                        5.8             5.9           0.38           13.8        379.0       8870
 Mayors                                      6.4             6.2           0.79           13.9        679.4        247
 Parliamentarians                            6.6             6.4           0.98           14.8        802.2      320(*)
 CEOs (10 − 24 employees)                    6.1             5.8           0.81           13.6       675.6        6825
 CEOs (25 − 249 employees)                   6.4             6.2           1.12           14.2       1046.2       6885
 CEOs (≥ 250 employees)                      6.8             6.7           1.29           15.4       1926.0       1470
 Medical Doctors                             6.5             7.4           1.13           17.1        640.0      29514
 Lawyers and Judges                          6.5             6.8           0.69           17.0        568.0       5308
 Economists                                  5.9             7.0           0.38           20.4         530         248
 Political Scientists                        5.8             6.8           0.61           20.4        513.3       306
Notes: The table shows ability averages among politicians (nominated but not elected in row 1, elected municipal councilors
in row 2, mayors in row 3, and parliamentarians in row 4) and among individuals in seven occupational categories, which
make up other “elite” occupations in Swedish society. Columns 1 and 2 report the means for the two enlistment scores, the
leadership score and the cognitive score (measured on a 1-9 scale). Column 3 reports the means of our earnings score, and
column 4 reports average years of education. Column 5 reports the mean of annual labor earnings (in 1000s Swedish Kro-
nor; 1 SEK 0.8USD), and finally, column 6 reports the number of individuals classified into each elite occupation. The data
are from 2011 and includes the full Swedish working-age population (18-65). Individuals working in universities are identi-
fied based on a 5-digit industry code that indicates employment at a university. For the cognitive score and the leadership
score, data is restricted to men in the 1951-1980 cohorts. (*) Removing individuals older than 65 reduces the number of
parliamentarians below the full size of parliament.




                                                       38
       Supplementary Appendix to “Who
       Becomes a Politician?”: Additional
          Analysis, Figures and Tables
This Supplementary Appendix includes additional figures in Section A and additional
tables in Section B. Section C offers an analysis of self-selection decisions and party
screening, by first laying out a formal model and then taking its predictions to the
data.




                                          1
A      Figures




Figure A.1: Distribution of earnings score in the population and among politicians, by
gender

Notes: The figure shows comparisons of the distribution of the earnings score among the Swedish
working-age population (18-72) and four categories of politicians: nominated (but non-elected) to
a municipal council, elected to a municipal council, mayors, and members of parliament, by gender.
The figures are created with pooled individual level data for election years in the 1990s and 2000s
(1991, 1994, 1998, 2002, 2006 and 2010).




                                                2
Figure A.2: Distribution across the percentiles of population income of mothers of elected
politicians, mayors, parliamentarians, doctors and CEOs

Notes: The figure shows the distribution of income among mothers to three types of politicians
(elected to a municipal council, mayors, and parliamentarians) and three types of other elite oc-
cupations (doctors and CEOs of small or medium, and large enterprises) in 2003, 2007 and 2011.
The proportion of individuals who fall into each 5-percentile bracket is shown in the histograms.
The income percentiles are calculated by birth year and gender. Data from year 1979 were used to
compute the percentiles of annual earnings for the mothers. Mothers are only included if they are
of adult age in year 1979 (18-or older), and politicians are only included if we can find an earnings
observation for their mother in that year.




                                                 3
Figure A.3: Distribution of 2010 politicians’ parental social class, measured in 1980 and
compared to the 2010 populations social class.

Notes: The figure shows the distributions across six social classes of politicians elected to municipal
council (light gray bars) and their parents (dark gray bars). The height of the bars show the
proportion of individuals in each social class. Elected politicians are measured in year 2010. Parents’
social class is measured in 1980. Only politicians for whom we can identify a father or a mother
with a non-missing social class are included. In cases where we can identify the social class of both
parents, only the one with the highest social class is included in the figure.




                                                  4
Figure A.4: Distribution of 2010 politician parental social class, measured in 1980 and
compared to the 2010 population parental social class.

Notes: The figure shows the distributions across six social classes of parents of four categories
of politicians (running in 2010, solid bars) and parents of individuals in the general population
(transparent bars). The height of the bars shows the proportion of parents in each occupational
social class. Parents’ social class is measured in 1980. Only politicians for whom we can identify a
father or a mother with a non-missing social class are included. In cases where we can identify the
social class of both parents, only the one with the highest social class is included in the figure. The
class division corresponds closely to the EGP social-class scheme (Erikson and Goldthorpe 1992).
We define six classes as: (1) non-skilled manual workers, (2) skilled manual workers, (3) lower
non-manual workers, (4) farmers, (5) intermediate non-manual workers, and (6) higher non-manual
workers.



                                                  5
Figure A.5: Estimated bivariate relationships between politician ability and the mayor’s
wage relative to the municipal population, by electoral ballot rank

Notes: The figure shows estimation results for the relationship between politician ability and the
mayor’s annual earnings as a fraction of the average annual earnings in the municipality that he
or she governs. Bivariate OLS regressions are run in sub-samples based on electoral ballot rank.
These sub-samples are denoted on the x-axis. In the left graph, the cognitive score (black color) and
the leadership score (gray color) are each used as the dependent variable. In the right graph, the
dependent variable is the earnings score measure. The dots represent the size of the point estimates
and the vertical lines 95% confidence intervals. Data is extracted for the election years in the 1990s
and 2000s (1991, 1994, 1998, 2002, 2006, and 2010). For the enlistment scores, we only use data
for men in the 1951-1980 cohorts.




                                                  6
              Figure A.6: Selection by ability and politician sector of work

Notes: The figure shows the relationship between the ability selection indices and the age-earnings
profile of various occupation types. The x-axis of the plots in the left (right) column shows the
average increase in annual earnings, in 1000 SEK, by education (sector), while the y-axis shows the
selection indices by education (sector). Each selection index is computed as mean ability among the
elected municipal politicians for each occupation minus mean ability among non-politicians in the
same occupation in the working-age population (18-72). Average earnings increases are computed
from annual individual-level data for the Swedish working-age population (1990-2012). Individuals
with the same occupation are divided into age brackets of five years and year-on-year average
earnings hikes are computed for the entire period as earnings(t+1)-earnings(t). The regression
lines are estimated by OLS. The cognitive and leadership scores are restricted to 1951-1980 cohort
men.                                              7
B       Tables

Table B.1: Correspondence between the sub-traits of the leadership score and the Big 5
personality traits.

                                                                                            Corresponding
 Sub-trait                       Details of component                                       Big 5 trait
                                 Extraversion                                               Extraversion
                                 Having friends                                             Extraversion
 Social Maturity
                                 Taking responsibility                                      Consciousness
                                 Independence                                               Openness
                                 Perseverance                                               Conscientiousness
 Psychological Energy            Ability to fulfill plans                                   Conscientiousness
                                 Ability to remain focused                                  Conscientiousness
                                 Capacity to generate initiative                            Conscientiousness
                                 without external pressure
 Intensity
                                 Intensity and frequency                                    Openness
                                 of free time activities
                                 Disposition to Anxiety                                     Neuroticism
 Emotional Stability             Ability to control and channel nervousness                 Neuroticism
                                 Tolerance of stress                                        Neuroticism
Notes: The Swedish enlistment procedure assesses conscripts’ psychological traits and combines them into a “Lead-
ership Score.” The manual followed by the trained psychologist to make this assessment specifies a process that
first scores the conscript on four sub-traits, listed in column 1 of the table, and then merges these assessments into
a final score. The sub-traits capture certain aspects of the conscript’s personality, which are listed in column 2. In
column 3, these personality aspects are related to their corresponding “Big Five” personality characteristics (see
Nilsson (2014)).




                                                          8
                    Table B.2: Correlations between ability measures, 2011

                                   Leadership score          Cognitive score        Years of education
       Cognitive score                       1
       Leadership score                    0.338                     1
       Years of education                  0.300                   0.511                       1
       Earnings Score                      0.201                   0.167                     0.076
      Notes: This table reports bivariate correlation coefficients between the various measures of ability. The
      underlying data encompass the Swedish working age population (18-72) in 2011. For the cognitive and
      leadership scores, the sample is restricted to men in the 1951-1980 cohorts.




Table B.3: Average ability selection indices of elected politicians and top-ranked politi-
cians on local parties’ electoral ballots, by party-internal career prospects

                               Probability that the politician’s party appoints the mayor
                                  0%             1-50%            51-99%           100%
                             Elected Top Elected Top Elected Top Elected Top
   Leadership Score            0.75     0.95         0.94     1.25         0.79     1.11         0.65    1.52
   Cognitive Score             1.29     1.42         1.15     1.37         1.03     1.41         0.90    1.92
   Earnings Score              0.35     0.51         0.51     0.79         0.58     0.88         0.60    1.13
   Observations*                  5,394                 1,584                 1,032                  456
  Notes: The table shows the means of three ability variables by the probability that the politician’s party ap-
  points the mayor. We measure this probability as the proportion of election periods that a local party was
  responsible for appointing the mayor between 1982 and 2010. The means of the leadership score are shown in
  row 1, the means of the cognitive score in row 2, and the mean of the earnings score in row 3. Row 4 shows the
  number of local party-election period observations in each category. Data are drawn from the election years in
  the 1990s and 2000s (1991, 1994, 1998, 2002, 2006, and 2010).
  * For the enlistment measures of ability, only male politicians in the 1951-1980 cohorts are included, which
  gives a smaller number of observations for these measures.




                                                         9
Table B.4: Summary statistics for the population and politicians with additional variables

                                             Population                                  Politicians
                                        Mean           Std. Dev.       Nominated         Elected      Mayors       MPs
 Women                                    51               50             39.9            40.8         24.9         42.2
 Age                                     48.4             18.9            50.3            50.8         52.5         49.6
 Foreign born (%)                        13.7             34.4            7.4              5.8          2.6         4.1
 Leadership score (1-9)                   5.3              1.7             5.6             5.9          6.5          6.8
 Cognitive score (1-9)                    5.1              1.9             5.6              6           6.4          6.7
 Years of education                      11.7               3             12.8            13.1         13.2         14.5
 Earnings Score (z-score)                0.05             0.94           0.18             0.55         0.97        1.33
 Fathers inc perc. (1979)                51.7             28.9           49.6             51.3         51.7        59.9
 Mothers inc perc. (1979)                46.9             28.5           45.9             47.2         47.2        50.8
 Fathers SEI =1 (1980)                   0.23             0.42             0.2             0.2         0.17         0.13
 Fathers SEI =2 (1980)                   0.28             0.45            0.23            0.23         0.19         0.18
 Fathers SEI =3 (1980)                   0.14             0.34            0.13            0.14         0.15         0.15
 Fathers SEI =4 (1980)                   0.05             0.21            0.13            0.12         0.16         0.07
 Fathers SEI =5 (1980)                   0.21             0.41            0.19            0.19         0.21         0.23
 Fathers SEI =6 (1980)                    0.1              0.3            0.11            0.11         0.12         0.24
 Observations                         42,096,789                        236,950          79,463       1,569        2,086
Notes: This table reports descriptive statistics on social attributes and on the various measures of competence. These
statistics were computed for the Swedish working-age population (18 or older), and for politicians, pooling individual level
data for election years in the 1990s and 2000s (1991, 1994, 1998, 2002, 2006 and 2010). For the cognitive and leadership
scores, the sample is restricted to men in the 1951-1980 cohorts. Politicians are divided into four hierarchical categories:
nominated (but not elected) to municipal council, elected to municipal council, mayor, and member of (national) parlia-
ment.




                                                         10
C      Self-selection into politics and party screening
In the main text of the paper, we have shown that Swedish democracy attracts
highly competent individuals even though they have higher opportunity costs from
participating in politics. How is this possible? It may be argued that municipal
councilors, as part-time politicians, do not face a strong opportunity cost. But we
have shown that full-time politicians such as mayors and MPs are also positively
selected, despite high pre-office earnings, so the puzzle remains. One explanation is
that Swedes are oblivious to pecuniary incentives and opportunity costs – but this
seems extreme (and ultimately testable). A less extreme explanation is that material
incentives overcome opportunity costs, or that they are aided by intrinsic motivation.
    Here, we try to make at least some progress on this puzzle. Three different sets of
actors shape the characteristics of the Swedish political class. One is political parties,
who have their own objectives and governance structures, which we have discussed
in the main text. Another is individuals themselves, who voluntarily give their time
to participate in politics. In this section, we analyze the individual incentives to
self-select into politics and how self-selection translates into equilibrium (observed)
selection under plausible assumptions about party screening. We do not explicitly
consider individuals in their role as voters.

C.1     Model of self selection
Main ideas We write down and analyze a simple “Roy model” to shed light on
self-selection into politics and on party screening. The model features two periods:
individuals decide whether to enter into politics in the first period when “young.”
The basics of the model track the reality of municipal politics in Sweden: since
politics is a part-time occupation, entering politics does not entail leaving one’s
private occupation when young.
    However, those who ascend to higher political ranks (such as mayor or MP)
when “old” have to abandon their private occupations, which imposes an opportu-
nity cost. Promotion is probabilistic and the opportunity cost is (for some, only
partly) compensated by an attractive wage. Moreover, private occupations become
more attractive over time – as compensation when old incorporates a seniority pre-
mium, which is occupation-specific (e.g., higher in finance than in elementary-school
teaching). While participation in politics when young does not impose an opportu-
nity cost right then, for those who do not obtain the promotion to senior political
ranks there is a cost later: due to their split attention while young, those enter
politics get lower private seniority premia when old. Individuals differ in terms of


                                           11
their ability, which determines their private occupation payoff, and their intrinsic
motivation, modeled as a utility kick from spending time in politics.
    Whether an individual who self selects into politics also gets an electable position
on the ballot depends on screening by her party. We consider different types of
screening, but the results presented in the main text strongly suggest that parties
screen positively on competence.

Supply side Consider a set of risk-neutral people, who have to decide whether to
supply their services as leisure politicians. Each person is drawn from a continuous
distribution jointly defined over two parameters: ability index Y with typical element
y, and an index of intrinsic motives to serve P with typical
                                                               element p. We assume
these parameters are independent, with P ∈ 0, P̄ > 0 uniformly distributed and
Y ∈ [0, ∞) distributed according to c.d.f. G (y) with density g (y).
     Each person has a two-period horizon and there is no discounting. For simplicity,
we assume that going into politics is a once-and-for-all choice in period 1.1 Whoever
does not go into politics earns y in the first period and expects to earn γy ≥ y in the
second. In other words, γ ≥ 1 is a measure of the seniority premium (in the data, γ
is proxied by the earnings-age profile and is allowed to across occupations).2
     Someone who offers to serve gets accepted to run and is elected to the municipal
council with probability q(y) – we consider different slopes of the screening q (y)
function when discussing the demand side. Elected politicians get intrinsic benefits
p
2
   in each of the two periods.3 They must also give up some career: period-1 private
earnings are y, but period-2 expected earnings are (1 − δ)γy, where δ ∈ [0, 1] shapes
the future opportunity cost of current political involvement. The opportunity cost of
politics is thus δγy, which depends on general ability, private-career prospects, and
how these are damaged by a political career.
     Some first-period council members are appointed mayors in the second period, in
which case they earn political wage w < Y plus intrinsic benefit p2 . This happens
   1
     At the cost of additional complexity, the model can be extended to include discounting as
well as sequential decisions: a person who entered in period 1 can decide whether to stay or leave
in period 2. Discounting adds notational complication only, while sequential decisions create more
complex selection patterns which converge to those presented here as the parameter δ (to be defined
shortly) goes to 1.
   2
     This model of the supply side is related to those in Delfgaauw and Dur (2007), Francois (2000)
and Dal Bó, Finan, and Rossi (2013), but among other differences it considers the distinct case of
“leisure” politicians who do not give up immediate private sector earnings when entering public
service, as well as the role of the seniority premium γ.
   3
     This benefit also captures non-pecuniary, but arguably somewhat extrinsic, returns such as
gains in social status.


                                                12
with probability π (in the data, we will allow w and π to differ by municipality and
party).

Cost-benefit calculation A person decides to become a politician when

    (1 + γ)y ≤ (1 − q(y))(1 + γ)y + q(y)((1 + (1 − π)(1 − δ)γ)y + πw) + q(y)p.

After some algebra, this condition simplifies to

                              p + π(w − (1 − δ)γy) ≥ δγy.

The intrinsic return to politics (the 1st term on the LHS) plus the probability of an
income gain when becoming mayor (the 2nd term on the LHS) has to outweigh the
opportunity cost of lost career prospects (the RHS).
   The entry condition can be re-written as

                          p ≥ p(y) ≡ π((1 − δ)γy − w) + δγy.                           (2)

Any type (y, p) on the “selection line” p(y) is indifferent between entering politics
and staying out. Those above (below) this line want to enter (stay out).

Comparative statics From the selection line defined in (2), we can derive the
effect of a change in w as

                                   dp (y)
                                          = −π < 0,
                                     dw
meaning that the selection line shifts down and the set of those willing to enter gets
larger. As we prove (in the Appendix), independent traits and a uniform distribution
over P , imply that average ability must go up with any parametric change that shifts
the selection line down in parallel fashion.
    For parameter π, we get

                                  dp (y)
                                          = (1 − δ) γy − w,
                                    dπ
which in general is ambiguous in sign. Here, the selection line pivots. As ability goes
to zero, the derivative approaches −w, meaning that the line shifts down. But for
very able types, it is positive if δ is low enough, and the selection line shifts up. Then,
a higher π would reduce supply of high-ability types. But the data tell a different
story, which can only be the case if δ is high enough that the line shifts down for all


                                            13
                                                                           dp(y)
types (for any finite y, there exists δ close enough to 1 to render         dπ
                                                                                   unambiguously
negative).
   Finally, for parameter γ, (2) implies that
                               dp (y)
                                      = (π + δ (1 − π)) y > 0,
                                dγ
meaning a steeper earnings-tenure profile shifts the line up. This discourages entry,
lowers average ability, and thus makes for worse supply.
   We can summarize the comparative statics in the following (proof in the Ap-
pendix):
Proposition 1 Suppose (p, y) are drawn from an independent distribution with P
uniformly distributed on 0, P̄ > 0 and Y distributed on [0, ∞) according to G (y) .
Then, maximum as well as average competence of people self-selecting into politics
increase (weakly) with higher w and lower γ, and with higher π (if δ is high enough).

Demand side Consider the three types of screening: (i) random selection (e.g.,
Athenian democracy, with election probability q unrelated to y); (ii) negative selec-
tion (e.g., cronyism, with q 0 (y) < 0); and (iii) positive selection (i.e., meritocracy,
with q 0 (y) > 0).
    Since Sweden is a party-based democracy, we assume that a party planner selects
from the available candidate pool, anticipating voter demands. The main question
is whether our earlier finding that elected politicians have higher ability than the
average citizen means that parties screen in a positive way.
    The answer is in the affirmative (proof in the Appendix):
Proposition 2 If the party has sufficiently good information on those who supply
their services, the fact that elected politicians are more competent than the average
citizen implies positive screening by parties. Then, the results in Proposition 1 extend
to equilibrium outcomes.
    To see this, note first that the term q (y) does not affect the cost-benefit calculus
of individuals. Since entry is invariant to party screening, we only need to keep
track of the entry condition to characterize the candidate pool. Suppose the planner
observes candidate types (y, p) perfectly. We can then show that both random and
negative screening must lead to politicians less competent than the average citizen,
leaving positive screening as the only remaining alternative.4
   4
    While our conclusion of positive screening relies on the assumptions of our model, specifically
the one on the distribution of traits, it is corroborated by evidence presented in the paper on the
screening role of parties.

                                                14
    Consider random selection. Given selection line p = π((1 − δ)γy − w) + δγy, the
relatively competent self-select out of politics, and expected candidate ability (denote
it E(yA )) must be worse than the average ability E(y) in the population. A bit more
formally, (and abstracting from the fact that γ ≥ 1) note that the entry condition
implies p(y) → −πw if γ → 0, such that all citizens enter and E(yA ) → E(y). But
as shown above, E(yA ) decreases in γ. This means that when we raise γ away from
zero, E(yA ) must dip below E(y).
    As random screening implies that the average quality of selected politicians is
worse than that of the population, the result for negative screening follows immedi-
ately.
    Because of positive screening, our comparative statics of supply characterize those
who are selected into parties and elected. This is easy to see if the party observes
types (p, y) perfectly.5 Any party that values competence       will select
                                                                           individuals
                                                                  P̄ +wπ
with the highest available ability, i.e., those with type P̄ , (π(1−δ)+δ)γ . Thus, any
change in (γ, π, w) that shifts the line down will (weakly) increase the average and
top quality not just among those willing to enter, but also among those elected.
Thus, the competence of politicians is weakly increasing in w and π (when δ is high
enough), and weakly decreasing in γ.

Summary Our simple model of supply and its comparative statics resonate with
the economic models of selection into politics discussed in the introduction to the
main paper, in that they point to clear material motives and opportunity costs as
important drivers of self-selection. In addition, our model highlights intrinsic motives
and dynamic career concerns.

C.2      Evidence on Self-selection
In this subsection, we check whether the patterns in the data are consistent with the
predictions of our model.

Mayor earnings One prediction is that higher monetary remuneration (w in the
model) attracts more competent politicians. To explore this, we look at the salary of
mayors, the only (or one of few) full-time paid position(s).6 Mayor salaries vary sub-
   5
     The argument can be extended to the case when the party observes types imperfectly at the
cost of some additional notation and algebra.
   6
     We could also add the prospects of a promotion to a position in the national parliament.
Because the probability of this event is so low (on the order of 0.5%), this would not change any of
the results to be shown here.


                                                15
stantially across municipalities. In 2011, their average annual earnings was 632,400
SEK (about 79,044 USD), with a standard deviation of 213,000 SEK.
    To relate the value of this wage to income opportunities in the municipality, we
normalize the mayor’s annual earnings by average earnings among all inhabitants
above 18 years of age. This approximates the material payoff to the position of
mayor.
    We consider a sample of all local parties that ever appointed a mayor in the
period 1991-2010. Because the probability of becoming mayor varies by rank on the
municipal party list – first-ranked politicians being (overwhelmingly) the most likely,
second-ranked being next in line, and so on – we select the top-five people from every
electoral ballot and create five samples, one for each list rank.
    Then, we use OLS to estimate

                             Qi,r,m,t = αt + βr wm,t + εi,r,t ,                      (3)

where Qi,r,m,t is one of our three ability measures for politician i with list rank r,
in municipality m in election period t, αt is an election-period fixed effect, and wm,t
is the (normalized) mayoral wage in municipality m and election period t. The
coefficient of interest is βr , the linear relation between the mayor’s relative wage
and the selection of politicians for rank r. If a higher salary attracts higher-ability
individuals, βr should be positive. Moreover, if high earnings attract high-ability
candidates to seek positions with a higher probability to become mayor, βr should
be the highest for r = 1.
    The estimates for the cognitive and leadership scores show a positive and sig-
nificant relationship between mayoral wage and selection into the top rank of the
list (from which mayors are almost exclusively appointed). A 1σ increase in rela-
tive mayoral wages is associated with a higher leadership score of individuals in the
top rank (averaging out across parties) by 0.28σ, and a higher cognitive score by
0.19σ.When restricting attention to leadership and cognitive scores, we do not see
evidence of positive effects for the remaining ranks. The estimates for earnings score
are positive and significant for ranks 1, 2, and 4. The largest point estimate is for the
top rank, which shows that a 1σ higher relative mayoral wages is associated with an
higher earnings score by 0.19σ. Figure A.5 in this Supplementary Appendix plots our
estimate of interest from equation (3), from our five r-samples. These correlations
lend some support to the idea from the model that stronger pecuniary prospects in
politics, in the form of a higher mayor’s wage, tend to draw more able candidates.

Age-earnings profiles Another prediction from our simple model is that selection
is less positive for people with a higher seniority premium (γ in the model). We

                                            16
capture this premium by computing occupation-specific age-earnings profiles, in two
ways. One builds on a categorization of easily identifiable education types, which
cover roughly 70 percent of the working-age population. The other way builds on
sectors of employment, the same sectors that go into the estimation of the Mincer
equation in (1) in Section 3 of the main text and underlying our measure of earnings
score. As in that estimation, we divide people in each sector into two groups, one with
tertiary education and one without. This categorization covers the whole working-
age population, but does not lend itself to as easy labeling as the first method.
    For each labor-market segment and each classification, we first compute the av-
erage rate of (nominal) earnings growth over the course of the sample. Then, we
compute separate selection indices, like that in (6.1) in the main text, for our three
ability measures in each occupation. Finally, we regress these selection indices on the
age-earnings profile in each occupation. Thus, we run six regressions (three ability
measures × two types of occupation classification). We find that in five of the six
regressions individuals are significantly less positively selected when they belong to
occupational categories with more rapidly rising earnings. In fact, a few occupations
with very rapidly increasing earnings display negative selection.
    Figure A.6 in this Supplementary Appendix graphs the data in each regression,
where each row of plots shows a specific ability selection index – from top to bottom,
the leadership score, the cognitive score, and earnings score. The columns apply to
an occupation division: educational categories to the left and employment sectors to
the right. Overall, this exercise yields substantial support to one of the less direct
predictions of the model.

Appointment probabilities The remaining prediction concerns the effect of prospects
for political promotion (π in the model). The probability of landing a paid political
position like the mayorship varies markedly with the political status of the party.
Some parties are in a strong majority position, making their appointing the mayor
highly probable. Other parties are small in size and/or belong to the opposition
bloc, making their appointing the mayor highly unlikely. We thus classify parties
into categories depending on the opportunity they afford in terms of political career.
    To do that, we simply calculate the proportion of election periods between 1982
and 2010 that it appointed the mayor. Specifically, to proxy for parameter π, we
divide parties into four groups: (1) 0 percent probability, (2) l-50 percent probability,
(3) 51-99 percent probability, and (4) 100 percent probability.
    We compare competence selection indices across these four categories. We want
to know: (i) Does type (4), with the highest probability of appointing the mayor,
stand out in terms of positive selection? and (ii) Do parties of other types, especially

                                          17
type (1), still show positive selection of politicians?
    Table B.3 in this Supplementary Appendix shows selection indices for each of
the groups (1)-(4). We find that parties that are sure to appoint the mayor indeed
have a better selection of their top-ranked politicians.7 Hence, the political career
prospects do seem to matter for positive selection, as our model suggests. This result
is in sync with the result on mayoral wages.
    In addition, we find no evidence of adverse (or even neutral) selection for the
rank and file in parties with a small or zero probability of promotion. The average
representative is as qualified in the party category with the weakest career prospects
as in the party categories with better prospects. In terms of our model, this suggests
that material motives tell only part of the self-selection story and that intrinsic
motives must also play an important role (in our model, individuals with p = 0
would not enter politics if they stood no chance to obtain a prized mayoral position).

Bottom line Our simple model establishes that if screening is either neutral or
positive (a “well behaved” demand side), the predictions of our self-selection model
(the supply side of politics) will translate into patterns of selection observed in equi-
librium. The findings in the main text do support the notion that screening is
positive. In addition, the predictions on self-selection derived here are also broadly
consistent with the data. Our findings suggest that both material and intrinsic mo-
tives matter in political entry. Material motives appear to matter in terms of direct
compensation, as this is relevant to outweigh opportunity costs in an intuitive way.
Moreover, less intuitive effects highlighted by the model are also consistent with the
data, such as those stemming from a dynamic opportunity cost created by different
age-wage profiles across occupations.

C.3      Appendix – proofs
Proof of Proposition 1 Proof. The set of willing politicians, the “applicant
                                                       p+πw
pool”, is (y, p) |p ≥ (π(1 − δ) + δ) γy − πw or y ≤ (π(1−δ)+δ)γ .
   The measure of the applicant pool is,
                                                  p+πw
                                 Z    P̄   Z
                                               (π(1−δ)+δ)γ            1
                                                             g(y)dy      dp
                                  0        0                          P̄
   7
    Majority parties have larger party delegations on average, which means that the average compe-
tence among the rank and file is pulled down by moving further down the competence distribution.




                                                      18
and the average quality in the applicant pool (denoted by E (yA )) is,
                                                        p+πw
                                              R P̄ R (π(1−δ)+δ)γ
                                               0    0                 yg(y)dy P̄1 dp
                             E (yA ) = R R p+πw                                                 .
                                        P̄ (π(1−δ)+δ)γ
                                                0   0                  g(y)dy P̄1 dp
                      p+πw            p+a
   Denote ϕ ≡      (π(1−δ)+δ)γ
                                  ≡    ψ
                                          ,   with a ≡ πw and ψ ≡ (π(1 − δ) + δ) γ.

Maximum           competence       The most competent type willing to enter politics is
                                                                      (P̄ +πw)
                         
               P̄ +πw                dȳ        π           dȳ
  P̄ , ȳ ≡ (π(1−δ)+δ)γ . Note that dw   = (π(1−δ)+δ)γ > 0, dγ  = − (π(1−δ)+δ)γ 2 < 0 showing
that the maximum competence increases with w and decreases with γ. Now observe
                      dȳ
that if δ = 1, dπ          = wγ > 0 and the statement in the proposition follows from
continuity.

Average competence We now prove the statements on average competence.
    Effects of w and γ. Since ϕ is increasing in w and decreasing in γ, establishing
dE(yA )
  dϕ
        > 0 will prove dE(y
                          dw
                            A)
                               > 0 and dE(ydγ
                                               A)
                                                    < 0. Write out the expression for dE(y   dϕ
                                                                                               A)


as
                       R P̄               R P̄ R ϕ
                            ϕg(ϕ) P̄1 dp             yg(y)dy P̄1 dp P̄
                                                                     Z
         dE (yA )       0                  0      0                            1
                   = R P̄                − R                    2        g(ϕ) dp
           dϕ                                                                 P̄
                                                               
                         0
                            G(ϕ) P̄1 dp          P̄
                                                    G(ϕ) P̄1 dp       0
                                                0
                       R P̄      1
                                          R P̄           1
                                                                 R P̄ R ϕ          1
                                                                                         !
                            g(ϕ)     dp         ϕg(ϕ)      dp             yg(y)dy     dp
                   = R 0P̄       P̄
                                        · R0 P̄         P̄
                                                              − 0 R 0P̄            P̄
                                                                                           ,
                                  1                    1                       1
                        0
                            G(ϕ)  P̄
                                     dp      0
                                                g(ϕ)   P̄
                                                          dp           0
                                                                          G(ϕ) P̄
                                                                                  dp
                                  p+a
and use the equality ϕ =           ψ
                                      ,   to get
                       R P̄ +a
                             ψ
                                      R R a
                                         P̄      ψ             1
                                                                              R P̄ R a+p
                                                                                       ψ              1
                                                                                                         
          g(ϕ)dp  ψa yg(y)dy  0 0 yg(y) P̄ dydp + 0 ψa yg(y)dy P̄ dp 
       R P̄
  = R 0P̄        ·  R P̄ +a         − R R a                                 R P̄ R a+p                 
          G(ϕ)dp         ψ                  P̄     ψ              1                    ψ           1
     0                 a     g(y)dy       0       0   g(y)dy     P̄
                                                                    dp   +      0    a      g(y)dy P̄
                                                                                                      dp
                       ψ                                                             ψ
                                                     R P̄ R ψa                                 
                                                                        1
                                                        0    0 yg(y) P̄ dydp
                      P̄
                   R ψ  +a
                                       R P̄ R ψa                  R P̄ R a+p
                                                                                              + 
                                                            1               ψ           1
    R P̄
          g(ϕ)dp  ψ  a      yg(y)dy           0    g(y)dy     dp+        a      g(y)dy    dp
                                       0                   P̄       0                  P̄
                                                                                              
                                                                          ψ
  = R 0P̄        ·  R P̄ +a         −                                                          .
                                                               a+p
                                                                                                
                                                       R P̄ R ψ               1
                                                                    yg(y)dy      dp
     0
          G(ϕ)dp        ψ
                    a g(y)dy
                                      
                                                       0      a
                                                               ψ
                                                                              P̄
                                                                                                
                                                                                                
                            ψ                                     a         a+p
                                                        R P̄ R    ψ                    R P̄ R       ψ
                                                         0       0    g(y)dy P̄1 dp+    0       a       g(y)dy P̄1 dp
                                                                                                ψ




                                                        19
                                          R P̄ R a+p                    R a+P̄ R P̄
Changing the order of integration, so that 0 a ψ yg(y)dy P̄1 dp = a ψ ψy−a yg(y)dpdy P̄1 =
                                                  ψ                       ψ
R a+ψP̄ P̄ −(ψy−a)            R P̄ R a+p               a+P̄
                                                            P̄ −(ψy−a)
                   yg(y)dy and 0 a ψ g(y)dy P̄1 dp = a ψ
                                                     R
 a
             P̄                                                  P̄
                                                                       g(y)dy, we can write
 ψ                                  ψ                  ψ

                                                         R a
                                                                                  
                                                                    ψ
                                                                   0 yg(y)dy
                                                                                                + 
                           R P̄ +a                 Rψa           R a+P̄ P̄ −(ψy−a)
            R P̄           a ψ yg(y)dy                 yg(y)dy+ a ψ                 g(y)dy      
                  g(ϕ)dp                            0
                                                                    ψ
                                                                                P̄                
          = R 0P̄        ·  ψ
                               P̄ +a
                                       −                     a+P̄
                                                            R ψ P̄ −(ψy−a)
                                                                                                  
                                                                                yg(y)dy
                  G(ϕ)dp
                          R ψ                              a
                                                                                                  
                                                                        P̄
             0             ψa g(y)dy                        ψ
                                                                                                
                                                        a           R a+ P̄
                                                                                                 
                                                      Rψ                ψ   P̄ −(ψy−a)
                                                       0 yg(y)dy+ a               P̄
                                                                                       g(y)dy
                                                                      ψ

   or
                                                                 a                                a                     
                                                               R   ψ                              Rψ
                                                                  0 g(y)dy                         0 yg(y)dy
                                                                                            ·        a       +
                 R P̄ +a                    a              R a+    P̄
                                                                          (P̄ −(ψy−a))
                                                                                                   Rψ                     
                                                                                                    0 g(y)dy
                                            Rψ                      ψ
   R P̄          a ψ yg(y)dy               0 g(y)dy+ a                               g(y)dy                             
        g(ϕ)dp                                                ψ
                                                                                P̄                                        
= R 0P̄        ·  ψ
                     P̄ +a
                             −             R a+ψ
                                                 P̄
                                                     (P̄ −(ψy−a))                         R a+ψ
                                                                                               P̄
                                                                                                   (P̄ −(ψy−a))
                                                                                                                          
                                                                         g(y)dy                                 yg(y)dy
        G(ϕ)dp
                R ψ                         a                                             a
                                                                                                                          
                                                             P̄                                           P̄
   0             ψa g(y)dy                  ψ
                                                                                       ·    ψ
                                                                                                                        
                                         a          R a+  P̄
                                                                                           R a+ P̄
                                                                                                                         
                                       Rψ                ψ      (P̄ −(ψy−a))                   ψ    (P̄ −(ψy−a))
                                        0 g(y)dy+ a                     P̄
                                                                                 g(y)dy      a             P̄
                                                                                                                 g(y)dy
                                                      ψ                                     ψ


which can be simplified as
                                                                                                             
               R P̄ +a                                  R a+ψP̄ (P̄ −(ψy−a))         
   R P̄        a ψ yg(y)dy          R ψa                       y              g(y)dy 
    0
       g(ϕ)dp  ψ
                                     0 yg(y)dy
                                                           a
                                                           ψ             P̄            
= R P̄       · R P̄ +a      − α 1 · R a
                                                   +α2 · R a+P̄                       
       G(ϕ)dp  a g(y)dy                  ψ                       (P̄ −(ψy−a))
                                                                                       
   0
                     ψ                 0   g(y)dy          a
                                                               ψ
                                                                               g(y)dy  
               ψ                   |      {z    }         ψ           P̄             
               |        {z }                A2           |              {z           }
                        A1                                                                 A3

where
                                              R ψa
                                               0 g(y)dy
                      α1 = R a                 R a+ψP̄ (P̄ −(ψy−a))
                             ψ
                              0   g(y)dy +       a
                                                               P̄
                                                                        g(y)dy
                                                 ψ

                                    R a+ψP̄   (P̄ −(ψy−a))
                                       a
                                                    P̄
                                                           g(y)dy
                                       ψ
                      α2 = R a                 R a+ψP̄                             .
                             ψ                             (P̄ −(ψy−a))
                              0   g(y)dy +       a
                                                                 P̄
                                                                        g(y)dy
                                                 ψ

                                                           R P̄ +a
Note that 1 ≥ αi ≥ 0, i = 1, 2 and α1 + α2 = 1. Then, if a ψ yg(y)dy > 0 (i.e. the
                                                             ψ
support of Y covers a neighborhood of some point on the selection line), A1 > A2
and A1 > A3 since P̄ −(ψy−a)
                       P̄
                             is a decreasing function in y. It follows that dE(y
                                                                              dϕ
                                                                                 A)
                                                                                    > 0.

                                              20
   Effects of π. The effect of π on ϕ is ambiguous and hence so is the effect of π
on E (yA ). This effect becomes unambiguous only as δ → 1 and y finite. At δ = 1,
ϕ = p+πw
      γ
          , and the effect of π is similar to that of w, and dE(y
                                                               dπ
                                                                  A)
                                                                     > 0.

Proof of Proposition 2 Proof. Suppose the party observes types (y, p) perfectly.

   Negative screening. Here, the party selects an ability type of zero, which yields
more incompetent politicians than the average citizen.
   Random (Athenian) screening. This obviously does not require the party to
observe types, as it can make random offers to those who volunteer. Clearly, the
party obtains politicians with the average competence in the volunteer pool (denoted
E (yA )). To show that this is worse than average competence in the population, we
                         p+πw
use the identity ϕ ≡ (π(1−δ)+δ)γ , noting that E (yA ) < E (y) requires
                       R P̄ R ϕ                         R P̄ R ∞
                                  yg(y)dy P̄1 dp             yg(y)dy P̄1 dp
            E (yA ) ≡ R0 P̄ R0 ϕ                 < R0 P̄ R0 ∞               ≡ E (y) .
                          0   0
                                   g(y)dy P̄1 dp     0     0
                                                              g(y)dy 1
                                                                     P̄
                                                                        dp

This inequality follows from the fact that ϕ < ∞ and E (yA ) is increasing in ϕ.
     Positive screening. This is the only form of screening that can deliver politicians
who, on average, are more able than the average citizen. By continuity, very mildly
positive screening – arbitrarily close to random screening – will yield politicians worse
than the population on average. Therefore, positive screening must be pronounced
enough for politicians to be better than the average. Under the assumptions that
types
        are perfectly
                   observable and both traits are valuable, the party will select types
          P̄ +wπ
  P̄ , (π(1−δ)+δ)γ .




                                                   21
