                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           ASSESSING MANAGERIAL ABILITY:
                      IMPLICATIONS FOR CORPORATE GOVERNANCE

                                         Benjamin Hermalin
                                         Michael Weisbach

                                        Working Paper 23121
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w23121


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2017




Forthcoming in The Handbook of the Economics of Corporate Governance. The authors thank Vivian
Fang, Jongha Lim, Yihui Pan, Miriam Schwartz-Ziv, Berk Sensoy, Léa Stern, Luke Taylor, Ralph
Walkling, and Tracy Wang for helpful comments on an earlier draft, and Shan Ge for excellent research
assistance. Hermalin gratefully acknowledges the financial support of the Thomas & Alison Schneider
Distinguished Professorship in Finance and the hospitality of Nuffield College, Oxford, where work
on this chapter began. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2017 by Benjamin Hermalin and Michael Weisbach. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Assessing Managerial Ability: Implications for Corporate Governance
Benjamin Hermalin and Michael Weisbach
NBER Working Paper No. 23121
February 2017
JEL No. D81,D83,G34,M12

                                         ABSTRACT

A manager’s current and potential future employers are continually assessing her or his ability.
Such assessment is a crucial component of corporate governance and this chapter provides an
overview of the research on that aspect of governance. In particular, we review how assessment
generates incentives (both good and bad), generates risks that must be faced by both managers
and firms, and affects the contractual relationships between those parties in important ways.
Assessment (or learning) proves a key perspective from which to study, evaluate, and possibly
even regulate corporate governance. Moreover, because learning is a behavior notoriously subject
to systematic biases, this perspective is a natural avenue through which to introduce behavioral
and psychological insights into the study of corporate governance.


Benjamin Hermalin
Vice Provost
University of California
200 California Hall, #1500
Berkeley, CA 94720-1500
hermalin@haas.berkeley.edu

Michael Weisbach
Department of Finance
Fisher College of Business
Ohio State University
2100 Neil Ave.
Columbus, OH 43210
and NBER
weisbach.2@osu.edu
                                    Contents



Contents
1 Introduction                                                                       1

2 The   Basics of Learning                                                           5
  2.1   The Issue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      5
  2.2   An Application: A Model of CEO Dismissal/Retention . . . . . .               7
  2.3   Empirical Analyses of Management Turnover and Learning . . .                11

3 Career Concerns                                                         13
  3.1 Career Concerns: Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
  3.2 Career Concerns: Empirics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
      3.2.1 Evidence from Intertemporal Pattern of Incentives . . . . 20
      3.2.2 Estimating Learning about CEOs of Public Corporations 21
      3.2.3 Evidence from the Money Management Industry . . . . . 22

4 Signal Jamming: Project Choice and Managerial Myopia                              24
  4.1 Project Choice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    .   .   24
      4.1.1 When No Project May be Available . . . . . . . . . .            .   .   29
  4.2 Managerial Myopia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     .   .   33
  4.3 Empirical Analyses of Myopia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      .   .   37

5 Learning about Governance and Capital Markets                            39
  5.1 Learning Models and Capital Markets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
  5.2 How Learning about Management Affects Capital Markets . . . . 40
  5.3 Capital Market Inferences about Other Executives and Other Di-
      mensions of Governance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42

6 Further Implications for Governance                                       43
  6.1 Bargaining Over Oversight . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
  6.2 Consequences for Choice of Manager . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
  6.3 Consequences for Choice of Information Structures . . . . . . . . 55

7 How Non-Bayesian Updating Affects Governance                             59
  7.1 How Do People Really Update Their Beliefs? . . . . . . . . . . . 60
  7.2 Implications of Biases for Interpretation of Learning Models . . . 61
      7.2.1 The Base-Rate Fallacy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
      7.2.2 The Hot-Hand Fallacy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
      7.2.3 The Fundamental Attribution Bias . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
  7.3 Potential Future Research Applying Behavioral Economics to
      Corporate Governance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64

8 Conclusion                                                                        66

Appendix A: Technical Details                                                       68

References                                                                          75


                                         i
                                        Introduction                                         1



1    Introduction
A good definition of corporate governance is it is “the way in which suppliers of
finance . . . assure themselves of getting a return on their investment” (Shleifer
and Vishny, 1997, p. 737). There are many dimensions to obtaining such as-
surance. One, much-studied in the literature, is control : aligning the interests
of the managers who make decisions with the interests of the investors affected
by their decisions.1 How, for instance, do shareholders or a board of directors
keep a ceo from pursuing an agenda that benefits him but not them? An-
other key dimension, but one much less well-studied, has to do with assessing
the quality of the decisions being made by managers. Even if managers had
the best of intentions vis-à-vis their investors, if they are incompetent, pur-
sue poor projects, or adopt ill-conceived strategies, then investors will suffer.
The “suppliers of finance” must, therefore, continually assess the ability of their
managers. This insight entails a number of questions: for instance, how should
a ceo be assessed with respect to her intrinsic ability, competency, and match
with her employer? A further, somewhat subtle, but critical question is how
does knowing assessment will occur affect the behavior of the relevant actors?
    The last question is especially relevant: absent strategic reactions, making
inferences about attributes, such as ability, from various correlates, such as firm
profits, would be a relatively straightforward and unexciting statistical exercise.
However, as has long been known in the physical sciences, the act of observation
can directly affect the phenomenon being observed: an insight with important
implications for incentive provision and corporate governance, as noted initially
by Fama (1980) and Holmstrom (1982) [1999].2 Moreover, unlike a sub-atomic
particle or an animal in the wild, a manager understands the consequences of
being observed. In particular, because the outcome of assessment is unknown
in advance, the act of observation exposes the manager to risk—for which he
or she will demand compensation—with the amount of risk and, thus, compen-
sation being dependent on the assessment protocol. Furthermore, also unlike a
particle or an animal, a manager is a strategic player, who can, therefore, be
expected to try to influence how he or she is observed and by whom. In short,
assessment—learning—profoundly affects corporate governance by generating
incentives (some good, some bad); by creating a tradeoff between the accuracy
of the assessment and the risk that imposes on the manager; and by creating an
impetus for the manager to try to affect by whom he is observed (and governed).
    This chapter presents an overview of the scholarly literature on assessment

   1 Smith (1776, p. 700): “The directors of companies, however, being the managers . . . of

other peoples money . . . it cannot well be expected, that they should watch over it with the
same anxious vigilance [as owners].” In the modern era, there was a revived interest in agency
and its relation to governance led by Berle and Means (1932), Williamson (1963), and Jensen
and Meckling (1976), among others. See Becht et al. (2003) and Hermalin (2013) for recent
surveys of the relevant literature.
    2 Holmstrom’s paper was originally published in 1982 as a chapter in a hard-to-find

festschrift for Lars Wahlbeck. In the pre-pdf 1980s, a photocopy of the working-paper version
of the chapter was a treasured belonging of students and scholars interested in contract theory
and governance. In 1999, the Review of Economic Studies wisely reprinted the paper.
                                      Introduction                                        2



and learning as it pertains to corporate governance. We begin, in Section 2,
with the basics of learning models and their application to the issue of ceo
turnover, the decision to dismiss or retain a ceo in light of evidence about her
“ability.” At some level, ability is a multi-dimensional and amorphous concept.
It can describe a manager’s decision-making or leadership capabilities, the fit
between her style and skills with the needs of her firm, or even the fit between
her strategic vision and the firm’s capabilities. From a modeling perspective,
however, it is possible to act as if ability is a one-dimensional attribute that has
a known mapping into the expected profits of the firm (indeed, in many models,
a manager’s ability is expected profit under her leadership).3 In many models,
this ability is a fixed, but ex ante unknown, attribute of the manager. How
the firm performs under her command provides information—or signals—about
her ability from which those monitoring her can update their beliefs about her
ability via Bayes Theorem. If this updating leads her employers to infer the
firm would be more valuable under a different ceo, less any transition costs,
then she will be dismissed; otherwise, she is retained. Although the models
considered in Section 2 are straightforward from a statistical perspective, they
are rich enough to yield insightful comparative statics. Moreover, as we show
in the second half of that section, the implications of those comparative statics
are consistent with empirical analyses of managerial turnover.
    Knowing that they are being monitored, with resulting inferences about
their ability affecting their careers (not only retention of current positions, but
also their future compensation), managers have an incentive to influence the
monitoring process. In many settings, there are actions that they can take to
alter the performance signals on which estimates of their abilities are based.
For instance, supplying more effort may boost performance. In Section 3, we
present the Holmstrom (1999) model, in which a manager attempts to influ-
ence the assessment of her ability via the hidden actions she takes (effort she
supplies). This being a game, those monitoring her—in particular the market
for managers—understand she is supplying effort to influence the performance
measure; that is, she is engaged in “signal jamming.” Those monitoring will,
consequently, adjust for anticipated effort when estimating managerial ability;
in equilibrium, no one is fooled. Although she fools no one, the manager must
nonetheless expend this effort because it is expected (were she not to do so, the
market would still make the adjustment, to her detriment). Consequently, in
equilibrium, career concerns serve to provide the manager an incentive to supply
effort; however, as Holmstrom shows, these career concerns do not, generically,
lead to her providing the first-best level of effort.
    Having set forth the basic model of career concerns, the remainder of Sec-
tion 3 considers the empirical literature on career concerns. The idea that
career concerns serve to motivate workers is very general, and likely applies to
nearly every profession. Unfortunately, testing this directly is difficult: to do
so would require data on individual outputs and also on their career paths. In

   3 To be more realistic, one could view ability as that portion of expected profit that is

attributable to the manager.
                                  Introduction                                   3



most settings, such data are unavailable. Yet the importance of career concerns
on workers’ motivations is sufficiently great that the literature has sought var-
ious indirect tests or sought to measure the effects in fields where the data are
arguably available.
    Because career-concern models make predictions about the intertemporal
pattern of executive compensation, one empirical approach has been to see
whether the data are consistent with those predictions. As reviewed in Sec-
tion 3.2, the results from these studies are generally consistent with the predic-
tions of career-concern models.
    Another empirical approach, also discussed in Section 3.2, is to consider in-
dustries in which managerial performance and its consequence for managerial
remuneration are readily observed. One such industry is the money manage-
ment industry. Several papers have documented that, in the private-equity and
hedge-fund industries, fund flows respond to performance as Bayesian updating
about managers’ abilities would suggest they should; indeed, because the fees
management receives are usually proportional to money under management,
the consequence of even marginally better performance on managers’ lifetime
incomes is substantial.
    As noted, career concerns induce incentives to engage in signal jamming. In
the portion of Holmstrom (1999) summarized above, such signal jamming can
be seen in a positive light insofar as it creates incentives for managers to supply
more effort. As, however, Holmstrom goes on to show, such signal jamming
can also be detrimental to the employer’s (shareholders’) interests; for example,
as he shows, it can lead managers to eschew projects with positive expected
net-present values. We explore in greater depth the potentially perverse incen-
tives created by career concerns in Section 4. With regard to project choice,
Section 4.1 shows that because how the market will update its beliefs about a
manager are ex ante uncertain, such updating necessarily exposes the manager
to risk. The nature of that risk depends not only the underlying risk of the
projects themselves, but also what the market knows or infers about their risk.
For example, as discussed below, there is a somewhat counter-intuitive result
that when the market knows the underlying risk of different projects, the man-
ager can have an incentive to choose the riskiest project, regardless of expected
return, because the riskier the project, the less information it reveals about the
manager’s ability, and thus the less the market will update about her ability
based on the outcome of the project.
    A related idea is that when the market values a firm, it draws inferences
about its prospects the same way it does when it evaluates managerial ability;
that is, via Bayesian updating of beliefs based on current performance met-
rics (e.g., earnings). This potentially creates an incentive to signal-jam current
performance in the hopes of influencing that updating and, thus, boosting es-
timated value, which is to say the stock price. Consequently, when managers
have motive to care about the stock price, either through ownership or through
equity-linked incentive plans, managers have incentives to signal-jam. In some
circumstances, such signal jamming means neglecting longer-term investments
in favor of ones with more immediate payoffs (that will boost current perfor-
                                   Introduction                                   4



mance). Such a myopic strategy could be at odds with truly maximizing firm
value if the longer-term investments have the greater net present value (npv).
Although, in equilibrium, no one is fooled—firm value is correctly estimated—
the evaluation process effectively traps managers into behaving in this myopic
manner, since if they behave at odds with the market expects—invest in longer-
term projects with more inherent value—the market will draw the wrong infer-
ence and discount the firm’s value. In Section 4.2, we investigate this using a
simplified version of the Stein (1989) model, which originally developed this idea.
We then conclude Section 4 by reviewing related empirical work. This work doc-
uments that managers appear to prefer ceteris paribus, shorter-term investments
over longer term investments, especially if they are compensated through stock-
based compensation plans, results consistent with the signal-jamming story.
    Models of learning have applications to areas of economics beside gover-
nance. One is the functioning of capital markets: a number of “anomalies”
pertaining to stock returns can be explained by the idea that the market learns
about corporate attributes. In Section 5, we review the Pastor and Veronesi
(2003) model, in which learning is critical to understanding the distribution of
stock returns. We then show that this model can be reinterpreted in terms rele-
vant to corporate governance: the attributes about which the market learns are
managerial abilities and fit with their firms. Such a reinterpretation formalizes
the notion of “management risk,” which is how uncertainty about an executive’s
ability affects the volatility of his company’s stock prices and his company’s cost
of debt. When there is less uncertainty about ability, both volatility and the
cost of debt are lower. There is empirical support for these ideas: among other
results, studies indicate that the less uncertainty there is about the executive,
the less volatile is the company’s stock price and its cost of debt.
    In addition to changing how managers behave, learning has implications for
how owners and boards of directors behave. For instance, how actively owners
and boards monitor their executives depends on the potential information has to
affect their actions. Monitoring—seeking to obtain information—is intrinsically
more valuable when there is more uncertainty about an executive’s ability than
when there is little uncertainty. Monitoring of an established ceo is less valuable
than monitoring a new ceo. Monitoring a ceo who has a strong track record
and for whom there is, therefore, little likelihood, of obtaining signals that would
lead to her dismissal is less valuable than monitoring one with a more modest
track record. As we discuss in Section 6, such implications have consequences
for the structure of the board of directors (how independent it will be) and
the firm’s choice of ceo in the first place. Because of the consequences for a
ceo’s wellbeing, there are indirect costs to having better monitoring of the ceo:
making the ceo’s situation worse necessitates paying her more, which means
shareholders won’t always consider more (better) information about managerial
performance as an unalloyed good.
    Much of the analysis discussed in this chapter and employed in the liter-
ature presupposes that learning is rational; in particular, that it is in accord
with Bayes Theorem (i.e., is Bayesian learning). The notion that individuals
process information rationally and act according to Bayes Theorem has been
                                  The Basics of Learning                                     5



challenged by a large body of work in psychology. That literature finds con-
sistent evidence that people are subject to a series of biases that lead them to
form beliefs in ways that are inconsistent with Bayes Theorem. Broadly, these
biases lead people to place too much weight on new signals and not enough
on prior information. Section 7 reviews the evidence that people are in fact
“bad Bayesians,” as well as the implications of that for learning models of cor-
porate governance. We argue that, in fact, these departures from rationality
make learning-based models of corporate governance more important than they
would be if agents were perfectly rational. Since the “action” in learning models
comes from agents updating their beliefs, the behavioral biases that real-world
actors exhibit suggest that, in reality, they will update more than rational-actor
models would suggest. This, in turn, means the models could well understate
the effects they describe. In other words, learning models appear to be one area
of economics in which behavioral biases make the implications of rational-actor
models even more important than one might otherwise imagine.
    Some technical details, including proofs not given in the text, can be found
in the Appendix.

2     The Basics of Learning
2.1   The Issue
People constantly evaluate each other, typically with an eye towards making
predictions about how they will do in the future. Examples abound: a school
evaluates would-be students to see if they will do well if admitted; we evaluate
would-be romantic partners to see if they will prove a good match; and employ-
ers evaluate employees to ascertain the value they will create going forward.
Within the realm of corporate governance, the last of these is especially rele-
vant: shareholders—or their representatives, the board of directors—evaluate
executives (existing or potential) to predict their future performance. They do
so because they wish to know an executive’s value (e.g., what is the maximum
they should pay her); alternatively, they might want to make a decision about
retaining her or gambling on putting someone else in charge.
    Within economics, such evaluation is modeled via learning models. To wit,
the employer’s (shareholders’) expected payoff in period t is assumed to be a
function of the employee’s (executive’s) then-current ability, αt ∈ A ⊆ R, where
A is the set of possible ability levels.4,5 The employer is assumed not to know the
employee’s ability, but he knows its relevant statistical properties. Additionally,
he has some set of past signals—possibly just past performance—that he can

   4 Generalizing ability to be multi-dimensional (e.g., α ∈ Rn ) gains one little: an employer
                                                          t
cares about his expected payoff, B(αt ), and one could simply define ability to be B(αt ). The
statistical properties of the random variable B(αt ) would be inherited from those of αt in
the usual way. Multiple dimensions could, however, be relevant if possible employee-employer
matching across different employers was at issue.
   5 There is also no gain to indexing A by period: just define A =
                                                                     S∞
                                                                       t=0 At , where At is the
set of possible time-t ability levels.
                                       The Basics of Learning                                  6



use to make inferences about ability at time t.
    The standard model assumes ability does not change over time.6 When
ability is time invariant, we simply denote it as α (i.e., without a time index)
and assume it is drawn from a known distribution, F0 : R → [0, 1], with asso-
ciated density f0 : R → R+ . Let α  b0 denote the expected value of ability given
distribution F0 . The entities F0 , f0 , and αb0 are known, respectively, as the
prior distribution, prior density, and prior of ability (the rationale for the zero
subscript will become evident shortly).
    As alluded to earlier, the employer observes signals that permit him to up-
date his beliefs about the employee’s ability. Specifically, let st ∈ R denote the
signal he observes at time t (e.g., st is the realization of profit at time t or an
indicator of whether the period-t project was successful).7 The signal in any
given period is drawn from a conditional distribution G(·|α) : R → [0, 1]. Let
g(·|α) : R → R+ denote the corresponding conditional density. Consistent with
this notation, the assumption is that, conditional on true ability α, the signal at
one time is distributed identically and independently of the signal at any other
time. Two relevant examples are:
   1. st ∈ {0, 1} — the period-t project either fails or succeeds, g(0|α) = 1 − α
      is the probability it fails, and g(1|α) = α is the probability it succeeds;
      that is, ability is equivalent to the probability of being successful.
   2. st = α + εt , where εt ∼ Ψ : (−∞, ∞) → [0, 1]. As the signal could always
      be redefined as s̃ = s − E{ε}, there is no loss of generality in assuming
      E{ε} = 0. Observe that G(s|α) = Ψ(s − α).
    It follows from Bayes Theorem that
                                                      g(s1 |α)f0 (α)
                                 f1 (α|s1 ) = R                         ,                    (1)
                                                     A
                                                       g(s1 |z)f0 (z)dz
where the integral in (1) is to be understood to encompass simple summation if
A is finite (i.e., ability is discretely distributed). More generally,
                                                  g(st |α)ft−1 (α|s1 , . . . , st−1 )
                   ft (α|s1 , . . . , st ) = R                                           .   (2)
                                                 A
                                                   g(s1 |z)ft−1 (z|s1 , . . . , st−1 )dz
    In practice, obtaining a closed-form solution for the recursive formula (2) in
terms of the primitives, f0 and g, is difficult, especially if one wants a solution
for an arbitrary t. One exception is if the signals are independent Bernoulli
trials, as in the first example above. In that case, the probability of n successes
in t trials given ability α is
                                  
                                  t n
                                     α (1 − α)t−n ;
                                  n
   6 See   Holmstrom (1999) for an analysis in which ability follows a Gaussian random walk.
   7 Given   that ability is uni-dimensional, there is little to be gained by assuming multi-
dimensional signals (e.g., st ∈ Rm ). If the model is tractable, one can form a sufficient
statistic from st and, thus, one could just define st as that sufficient statistic.
                                   The Basics of Learning                                      7



hence, employing Bayes Theorem,

                                              αn (1 − α)t−n f0 (α)
                           ft (α|n) = R                                .                     (3)
                                             A
                                               z n (1 − z)t−n f0 (z)dz

So if ability is also the realization of a Bernoulli trial (i.e., A = {α, ᾱ}), then

                                              ᾱn (1 − ᾱ)t−n f0 (ᾱ)
                ft (ᾱ|n) =                                                     .
                              ᾱn (1   −   ᾱ)t−n f          n
                                                   0 (ᾱ) + α (1 − α)
                                                                      t−n f (α)
                                                                           0

As a second example, if ability is drawn from a uniform distribution on [0, 1],
then Ft (·|n) is a beta distribution with parameters n + 1 and t − n + 1.8
    Another model that permits a closed-form solution, and which has been
widely used in the literature, is (i) to assume that ability is drawn from a normal
distribution with mean α          b0 and precision τ0 (the precision of a distribution is
the multiplicative inverse of its variance); and (ii) to assume that st = α + εt (as
in the second illustration above), where εt is distributed normally with mean
zero and precision η. Then it can be shown (see, e.g., DeGroot, 1970, p. 166)
that Ft (·|s1 , . . . , st ) is a normal distribution with mean
                                        Pt
                              τ0 α
                                 b0 + η i=1 si   τ0 α
                                                    b0 + tηs̄
                         α
                         bt =                  =              ,                              (4)
                                    τ0 + tη        τ0 + tη
where s̄ is the arithmetic average of the t signals, and precision

                                            τt = τ0 + tη .                                   (5)

Because of its reliance on the normal distribution, the literature refers to this
as the normal learning model .

2.2    An Application: A Model of CEO Dismissal/Retention
As an application of the normal learning model, consider the following. Share-
holders (or their representatives, the board of directors) hire a ceo from a pool
of ex ante identical ceos. Assume that the ability of any ceo is drawn from a
normal distribution with mean 0 and precision τ0 (each ceo’s ability being an
independent draw from this common distribution). Setting the mean to zero is
purely for convenience and without loss of generality. The timing of moves is:

   1. Risk-neutral shareholders (alternatively, the board—here assumed to be
      perfect agents) set an information policy (more on this below).

   2. A ceo is hired from the aforementioned pool of ceos.

   8 Recall that a uniform distribution is equivalent to a beta distribution with both parameters

equal to 1. It can be shown more generally, see DeGroot (1970, p. 160), that if α is distributed
beta with parameters ξ and ζ, then Ft (·|n) is a beta distribution with parameters ξ + n and
ζ + t − n.
                             The Basics of Learning                                8



  3. A signal about the ceo’s ability, s, is realized; its distribution is normal
     with a mean equal to the ceo’s ability and a precision, η, that depends
     on the information policy determined at stage 1.
  4. Based on the signal, the shareholders (board) decide to keep or replace
     the ceo. The firm incurs a replacement cost of r > 0 if it replaces him.
     A replacement ceo is drawn from the same pool as the original ceo.

  5. The shareholders realize a payoff with expected value equal to the ability
     of the ceo in place at this stage.

    Let αb1 denote the posterior estimate (mean) of ceo ability following the
realization of the signal. From (4),
                                           ηs
                                  α
                                  b1 =          .
                                         τ0 + η

Observe that α b1 is the shareholders’ expected payoff should they retain the ceo.
If, instead, they replace him, the expected payoff generated by the replacement
is 0 by assumption. Hence, replacing the initial ceo is rational if and only if

                                            (τ0 + η)r
                       −r ≥ α
                            b1 ⇐⇒ −                   ≥ s.                    (6)
                                                η

    Recall that s ∼ N(α, 1/η) (the notation N(µ, σ 2 ) denotes a normal distri-
bution with mean µ and variance σ 2 ). This is a conditional distribution. It is
also necessary to know the unconditional distribution of s. Because s = α0 + ε,
it is the sum of two normal random variables and, as such, is normally dis-
tributed with a mean equal to the sum of their means–in this case, 0—and a
variance equal to the sum of their variances—in this case 1/τ0 + 1/η; that is,
the unconditional distribution of s is
                                              
                                        η + τ0
                              s ∼ N 0,           .                          (7)
                                         τ0 η

It is convenient to denote the precision of the unconditional distribution of s:
                                          τ0 η
                                  h=            .                             (8)
                                         η + τ0

        b1 = sh/τ0 and so replacement occurs if and only if s ≤ −rτ0 /h.
Observe α

A useful aside. Let Φ and φ denote the distribution and density functions
of the standard normal (i.e., N(0, 1)), respectively. If x ∼ N(µ, σ 2 ), then the
distribution and density functions for x can be expressed, respectively, as
                                                  
                            x−µ           1    x−µ
                        Φ            and φ              .
                              σ           σ      σ
                                  The Basics of Learning                                     9



    Employing the aside, the shareholders’ expected payoff at stage 1—the value
of the firm—is (see Appendix for derivation):
                                                √             
                                           rτ0      h       rτ0
             E max{−r, α  b1 } = −rΦ − √         +     φ −√                 (9)
                                              h     τ0         h
Some observations about expression (9):
   1. Because
                     b1 } ≥ α
              max{−r, α      b1 and strictly so for a set of positive measure,
      E max{−r, αb1 } > E{bα1 } = 0; hence, (9) is positive.
   2. The positive value of (9) reflects the value of the option to replace the
      initial ceo. In this regard, observe that the limit of (9) as r → ∞ equals
      zero: there is no option if replacing the ceo is impossible (infinitely costly).
   3. The derivative of (9) with respect to h is
                                                       
                        r 2 τ0     1       r 2 τ0     rτ0
                     − 3/2 +        √ +            φ −√     > 0.                          (10)
                       2h       2τ0 h 2h3/2             h

   Because the (conditional) precision of the signal, η, enters into the value of
the firm, expression (9), only through h, the last observation implies that the
derivative of firm value with respect to η must have the same sign as dh/dη,
which from (8) is positive. We can conclude:
Lemma 1. Ceteris paribus, the value of the firm (i.e., expression (9)) increases
in the precision of the signal of ability, η.
    In light of Lemma 1, one might imagine that shareholders should, for in-
stance, desire very precise information relevant to assessing their ceo’s ability,
such as highly accurate accounting and close monitoring by the board of direc-
tors.9 Of course, one needs to take into account the direct costs of obtaining
such information, which need to be balanced by the benefits. There are also, as
noted by Hermalin and Weisbach (1998, 2012), indirect costs arising from the
fact that the ceo must agree to employment in the first place and he may have
opposing preferences concerning the quality of information.
    As a first pass as to why executives could have opposing preferences, suppose
the initially hired ceo’s payoff is w if retained and w − L if dismissed, where
w is his compensation and L > 0 is a loss suffered if dismissed (e.g., a loss of
status, costs of relocating, etc.). Normalize ceos’ reservation utilities to zero;
that is, a ceo is willing to accept any position that provides him a non-negative
expected utility. For purposes here, suppose that the shareholders possess all
the bargaining power and can, thus, make take-it-or-leave-it (tioli) offers to

   9 This is not the only reason shareholders could prefer greater accuracy. In hidden-action

agency models with risk-averse agents, principals benefit from better information systems (see,
e.g., Grossman and Hart, 1983; Hermalin and Katz, 1991, 2000; and Kim, 1995). Also, as
noted by Cebon and Hermalin (2015), a better informed board can sometimes utilize a better
contracting technology than a less well informed one.
                                   The Basics of Learning                                    10



ceos. Because a replacement ceo is never fired, she would accept any offer
with w ≥ 0. As the shareholders wish to maximize firm profit, it follows they
would offer a replacement ceo w = 0.
    Before considering the wage offered the initially hired ceo, it is necessary
to clarify what he knows about his own ability at time of employment. If his
knowledge of his own ability is superior to what a potential employer knows,
then bargaining between shareholders and ceo (even tioli offers) will convey
information to the shareholders about the ceo’s ability.10 For this reason, the
literature has, for the most part, focused on information-neutral bargaining,
which requires that the employer and employee have identical ex ante beliefs
about the employee’s ability. Although one can debate the literal truth of that
assumption, there are reasons to view it as a reasonable approximation. First,
one’s own assessment of ability is based on past performance, which could well
be known to potential employers (this seems especially relevant for executives,
whose firms’ performance is highly public); second, the uncertainty about a
ceo’s ability in a particular job is largely uncertainty about the match between
him and the firm, which is similarly unknown to both the board and the ceo.11
    Returning to the initially hired ceo, what wage is he offered? His expected
utility if he accepts employment is
                                                
                                             rτ0
                                w − LΦ − √         ,
                                               h
which reflects that he will be fired if the signal falls
                                                    √ below the cutoff given in (6),
an event that occurs with probability Φ(−rτ0 / h ). Because the shareholders
get to make a tioli offer, the ceo’s participation constraint will bind; hence,
in equilibrium,                                   
                                               rτ0
                                 w = LΦ − √          .                         (11)
                                                 h
The righthand side of that expression increases in h and, thus, in η: the greater
the precision of the signal, the greater will be the ceo’s compensation. As intu-
ition, observe that as η → 0 (the signal is without precision), h → 0 and, thus,
the righthand side of (11) goes to 0 (the argument of Φ goes to −∞): because
the signal contains no information, it won’t ever be the basis for dismissing the
ceo, so he requires no compensation to bear the risk of dismissal. The ceo
faces a risk of dismissal only if the signal is informative about his ability and
that risk increases with the informativeness of the signal.12
    It follows that the shareholders bear an indirect cost from a more precise
signal: the compensation they must offer the ceo is greater. Taking that into
  10 For example, whether the ceo would accept the shareholders’ tioli offer would depend

on his assessment of his ability and, so, the shareholders should update their beliefs about his
ability based on his acceptance of their offer.
  11 This   assumption is discussed at length in Holmstrom (1999).
  12 Atthis juncture, we are admittedly being loose about the relation between the precision
of the distribution and informativeness of the signal. However, as Hermalin and Weisbach
(2012, Corollary 1) prove, the two concepts coincide in this context.
                                The Basics of Learning                                  11



account, expected firm value is, now, (9) less w or
                                        √             
                                    rτ0        h     rτ0
                     −(r + L)Φ −    √     +      φ − √                                (12)
                                      h       τ0       h
Differentiating (12) with respect to h yields
                                                   
                            Lrτ0       1          rτ0
                          − 3/2 +      √      φ − √     ;
                           2h       2τ0 h           h

the sign of which is the same as that of h−Lrτ02 . It is readily seen that h = Lrτ02
minimizes firm value and, thus, the shareholders are either best off with a signal
of minimum precision (within the realm of possible precision levels) or with one
of maximum precision (again within the feasible set).
   Although a simple model, the analysis above illustrates that employer and
employee can have opposing preferences about the precision with which the
employee is assessed. Consequently, the employee’s compensation will be higher
when he is assessed with greater precision than with less precision.

Bibliographic Note. The above model can be seen as simplified version of a
more general analysis by Hermalin and Weisbach (2012). Hermalin (2005) uses
a similar model to explore, inter alia, how trends toward greater monitoring of
executives (e.g., via more vigilant boards and tighter reporting requirements)
could help to explain a secular trend toward higher executive pay. We return
to these and other applications below.

2.3   Empirical Analyses of Management Turnover and Learning
This learning model provides a natural way to understand the relation between
management turnover and firm performance. A firm’s board is constantly up-
dating its assessment of the firm’s ceo and top management team. When the
expected profits are lower from the current management than from a potential
replacement, a profit-maximizing board should replace the current management.
This idea was formally introduced to the governance literature in Hermalin and
Weisbach (1998) and provides a framework for understanding the negative em-
pirical relation between firm performance and management turnover.
    A large number of papers have documented that there is a positive relation
between ceo turnover and poor performance in large corporations, as well as
other types of organizations.13 In addition, Denis and Denis (1995) document
that firm performance generally improves following a ceo turnover, especially a
forced turnover. The standard interpretation of this relation is that it measures

  13 Among these are Coughlan and Schmidt (1985), Warner et al. (1988), Weisbach (1988),

Barro and Barro (1990), Jensen and Murphy (1990), Blackwell et al. (1994), Huson et al.
(2001), Brickley and Van Horn (2002), Engel et al. (2003), Parrino et al. (2003), Eldenburg
et al. (2004), Kaplan and Minton (2012), Eisfeldt and Kuhnen (2013), Jenter and Lewellen
(2014), and Jenter and Kanaan (2015).
                                   The Basics of Learning                                     12



the board’s monitoring; when performance is worse, the board is more likely to
find the current ceo unacceptable and, so, replace him.
     An important issue in empirical studies of turnover and performance is dis-
tinguishing voluntary turnovers (i.e., unforced resignations for reasons unrelated
to performance) and involuntary turnovers (i.e., dismissals—perhaps disguised
as resignations). Because the true reasons for turnover are often not given pub-
licly, press releases and other public information are often largely or wholly
uninformative as to whether a turnover was voluntary or not. Empirical stud-
ies have taken different approaches to try to sort voluntary from involuntary
managerial change—some ignore the issue, some exclude observations of ceos
at normative retirement age, and some make a detailed effort to distinguish vol-
untary from involuntary turnover. The algorithm suggested by Parrino (1997)
has become more or less the standard approach to assessing whether a partic-
ular turnover is “forced”:14 a plus to it is the turnovers it identifies as forced
are likely correctly classified; a minus is it will mis-classify as voluntary those
turnovers in which the press fails to report information about pressure exerted
on executives to resign. Nonetheless, voluntary turnovers are unlikely to be
related to performance and the negative relation between performance and ceo
turnover is extremely robust across samples. Therefore, the measured nega-
tive relation between turnover and performance probably reflects boards firing
ceos (i.e., the difficulty in distinguishing the two types of turnover merely adds
noise to the dependent variable and, thus, is irrelevant beyond its effect on the
standard errors).
     Are learning models consistent with the data on executive turnover? This
is a difficult question to answer, although Taylor (2010) offers evidence that
the models could well be consistent with the data. He does so by calibrating a
learning model and measuring the extent to which it fits various aspects of the
data. In particular, Taylor’s model does a good job of jointly and quantitatively
matching the data (see, in particular, Figure 4 of his article). Inter alia, Cornelli
et al. (2013) also find evidence consistent with a learning model of ceo turnover.
     An additional difficulty for empirical work on this topic is disentangling
learning-based rationales for dismissal from other rationales. For instance, a
prediction of some dynamic moral-hazard models in which the agent enjoys
limited-liability protection (i.e., cannot be fined for poor performance) is that
the principal will wish to commit to terminate the agent after sufficiently bad
performance as a deterrence to shirking ex ante.15 It is not clear how one would

  14 Parrino uses a three-step process to identify forced departures. First, all successions for

which the Wall Street Journal effectively reports that the ceo has been fired are classified
as forced. Second, if the ceo is less than 60 and the Wall Street Journal fails to report the
reason for the departure is death, poor health, or taking another position or if it reports that
the ceo is retiring but the announcement is not at least six months before the succession,
then this too is classified as forced. Third, the remaining cases are classified as voluntary if,
as reported in the press, the incumbent takes a comparable position elsewhere or departs for
previously undisclosed personal or business reasons that are unrelated to the firm’s activities;
otherwise they are classified as involuntary.
  15 See   Edmans and Gabaix (in press), especially Section 4, for more on such models.
                                    Career Concerns                                       13



design a test that could distinguish between moral hazard and learning-based
models empirically.
    One might, at first, think to look at the stock market reaction to a dismissal
as a means of distinguishing the two because moral hazard and learning models
would seem to have different implications for firm value. Dismissal in a pure
moral-hazard model is ex post inefficient: all ceos are identical, so firm value
is reduced by the costs of transition (this is why, for dismissal to be a credible
threat and, thus, its possibility to create incentives, the board must commit ex
ante to dismissal should certain outcomes occur). In contrast, in a learning
model, the expected value of a replacement ceo to the firm less transition costs
exceeds the expected value of the incumbent. Naı̈vely, then, one might expect
the market to respond positively to dismissal if learning explains dismissal and
to respond negatively if moral hazard does. This view is, however, potentially
incomplete: if there was uncertainty in the market about whether the board was
committed to dismissing the ceo for poor performance, then dismissal would
be a positive signal about that commitment and, thus, the board’s ability to
provide strong incentives. Conversely, the information that causes the board
to update negatively about the ceo’s ability could be information private to
it; hence, his dismissal causes the market to revise downward its assessment of
the firm’s value (since the initial value was calculated under the belief that the
incumbent ceo was better than any replacement; a belief that has been revealed
to be false).16 A reasonable summary then is that while one cannot rule out
other explanations, one equally cannot claim that learning models are in any
way inconsistent with the data on ceo turnover.

3    Career Concerns
An important way in which assessment affects executives is by influencing their
market value. A successful manager is, all else equal, likely to have greater abil-
ity than a less successful one. Correspondingly, her services would be in greater
demand than her less-successful counterpart, which means her compensation
should be greater.
    Using the previous section’s setup, this point is readily formalized: suppose
the signal at time t is the executive’s contribution to firm profit (gross of her
compensation). That is, st is the increment to period t’s profit attributable to
the executive. Assume st = α+εt , where, similar to above, the prior distribution
of α is N(bα0 , 1/τ0 ) and εt is i.i.d. N(0, 1/η). Given this structure, the executive’s
expected contribution to period-t + 1 profit is α      bt , the value of which is given
by (4). If there is a competitive market for the executive’s services and her
contribution to profits the same across firms, then her pay in period t + 1 will
be αbt . From (4), greater past success—higher average s—means greater pay.
    A shortcoming of that simple formulation is it misses the possibility that the
executive, knowing her compensation is tied to her performance, may undertake

  16 See Hermalin and Weisbach (1998) for a more detailed discussion of possible stock-market

reactions to dismissals in a learning model.
                                         Career Concerns                                     14



activities to influence her perceived performance. As will be seen, those activities
may be to the benefit or detriment of her employer(s).

3.1    Career Concerns: Theory
Fama (1980) made the following argument: given a competitive market for
managerial talent, the more able a manager appears, the greater will be her
compensation.17 Estimated ability is a function of performance, but now sup-
pose, unlike the analysis to this point, performance is also a function of the
manager’s actions as well as her innate ability. If so, then because of their effect
on the market’s inference about her ability and, thus, on her compensation,
the manager has incentives to take actions that will cause her firm to perform
well. Although compelling, Fama’s argument is, as Holmstrom (1999) noted,
incomplete and, in some ways, even incorrect.
   Holmstrom formalizes the issues by supposing that time-t performance is

                                     s t = e t + α + εt ,                                  (13)

where α and εt are as above, with the same statistical properties, and et ∈ R+ is
the executive’s action (effort) in period t.18 Holmstrom assumes the executive’s
utility in period t is wt − c(et ), where wt is her compensation that period and
c : R+ → R+ is a twice differentiable increasing function. To ensure unique
interior maxima, assume that c′ (0) = 0 and c is strictly convex (for future
reference, the latter assumption entails first-order conditions are sufficient as
well as necessary). Consistent with the usual notion of cost, c(0) = 0.
     Assume the executive’s action each period is a hidden action; that is, known
to her, but not observable by anyone else. Were it, instead, observable, then
the problem would be of little interest because the parties could contract on her
action directly. Although no one but the executive knows her action in period t,
et , there is a level of effort, ebt , that interested parties (i.e., current and potential
employers) anticipate she will take. This means that the other interested parties
translate performance, st , in period t into a signal of ability by subtracting ebt
from st ; call this constructed signal s̃t and observe

                             s̃t ≡ st − ebt = α + εt + et − ebt .
  17 This is true even if the manager stays with her current employer: to keep her, the current

employer must increase her compensation in response to the outside offers her good perfor-
mance elicits.
  18 Conditional on a linear specification such as (13), the assumption of a uni-dimensional

action is without loss of generality. The alternative, that
                                     st = γ(et ) + α + εt ,
where γ : Rn  → R, is effectively equivalent to (13): simply define et = γ(et ). In terms of her
mix of actions, the executive’s choice must minimize her disutility of action, C(et ), subject
to her desired level of γ(et ); hence, the soon-to-be-defined c(et ) can simply be seen as
                         c(et ) = argmin C(et ) subject to et = γ(et ) .
                                    et
                                       Career Concerns                                              15



It follows from (4) and (5) that
                    Pt
        τ0 α
           b0 + η    i=1 (α   + εt + et − ebt )        bt−1 + η(α + εt + et − ebt )
                                                  τt−1 α
 α
 bt =                                           =                                   . (14)
                         τ0 + tη                             τt−1 + η

    If the executive plays a pure strategy in equilibrium, then, given players cor-
rectly anticipate others’ strategies in equilibrium, ebt = et along the equilibrium
path. Of course, part of determining the equilibrium is verifying that, for any
purported equilibrium sequence of actions, {b    et }Tt=1 , anticipated by others, the
executive’s best response is actually to play the matching actions (i.e., so that
et = ebt is, indeed, a best response to what others expect). Given accurate antic-
ipation, observe, from (14), that the executive’s actions don’t actually influence
estimates of her ability.
    The expected value of the executive in period t is α      bt−1 + ebt , which is the
expected value of st . Given a competitive market for her services, that will thus
be her compensation at time t. Formally:

                                        wt = α
                                             bt−1 + ebt .                                     (15)

Critically, notice that wt does not depend on the executive’s actual time-t action.
    To begin the analysis, assume the executive’s career lasts T periods, T fixed
and commonly known. Assume her discount factor from one period to the next
is δ ∈ (0, 1) (i.e., she values a payoff of u one period hence at δu now).
    A consequence of a finite career span is that the game can be solved via
backward induction. Consider period T . The executive’s utility in that terminal
period is wT − c(eT ). The effort that maximizes that expression is clearly 0;
that is, eT = 0. Consequently, in equilibrium, ebT = 0. From (15), wT = α     bT −1 ,
and, as just noted, it is also the executive’s period T utility. Fold back to period
T − 1, the executive’s remaining lifetime expected utility is

                                 δEwT + wT −1 − c(eT −1 ) .                                   (16)

To determine the executive’s action in period T − 1, we need to determine EwT
and how it depends on eT −1 . Utilizing (14),

                 bT −2 + (eT −1 − ebT −1 )η + ηE{α + εT −1 }
           τT −2 α
  EwT =
                               τT −2 + η
                                                                      η
                                                     =α
                                                      bT −2 +                 (eT −1 − ebT −1 ) ,
                                                                  τT −2 + η

where the second equality follows because the expectation of α after T −2 periods
is α
   bT −2 and the expectation of εt is zero for all t. Substituting that value for
EwT back into (16), it follows that the executive’s unique best response is the
solution to the first-order condition
                                       η
                                δ               − c′ (eT −1 ) = 0 .                           (17)
                                    τT −2 + η
                                        Career Concerns                                                16



Observe the solution is independent of both the conditional expectation of her
ability, α
         bT −2 , and the effort others anticipate, ebT −1 . It follows that, in equilib-
rium, ebT −1 equals the eT −1 that solves (17); call that latter value e∗T −1 .
    Two observations about the results to this point:
   1. Welfare is e − c(e); so, the welfare-maximizing effort, efb (fb for first best)
      solves 1 − c′ (e) = 0. Clearly, efb > 0, so the executive’s action is less than
      first best in the last period of her career. Because δη/(τ +η) < 1, the usual
      comparative statics entail that efb > e∗T −1 : the executive’s action is also
      less than first best in the penultimate period of her career. Hence, at least
      in the twilight of an executive’s career, career concerns are insufficient to
      induce optimal actions.
   2. From (17), the executive’s private marginal return is δη/(τT −2 + η), which
      increases in δ and η, but falls in τT −2 . Consequently, the executive takes
      greater action (closer to optimal) the more patient she is and the greater
      the precision of the signal; she takes a lesser action (farther from the
      optimum) the more precise the current estimate of her ability.
    Let Et denote expectation given information at the beginning of period t
(i.e., just after t − 1 periods). The executive’s expected remaining lifetime
utility from period t on is
                                                      
                               XT
                                                      
                            Et     δ j−1 wj − c(ej )
                                                      
                                        j=t

For an arbitrary period t′ > t, the same logic as above yields
                               Pt′ −1
               τt−1 α
                    bt−1 + η     j=t    (ej − ebj + Et {α + εj })
  E t w t′ =
                               τt−1 + (t′ − t)η
                                                                            Pt′ −1
                                                                        η     j=t    (ej − ebj )
                                                             =α
                                                              bt−1 +                               .
                                                                         τt−1 + (t′ − t)η
It follows, therefore, that at period t < T , when the executive is choosing her
action for that period, her optimization program is equivalent to solving
                                T
                                X −t
                                                    η
           max −c(et ) + et            δj                     ≡ max mt et − c(et ) ,           (18)
               et
                                j=1
                                            τ0 + (t + j − 1)η    et


where mt , the sum given in (18), is the executive’s lifetime marginal return to
her effort in period t. The properties of this marginal return are summarized as
follows:
Lemma 2. The executive’s lifetime marginal return to effort in period t (i.e.,
the mt defined in (18)) is (i) decreasing in t; (ii) decreasing in the precision of
the prior estimate of ability, τ0 ; (iii) increasing in the precision of the signal, η;
and (iv) increasing with the discount factor, δ.
                                    Career Concerns                                      17



     The value of mt determines the executive’s unique pure-strategy best re-
sponse, e∗t , the solution to the first-order condition mt − c′ (e) = 0. Ob-
serve mt is deterministic (it depends on the underlying parameters, not the
realization of random variables). The equilibrium is, thus, characterized by
             −1
ebt = et = c′ (mt ).
     On the equilibrium path, the executive’s actions are perfectly anticipated.
In a sense, then, they play no role in employers’ (current and potential) estimate
of her ability. One might, therefore, ask why she, then, bothers to take actions
motivated by influencing the market’s beliefs if the market will see through that?
The answer is the market subtracts the actions it anticipates she will take—recall
it does not see what she actually chooses to do—so if she chose not to take those
expected actions, then her performance would be worse and the market would
subtract its anticipation of her action from that worse performance; her inferred
ability would, therefore, be correspondingly low. In other words, she must match
what the market anticipates to avoid being judged harshly by it. The manager
is like the Red Queen in Lewis Carroll’s Through the Looking Glass: she must
run as fast as possible just to stay still.19
     The properties of {mt }Tt=1 set forth in Lemma 2 determine the time path
of the executive’s actions and how it varies with the underlying parameters. In
particular, because {mt }Tt=1 is a decreasing sequence, it follows that {e∗t }Tt=1
is likewise a decreasing sequence: the actions (efforts) of the executive decline
over the course of her career. As seen earlier, they ultimately go to zero and, in
the twilight of her career, are below the first best. It is, however, possible that
her actions could be above the first best early in her career: if, for instance,
T = 10, δ = 9/10, and τ0 = η = 1, then m1 ≈ 1.35 > 1—the executive’s private
marginal return to action in period 1 exceeds the social marginal return.
     There are two effects driving the decline in career-based incentives over the
executive’s life: first, the closer she gets to the end of her career, the fewer
periods that her current action affects, which reduces the return to that action;
second, as her career progresses she becomes more of a known entity, the weight
attached each period’s performance in assessing her ability decreases over time,
and, thus, the scope for her action to influence assessment also decreases. This
last effect can be seen by observing that
                          τt−1             η
                 α
                 bt =            α
                                 bt−1 +          (et − ebt + α + εt ) .
                        τt−1 + η        τt−1 + η

The first fraction—the weight on the prior going into period t—increases over
time because τt increases in t, while the second fraction—the weight given cur-
rent performance—decreases over time for the same reason.
   The results in Lemma 2 also entail that the actions of the executive are
greater, ceteris paribus, the more precise the signal and they are less, ceteris
paribus, the more precise is the initial prior estimate, α
                                                         b0 . As a summary:

  19 Holmstrom (1999) refers to the Red Queen effect as a form of rat racing. Unlike conven-

tional rat-racing models, such as tournaments, the agent in question is not competing with
other agents but rather, in essence, with what the market anticipates.
                                 Career Concerns                                  18



Proposition 1. In the career-concerns model of this section, there is a pure-
strategy subgame-perfect equilibrium in which the executive’s strategy is the se-
                                           −1
quence of actions {e∗t }Tt=1 where e∗t = c′ (mt ), mt defined by (18). The market
(employers) accurately anticipate the executive’s actions. The executive’s ac-
tions decline over time; although they may initially exceed the first-best level,
they ultimately are less than first best and her action is zero in her last period
of work. Ceteris paribus, the executive’s actions are greater the more precise a
signal performance is of her ability and they are less the more precise the initial
estimate of her ability is.

An Infinite Horizon. The model was constructed assuming a known and
finite career length for the executive. Such an assumption is not necessary:
as an alternative, assume the length of her career is unknown, but that there
is a constant probability of it ending for exogenous reasons after each period.
Hence, her career has finite length with probability one. As is well known, the
probability of her surviving to the next period can be incorporated into the
discount factor (i.e., δ reflects both financial and survival discounting). In this
variant of the model, one has
                                 ∞
                                 X                  η
                          mt =         δj                     .
                                 j=1
                                            τ0 + (t + j − 1)η

It is readily verified that the results stated in Proposition 1 continue to hold.
Note, though, that the diminishing-action-over-time result is due, in an infinite
horizon model, solely to learning; that is, only the second of the two reasons
for a decline in career-based incentives over the executive’s life applies. Finally,
from Lemma 2(iv), the executive’s actions are greater (less) ceteris paribus the
greater (less) is the exogenous rate of survival from one period to the next; that
is, executives who, for exogenous reasons, are more committed to the managerial
labor market can be expected to supply greater action ceteris paribus.

Ability Follows a Stochastic Process. In Holmstrom (1999), an extension
is considered in which executive ability varies over time according to a stochastic
process (a Gaussian random walk). In such an environment, the relevance of
past performance at time t for predicting future performance at t′ diminishes as
the difference t′ − t grows. Consequently, if the executive’s horizon is infinite (as
in the last paragraph), there may be no decline in career-based incentives over
time: recent performance can be sufficiently important to forecasting future per-
formance that career incentives remain high—indeed, they can remain constant
in the limit under some formulations. See Holmstrom (1999) for details.

Contractual Solutions. Although career concerns generate incentives for
the executive, they do not—as seen above—generate optimal incentives for the
executive generically. For the above model, the shareholders could improve
matters—at least late in the executive’s career—by providing financial incentives
                                      Career Concerns                                          19



tied to performance. In particular, for the sake of concreteness, suppose that
the executive’s career is two periods in length (i.e., T = 2). It was earlier noted
that her action in period 2 is zero (i.e., e∗2 = 0) and her action in period 1 is
the solution to (17); that is,
                                         η
                                    δ        −c′ (e∗1 ) = 0 .                               (17′ )
                                      τ0 + η
                                    | {z }
                                       m1

As noted earlier, her marginal return to her action, m1 , is less than the social
marginal return, 1. Assuming the shareholders can contract on performance,
st , then they increase welfare by offering the executive compensation tied to
that performance. For instance, in the second period, a contract that paid the
executive s2 would induce first-best action. The executive would capture all of
her contribution to profit, but this is consistent with the underlying presump-
tion that there is a perfectly competitive market for her services. Given such
an incentive contract, the market no longer cares about her perceived ability.
Hence, in the first period, the executive would have no career concerns. Similar
logic dictates, therefore, that she would be offered a contract in the first period
in which her compensation equals her contribution to profit, s1 .
     The last paragraph does not invalidate career concerns. First, the ability
of incentive contracts to deliver the first-best outcome depends on the execu-
tive’s being willing to absorb all the risk associated with those contracts and,
moreover, a means of compelling her to pay her employer when st < 0. Absent
such assumptions, incentive contracts are typically incapable of delivering the
first best.20 Moreover, when the executive’s compensation is not 100% of her
contribution to profit, then contracts offered her in the future can depend on
her past performance, which reintroduces career concerns. Second, it could be
less than straightforward to write a contract directly contingent on the signal.
This could be because the signal, although observed by the market, is not read-
ily measurable in a verifiable way.21 This would be true if only market experts
(but not judges, juries, or others who would enforce a formal contract) can in-
fer ability from signals (by way of analogy, presumably scouts for professional
sports teams can assess ability in ways that non-experts cannot).22 Third, the
signal could be unobservable to the market and accordingly unverifiable. If,

  20 See Holmstrom (1979) and Grossman and Hart (1983) for what goes wrong when the

executive (agent) is risk averse and Sappington (1983) for what goes wrong when the executive
cannot be made to pay her employer.
  21 It is worth noting, however, that the observable-vs.-verifiable distinction is not without

controversy; see Hermalin et al. (2007, especially §4) for a discussion of the issues and a survey
of the relevant literature. In particular, as Hermalin and Katz (1991) and Maskin and Tirole
(1999) show, it is often possible to write contracts in such a way that it is as if they were
contingent on observable but unverifiable signals.
  22 A possible counter argument is that these very experts could be hired to testify should

contractual disputes arise. On the other hand, experts hired for an adversarial process could
easily fail to provide accurate or unbiased reports (ironically, there is a literature on the
career—reputational—concerns of experts; see Wolinsky, 1993, and subsequent work).
                                     Career Concerns                                        20



however, the board and ceo can observe it and the ceo’s compensation is set
according to a bargaining game in which the ceo has some bargaining power
(e.g., as in Hermalin and Weisbach, 1998), then the logic of career concerns
would still apply.23

3.2     Career Concerns: Empirics
Although corporate governance was the impetus for the initial career-concerns
literature (Fama, 1980, and Holmstrom, 1999), the subject is much more gen-
eral: inside of almost any organization the possibility of advancement is what
motivates most employees. Standard advice given to young professionals (and
others) is that they are always being evaluated, so they should always seek
to make a good impression on everyone they meet. Regardless of any explicit
pay-for-performance incentives facing employees, they nonetheless wish to per-
suade others they are high ability. Doing a good job will enhance one’s career
prospects, and consequently, regardless of any explicit incentive plans, career
concerns will provide a reason for employees to do a good job.
    Such career-based incentives are crucial to the functioning of most orga-
nizations. Unfortunately, they are particularly difficult to measure directly.
Consider the marginal return to effort, mt , defined by (18) above. To know it
precisely, one would need to know the relevant discount factor, δ; the date at
which the employee’s career ends, T ; the variance of ability, 1/τ0 ; and the vari-
ance of the random shocks to the performance measure, 1/η. Moreover, even
if mt can be estimated, there is no way to measure effort. All of this renders
any direct empirical test of career-concern models impossible. Instead, one is
obliged to consider secondary hypotheses of the model and test them.
    One such secondary hypothesis is that fixed components of compensation to-
day, such as salary, should be positively correlated with past performance. Un-
der standard (i.e., hidden-action) agency theory, there should be no reason for
a salary that is determined today to depend on previous performance.24 In con-
trast, under a career-concerns model, present compensation should be strongly
determined by past performance. Early work exploring that possibility—speci-
fically, Murphy (1986) (but see also Murphy, 1985, and Jensen and Murphy,
1990)—finds evidence of such intertemporal links between performance and
compensation. The rest of this section considers other empirical tests.

3.2.1    Evidence from Intertemporal Pattern of Incentives
The career-concerns model’s intertemporal implications provide one way to test
it; in particular, observe that the incentives due to career concerns diminish over

  23 Note if the game were one of infinite time, then reputational contracting might serve to

replicate formal incentive contracting; see Levin (2003).
  24 To be precise, this assumes that compensation is determined by formal rather than rela-

tional contracting (i.e., this is not a repeated game in which salary today is determined by an
implicit promise relating past performance to current salary). It also assumes that there are
no wealth effects, due to past contingent pay, that might affect the optimal contract today.
                                       Career Concerns                                         21



the course of an executive’s career. As noted earlier, there are two reasons for
this: first, as the executive becomes a known entity, less is inferred from any one
period’s performance; and, second, the closer she is to retirement, the less time
she has to capitalize on her reputation. To offset declining incentives, Gibbons
and Murphy (1992) predict that firms will offer those ceos close to retirement
greater direct incentives (i.e., performance-contingent pay) than those many
years from retirement. Using ceo compensation data drawn from a sample of
large us corporations, Gibbons and Murphy test this prediction, finding that
the sensitivity of salary and bonus to performance is indeed significantly greater
for ceos at the end of their careers than for ceos in the midst of them.
    Dechow and Sloan (1991) find results complementary to those: to wit, exec-
utives at the end of their career are less inclined to make r&d investments than
those earlier in their careers. The explanation offered by Dechow and Sloan
is that compensation tied to short-run performance measures create perverse
incentives for executives to underinvest in projects with long-term payoffs when
the executives won’t be around to collect any reward from those payoffs later.25
Put slightly differently, consider a positive net-present-value (npv) project that
requires an upfront cost today. An executive at the end of her career has little
incentive to pursue such a project if her compensation today is a function of
today’s profits. But if she has a longer horizon, then she knows tomorrow’s
pay, which is based on tomorrow’s greater profits due to today’s investment,
will reward her investing. Notice, however, that a career-concerns model would
yield a similar pattern: if effort et−2 boosts later signal st−1 , which affects to-
day’s compensation wt , then an executive whose career will last to t will wish
to expend effort; whereas one whose career ends at t − 1 will not.
    There are undoubtedly additional factors affecting the intertemporal pattern
of incentives. For instance, a successful executive tends to gain power vis-à-vis
her board of directors, allowing her to capture greater compensation,26 which
provides an alternative (or at least complementary) explanation for the pattern
Gibbons and Murphy find. In addition, most performance-based ceo firings
occur in the first few years of a ceo’s tenure (Allgood and Farrell, 2003). To
induce ceos to accept the risk inherent in such “probation,” boards may need
to make implicit promises to reward survivors adequately later in their careers.

3.2.2       Estimating Learning about CEOs of Public Corporations
Murphy (1986) addresses the question of which is more empirically relevant:
assessing and rewarding ceo ability (the value he adds) or providing him incen-
tives? To do so, he presents both learning and incentive-based models of ceo
compensation. The learning and incentive-based models share a number of pre-
dictions, but differ in what they predict about how the variance of earnings and
the pay-performance relation will vary with experience. Murphy finds empirical

  25 Some of the models in Section 4 also speak to this finding; see further discussion of Dechow

and Sloan (1991) in this context in Section 4.3.
  26 In   this regard, see both Hermalin and Weisbach (1998) and our discussion of it infra.
                                Career Concerns                                 22



evidence that the relation between a ceo’s pay and his performance is strongest
early in his tenure. This finding is consistent with the learning model, but not
a standard incentive-based one. Early in his career, performance is more infor-
mative about ability given that the prior on ability is more diffuse. Therefore,
if pay reflects expected ability, it should vary more with performance early in a
ceo’s tenure, when a given level of performance will lead to larger updates of
assessed ability. Consequently, Murphy concludes that assessing and rewarding
managerial ability is the primary factor in setting ceo pay.
    Boschen and Smith (1995) examine the long-term effect of firm performance
on ceo pay. They find that contemporaneous firm performance affects a ceo’s
income not only today, but in the future. Their estimates indicate that a pos-
itive shock to performance raises ceo pay for the following four to five years.
Boschen and Smith summarize their findings as “the cumulative response of
pay to performance is roughly 10 times that of the contemporaneous response”
(p. 577). Although dynamic agency models can yield the prediction that pay to-
day is dependent on performance yesterday (see, e.g., Rogerson, 1985), Boschen
and Smith interpret their results as not providing support for such models (see
discussion on pages 599–600). Rather, they interpret their results as being more
consistent with the career-concerns model. In particular, their finding that the
effect of a positive performance shock on compensation eventually fades is con-
sistent with a learning model (consider, e.g., expression (14) above).
    Taylor (2013) estimates a structural model of learning about ceo ability. His
goal is to evaluate the extent to which ceos are able to capture rents from this
process, as suggested by Bebchuk and Fried (2004). Taylor’s model is based
on the idea that a ceo and board can enter into an implicit or reputational
contract that permits the board to partially insure the ceo against the income
risk that assessment imposes on him. His estimates suggest that 50% of any
increase in firm value due to favorable news about the ceo is captured by
the ceo, whereas the ceo enjoys nearly complete insurance against downward
risk. His analysis shows how one might estimate the underlying parameters of
a learning model, and use these estimates to evaluate an important question
about corporate governance.

3.2.3   Evidence from the Money Management Industry
One industry for which it is possible to measure market-based incentives is the
money-management industry. Berk and Green (2004) argue that the market’s
assessment of a money manager’s ability will be reflected by the inflows to her
or his fund. To wit, when a fund performs well, the market’s assessment of its
manager increases and investors correspondingly invest more (presumably, until
the perceived abnormal return to managerial skill disappears).
    This idea lends itself to empirical analysis. Because the fee structures of
most funds are observable and one can estimate the extent to which future in-
flows respond to current performance, it is possible to calculate the expected fees
from incremental flows given a specified performance level. These incremental
fees represent the return for having a better managerial reputation insofar as
                                 Career Concerns                                  23



Table 1: The ratio of indirect to direct incentives and Jensen-Murphy b for different
         types of funds.27

                          Private Equity                      Hedge Funds

                                Panel A: Averages
   Indirect/Direct              0.63                               3.03
 Jensen-Murphy b                0.29                               0.66

                         Panel B: By Sequence or Age

                      Current Fund Sequence                  Fund Age (years)
                         2           3                       0              3
   Indirect/Direct     0.47        0.32                    5.51           3.33
 Jensen-Murphy b       0.26        0.23                    0.67           0.62

                             Panel C: By Scalability

                                                      Not Capacity         Capacity
                      Buyout        Venture           Constrained         Constrained
   Indirect/Direct     1.24          0.48                 3.23               2.53
 Jensen-Murphy b       0.43          0.24                 0.68               0.60



they reflect the positively updated estimate of the manager’s ability. Through
this process, one can, therefore, estimate the managers’ indirect, market-based,
incentives. These incentives are undoubtedly economically important given in-
vestors responsiveness to their assessments of managerial ability and the close
connection between size of fund and managerial compensation.
    Chung et al. (2012) and Lim et al. (2016) perform this exercise for private
equity funds and hedge funds, respectively. In each case, the authors estimate
the sensitivity of inflows to performance, and calculate the present value of the
expected fees that occur with an incremental return. Both private equity and
hedge funds have relatively large direct-incentive compensation: 20% profit-
sharing plus the additional incentives that derive from management ownership.
These papers use this large direct incentive compensation as a benchmark, and
also calculate the “indirect Jensen-Murphy b,” the amount managers receive in
future income for each additional dollar returned to investors, not including the
return on the managers’ own investments in the fund (see Jensen and Murphy,
1990).
    Table 1 shows that indirect incentives are large even relative to the significant
direct incentive compensation in this industry, and that they are a substantial
fraction of money returned to investors. For a typical private equity fund, Chung
et al. (2012) find that indirect incentives are 63% as large as direct incentives,
while Lim et al. (2016) find, for a typical hedge fund, that they are about three
times as large.
               Signal Jamming: Project Choice and Managerial Myopia                          24



    Moreover, both papers find that the cross-sectional and time-series patterns
of indirect incentives are consistent with the assessment framework. In keep-
ing with the theory’s underlying logic, which predicts that assessment effects
diminish over a career, indirect incentives are much higher for younger partners
than for older ones for both private-equity and hedge funds (see Table 1). The
greater uncertainty about younger partnerships’ abilities means the market’s
updating about their abilities is more sensitive to performance, hence so too are
investment inflows and, thus, future fees.
    In addition, fixing ability, funds that rely on scalable strategies should be
better able than other funds to utilize fresh investments profitably. Hence,
inflows will be greater for scalable-strategy funds following good performance,
ceteris paribus. The market-based incentives for managers of scalable-strategy
funds are, correspondingly, stronger. Consistent with this prediction, Chung
et al. (2012) find that more scalable buyout funds are associated with higher
indirect incentives than less scalable funds. Lim et al. (2016) find a similar
result for hedge funds: more scalable strategies have higher indirect incentives
than funds with less scalable strategies ceteris paribus.

4     Signal Jamming: Project Choice and Managerial My-
      opia
In Holmstrom (1999), the executive undertakes an action in hopes of influencing
the market’s perception of his ability. As such, the model is among the first
examples of a more general economic phenomenon in which an actor has an
incentive to influence, through her action, what others infer from public signals.
This phenomenon has come to be called signal jamming.28 As its somewhat
pejorative name suggests, signal jamming can have negative consequences; in
this section, we consider the darker side of signal jamming.

4.1    Project Choice
Holmstrom (1999) also considers the following model: in each of two periods, the
executive chooses a single project pt from a set of possible projects Pt , where
t again indexes periods. The return, R, to the chosen project is stochastic,
distributed normally with a mean of α+βp +ε, where α, drawn from N(b       α0 , 1/τ0 ),
again denotes the executive’s ability; βp is the project-specific expected benefit
gross of ability; and ε ∼ N(0, 1/ηp ), where ηp , the precision, is project specific.

  27 Jensen-Murphy b (the number in italics) is the present value of the change in managers’

income per dollar returned to investors (other than the managers, in the case of private
equity). See Jensen and Murphy (1990) for details. The lefthand columns are from Chung et
al. (2012), the righthand from Lim et al. (2016). For details on the private equity numbers, see
Tables 5 and 6 of Chung et al. For private equity, the maximum number of potential future
funds the general manager (gp) could run is three. For details on the hedge fund numbers,
see Tables 4–6 in Lim et al.
  28 Fudenberg and Tirole (1986) appear to have introduced the term “signal jamming” into

economics for the purpose of describing this phenomenon.
             Signal Jamming: Project Choice and Managerial Myopia                 25



    It is assumed that the executive and all would-be employers are symmetri-
cally informed about all payoff-relevant variables at the start of the executive’s
career. In particular, as in the earlier model, the executive initially has no bet-
ter knowledge of his ability than the market. The sets P1 and P2 are common
knowledge, as are the parameters, (βp , ηp ), associated with each p ∈ P1 and P2 .
    Assume, other than their potential consequences for future compensation—
to be detailed shortly—the executive has no inherent preferences over projects.
    As before, there is a competitive market for the executive’s services. Con-
sider the second period: because there are no career concerns in the last period,
there is no reason for the executive not to choose the project in P2 with the
greatest expected return, β ∗ . Competition for the executive’s services means his
second-period compensation is bid up to expected second-period return, β ∗ + α  b1 .
Because the ensuing analysis does not depend on the value of β ∗ , we are free to
set it to zero for convenience; so, second-period compensation is just α b1 .
    Given the project, p, observers anticipate (or perhaps observe) the executive
to take, the realized return from the first-period project, R1 , is equivalent to
the signal s1 = R1 − βp . Building on previous analysis (in particular (4) and (5)
above), it follows that the posterior distribution of ability is normal with mean

                                             b0 + ηp (R1 − βp )
                                          τ0 α
                              α
                              b1 =                                              (19)
                                                 τ0 + η p

and precision τ0 + ηp . In what follows, we also need to know the ex ante distri-
bution of α
          b1 (i.e., before the realization of R1 ). Following an analysis similar
to that underlying (7) above, s1 is the sum of two normal random variables, α
and ε1 . As such, it too is distributed normally, with a mean equal to the sum
of their means (i.e., α
                      b0 ) and a variance equal to the sum of their variances:
                            1    1    τ0 + η p
                               +    =          = Var(s1 ) .                     (20)
                            τ0   ηp    τ0 η p

Viewed from an ex ante perspective, α   b1 is an affine transformation of the random
variable s1 ; hence, it is distributed normally with a mean of
                           τ0 α
                              b 0 + ηp s1   τ0 α
                                               b0 + ηp Es1
                       E                  =                =α
                                                            b0
                              τ0 + η p          τ0 + η p

and a variance of
                                    2
                             ηp                              ηp
                                          × Var(s1 ) =                .         (21)
                          τ0 + η p                       (τ0 + ηp )τ0

    Unlike the first Holmstrom (1999) model, assume now that the executive is
risk averse: his utility in period t is u(yt ), where yt is his period-t compensation
and u : R → R is strictly increasing and strictly concave. Assuming, as we do,
that the executive’s only motivation is his expected utility from his market com-
pensation in period 2, the executive’s choice of first-period project maximizes
Eu(bα1 ). In thinking about his choice, note that a payoff distributed N(µ, σa2 )
                Signal Jamming: Project Choice and Managerial Myopia                          26



dominates one distributed N(µ, σb2 ) in the sense of second-order stochastic dom-
inance if σb > σa ;29 that is, fixing the mean, a risk-averse decision maker prefers
a draw from a normal distribution with a lower variance than from one with a
higher variance. Because of his risk aversion, both the mean and variance of α   b1
matter to him and will, thus, affect his choice of project.
    As a first pass, consider a variant of Holmstrom (1999) due to Hermalin
(1993): assume the market observes the executive’s choice of first-period project;
that is, it knows βp and ηp .30 There is thus no scope for the executive to try
to fool the market by choosing a project with a higher project-specific expected
benefit than it anticipates. Consequently, the executive cares solely about the
risk attributes of the project he chooses. In particular, he wishes to choose
among the available projects the one that minimizes (21). It is readily seen
that (21) is an increasing function of ηp , which means the executive prefers the
project with the least precision, equivalently greatest variance. To summarize:

Proposition 2. When the market can observe the mean and variance of the
project chosen by the executive, the executive will wish to choose the noisiest
(highest variance) project ceteris paribus.

    It might at first seem counter-intuitive that a risk-averse executive with
career concerns would choose the highest-variance project. The rationale behind
this result is that the noisier the signal, the less weight observers assign it in
updating their beliefs about the executive. The less weight assigned the signal,
the more assigned the prior, which is non-stochastic. Because the expected
posterior is always the same, αb0 , assigning weight to the signal is simply adding
risk. Admittedly, the risk is also a function of how noisy the signal is; that
is, were the weight assigned the signal invariant, then the executive would like
less noisy signals. What (21) shows is that the less-weight effect dominates the
greater per se noise effect.
    Because, as Proposition 2 concludes, the executive cares only about about
how risky projects are, there is no reason to expect him to choose a project with a
high project-specific expected benefit. In other words, an agency problem arises
whenever P1 contains projects p and p′ such that βp > βp′ and ηp > ηp′ : the
first-period employer would prefer the executive choose the former project, but
the executive prefers the latter.
    In the original Holmstrom (1999) model, it is assumed that the market
cannot observe the project chosen (equivalently, does not directly observe its

  29 See   Lemma A.2 in the appendix
  30 A subtlety is why doesn’t the executive’s first-period employer write a contract fixing
project choice if it’s observable? One possibility is that although observers can determine the
βp and ηp of a chosen project, it is not feasible to specify projects with sufficient clarity to
serve as contractual contingency (in this regard, see also footnote 21 supra and connected
discussion). Alternatively, as will be seen, nothing in Hermalin’s analysis requires that the set
P1 be known ex ante; hence, it could be infeasible to contract on a specific project or even
parameters (βp , ηp ) because whether such project or parameters exist is unknown and no one
might know which projects the executive chose not to pursue (so, e.g., a contract calling for
him to choose the project with the greatest βp in P1 is infeasible).
              Signal Jamming: Project Choice and Managerial Myopia                         27



characteristics, (βp , ηp )). Let p̂ ∈ P1 denote the project the market anticipates
the executive will take and p the project he actually chooses (of course, in equi-
librium, they must be the same). In terms of the analysis above, replace the ps
in expression (19) with p̂s; hence,
                                                 ηp̂
                                  α1 = α
                                 Eb    b0 +            (βp − βp̂ ) .                     (22)
                                              τ0 + ηp̂

The variance of s1 depends on the project actually chosen; so Var(s1 ) remains
as defined in (20). The equivalent of expression (21), the variance of α
                                                                       b1 , is
                                2                                2
                         ηp̂                                ηp̂          (τ0 + ηp )
                                      × Var(s1 ) =                                  .    (23)
                      τ0 + ηp̂                           τ0 + ηp̂          τ0 η p

   If project-specific expected return were the same for all projects, then the
executive would care about the noisiness of the projects only; that is, he would
choose the project that minimized (23). It is readily seen that corresponds to
the project with the greatest precision (smallest variance). This is opposite to
the conclusion reached in Proposition 2: when observers don’t directly observe
the parameters of the chosen project, the executive cannot affect the weight
they assign to the signal versus the prior and, thus, the only relevant effect is
the noise of the signal itself. To summarize:

Proposition 3. When the market cannot observe the variance of the project
chosen by the executive and all projects have the same project-specific expected
return (i.e., βp a constant for p ∈ P1 ), the executive will wish to choose the least
noisy (lowest variance) project ceteris paribus.

    If project-specific expected return is the same across projects, then the exec-
utive’s risk preferences don’t matter to his employer. But if those returns aren’t
the same, then an agency problem can arise: the executive’s concern about risk
can lead him to choose a project other than the one that maximizes βp . To
illustrate this possibility, suppose it is common knowledge that the executive’s
utility function exhibits constant absolute risk aversion (is cara), with known
coefficient of absolute risk aversion ζ. It follows that his choice of project will
maximize31
                                                                  2
          1                       ηp̂                1       ηp̂      (τ0 + ηp )
  Ebα1 − ζ Var(b  α1 ) = α
                         b0 +           (βp − βp̂ ) − ζ                          . (24)
          2                    τ0 + ηp̂              2    τ0 + ηp̂      τ0 η p

  31 Expression (24) is derived as follows: the assumption that utility is cara entails that

u(y) = K − exp(−ζy), where K is an irrelevant constant. It follows that E{u(y)} is K less
the moment-generating function (with auxiliary variable −ζ). For a N(µ, σ 2 ) random variate
the moment-generating function with auxiliary variable q is exp(qµ + q 2 σ 2 /2); hence,
                                                             
                                                       1
                            E{u(y)} = K − exp −ζµ + ζ 2 σ 2 .
                                                       2
Optimization programs are invariant with respect to positive monotonic transformations (here,
the transformation is − log K − E{u(y)} /ζ.
               Signal Jamming: Project Choice and Managerial Myopia                            28



    Suppose, to slightly abuse notation, that
                       
                P1 = (β, η) ∈ R2+ η ≥ η̄ − β and 0 ≤ β ≤ β̄ ,                               (25)

where β̄ and η̄ are constants such that
                                        ζ
                       η̄ 2 + τ0 η̄ >     > (η̄ − β̄)2 + τ0 (η̄ − β̄) > 0 .                 (26)
                                        2
Given Proposition 3, the only relevant portion of P1 is the frontier
                  
                    (β, η) ∈ R2+ η = η̄ − β and 0 ≤ β ≤ β̄ .

Observe the frontier displays a risk-return tradeoff—on the frontier the greater
the project-specific expected return, the greater the variance (the noisier) is the
return. Maximizing (24) is, thus, equivalent to solving

                                   1    ηp̂ (τ0 + η̄ − β)
                            max β − ζ                     .
                           β∈[0,β̄]2 τ0 + ηp̂ (η̄ − β)τ0

Standard methods reveal the solution is32
                                    s
                                                       ζηp̂
                                  β ∗ = η̄ −                     .                          (27)
                                                    2(τ0 + ηp̂ )

   In equilibrium, the market must correctly anticipate the executive’s choice.
Noting that the frontier can be reëxpressed as β = η̄ − η, the condition for
equilibrium then follows from (27):
                                    s
                                         ζη
                               η=               .
                                      2(τ0 + η)

The solution is                                        q              
                                        1
                               ηe =             −τ0 +       τ02 + 2ζ       .
                                        2
Given (26), it is readily shown that ηe is in bounds (i.e., ηe ∈ (η̄ − β̄, η̄)).
Straightforward calculations reveal that ηe increases in ζ and decreases in τ0 .
In words, the more risk averse the executive, the lower the variance (and hence
expected return) of the equilibrium project; and the greater the precision of
the prior estimate of his ability, the greater the variance (and hence expected
return) of the equilibrium project. To summarize:
Proposition 4. Suppose the market cannot observe the executive’s choice of
project. Assume the executive has a cara utility function and the set of possible
projects is described by expressions (25) and (26). Then the executive does not

  32 Because η ∈ [η̄ − β̄, η̄], it is readily shown that β ∗ ∈ (0, β̄); that is, it is an inbounds
                p̂
interior solution. Second-order conditions are readily verified.
                Signal Jamming: Project Choice and Managerial Myopia                          29



choose the project with the highest project-specific expected return (i.e., he does
not choose β̄) in equilibrium. Furthermore, the expected return of the project he
does choose is greater in equilibrium the less risk averse he is or the greater is
the precision of the prior estimate of his ability. Correspondingly, the variance
of returns from the chosen project is greater in equilibrium the less risk averse
is the executive or the greater is the precision of the prior estimate of his ability.

Intuitively, the less risk averse is the executive (the lower is ζ), the more willing
he is accept greater risk for a higher expected wage. Although still a victim
of the Red Queen effect, the cost to the executive of reducing β below the
anticipated level to reduce risk is that he reduces his expected wage; as noted,
he is less willing to do this the less risk averse he is, which means the equilibrium
β will be greater. The greater the precision with which the prior is estimated,
the less weight is placed on actual performance when assessing the executive’s
ability. Hence, the riskiness of the project matters less, which means he is more
willing to accept risk in hopes of inducing a higher assessment of his ability.
Again, the Red Queen effect means he fools no one in equilibrium, but because
of the greater temptation, the equilibrium β will be greater.

Summary. The analysis presented in this section shows that career concerns
can generate an agency problem:33 the executive (agent) is induced to care
about the riskiness of the projects, something that is directly immaterial to
the shareholders (principal). Were there no career concerns (e.g., the executive
lived just one period), then the agency problem would disappear: the executive
would have no reason not to choose the project with the greatest project-specific
expected return. Ironically, the agency problem could be worse when the ex-
ecutive’s choice of project is observable: he then places no weight on expected
return, caring only about risk (preferring the riskiest project).34 When the pa-
rameters of projects are unobservable to the market, then the Red Queen effect
(signal jamming) causes the executive to care somewhat about the expected
return of the project he chooses. Nonetheless the agency problem remains and
is worse the more risk averse is the executive or the more uncertainty there is
about him (the lower the precision of the prior estimate of ability).

4.1.1    When No Project May be Available
Implicit in the analysis to this point is that the executive must choose a project—
he cannot claim there is no project to pursue. Suppose, instead, it is plausible
for him to make such a claim; that is, it is uncertain what P1 may be and there
is positive probability it is the empty set (i.e., that P1 = ∅).
    Given the above framework, if no project is a plausible claim, then absent
any other incentive, the executive will always claim no project existed: if there

 33 Section   2.2.2 of Stein (2003) offers a survey of agency problems caused by career concerns.
 34 Of  course, no agency problem would exist if P1 is defined by (25) and (26), because the
riskiest project would then be the one with the greatest expected return.
               Signal Jamming: Project Choice and Managerial Myopia                              30



is no project, there is no updating beliefs about his ability and his next-period
compensation will be α  b0 with certainty; whereas, no matter what project he
pursues (and regardless of the observability or not of its parameters), his next-
period compensation will be a random variable with expectation α       b0 . Given
his risk aversion, he strictly prefers a sure thing that has a payoff equal to the
expectation of a random variable. To summarize:

Proposition 5. If the career-concerns model set forth above is extended to make
it plausible for the executive to claim no project is available (or to claim all
available projects are inferior to not undertaking a project), then the executive
never undertakes a project in the first period.35

    Proposition 5 indicates that a career concerns can lead to a form of paralysis:
to avoid the risk of being seen as bad (i.e., to have an updated assessment of
ability less than α
                  b0 ), the executive pursues no innovations.
    This result, though, is somewhat hard to reconcile with the celebration of
innovative executives such as Steve Jobs. Reconciliation can be achieved if
one views managerial ability as referring to an ability to discern good from
bad projects rather than, as has so far been considered, an ability to execute
projects successfully. To this end, consider the following model: in each of the
two periods the manager will have a choice among three projects indexed by 1,
2, or ∅. Project p∅ is equivalent to choosing no project. In each period, one of
the projects in {p1 , p2 } is good (g) and one is bad (b). The prior probability
that a given project is good is 1/2; that is, Pr{p1 = g, p2 = b} = Pr{p1 = b, p2 =
g} = 1/2. These probabilities are independent between periods. A bad project
pays −2 with certainty, a good project +1 with certainty. The project p∅ pays 0
with certainty. Observe, therefore, that choosing a project p1 or p2 at random
has a lower expected payoff, −1/2, than choosing project p∅ . An executive can
be able or unable. An able executive acquires a signal s ∈ {1, 2} such that

                                                  2
   Pr{ps = g|s} = Pr{p3−s = b|s} = q >
                                                  3
                                                                                           1
                                 and Pr{ps = b|s} = Pr{p3−s = g|s} = 1 − q <                 .
                                                                                           3
An unable executive acquires no signal. Whether an executive acquires a signal
is her private information. An able executive is able in both periods; that is,
an executive who acquires a signal in period 1 knows she will acquire one in
period 2. Similarly, an unable executive is unable in both periods: upon not

  35 A slight caution: although the analysis leading to the proposition is complete if the market

observes the mean and precision of any project taken (i.e., as in Hermalin, 1993), it is a bit
loose if the market cannot observe those parameters. In that case, there is the question
of how observers form their beliefs about the parameters of any project the executive may
have undertaken, especially if actually pursuing a project is an out-of-equilibrium act. Even
accounting for those issues, it can be shown there is no equilibrium in which the executive
pursues a project when he can plausibly claim one does not exist. See Holmstrom and Ricart i
Costa (1986) for details.
             Signal Jamming: Project Choice and Managerial Myopia                        31



acquiring a signal in period 1, she knows she won’t acquire one in period 2. Let
f0 ∈ (0, 1) be the commonly held prior probability that an executive is able.
   Because
                        1 × q − 2 × (1 − q) = 3q − 2 > 0 ,
shareholders would like an able executive to act on her signal (i.e., choose project
ps if she observes signal s). Because
                                 1      1   1
                            1×     − 2 × = − < 0,
                                 2      2   2
shareholders would like an unable executive to choose project p∅ . Absent career
concerns—notably in the second period—there is no reason for the executive
not to accede to those preferences. Hence, the executive’s second-period market
value if known to be able is 3q − 2 and it’s 0 if known to be unable.
    Now consider the overall model. There are two equilibria. In one, sharehold-
ers believe that executives won’t execute a project in the first period (equiva-
lently, choose p∅ ) and that any executive who does attempt a project in {p1 , p2 }
is unable. Given such beliefs, both executive types will choose p∅ in the first
period: deviating means a second-period wage of 0 (since now seen as unable),
whereas choosing p∅ means a second-period wage of (3q − 2)f0 , the one-period
expected value of an executive of unknown ability. Beliefs are consistent with
behavior, so this is indeed an equilibrium.
    In the other equilibrium, shareholders believe that both types will execute
a project (i.e., choose a p ∈ {p1 , p2 }) and that an executive who does not
is unable. Based on project outcome, shareholders update their beliefs about
executive ability:

                       qf0
  Pr{able|g} =                      ≡ f1 (g) and
                 qf0 + 12 (1 − f0 )
                                                         (1 − q)f0
                                  Pr{able|b} =                              ≡ f1 (b) .
                                                   (1 − q)f0 + 12 (1 − f0 )

An executive’s future compensation based on outcome o is therefore (3q − 2)
×f1 (o) > 0; hence, both types do better to pursue a project than not. Beliefs
are consistent with behavior, so this is, thus, also an equilibrium.
   For this “toy” model, standard refinements (e.g., Cho and Kreps, 1987)
cannot be invoked to choose between these equilibria. One could, however,
construct a richer model along these lines for which the second equilibrium
would be selected. Consequently, we focus on the second equilibrium going
forward. Because f1 (g) > f1 (b), an executive who had a successful project in
the first period will command greater compensation in the second than one who
had an unsuccessful project. As such, the model is consistent with the idea
that successful innovators are rewarded. It also yields an equilibrium in which
executives are under pressure to pursue a project and will, in fact, do so even if
that is contrary to what fully informed shareholders would want.
             Signal Jamming: Project Choice and Managerial Myopia                32



   The structure of this model, in particular the shareholders’ ability to discern
whether or not a project was pursued, suggests that shareholders would do
better to make first-period compensation contingent on choosing a project or
not; or even the outcome of a first-period project. For instance, if
                                       1
                           (3q − 2)f0 − (1 − f0 ) < 0 ,
                                       2
then the shareholders would do better to force no project in the first period by
imposing a sufficiently large fine on any executive who pursues a first-period
project than to let the second equilibrium play out. The shareholders can,
though, do better than that: let w2 = 3q − 2 denote the second-period compen-
sation of an executive believed to be able and consider a first-period compen-
sation contract hwg , wb , w∅ i, where wo is compensation if the executive chooses
a project with outcome o and w∅ is her compensation if she doesn’t choose a
project. The objective is to have an equilibrium in which an executive pur-
sues a project in the first period if and only if she learns she is able. Recalling
that the executive doesn’t know her ability prior to employment, her expected
compensation—assuming she pursues a project only if she proves able—is
                                           
                          qwg + (1 − q)wb f0 + w∅ (1 − f0 ) .                 (28)

Because, recall, there is a competitive market for managerial talent, (28) must
equal the expected revenue generated by the executive, which is (3q − 2)f0
(= w2 f0 ). If it is an equilibrium for only able executives to pursue projects,
then market beliefs following a first-period project must be that the executive
is able if she pursues a project regardless of its success or failure. So if an able
executive pursues a project, her expected lifetime compensation is

                              w2 + qwg + (1 − q)wb .                           (29)

If an unable executive pursues a project, her expected lifetime compensation is
                                    1    1
                                w2 + wg + wb .                                 (30)
                                    2    2
Regardless of ability, an executive who doesn’t pursue a project has a lifetime
utility of w∅ . For the contract to induce the correct behavior, (29) cannot be
less than w∅ and (30) cannot be greater than w∅ . A necessary condition for
those two incentive constraints to be satisfied is that
                                                       
                             1      1                 1
         qwg + (1 − q)wb ≥ wg + wb ⇐⇒ q −                 (wg − wb ) ≥ 0 ,
                             2      2                 2

from which it follows that a necessary condition is wg ≥ wb (recall q > 1/2). In
words, the executive’s compensation if she chooses a project must be contingent
on its success—with greater compensation due her for success—even though,
conditional on choosing a project, nothing she does affects whether the project
             Signal Jamming: Project Choice and Managerial Myopia                33



is successful (i.e., there is no effort that needs to be induced). As an example,
were the shareholders to offer the contract
                                    1 + 2q               3 − 2q
                w∅ = 0 ; wb = −w2          ; and wg = w2        ,              (31)
                                    2q − 1               2q − 1
then this would satisfy the relevant constraints and induce a first-period project
to be pursued if and only if the executive discovered herself able.

Summary. Although a “toy” model, the preceding illustrates the following
possibilities in a setting in which the dimension of managerial ability about
which the market is uncertain is the ability to distinguish good from bad projects
and shareholders (boards) can write contingent contracts: (i) project failure is
directly punished and project success directly rewarded (i.e., from (31), wg >
w∅ > wb ) even though, conditional on choosing a project, the executive has no
effect on its success or failure; and (ii) innovative (project-choosing) executives
are rewarded by the market later in their careers relative to non-innovative
executives even if their first-period innovation (project) fails (i.e., w2 > 0).

Bibliographic Note. Holmstrom and Ricart i Costa (1986) and Hermalin
(1993) also consider contractual solutions to the issue of inducing executives
to pursue projects, but in a context in which ability pertains, as earlier, to the
payoff from the project; that is, project payoff is α +β +ε. The need to compen-
sate the executive for career risk affects what types of projects the shareholders
seek to induce and the contracts they offer. For instance, in Hermalin, under
mild assumptions, the shareholders will choose to induce a first-period project
that has a lower mean return than the project with the maximum mean return,
but is riskier than that project. Holmstrom and Ricart i Costa show that the
tradeoffs faced by the shareholders can, in some circumstances, explain credit
rationing within the firm.

4.2   Managerial Myopia
In the 1980s, American industry was criticized for “short-termism,” a focus on
the next quarter rather than the long run. From the perspective of traditional
finance theory, such criticism is puzzling: if, as the theory of efficient markets
dictates, the stock price is an accurate reflection of the present value of the firm
and if, as those alleging myopia claimed, managers are focused on the stock
price, then it is hard to see how there could be scope for costly myopia: if
short-termism adversely affected a firm’s long-term interests, then this would
depress the stock price, an outcome at odds with what myopic managers were
supposedly seeking to achieve.
    As Narayanan (1985) and Stein (1988, 1989) observed, signal jamming pro-
vides a means of reconciling this apparent contradiction. To illustrate the basic
idea, consider the following simplified version of Stein (1989): a debt-free firm
exists for two periods; at the end of the second, it is liquidated and pays out
               Signal Jamming: Project Choice and Managerial Myopia                              34



                          Period 1                             Period 2

               Executive
                chooses                               Stock
                ξ ∈ R+                                trades




            “Nature”           Signal s =                          Firm
            draws              α+ξ +ε                           liquidated
            ability α ∼        observed                        and pays out
            N(0, 1/τ )                                           α − C(ξ)


             Figure 1: Timing for Simple Version of Stein (1989) Model



α−C(ξ) to the shareholders, where α is the ability of the executive, ξ is a signal-
jamming action to be described shortly, and C(ξ) is the cost of that action to
the firm.36 Assume α ∼ N(0, 1/τ ).37 The first period ends with a public signal
s = α + ξ + ε being observed, where ε ∼ N(0, 1/η). Immediately thereafter (i.e.,
at the beginning of the second period), the firm’s stock trades. Assume this
is the only point at which trade occurs. At the beginning of the first period,
the executive chooses ξ ∈ R+ . To keep matters straightforward, we will ignore
financial discounting between periods. Figure 1 illustrates the timing.
    The action ξ should be interpreted as one that appears to boost first-period
accounting measures, but at the long-term expense of the firm (e.g., borrowing
at a disadvantageous interest rate, extending trade credit in a disadvantageous
manner, etc.). That long-term expense is C(ξ). Assume that that C(·) is twice
differentiable, C ′′ (ξ) > 0 for all ξ ∈ R+ , and that C(0) = C ′ (0) = 0. Observe,
the mean-value theorem can be invoked to establish C ′ (ξ) > 0 for all ξ > 0 and,
again, to establish C(ξ) > 0 for all ξ > 0. In turn, this implies that firm value is
maximized if the executive chooses ξ = 0. Interpret, therefore, choosing ξ > 0
as engaging in myopic behavior.
    Let the market anticipate that the executive chooses ξ.  b The posterior esti-

  36 InStein (1989), α is an attribute of the firm rather than the executive. For our purposes,
the distinction is irrelevant. Thinking of α as ability ties this model to those considered earlier.
  37 Because α is distributed normally, there is the possibility that the final liquidated value

of the firm is negative. This is not a problem insofar as the model can be modified without
changing the conclusions to avoid negative values. For instance, at the cost of slightly com-
plicating the analysis, we could assume liquidated value is W + B(α) − C(ξ), where W big
enough that W ≥ C(ξ) for any equilibrium value of ξ, B(·) increasing, and limz↓−∞ B(z) ≥ 0.
Normalizing Eα to zero is for convenience and without loss of generality.
                Signal Jamming: Project Choice and Managerial Myopia                          35



mate of ability will, thus, be

                                              (s − ξb)η
                                        α
                                        b=
                                                τ +η
(the logic is the same as behind (14) above, recalling that the prior estimate of
ability is 0). The estimated value of the firm at the end of period one is, thus,
                                 (s − ξb)η     
                          b − C ξb =
                          α                  − C ξb ≡ V1 .
                                     τ +η
    As an initial way of closing the model, suppose that each shareholder knows
at the beginning of period one that she will need to liquidate her holdings of the
firm at the end of period one with probability λ ∈ (0, 1). Whether she needs
to liquidate is exogenously determined.38 It follows her expected payoff is her
fraction of ownership times

                                     λEV1 + (1 − λ)EV2 ,                                   (32)

where V2 = α − C(ξ) is final (liquidation) value. We can rewrite (32) as
                                          !
                       (ξ − ξb)η       
                  λ              −C ξ   b   − (1 − λ)C(ξ) .                                (33)
                         τ +η

Shareholders would like their executive to choose the ξ that maximizes (33).
Earlier made assumptions about C(·) ensure that the first-order condition
                                   λη
                                       − (1 − λ)C ′ (ξ) = 0                                (34)
                                  τ +η
uniquely defines a maximum. Let ξ ∗ solve (34). Because C ′ (0) = 0, ξ ∗ > 0 if
λ > 0. In equilibrium, the market correctly anticipates that the executive will
choose ξ ∗ , so the equilibrium maximized value of (33) is −C(ξ ∗ ). To summarize:
Proposition 6. For the version of Stein (1989) presented above, the equilibrium
level of myopic action, ξ ∗ , is positive. It is increasing in the probability that
shareholders must sell at the end of period 1 (i.e., λ) and the precision of the
signal (η); it is decreasing in the precision of the prior (τ ).39 In equilibrium,
the initial shareholders bear 100% of the myopic action’s cost.
    Given that the shareholders do not, in equilibrium, benefit from myopic
actions, it might seem odd that they instruct the executive to behave in this
way. Once again, the Red Queen logic prevails: because the market anticipates
  38 As will be seen, in equilibrium, market valuation at the end of period 1 will equal the true

expected value of the firm at the end of period 2, so a shareholder would be indifferent between
selling and retaining her shares. The exogeneity of λ matters for what the shareholders instruct
the executive to do. We return to this point later.
  39 The   proof of these comparative-static results is immediate from (34).
               Signal Jamming: Project Choice and Managerial Myopia                         36



myopic behavior, the shareholders would be even worse off were the executive
not to behave that way.
    Observe that, if the shareholders could commit that the executive would
not behave myopically, they would do better: the value of their holdings would
increase by C(ξ ∗ ). One way for them to do so would be to commit to never sell
at the end of period 1 (i.e., set λ = 0). From (34), if λ = 0, then ξ ∗ = 0. This
might be achievable if there were a controlling group of shareholders who never
face a liquidity event and highly valued control so that they never sell.
    What if λ is endogenous, but the shareholders cannot commit to its value?
Because, as shown in (33), the shareholders payoff is affine in λ, either λ = 0 or
λ = 1 is an optimum. If λ = 0, then, as noted, the optimal ξ = 0, which yields
an expected payoff of 0. Expression (33) is, then,
                                          
                          (ξ − 0 )η
                      λ             − C (0) − (1 − λ)C(ξ) .
                            τ +η
It follows immediately that if the shareholders deviated to λ = 1 and ξ > 0,
their payoff would be positive.40 So the only equilibrium must be λ = 1. The
                                                 ¯ 41 In equilibrium, no one is
value of ξ would be its maximal value (call that ξ).
           b   ¯
fooled, so ξ = ξ.
Proposition 7. If the shareholders are free to determine whether they sell or
not at the end of the first period and their probability of selling is unobservable
to the market, then there will be the maximum level of myopic behavior.
    Proposition 7 suggests one reason why securities regulations require control-
ling parties to commit to a buying or selling pattern in advance.

An Agency Interpretation. To this point, it has been assumed that the
(controlling) shareholders instruct the executive as to how myopic to be. Al-
ternatively, one could assume that the executive has complete control over the
choice of ξ and is motivated by the fact that he may have to sell at the end
of period 1 with probability λ (set either exogenously, as in Proposition 6, or
endogenously, as in Proposition 7).

Bibliographic Note. Among the differences between the model above and
the one in Stein (1989) is that the latter assumes an infinite horizon, with ability
following a random walk. Stein goes on to develop a steady-state equilibrium
in which ξ ∗ > 0 is the same every period.
  40 There are some subtleties concerning what the market would make of there being shares

for sale when none were expected. A partial out is to assume that there some shareholders,
who are not controlling shareholders, who will always sell. There are still questions as to why
the price doesn’t respond to the unexpected volume, but the points being made in the text
would still apply even if we had a richer model of trading and price setting.
  41 One could imagine an interpretation in which ξ̄ represents the controlling shareholders’

looting the firm of its assets. Hence, there is a link between this model and models that worry
about the pathologies of tightly controlled firms (see e.g., Johnson et al., 2000).
                Signal Jamming: Project Choice and Managerial Myopia            37



4.3   Empirical Analyses of Myopia
The traditional view is that, as long as managers are motivated to maximize
their firms’ stock prices, then they will not make myopic investment decisions:42
the stock market will punish them if they fail to make investments that don’t
have positive npv. However, as reviewed above, Stein (1989) shows that there
is an important distinction between value-maximization and stock-price maxi-
mization. Even though, in the long term, an efficient stock market will cause
stock prices to coincide with underlying value, in the short term, there can be
important deviations between the two. If a manager cares about boosting stock
prices in the short term because he plans on selling the stock, then it will be
rational for him to undertake myopic investments that boost short-term stock
prices at the expense of long-term value. Stein’s work, thus, raises an important
question: do managers deviate from value-maximization when they compare in-
vestments of different horizons? In particular, do they prefer projects with early
payoffs more than they should given relative interest rates? If so, what factors
affect the magnitude of such myopic preferences in investments?
    The idea of myopic investment, while perhaps foreign to the way economists
traditionally perceive investment decisions, turns out to reflect how practitioners
tend to view the world. The business press often claims that managers regularly
sacrifice long-term value to meet short-term earnings goals. Consistent with this
notion, survey evidence from Graham et al. (2005) finds that a majority of exec-
utives indicated that they would be willing to sacrifice long-term value to meet
short-term earnings targets. The Stein model explains why executives would
make such sacrifices even if they are compensated with equity-based incentives,
and why increasing the magnitude of equity-based incentives could potentially
exacerbate rather than alleviate the extent to which investment is myopic.
    Aside from survey evidence, identification makes formal tests of myopia mod-
els relatively difficult. Managers’ compensation plans and ownership, as well as
their investment policies, are all determined jointly as a function of the invest-
ment opportunities that a firm faces. Nonetheless, there are a number of papers,
many of which are in the accounting literature, that provide evidence suggesting
that myopia is a real problem facing firms.
    Dechow and Sloan (1991) provide evidence consistent with what they refer
to as the “horizon problem.” Specifically, they document that firms cut back on
r&d expenditures investment toward the end of a ceo’s tenure. Presumably,
decreasing r&d leads to higher current earnings, which come at the expense of
future earnings. Executives therefore appear to make myopic investment deci-
sions toward the end of their tenure. Dechow and Sloan attribute these decisions
to earnings-based compensation plans and find that this effect is minimized by
stock ownership. It is not clear, however, how to interpret this finding in light
of Stein (1989); the model predicts that temporary stock ownership will lead to
more myopia but permanent stock ownership could offset the myopic tendencies
managers acquire through their earnings-based plans.

 42 See   Jensen (1986) for discussion.
                  Learning about Governance and Capital Markets                             38



    Gopalan et al. (2014) provide evidence that firms appear to care about my-
opia and the horizon of investments. These authors develop a measure of the
time dimension to executive compensation, quantifying the extent to which the
compensation of executives at a given firm is short term. They find that the
timing of executive pay tends to follow that of their firms’ investments, so that
when firms’ investments are longer-term, executive pay is longer-term as well.
Presumably, firms are concerned about executives’ tendencies to sacrifice valu-
able long-term investments for short-term profits. Therefore, when firms’ more
valuable investment opportunities are long term, firms respond by paying their
executives with longer-term compensation. When their investments tend to be
of a shorter duration, there is less need for longer-term compensation, so firms
in this case rely more on shorter-term compensation plans.
    Probably the most direct test of myopia theories to date is Edmans et al. (in
press). These authors introduce a new measure of short-term incentives: the
amount of stock and options scheduled to vest in a given quarter, which in the
data is highly correlated with ceo equity sales. There are several aspects of this
measure that make it particularly useful to test myopia theories. First, vesting
schedules are set years in advance and are unlikely to be jointly determined with
investment decisions at the time vesting occurs. Second, they correspond to the
key theoretical variable in the myopia models, the fraction of stock that is likely
to be sold by executives in the short term. It is this stock that will be sold in
the short term that is the underlying determinant of the wedge between value
and stock prices in the Stein model.
    Edmans et al. (in press) link this measure to reductions in real investment.
Their results indicate that there is a sizable decline in growth in r&d plus net
capital expenditures in quarters during which ceos have large amount of equity
vesting. Vesting equity is also associated with more positive analyst forecast
revisions and earnings guidance during the same quarter. Overall, this paper
represents provides clear evidence that incentives to maximize short-term stock
valuations can lead to myopic investments.
    In many ways, corporate fraud can be viewed through the lens of myopia
models, because fraud typically represents seeking benefits today in exchange
for uncertain penalties in the future. Incentives that induce myopia in invest-
ments are also incentives to commit fraud, given they cause managers to place
greater weight on today’s payoff relative to future payoffs. So, for example,
Burns and Kedia (2006), Efendi et al. (2007), and Johnson et al. (2009) all
find that vested options and unrestricted stock increase the likelihood of cor-
porate fraud.43 These findings further suggest that equity-based compensation
increases managers’ incentives to boost earnings today at the expense of dimin-
ished value (or even penalties) tomorrow, consistent with the basic premise of
the Stein model.
  43 It should be noted, however, that Erickson et al. (2006) find that equity-based incentives

do not increase the likelihood of fraud.
                  Learning about Governance and Capital Markets                            39



5     Learning about Governance and Capital Markets
5.1   Learning Models and Capital Markets
An influential literature in finance applies learning models to study certain
“anomalous” phenomena in capital markets. Two such phenomena are (i) that
dividend yields apparently predict future stock returns (Fama and French, 1988),
contrary to the efficient markets hypothesis; and (ii) the volatility of stock re-
turns is higher than can be explained by the volatility of a firm’s dividend
stream (Shiller, 1981; Leroy and Porter, 1981). To understand these facts, Tim-
mermann (1993) simulates a model with uncertainty in which rational investors
learn about the firm over time. He finds that the data from his simulated model
are consistent with the empirical findings; in particular, dividends prove to be
predictive of future returns and there is “excess” volatility of returns relative to
that of dividends.
    Pastor and Veronesi (2003, 2009) extend the ideas in Timmermann. The
critical aspect of their model is incorporating uncertainty about a firm’s growth
into the well-known Gordon growth formula:
                                               D
                                        P =       ,                                      (35)
                                              r−g
where P is the firm’s stock price, D its dividend, r the interest rate, and g the
growth rate of dividends.
    In the Pastor and Veronesi model, g is uncertain, but the market can make
inferences about it based on observed data; that is, the market estimates growth
prospects and continually updates its estimates over time. In this model, an
application of Jensen’s inequality to the Gordon growth model leads to
                                        
                                     D          D
                           P =E            >           .
                                    r−g       r − Eg
Moreover, because the righthand side of (35) is a convex function of g, the
greater the uncertainty about g (in the sense of second-order stochastic dom-
inance), the greater the valuation (stock price) of the firm. So, for instance,
holding expected growth rate constant, a startup with uncertain prospects will
be worth more than an established firm for which there is little uncertainty
about its rate of growth. Consequently, as the market learns about a firm’s
prospects over time—uncertainty about its growth rates is reduced—the model
predicts that its valuation should decline ceteris paribus. Pastor and Veronesi
(2003, 2006) argue that this logic can explain the fact that firms’ market-to-
book ratios tend to decline over time, and also how valuations of technology
firms with very uncertain growth rates could be so high in the late 1990s.44
    In addition to influencing the level of a firm’s valuation, Pastor and Veronesi
also show that the sensitivity of a firm’s valuation to news—hence its stock-price
  44 Pastor and Veronesi (2009) is an excellent survey of the literature discussing the way in

which learning can also explain a number of other seemingly puzzling stylized facts about
capital markets.
                Learning about Governance and Capital Markets                    40



volatility—is also affected by market learning. Intuitively, a positive innovation
to dividends leads to an increase in valuation, but also to a positive update
in the market’s estimate of the growth rate, which further increases valuation.
Similarly, a negative innovation leads to a decrease in the assessment of the
growth rate and consequently a larger decline in valuation than the news itself
would warrant. The updates of the estimates of firms’ growth rates, which
serve to magnify the effect of news and increase volatility, will be larger when
the market’s prior estimate of the growth rate is more uncertain. Therefore,
the Pastor and Veronesi model predicts that when the prior estimate of a firm’s
growth rate is more diffuse, the reactions of the firm’s stock to news will be
larger, so stock return volatility will be higher.

5.2   How Learning about Management Affects Capital Markets
Though stated in terms of growth rates, the Pastor and Veronesi model can be
readily applied to learning about any other factor that affects a firm’s value;
of particular relevance here is learning about the firm’s management. When a
firm hires a new executive, his resume will be well known, but the fit between
his skills and the firm’s needs are often unclear. For example, JC Penney hired
Ron Johnson, a former Apple executive, to be its ceo in 2011. When Johnson’s
strategy of adopting policies similar to those used by Apple turned out to de-
crease rather than increase profits, Johnson was fired. His style did not work
as well at an old-fashioned retailing company, like JC Penney, as it had at a
technology company like Apple (see Business Week , October 22, 2013).
     The value of a management team to a particular firm reflects the quality
of the match between the team and the firm, something which is revealed over
time. In the case of Johnson, the appropriate inference to poor earnings was
not only that the current year’s performance was bad, but that the strategy of
adopting an Apple-style approach at JC Penney was dubious. Because of its
implications for the future, JC Penny’s stock price declined more than it would
have with a ceo whose match with the firm was more well-known. In short,
uncertainty about a management team, particularly the fit between its approach
and the firm, magnifies the effect of news on stock prices, and leads to higher
stock return volatility.
     Consistent with this idea, Clayton et al. (2005) document that stock-return
volatility declines with ceo tenure. Presumably, early in a ceo’s tenure, news
conveys, inter alia, information about the ceo’s ability (fit). Later in his tenure,
when the ceo is more a known quantity, stock prices respond less to news and
volatility is, correspondingly, lower.
     Pan et al. (2015) examine whether the pattern of volatility over the ceo cycle
fits with a variant of the Pastor and Veronesi (2003) model applied to uncertainty
about management. Consistent with a learning model, Pan et al. find that the
decline in volatility over a ceo’s tenure is convex: it declines more steeply with
time earlier in his tenure than later in it. In addition, volatility declines more
rapidly when there is more ex ante uncertainty about the incoming ceo: if he is
younger, an outsider, not an “heir apparent,” or held fewer previous positions.
                   Learning about Governance and Capital Markets                               41



Pan et al. also find that the magnitude of the changes in value in response to
news is larger early in a ceo’s tenure, when the news reveals more information
about his quality and overall fit with the firm.45 Quantitatively, Pan et al.
estimate that uncertainty about a new ceo and his policies explains roughly a
quarter of overall stock-price volatility at the time of appointment, indicating
that uncertainty about management has a substantial effect on volatility.
    Arguably, rating agencies have been aware of this for some time insofar as
they pay attention to “management risk” and consider it to be an important
factor in their evaluations.46 If, indeed, management risk is a meaningful factor
affecting a firm’s overall risk, then the cost of borrowing (i.e., interest rates)
should greater at the time of top management turnover than at other times.
Subsequently, as the market learns more about the quality of the management
team and its match with the firm, rates should decline to approximately the
pre-turnover levels.
    Pan et al. (2016) test these predictions by estimating the extent to which
the learning about management affects firms’ cost of borrowing. Their findings
are summarized in Figure 2, which illustrates the way credit default swap (cds)
spreads change around the time of a ceo change.47 The announcement of a
ceo’s departure is associated with an increase in his firm’s cds spread, reflecting
a greater estimate by the market of default risk. The cds spread declines when
a successor is announced; it declines further during the new ceo’s time in office,
approximately back to the pre-turnover level after about three years. Holding
other factors constant, the five-year cds spread is 36 basis points (24% relative
to the sample mean) higher when a new ceo takes office than three years into his
tenure. Spreads on loans and bond yields also decline following ceo turnovers.
These effects are consistent with the idea, set forth above, that markets react
to management risk—uncertainty about managerial ability and fit.48

   45 These results are robust to sample construction. They hold whether the data consist

of the universe of turnovers from Execucomp or just the subsample of turnovers that are
likely to have been exogenously determined (i.e., were not the result of the executive’s poor
performance).
  46 For example, a special document circulated by Moody’s about corporate governance

states: “[T]here is inherent transition risk in any ceo change and we therefore look to evaluate
any changes to strategic initiatives or financial policies that differ from previous expectations,
and whether credit metrics or liquidity deteriorates as a result.” See Plath (2008).
  47 A firm’s cds spread measures the premium one pays to insure against a potential default

on the firm’s debt. Because cdss trade daily, they provide a continually updated, market-based
estimate of expected default costs.
   48 An alternative hypothesis to explain these results is that ceo turnovers are more likely

at times of greater uncertainty about the firm. This could lead to patterns similar to those
reported in Pan et al. (2016). To evaluate the importance of this alternative explanation, these
authors also report results for various subsamples of “exogenously determined” turnovers (e.g.,
due to death). In each case, the results are similar to those described here, suggesting that it
is management risk that drives concerns about default risk.
                Learning about Governance and Capital Markets                   42




 230.0

 220.0

 210.0

 200.0

 190.0

 180.0

 170.0

 160.0

 150.0
         Within 3 months       Departure         Inauguration     36 months after
         before departure                                          inauguration

Figure 2: Average CDS Spreads at Key Events Related to CEO Turnovers.
          Average CDS spreads (in basis points) at various points around a change
          in CEO. The turnover sample includes 284 CEO turnovers since 2001,
          for which the departure announcement and the inauguration occurred in
          different times. See Pan et al. (2016) for details.


5.3   Capital Market Inferences about Other Executives and Other
      Dimensions of Governance
Pan et al. (2016) also consider the effect of hiring a new Chief Financial Officer
(cfo) on borrowing costs. They find that when there is a new cfo, even absent
a change in ceo, effects similar to those seen with ceo turnover hold (although
these effects are 36 to 58% smaller in magnitude than for ceos). The explanation
is the same as for ceos (see Figure 2 and related text). The fact that the effects
are smaller with cfo turnover than for ceo turnover suggests that a ceo’s
ability and match are of greater importance for a firm’s future than a cfo’s;
that is, a ceo can add (or subtract) more value than a cfo.
    Stern (2016) uses this approach to understand the importance of boards of
directors. She examines the change in volatility around the appointment of
directors. Stern’s results indicate that there is a spike in volatility around the
appointment of directors, followed by a decline as they become more well-known
to the market. Uncertainty about the board accounts for between seven and ten
percent of overall volatility. Stern also examines how volatility effects vary with
circumstances. She finds differences exist; for example, her results imply that
when there is a relatively powerful ceo, volatility changes around the arrival
of directors are relatively small, consistent with a view that boards matter less
when the ceo is more powerful. Overall, this approach is promising and is likely
                        Further Implications for Governance                        43



to be useful in evaluating the importance of different governance attributes.

6     Further Implications for Governance
6.1    Bargaining Over Oversight
As noted in the introduction, a reaction to being monitoring is to try to change
how that monitoring is conducted; for example, seeking to change who the
monitor is. Hermalin and Weisbach (1998) exploit this insight to explain a
number of phenomena in governance, including management’s influence over
the composition of the board of directors.
   The timing and principal assumptions of their model are:
    1. The firm has a new ceo with ability α. Assume α ∼ N(0, 1/τ0 ).
    2. The first realization of earnings, x1 , occurs. Assume x1 ∼ N(α, 1/ρ).
       Based on this, the board updates its beliefs about the ceo’s ability and
       may choose to replace him. The ability of any replacement ceo is also
       drawn from N(0, 1/τ0 ).
    3. The ceo (incumbent or replacement) bargains with the board over filling
       board vacancies and over his compensation (wage) w. If bargaining fails,
       the ceo is fired, a replacement hired, and the stage repeated.
    4. The board chooses how intensely to monitor the ceo, which is modeled as
       the probability, p, it acquires a private signal, y, about the ceo’s ability.
       Assume y ∼ N(α, 1/η).
    5. If the board acquires the signal y, it updates its estimate of the ceo ability,
       which affects its decision to keep or replace the ceo.
    6. The second realization of earnings, x2 , occurs. Assume Ex2 = α. The
       random variables y − α, x1 − α, and x2 − α are independent.
    The ceo in change at stage 6 receives some nonpecuniary benefit b > 0 (e.g.,
the additional utility that comes from the power and prestige of being ceo). A
ceo dismissed prior to that receives no such benefit. The wage w agreed to in
stage 3 is paid regardless of whether the ceo survives to stage 6. The ceo is
protected by limited liability: he cannot be made to pay the firm, so w ≥ 0.
    As in many models of boards, the board is modeled in a somewhat re-
duced form: it acts as if its utility (payoff) is x2 − ℓd(p), where ℓ measures the
board’s lack of independence and d : [0, 1] 7→ R+ is a disutility-of-effort func-
tion satisfying the usual properties of d(0) = d′ (0) = 0 and d′′ (p) > 0 for all
p ∈ [0, 1] (so both disutility and marginal disutility are increasing functions).
To ensure interior solutions to the board’s choice problem vis-à-vis p, assume
limp→1 d′ (p) = ∞.
    This is a normal learning model, so the posterior expectation of ability, α b′ ,
given prior αb and signal s (s = x1 or y) is
                                          τα
                                           b + κs
                                   b′ =
                                   α              ,                              (36)
                                           τ +κ
                           Further Implications for Governance                           44



where τ is the precision of the estimate αb and κ = ρ or η depending on whether
the signal is x1 or y, respectively. Invoking now familiar arguments, the distri-
bution of y given the ceo’s estimated ability, αb, is N(b
                                                        α, 1/H), where
                                                ητ
                                        H=         .
                                               η+τ
The posterior estimate of ability is, note, also the expectation of x2 .
    As usual, the game is solved via backward induction. Consider the decision
to retain or replace the ceo at stage 5. By assumption, there is a large pool of
ex ante identical possible replacements; hence, a replacement has no bargaining
power. So he will be offered and accept the minimum possible wage, namely
zero. Because E{α} = 0, expected earnings under a replacement are also zero;
hence, the expected net value of a replacement is 0. So, if it learns y, the board
dismisses the incumbent ceo if α  b′ < 0. Similar to (6) above, this means the
board will dismiss the ceo if y < −τ αb/η ≡ Y . Along the lines of the derivation
of (9) above, a firm’s expected value if the board will learn y is49
                                             √
                                  √            H           √ 
                V = Φ − (Y − α  b) H α  b+        φ (Y − αb) H .              (37)
                                               τ
Lemma 3. The value of the firm if monitoring will occur, V , is increasing in the
prior expected ability of the incumbent, α
                                         b, but the option value of monitoring,
V −α b, is decreasing in α
                         b.
   The board is assumed to choose its monitoring intensity to maximize its
expected utility; that is, its choice of p solves

                          max pV + (1 − p) max{0, α
                                                  b} − ℓd(p) .
                         p∈[0,1]

Observe that should it not receive the signal y—an event that happens with
probability 1 − p—the value of the firm is max{0, αb}, which reflects that it will
hire a replacement ceo if and only if its expectation of the incumbent’s ability
is less than its expectation of a replacement’s.50 Let P ∗ denote the solution
to that optimization program. Assumptions previously made ensure both that
P ∗ ∈ (0, 1) and that P ∗ is unique.
Proposition 8. The intensity with which the board monitors the ceo, P ∗ , is
  (i) decreasing with its prior estimate of the ceo’s ability, α           b ≥ 0;
                                                               b, whenever α
 (ii) decreasing with the precision of its prior estimate of his ability, τ ;
(iii) decreasing with its collective lack of independence, ℓ; but
 (iv) increasing with the precision (i.e., η) of the performance signal, y.

 49 Recall   the incumbent must be paid w regardless of whether he is retained or not.
 50 Again  note that compensation promised the incumbent must be paid regardless of the
decision to retain or replace him, so that compensation is a sunk expenditure.
                        Further Implications for Governance                        45



   Assume that bargaining between board and incumbent ceo is Nash (1950):
their agreement maximizes the product of their surpluses. The limited-liability
assumption (i.e., w ≥ 0) means the board can capture none of the benefit, b,
that a new ceo would enjoy; hence, the board’s surplus is simply its expected
payoff from retaining the incumbent ceo (if that’s positive). The incumbent
ceo’s expected surplus is his expected benefit,
                                      √          
                         pΦ − (Y − α b) H + 1 − p b .                     (38)

   Before analyzing the bargaining game, it’s worth considering the intensity
of monitoring that would maximize total surplus. Total surplus is
                                                     √           
     pV + (1 − p) max{0, αb} − ℓd(p) + pΦ − (Y − α  b) H + 1 − p b .

The intensity of monitoring, p, that maximizes total surplus, P ∗∗ , solves the
first-order condition (foc):
                                                      √ 
            V − max{0, α b} − ℓd′ (p) − 1 − Φ − (Y − α
                                                     b) H b = 0 .          (39)
            |          {z           }
             =0 is foc determining P ∗

Because d′ (·) is increasing, (39) implies that P ∗∗ < P ∗ : the joint-surplus-
maximizing intensity of monitoring is less than what the board prefers. The
reason is that, in maximizing its own payoff, the board ignores the benefit, b,
the incumbent ceo can achieve. That benefit is lost if he is fired: limited lia-
bility means the board can’t capture it from a new ceo; so, the marginal joint
benefit of monitoring is less than the board’s own benefit. In sum, we have:
Proposition 9. The intensity of monitoring, p, chosen by the board is greater
than the intensity that would maximize expected total surplus (i.e., P ∗ > P ∗∗ ).
    That P ∗∗ < P ∗ reflects, in essence, a commitment problem: to generate
more collective surplus, the board and incumbent ceo would like to fix ex ante
a lower level of monitoring. The one lever they have to do so is to adjust the
board’s lack of independence, ℓ: from Proposition 8(iii), the more the board
lacks independence, the less intensely it monitors. This provides a motive for
the board and incumbent ceo to bargain for a less independent board at stage 3.
Let ℓ0 denote the collective lack of independence of those directors continuing
as directors. Suppose that bargaining with the ceo results in board vacancies
being filled such that the new board’s lack of independence is ℓ1 . If P ∗ (ℓ) denotes
the intensity of monitoring chosen by a board with lack of independence ℓ, then
the continuing directors’ expected utility is
                                                                    
                P ∗ (ℓ1 )V + 1 − P ∗ (ℓ1 ) max{0, α
                                                  b} − ℓ0 d P ∗ (ℓ1 ) .           (40)

   Consider now the bargaining between continuing directors and the incum-
bent ceo. They will agree to a lack of independence, ℓ1 , and wage, w, that max-
imizes the product of their surpluses from trade. In light of Proposition 8(iii),
                       Further Implications for Governance                          46



P ∗ (·), is monotone; hence, there is no loss in treating P ∗ as the choice variable.
Because the ceo gets zero if no agreement is reached, his surplus is
                                       √              
                       P ∗ Φ − (Y − α b) H + 1 − P ∗ b + w .                     (41)

If no agreement is reached, the board hires a replacement ceo. Let U0 denote
the board’s expected utility if it hires a replacement. Its surplus is, thus,

                 P ∗ V + (1 − P ∗ ) max{0, α
                                           b} − ℓ0 d(P ∗ ) − w − U0 .             (42)

   Two more steps are necessary before we can determine the w and P ∗ that
maximize the product of (41) and (42) (i.e., solve the bargaining game): deter-
mine what U0 is and show that the board fires, prior to bargaining, an incumbent
ceo for whom α b < 0.
Lemma 4. The board’s outside option in√       its bargaining with an incumbent ceo
is U0 = P0 V0 − ℓ0 d(P0 ), where V0 = φ(0) H/τ0 (i.e., the expected value of the
firm under a new ceo) and P0 maximizes the existing board’s (continuing direc-
tors’) expected utility; that is, P0 solves the first-order condition V0 −ℓ0 d′ (p) = 0
(equivalently, P0 = P ∗ (ℓ0 ) for a new ceo).
Observe the wage paid a new/replacement ceo is zero.
Proposition 10. A unique finite cutoff, A > 0, exists such that an incumbent
ceo is fired prior to bargaining if and only if his estimated ability is less than A.
Moreover, A is decreasing in the board’s lack of independence (i.e., ∂A/∂ℓ0 < 0).
The result A > 0 reflects that more is known about an incumbent ceo than his
replacement, so a replacement has a greater option value than he does; hence,
his expected ability needs be greater than a replacement’s for him to keep his
job. We explore the implications of different option values further in Section 6.2.
    Back to the bargaining problem (i.e., maximizing the product of (41) and
(42)): Because α
               b > A, the first-order conditions with respect to p and w are
                                      
      b − ℓ0 d′ (p) pΦb + (1 − p)b + w
   V −α
                                                          
                         + p(V − α    b − ℓ0 d(p) − w − U0 (Φ − 1) b = 0 (43)
                                 b) + α
                          |              {z               } | {z }
                               >0 given incumbent ceo retained      <0


and                                                          
         p(V − α    b − ℓ0 d(p) − w − U0 − pΦb + (1 − p)b + w ≤ 0 .
               b) + α
(Note the arguments of Φ have been suppressed for the sake of readability.)
Observe (43) entails V − αb − ℓ0 d′ (p) > 0; hence, p < P ∗ (ℓ0 ), which means
ℓ1 > ℓ0 : bargaining with a ceo who is retained leads to a less independent
board. This establishes:
Proposition 11. If the continuing directors choose to retain the ceo, then the
new board is less independent than the continuing directors (i.e., ℓ1 > ℓ0 ).
                        Further Implications for Governance                           47



    What about the compensation of a ceo who is retained? If the limited-
liability constraint binds, then it is zero. If it doesn’t bind, then the second
first-order condition entails
                                                                  
          p(V − α     b − ℓ0 d(p) − w − U0 − pΦb + (1 − p)b + w = 0 .
                 b) + α

Plugging that back into (43), it follows, after some algebra, that

                             b − ℓ0 d′ (p) + (Φ − 1)b = 0 .
                          V −α

That, note, is the first-order condition for maximizing joint surplus (i.e., ex-
pression (39) above). If, instead, the limited-liability constraint binds, then

                             b − ℓ0 d′ (p) + (Φ − 1)b < 0 .
                          V −α

When the limited-liability constraint binds there is more monitoring (equiva-
lently, greater board independence) than if it doesn’t bind. In sum,

Proposition 12. Suppose that the incumbent ceo is retained. If the limited-
liability constraint is not binding, then the level of monitoring will maximize the
ceo and board’s joint surplus. If it is binding, then the level of monitoring will
exceed the joint-surplus-maximizing level. Correspondingly, board independence
will be greater if the constraint is binding than if it is not binding.

Empirical Validation. The model analyzed above has a number of empirical
predictions, including:

   1. A ceo who performs poorly is more likely to be replaced than one who
      performs well.

   2. Ceteris paribus, a ceo is more likely to be dismissed for poor performance
      when the board is more independent (i.e., when ℓ is lower).

   3. Strong performance should lead to less independent (higher-ℓ) boards.

   4. Board independence declines over the course of a ceo’s tenure.
The results of a number of empirical studies are consistent with these predic-
tions. The first predictions has considerable support: a long list of articles plus
popular press coverage document the result.51 Weisbach (1988) provides strong
evidence for the second prediction. The last two predictions are consistent with
the patterns of director turnover documented by Hermalin and Weisbach (1988).

 51 For a recent popular-press article see James Surowiecki’s “Why ceos are Getting Fired

More,” New Yorker , November 7, 2016. For discussions of relevant scholarly articles, see
Hermalin and Weisbach (1998) or Hermalin (2013).
                           Further Implications for Governance                            48



Summary. The Hermalin and Weisbach (1998) model is one of the first bar-
gaining models of governance. In particular, the rarer a commodity a ceo
proves to be (i.e., to have higher estimated ability than a replacement), the
more leverage he has to extract what he wants from the board of directors.
Not surprisingly, he wants greater compensation. But, to the extent he obtains
other non-pecuniary benefits from being ceo (the parameter b), he also wants
to keep his job. The latter objective makes him seek a board that will be a less
vigilant monitor; that is, one that is less likely to dismiss him ceteris paribus.
Because an incumbent board sees itself as optimally vigilant, it views yielding
somewhat on vigilance (agreeing to filling board vacancies with less independent
directors—raising ℓ) as a second-order loss; whereas paying the ceo more is a
first-order loss. Hence, a ceo has an easier time negotiating a higher ℓ than more
pay, at least when he is only marginally more valuable than a replacement.52 A
“star” ceo, who is significantly more valuable than a replacement, can bargain
for both a less independent board (higher ℓ) and greater pay. Observe the two
roles played by learning in this model: (i) it is because the board learns that
the ceo is a rare commodity that he gains bargaining power; and (ii) because
the ceo wants to constrain the board from learning more about him, he uses
that bargaining power to lessen the odds it will learn more about him.

6.2     Consequences for Choice of Manager
As reviewed in Hermalin (2005, 2013), among other sources, there have been a
number of trends in corporate governance in the past quarter century:

      • In many countries, notably the us, there has been a significant shift toward
        having outside directors be a greater proportion of the board.53 Such
        directors are generally seen as more independent of management and,
        thus, more diligent monitors (in the notation of the previous subsection,
        a more independent board is a lower ℓ board).

      • In many countries, again notably the us, there has been a trend toward
        more external hiring of the ceo (versus appointing someone who rose
        through the company’s ranks).

      • There has also been a trend toward greater ceo compensation, both con-
        tingent and non-contingent.

      • There has been a trend toward shorter ceo tenures.

A question is how interconnected these trends might be? A further question is
what do these trends suggest about governance?

  52 More   valuable accounting for the greater option value a replacement has.
  53 Outsidedirectors are typically defined as directors whose sole involvement with the com-
pany is in their role as a director; hence, for example, a university president serving on a
corporate board would be an outsider. In contrast, inside directors are generally employees
of the company (e.g., the ceo is an inside director). See Adams et al. (2010) for details.
                       Further Implications for Governance                     49




                                        If signal acquired,
                                        board makes
                Board Hires             decision to keep or
                ceo                     fire incumbent ceo


                         Board monitors           Earnings, x,
                         with intensity p;        realized
                         that is, acquires
                         signal, y, about
                         ceo’s ability with
                         probability p
             Figure 3: Basic timeline of the Hermalin (2005) model



    As discussed earlier, among the roles of the board of directors are hiring a
ceo, monitoring (assessing) him, and replacing him if necessary. A key point,
though, is that the way in which the board will fulfill the latter two roles has
implications for who it wants to hire in the first place. Hermalin (2005) explores
this insight via a model that builds on Hermalin and Weisbach (1998). The
model’s basic elements are summarized in Figure 3.
    As in the previous subsection, the board’s preferences are captured by the
utility function x − ℓd(p). As before E{x} = α, where α is the ability of the ceo
in place at the end (i.e., either the incumbent if retained or his replacement
otherwise). Similar to before α ∼ N(µ, 1/τ ). The signal y ∼ N(α, 1/η). As
before, the random variables y − α and x − α are independently distributed.
    Assume that the prior estimate of the incumbent ceo’s ability (his µ) is
strictly positive. Assume, however, the prior estimate of a replacement ceo’s
ability (his µ) is zero. Setting the latter to zero is a convenient normalization
that entails no loss of generality. The higher prior estimate for the incumbent
is a way of accounting for firing (transition) costs when replacing one ceo with
another (i.e., the r of the Section 2.2 model). An implication of this assumption
is that, absent any new information about the incumbent ceo, the board would
want to retain him: his expected value exceeds his replacement’s.
    Given this assumption, there should be no confusion in letting µ now simply
denote the prior estimate of the incumbent ceo’s ability.
    Via now familiar reasoning, if the board obtains the signal y, then the pos-
terior distribution of ability is normal with mean µ̂ and precision τ̂ , where
                                 τ µ + ηy
                          µ̂ =            and τ̂ = τ + η .
                                   τ +η
Observe, then
     E{x|y} = µ̂ , E{x|no signal} = µ , and E{x|replace incumbent} = 0 .
As noted, the board will fire the incumbent ceo only if it gets a signal and,
then, only if the signal is such that µ̂ < 0. Given the formula for µ̂, the signal
                      Further Implications for Governance                          50



will cause the incumbent ceo to lose his job if and only if
                  τ µ + ηy                           −τ µ
                           < 0 equivalently, iff y <      ≡Y .
                    τ +η                              η
   Again building on previous analysis, the prior distribution of y is
                                                
                              1   1              1
                        N µ, +         ≡ N µ,        .
                              η τ               H
It follows that the expected value of the firm if the signal will be observed is
              Z ∞                      r                          
                              τ µ + sy       H           H
         V ≡         max 0,                      exp − (y − µ)2 dy .
               −∞               τ +s         2π          2
                     |       {z        }
                   E{α|y,optimal replacement}

Consequently, utilizing familiar methods (see, e.g., the derivation of (9) above),

                         √
                   √      H          √ 
  V = 1 − Φ (Y − µ) H µ +     φ (Y − µ) H
                           τ
                                                          √
                                              √            H          √ 
                                 = Φ − (Y − µ) H µ +          φ (Y − µ) H .
                                                           τ
                     √ 
Observe Φ (Y − µ) H is the probability that the ceo is fired conditional on
knowing the signal will be obtained.
   If the ceo cannot be monitored (or, equivalently, if no signal is obtained),
the value of the firm is just the incumbent ceo’s expected ability, µ. Being able
to monitor the ceo is valuable insofar as V > µ; that is, monitoring creates an
option worth V − µ.
   The board chooses its intensity of monitoring, p, to maximize

                              pV + (1 − p)µ − ℓd(p) .

Let P ∗ denote the solution. The assumptions made earlier about d(·) ensure
that P ∗ is unique given V , µ, and ℓ, and that it lies in (0, 1).
Proposition 13. The intensity with which the board monitors the ceo in equi-
librium, P ∗ , is
  (i) decreasing with the prior estimate of the ceo’s ability, µ;
 (ii) decreasing with the precision of the prior estimate, τ ; and
(iii) decreasing with the board’s lack of independence, ℓ.
The proof of Proposition 13 is the same as Proposition 8’s.
    Now extend the model to include the board’s initial choice of ceo; in par-
ticular, assume the board has a choice between an internal candidate (index I)
and an external candidate (index E). Assume it is common knowledge that the
                      Further Implications for Governance                      51



ability of the two candidates are drawn, respectively, from the normal distribu-
tions N(µI , 1/τI ) and N(µE , 1/τE ) (where both µs are positive). The critical
assumption is that τI > τE : the board has better information about the internal
candidate than the external one. As Hermalin (2005) details, there are many
reasons this assumption is empirically valid.
    A key result in this extended model is the following:

Proposition 14. Fix τI > τE and define ∆ = µI − µE . Then, fixing µI (or
µE ), there exists a minimum ∆m > 0 such that the external candidate is hired if
and only if ∆ < ∆m . Moreover, ∆m increases as the board gains independence
(i.e., the lower is ℓ); that is, more independent boards are more inclined to hire
external candidates, all else equal.

Intuition: monitoring creates an option value that increases with uncertainty
about the ceo’s ability (i.e., ∂V /∂τ < 0 from Proposition 13(ii)). That means
the board would strictly prefer, between two ceos with the same expected
ability (same µs), the one about which it was more uncertain. Hence, the board
should be willing to hire the external candidate even if µE < µI , provided the
difference is not too great. That is, external candidates have an “edge.” At the
same time, the external candidate’s greater option value is conditional on the
ceo actually being monitored; so, this effect is tempered by how likely the board
is to monitor. This, then, explains the “moreover” portion of Proposition 14.
    An immediate corollary is:

Corollary 1. A necessary condition for the internal candidate to be hired is
that his estimated ability be strictly greater than that of the external candidate
(i.e., that µI > µE ).

    Observation, including field work, suggests that outside directors are more
inclined to monitor than are inside directors. Additionally, an empirical study
by Weisbach (1988) finds evidence in support of that hypothesis. If, then, out-
side directors are more likely to monitor (i.e., a greater proportion of outside
directors corresponds to a lower ℓ), then a trend toward greater outsider rep-
resentation on boards should, in light of Proposition 14, lead to more external
candidates being hired as ceos ceteris paribus. Hence, this model can serve to
tie together two of the trends noted above: greater proportion of outsiders on
the board and increased hiring of ceos from outside the firm.
    Denis et al. (in press) suggest that this result can run in reverse in certain
circumstances; namely, that when a firm knows it will employ a ceo about
whom it is more uncertain, then it will want to have a board more inclined to
monitor. Such a scenario arises with de novo firms (e.g., as in the Denis et
al., when the firms are spinoffs of existing firms). Denis et al. find evidence to
support this hypothesis in their empirical study of 143 spinoffs.
    Another implication of the model is the following. Recall that were there
no monitoring at all, the initially hired ceo (the incumbent) would never be
replaced. In contrast, when there is monitoring the incumbent ceo faces a
positive probability of being fired. The more monitoring there is, the greater
                       Further Implications for Governance                         52



the proportion of incumbent ceos who will be fired. This, then, means that
the average length of ceo tenure should fall. So, one gets the following causal
chain: more outsider representation on boards entails more monitoring, which
entails shorter ceo tenures on average. So the model ties together the trends of
a greater proportion of outsiders on the board and shorter average ceo tenures.
    There is also an indirect effect that reinforces the effect just identified:
greater outsider representation leads to a greater proportion of external hires;
externally hired ceos are more uncertain entities, which means their ex ante
probability of being fired is greater than internal hires ceteris paribus. So this is
another path linking greater outsider representation and shorter average tenures:

Proposition 15. Suppose the board is indifferent between hiring the external
candidate or the internal candidate as ceo. Then, if the external candidate is
hired,

  (i) he is more intensely monitored than the internal candidate would have
      been (i.e., PE∗ > PI∗ );

 (ii) he is more likely to be dismissed than the internal candidate would have
      been conditional on being monitored (i.e., conditional on the signal y being
      obtained); and, hence,
(iii) he has a shorter expected tenure than the internal candidate would have
      been expected to have.

Proof: Result (i) follows from Propositions      √ 13 and 14√ given both µI < µE
and τI < τE . Result (ii) follows if −(Y − µ) H = µτ / H increases in µ and
τ . That it increases in µ is immediate. Straightforward differentiation and al-
gebra reveal it’s increasing in τ too. Result (iii) is immediate from (i) and (ii).


Effort and Compensation. The model so far assumes no effort by the ceo
nor does it consider compensation. Suppose, as in earlier models, that the ceo
wishes to keep his job. Suppose too that effort influences the board’s perception
of his ability if it monitors; that is, there is a signal-jamming motive for him
to expend effort. Recalling, though, that such signal jamming fools no one in
equilibrium—the Red Queen effect holds—so effort makes the ceo directly worse
off without truly affecting his probability of retaining his job; consequently, he
will demand compensation for this effort. Indeed, even if there were no scope
for signal-jamming effort, the fact that greater monitoring puts him at greater
risk of losing his job could also lead him to demand greater compensation. To
explore these issues consider the modified model of Figure 4.
    Make the standard assumptions about the ceo’s disutility-of-effort function:
it is twice differentiable; k(0) = k ′ (0) = 0; and it exhibits increasing marginal
disutility of effort. It follows that k ′ (e) > 0 for all e > 0. Assume the benefit of
effort e, β(e), is realized after the board makes its keep or fire decision, but its
realization does not depend on that decision (i.e., the firm gets β(e) whether
                        Further Implications for Governance                       53




                                                        If signal acquired,
                                                        board makes
                 Board Hires                            decision to keep or
                 ceo                                    fire incumbent ceo


                       ceo expends     Board monitors             Earnings,
                       effort e at     with intensity p;          x + β(e),
                       personal cost   that is, acquires          realized.
                       k(e)            signal, y + e, about       Surviving
                                       ceo’s ability with         ceo gets
                                       probability p              benefit b > 0
             Figure 4: Timeline of expanded model with ceo effort



the initially hired ceo keeps or loses his job). Because the properties of β(·)
are irrelevant to the analysis at hand, we will not focus on it in what follows.
As with previous signal-jamming models, the board cannot observe y separately
from e; instead, it observes ỹ ≡ y + e. As noted, the board will anticipate some
level of effort from the ceo. Denote that anticipated level by ê.
    As before, the ceo is fired if the best estimate of y is too low. Specifically,
following the prior analysis, he’s fired if
                                              τµ
                                ỹ − ê < −      ≡Y .
                                               η
We can rewrite that cutoff rule as the ceo loses his job if y < Y + ê − e. The
ceo chooses his effort to maximize his expected utility; that is, to maximize
                                      √              
              P ∗ Φ − (Y + ê − e − µ) H + (1 − P ∗ ) b − k(e) .

The first-order condition for maximizing that expression is
                                         √ √
                 bP ∗ φ − (Y + ê − e − µ H) H − k ′ (e) = 0 .
As has been noted repeatedly, in a pure-strategy equilibrium, ê must equal the
e the ceo chooses. Hence, equilibrium effort, e∗ , must satisfy
                                   √ √
                   bP ∗ φ − (Y − µ H) H − k ′ (e∗ ) = 0 .                  (44)
The assumed properties of k(·) ensure that a unique e∗ exists that solves (44).
   Expression (44) is only a necessary condition; existence of a pure-strategy
equilibrium also requires that
                                          √              
     e∗ ∈ argmax P ∗ Φ − (Y + e∗ − e − µ) H + (1 − P ∗ ) b − k(e) .        (45)
             e

Additional assumptions on k(·) are needed to ensure (45) holds. Fortunately,
such assumptions are plausible (see Hermalin, 2005, for details) and henceforth
maintained. A key result for this extended model is the following:
                       Further Implications for Governance                        54



Proposition 16. Assume the game with ceo effort has a pure-strategy equi-
librium. Then the following comparative statics hold:
  (i) the lower the ceo’s estimated ability, the more effort he expends in equi-
      librium; and
 (ii) the less independent is the board (i.e., the greater is ℓ), the less effort the
      ceo expends in equilibrium.
    Given that, conditional on employment, externally hired ceos tend to have
lower µs, Proposition 16 suggests that external ceos will expend more effort
in equilibrium than ceos hired from the inside. The proposition also suggests
that a trend toward greater board independence (a growing trend for greater
outsider representation) could lead to ceos’ expending more effort.
    Now consider compensation. A ceo’s equilibrium utility is
                                  √             
                   P ∗ Φ − (Y − µ) H + (1 − P ∗ ) b − k(e∗ ) .

The derivative of that with respect to ℓ, the lack-of-independence parameter, is
                         ∂P ∗                         ∂e∗
                                (Φ − 1) b − k ′ (e∗ )      >0
                           {z } | {z }
                         | ∂ℓ     −
                                                       ∂ℓ
                                                      |{z}
                           −                        −

given Propositions 13 and 16. So a ceo’s equilibrium utility falls if ℓ falls; that
is, if the board is more independent. People typically require compensation if
their utility is lowered. Combined, these insights yield:
Proposition 17. If ceos with similar attributes enjoy equal expected utility in
the equilibrium of the ceo market, then, controlling for attributes, ceos who
work for more independent boards will receive greater compensation than ceos
who work for less independent boards.
    It is not necessary to introduce effort into the model to identify a relation
between board independence and executive compensation. To see this, return
to the version of the model without effort. Assume a ceo’s expected utility is
                                         √              
                    w + P ∗ Φ − (Y − µ) H + (1 − P ∗ ) b ,                   (46)

where w denotes compensation. Assume further that a ceo accepts a job if and
only if his expected utility (i.e., expression (46)) exceeds his reservation utility,
U . If we assume that the firms have all the bargaining power and can, thus,
hold a ceo to his reservation utility, then
                                              √              
                 w = U − P ∗ Φ − (Y − µ) H + (1 − P ∗ ) b .

The derivative with respect to ℓ is
                            ∂w      ∂P ∗
                               = −b        (Φ − 1) < 0 .
                            ∂ℓ      | ∂ℓ
                                      {z }
                                        <0

In words: the less independent the board, the less the ceo’s equilibrium pay.
                        Further Implications for Governance                      55



Summary.        The causal links just identified are readily summarized as follows:

      • More independent boards (greater outsider representation) means more
        monitoring of ceos (i.e., higher values of p in equilibrium).

      • More monitoring of ceos leads to:

          – More effort by ceos
          – More hiring of external ceos
          – Shorter average tenures for ceos

      • More hiring of external ceos leads to:

          – More effort by ceos
          – Shorter average tenures for ceos

      • More effort by ceos and shorter average tenures for ceos both lead to
        greater compensation.

6.3     Consequences for Choice of Information Structures
As touched upon in Section 2.2, shareholders and their executives can have
divergent interests with respect to the quality of information used in assessing
executives’ ability. Hermalin and Weisbach (2012) provide a more in-depth
analysis of that issue, which we briefly review here.
   The basic timing and assumptions of Hermalin and Weisbach (2012) are:

  1. The firm’s owners determine the quality of information—what Hermalin
     and Weisbach call a disclosure regime. Let D denote a disclosure regime.

  2. The owners negotiate with a potential ceo as to his compensation, w, and
     (in equilibrium) hire him.

  3. The owners learn information, the quality of which depends on the disclo-
     sure regime.

  4. The owners base an action (e.g., firing the ceo) on what was learned.

  5. Payoffs are realized.

This is a very general model that pertains to a number of situations, including:

      • Information pertains to the ceo’s ability. The consequent action is whether
        to retain or fire him. As in Section 2.2, the ceo suffers a loss if fired.

      • Information pertains to the firm’s prospects. The consequent action is
        whether to invest additional resources into the firm or to take resources
        out. The ceo prefers to manage more resources than fewer, ceteris paribus.
                          Further Implications for Governance                                  56



      • Information learned by the owners lessens an informational advantage held
        by the ceo. The consequent action is the owners adjust the ceo’s com-
        pensation plan, resulting in the ceo’s loss of information rents.
      • Information refers to how informative firm performance is about the ac-
        tions the ceo has taken. The consequent action is the owners adjust the
        ceo’s compensation plan, resulting in his loss of quasi-rents.

    Let D ≻ D′ denote that disclosure regime D is more informative than regime
  ′
D with respect to some recognized notion of informativeness, such as Blackwell
informativeness.
    Let the owners’ payoff be π(D) − w and the ceo’s U (D) + v(w). where v(·) is
an increasing function. Assume the ceo is protected by limited liability: w ≥ 0.
    The following condition is key to the Hermalin and Weisbach (2012) analysis:

Condition 1. If D and D′ are two disclosure regimes such that D ≻ D′ , then
π(D) > π(D′ ) and U (D) < U (D′ ).54

In words: owners prefer a more informative disclosure regime to a less informa-
tive one, whereas a ceo prefers a less informative regime. Recall that Condi-
tion 1 followed from first principles in the model in Section 2.2 above. Indeed,
Hermalin and Weisbach show that in many situations of interest (including those
just listed) the condition follows from first principles.
    Hermalin and Weisbach (2012) assume that bargaining between owners and
the ceo is generalized Nash; to wit, compensation, w, is set to maximize
                                                               
                θ log π(D) − w + (1 − θ) log U (D) + v(w) − u ,

where θ ∈ [0, 1] is the owners’ bargaining power and u is the ceo’s reservation
utility (the value of his outside option).
    The first result is55

Proposition 18. Assume wage bargaining is generalized Nash and Condition 1
holds. Then the ceo’s compensation, as determined by the bargaining process,
is non-decreasing in how informative is the disclosure regime.

The proof is a straightforward application of standard comparative static meth-
ods (see Hermalin and Weisbach, 2012, pp. 223–224 for details) and so omitted.
As noted in Section 2.2, there is a cost to owners of better information (beyond
any direct cost of producing it) because they must compensate their executive
for the disutility it imposes on him.
    Although, as noted, Hermalin and Weisbach (2012) consider a wide variety
of models that satisfy Condition 1, we limit attention to a learning model, in

  54 In Hermalin and Weisbach (2012), the condition is slightly weaker insofar as they allow

π(D) ≥ π(D ′ ); that greater generality is not needed for our purposes here.
  55 For the purposes of this chapter, we ignore the possibility of corner solutions; see Hermalin

and Weisbach (2012) for an analysis that accounts for possible corner solutions.
                         Further Implications for Governance                                57



keeping with the theme of this chapter.56 Suppose that the owners’ payoff is

                                       xγ(a) − c(a) ,                                     (47)

where a is an action taken by the owners from a known set A and x is a stochastic
return such that E{x} = α. As above, α is an unknown parameter. Consistent
with previous analysis, it can be considered the ceo’s ability, although Hermalin
and Weisbach allow for other interpretations. As before, the information owners
receive permit them to form an unbiased estimate of α, α    b. Although Hermalin
and Weisbach allow for a number of different functions γ(·) and c(·), one that
fits with earlier analysis is that a ∈ {0, 1}, keep or fire the ceo, respectively;
c(1) > c(0), reflecting firing costs; and γ(a) = 1 − a, so if the ceo is fired,
the owners expect the return a replacement generates (normalized to zero), and
otherwise they expect the return equal to their best estimate of his ability, α
                                                                              b.
    Define
                          a∗ (b
                              α) = argmax αbγ(a) − c(a) ;                    (48)
                                         a∈A
          ∗
            α) is the owners’ best response to their information.57 Define
that is, a (b
                                                      
                         Π(b
                           α) = αbγ a∗ (b
                                        α) − c a∗ (bα) ;

that is, Π(b
           α) is the owners’ expected payoff conditional on their estimate of the
parameter α.

Lemma 5. The payoff function Π(·) is convex.

    Lemma 5 entails that the owners are risk loving with respect to the estimator
α
b, which recall is a random variable ex ante. The (unconditional) mean of α          b
is E{α}, so invariant across disclosure regimes; hence, owners prefer, ceteris
paribus, a disclosure regime in which the distribution of α b is riskier, in the sense
of second-order stochastic dominance, than a regime in which the distribution is
less risky. Critically, an estimator based on better information in the Blackwell
sense is a riskier estimator in the sense of second-order stochastic dominance (see
Baker, 2006); intuitively, receiving no information—minimal informativeness—
makes α b invariant, it remains equal to the prior. Receiving information makes
α
b vary, which means risk. It therefore follows from Lemma 5 that

Proposition 19. If D is a more informative disclosure regime, in the Blackwell
sense, than D′ , then the owners prefer D to D′ , ceteris paribus.

   Proposition 19 establishes half of Condition 1. To establish the other half,
more structure is required. Among the possible set of assumptions, suppose that
the ceo loses L if dismissed (similar to Section 2.2). Observe that the owners

  56 Among the other models they consider are a managerial myopia model with empire build-

ing; a hidden-information agency model; and a hidden-action agency model.
  57 Generically, a∗ (b
                      α) is unique, so we treat it as such (i.e., we assume an equality in (48)
rather the technically more correct ∈).
                                  Further Implications for Governance                      58



maximize (47) by choosing a = 1 if and only if α      b < −c(1). Let F (·|D) denote
the distribution function of the estimator α  b conditional
                                                            on the disclosure regime
being D. It follows that U (D) = −LF −c(1)|D in this version of the model.
    We also require a bit more structure on the relations between disclosure
regimes: suppose that the set of disclosure regimes can be ordered by the dis-
persive order: for any two disclosure regimes D and D′ either F (·|D) dominates
F (·|D′ ) in the dispersive order (denoted F (·|D) disp≥
                                                          F (·|D′ )) or the other way
         58
around. Because all distributions of α     b have the same mean, F (·|D′ ) disp
                                                                             ≥
                                                                                F (·|D)
                 ′ ≥
implies F (·|D ) ssd F (·|D), where ssd denotes second-order stochastic dominance
                                      ≥


(Shaked and Shanthikumar, 1994, Theorem 2.B.10). It follows from Lemma 5
that F (·|D′ ) disp
                ≥
                    F (·|D) implies the owners prefer regime D to regime D′ . Under
reasonable conditions, the ceo has the opposite preferences:59
Proposition 20. Suppose the median of the estimate α     b coincides with the mean
and exceeds −c(1). Then F (·|D′ ) disp
                                   ≥
                                       F (·|D) implies the owners prefer regime D
to regime D′ and the ceo prefers D′ to D. In other words, Condition 1 holds.
Intuitively, F (·|D′ ) disp
                        ≥
                            F (·|D) means that F (·|D) has a fatter left tail than does
      ′
F (·|D ). Because it is left-tail outcomes that get him fired, the ceo prefers
thinner left tails to fatter left tails, ceteris paribus.
    Finally, it’s worth tying this more general analysis back to the normal learn-
ing model employed elsewhere in this chapter. As often assumed above, let
α ∼ N(0, 1/τ ) and assume the owners receive a signal s ∼ N(α, 1/η). Because
0 > −c(1) and the median of the distribution of α           b = 0 = E{b    α}, the sup-
positions in Proposition 20 are met. Consider two disclosure regimes: in one
s ∼ N(α, 1/η), in the other s ∼ N(α, 1/η ′ ), where η > η ′ ; that is, the first is
more informative than the second. We wish to show that the distribution of α          b
under the first regime is dominated by the second in the sense of the dispersive
order. Recall (see, e.g., (4)) that α    b = ηs/(τ + η). Hence
                                                               
                           η2                  η2         1   1           η
         Var(b α) =              2
                                   Var(s) =         2
                                                      ×     +     =
                      (τ + η)               (τ + η)       τ   η      τ (τ + η)
(note this is the unconditional variance of α  b). Simple calculus reveals that
∂ Var(b
      α)/∂η > 0. In light of Lemma A.3 in the appendix, it follows that
                                                        
                               η′                     η
                    N 0,                ≥
                                            N 0,             .
                          τ (τ + η ′ ) disp      τ (τ + η)
Proposition 20 therefore entails:
  58 F (·|D ′ ) ≥    F (·|D) if
              disp

                           F −1 (ξ|D ′ ) − F −1 (ξ ′ |D ′ ) < F −1 (ξ|D) − F −1 (ξ ′ |D)
whenever 1 > ξ > ξ ′ > 0, where F −1 is the inverse of the distribution function.
  59 The requirement that the mean and median of the estimator coincide is a property of

many estimation procedures. The condition that E{b     α}, which recall equals E{α}, exceed
−c(1) should be non-controversial because the alternative would mean the owners would wish
to fire the ceo in the absence of information, which begs the question of why they would have
hired him in thee first place.
                   How Non-Bayesian Updating Affects Governance                              59



Corollary 2. In a ceo-dismissal model, if α      b derives from a normal-learning
model, then owners prefer more precise signals (i.e., higher ηs), while the ceo
prefers less precise signals, ceteris paribus; that is, Condition 1 holds.

Bibliographic Note. As noted, Hermalin and Weisbach (2012) consider the
tradeoff reflected in Condition 1 across a number of models relevant to gover-
nance. Additionally, they study how firm characteristics affect the choice of
disclosure regime. In particular, they show that larger firms will tend, ceteris
paribus, to have better disclosure regimes and, thus, greater executive compen-
sation. Moreover, via a general equilibrium analysis of the ceo labor market,
they show firms with better disclosure regimes employ more able ceos. They
also explore the consequences of mandated (e.g., by legislation) reforms of dis-
closure and its consequences for managerial compensation and well being.

7    How Non-Bayesian Updating Affects Governance
A maintained assumption of most learning models is that individuals incorporate
new information rationally; that is, they update their beliefs according to Bayes
Law. There is, however, a large body of research in psychology that convincingly
demonstrates that people often hold beliefs or take actions that are inconsistent
with their having properly employed Bayes Law to account for new evidence.60
    If, as the psychological evidence suggests, people fail to apply Bayes Law
correctly (are “bad Bayesians”), what does this mean for the realism of the
learning-based models previously discussed? One view is that they are inval-
idated, since their key underlying assumption is wrong. This is too strong a
response: although the average person may incorrectly calculate posterior prob-
abilities in the face of new information, these models do not rely on precise
calculations; rather, they rely on the direction in which beliefs are updated. As
long as bad news shifts beliefs about ability downward and good news shifts
them up, then the spirit of the models is preserved. Moreover, the models allow
us to say what the consequence of particular cognitive biases will be. Specifi-
cally, keep in mind that the sign of the bias when updating beliefs is generally
understood: in particular, people put too much weight on their most immediate
observations and experiences and too little on base rates (as we discuss below).
A consequence is that people are likely reacting to current signals more than
rational Bayesian updating would imply. In a sense, the models’ implications
are likely to be greater in magnitude in reality than on paper. For this rea-
son, the behavioral biases documented by psychologists imply that the models
previously considered could understate the true importance of the effects they
characterize.
    This section expands on that idea; in particular, we explore the implications
of biased (non-Bayesian) updating for learning-based models of governance. We
first summarize some of the literature on behavioral biases. Then we discuss the
  60 Some good introductions and overviews of this literature are Gilovich (1991), Plous (1993),

and Kahneman (2011).
                     How Non-Bayesian Updating Affects Governance                             60



way that the behavioral biases potentially affect learning models of governance,
as well as the way in which behavioral analysis could be incorporated into this
analysis in future research. Finally, we suggest some ways in which this type of
behavioral analysis could be incorporated into future research.

7.1    How Do People Really Update Their Beliefs?
The psychology literature has documented a number of biases or fallacies that
pertain to how individuals tend to depart from rationality in their decision-
making. Three such departures are especially relevant in the context of this
chapter: the base-rate fallacy, the “hot-hand” fallacy, and the fundamental-
attribution bias.61
    The base-rate fallacy is a tendency to underweight base rates; in terms of
Bayes Law, when agents receive a signal, they revise their beliefs by more than
Bayes Law would have them do. Numerous experiments have given test sub-
jects information about the population (the base rate), and then subsequent
information that can be used to answer a question. This is especially relevant
with regard to experiments considering tests for rare diseases: tell the subjects
that the prevalence of some disease is, say, one in 10,000 in the population and
there is a test for that disease that has only a one-percent false positive rate
and a very high (perhaps even perfect) true positive rate. Then ask the subjects
how likely is it that a patient who tests positive has the disease. The subjects’
guesses are usually very high, often over 90%.62 The true answer, however, is
less than one percent.63 In other words, individuals underweight the base rate
(the remarkably low prevalence of the disease) and place too much weight on
new information (the signal—the test result).64
    The hot-hand fallacy, somewhat relatedly, is a tendency to forecast future
success based on a recent run of success. Gilovich et al. (1985) originally doc-
umented this tendency using data from professional basketball games. Their

  61 See   Kahneman (2011) for, inter alia, an overview of these biases.
  62 This  has been the experience of one of the authors who has routinely run this experiment
in his first-year mba course.
  63 If p is the true positive rate, then Bayes Law yields a posterior probability of having the

disease based on a positive test as
                                          1
                                 p×     10,000                      1
                                 1        9999         1
                                                            <             ≈ .0099 .
                         p×   10,000
                                       + 10,000   ×   100
                                                                1 + 99.99

  64 A related fallacy is the conjunction fallacy (Tversky and Kahneman, 1983): Linda is 31,

single, outspoken, and very bright. She majored in philosophy. As a student, she was deeply
concerned with issues of discrimination and social justice, and also participated in anti-nuclear
demonstrations. Which is more probable? 1) Linda is a bank teller or 2) Linda is a bank
teller and active in the feminist movement. In the Tversky and Kahneman study, the majority
of subjects chose the second option even though the event in that option is a proper subset
of the event in the first; that is, if B is the event Linda is a bank teller and F the event
she’s a feminist, then the first option is B and the second is B ∩ F ⊆ B and, necessarily,
Pr{B ∩ F } ≤ Pr{B}.
                  How Non-Bayesian Updating Affects Governance                            61



statistical analysis reveals that a player’s likelihood of making a given shot is
unrelated to whether he made his most recent shots. Nevertheless, coaches,
players, and fans all believe strongly that the opposite is true, that the proba-
bility of a player making his next shot increases substantially if he has hit his last
two or three shots. Gilovich et al. argue that this misperception is evidence of
a bias in which people over-extrapolate the most recent events and underweight
other relevant data.
    This finding was very controversial, and has led to a large literature reëxam-
ining Gilovich et al.’s conclusions. However, as emphasized by Alter and Oppen-
heimer (2006), much of this literature is actually about the statistics of basket-
ball, using more sophisticated estimation strategies to see whether, in fact, the
likelihood of making shots is independent. Little of the subsequent research is
on the more important issue (at least to non-basketball fans) of whether people
systematically and substantially overestimate the implications of past success
on future success (see, e.g., Bocskocsky et al., 2014). Alter and Oppenheimer
argue that regardless of whether there is serial correlation in shot-making suc-
cess, agents dramatically overstate the implication that making one shot has on
the probability of making the next. Moreover, data unrelated to sports confirm
that people tend to believe that one success increases the probability of future
success far more than is warranted by data. Therefore, there appears to be a
systematic tendency to overestimate the implications of recent events on the
likelihood of future events.65
    The fundamental attribution bias is to assign more credit or blame to an
individual and less to her circumstances than is appropriate. This behavior
was first documented in experiments by Jones and Harris (1967), and the term
coined by Ross (1977). This bias represents a departure from Bayesian infer-
ence because the rational inference from a person’s action is to update one’s
prior about his ability based on his actions conditional on the circumstances
the person faces. However, people fail, on average, to adjust appropriately for
circumstances outside one’s control and give people too much credit or blame
than they deserve for a particular outcome.

7.2     Implications of Biases for Interpretation of Learning Models
7.2.1    The Base-Rate Fallacy
It is relatively straightforward to incorporate the base-rate fallacy into learning
models of governance. As was shown repeatedly above (consider, e.g., expres-
sions (4) and (19)), the true Bayesian estimate of ability is a weighted average of
new information and the prior (for instance, in (19), the weights are—dropping
subscripts—
                                   η          τ
                                        and       ,
                                 τ +η       τ +η
  65 A related bias is the gambler’s fallacy: the tendency of people to think that luck will

reverse itself. If a gambler has a run of bad luck, people will think s/he is “due” some good
luck, even though the random events are, just that, random, and do not systematically reverse
themselves.
                How Non-Bayesian Updating Affects Governance                   62



respectively). A shift in weight toward new information over the prior will
increase a ceo’s incentive to jam the signal. For example, consider, expression
(34): if η/(τ +η) increases, then the ceo’s marginal return to the signal-jamming
action, ξ, is greater and so his choice—the solution to (34)—will be greater. So
if we think of the base-rate fallacy as meaning those assessing the ceo have
a downward bias in their estimate of τ (or, equivalently, an upward bias in
their estimate of η), then the ceo, if he understands this bias (or simply suffers
it himself), will be more inclined to jam the signal than were this a world of
unbiased Bayesians. This insight has a number of implications vis-à-vis models
that assume actors are perfect Bayesians: if the base-rate fallacy is a prevalent
bias, then 1) the career-concern incentives facing managers would be greater;
2) the distortions in investment identified by Holmstrom (1999) could be larger;
3) the reaction (positive or negative) to any news releases in terms of estimates
of managerial ability would be greater; and 4) under at least some assumptions,
it would, as just suggested, mean managers’ motives to take myopic investments
are bigger.
    The base-rate fallacy should be kept in mind when interpreting empirical
work about learning. For example, consider the estimates of indirect incentives
in the private equity and hedge fund industries summarized in Table 1. The
mechanism presumed to underlie these estimates is that a fund’s performance
leads the market to update its assessment of the ability of that fund’s manager,
which affects inflows into the fund. The fees on these new inflows (or outflows)
determine the incremental pay the managers receive from their performance.
The magnitude of this effect clearly depends on the extent to which the market
updates their assessment of the manager’s ability. So if the base-rate fallacy
leads the market to have larger updates for a given level of performance than
Bayes Law would imply, there would be more inflows to the fund for that level
of performance and consequently higher indirect incentives.
    When interpreting these estimates, it is impossible to disentangle rational
Bayesian updating from an overreaction due to behavioral biases. There are,
however, reasons to suspect behavioral biases are present. The magnitude of
the estimates of indirect incentives is very large, potentially larger than one
might expect only from rational updating. For private equity funds, Chung
et al. (2012) find that indirect incentives are about the same size as the 20%
carried interest, which by itself is substantial source of incentives for private-
equity general partners. For hedge funds, for which moving capital is easier
than with private-equity funds, Lim et al. (2016) find that, on average, indirect
incentives are several times as large as they are for private-equity funds. For
young funds, indirect incentives are so large that an additional dollar of wealth
returned to investors appears to increase the fund manager’s lifetime personal
wealth by more than a dollar. It is possible that these effects could be generated
by rational updating, after all a small difference in estimated ability between
fund managers could lead a rational investor to switch funds. However, the
estimated effects are sufficiently large that it seems likely that some of the
incentives could be a result of investors overreacting to fund performance.
    Relatedly, the magnitude of the investors’ responses to performance in terms
                  How Non-Bayesian Updating Affects Governance                        63



of fund inflows and outflows is very large. The strong relation between inflows
and performance, together with the lack of abnormal performance for mutual
funds, has long been considered an important puzzle in finance (see e.g., Berk
and Green, 2004). It is possible that some of this reaction could be explained by
the base-rate fallacy: investors place too much weight on recent performance and
consequently adjust their portfolios more than they should in response to a shock
to performance. In fact, Lim et al. (2016) find that inflows respond strongly to
monthly performance; it is difficult to imagine that a rational update of ability
could change so rapidly in response to short-term fluctuations in performance.66

7.2.2    The Hot-Hand Fallacy
In one sense, the hot-hand fallacy is an extreme version of the base-rate fallacy.
In basketball, for instance, it turns out that a player’s field-goal percentage is
roughly constant over time (e.g., over a season or two) and there is little to no
serial correlation within a particular game. Hence, the right “model” is that
each shot a player takes has an independent probability p of being good, so p
should be the probability with which one should expect the next shot to hit,
even if the player has enjoyed a run of success (just as one knows a fair coin will
land heads with probability 1/2 no matter how many heads in a row have just
been tossed). The hot-hand fallacy is, in essence, the false belief that there is
something to be learned when there is, in fact, nothing to learn—those subject
to the fallacy can be seen as assigning a weight less than one to the prior (base
rate) even though, here, one is the correct weight to assign.
    Another way to view the hot-hand fallacy is that people are using the wrong
stochastic model. Suppose that, as is standardly assumed in the literature,
a ceo’s ability is fixed over time. If, instead, one mistakenly believed that
it followed a random walk (or other process with serial correlation), then one
would believe that there is more to be learned from recent events than there
truly is. In this regard, it is worth recalling, as noted earlier, that Holmstrom
(1999) considers an extension of the basic career-concerns model that encom-
passes abilities that follow a random walk. Although the resulting formulae are
different in this version of the model than the one with fixed ability, the basic
conclusions discussed above continue to hold—at least if abilities truly follow a
random walk and this is commonly understood . What could prove interesting
is to explore the deviations in beliefs, efforts, compensation, and so forth when
people are subject to the hot-hand fallacy (falsely believe, e.g., ability follows a
random walk). To the best of our knowledge, no one has extended the career-
concern model to allow for the possibility that some or all observers are using
an erroneous model of the underlying stochastic process.

  66 The published version does not contain these monthly regressions. They are, however,

reported in the working paper version, nber wp 18903.
                  How Non-Bayesian Updating Affects Governance                           64



7.2.3    The Fundamental Attribution Bias
The fundamental-attribution bias is somewhat trickier. If there is only one
signal of performance, then there is no means of identifying what is attributable
to the manager and what to circumstances. In some settings, though, inferences
could be made about circumstances by comparing the performance of a given
firm to others in the same industry. Differences in relative performance could
help identify the degree to which the firm’s success (or lack thereof) should be
attributable to its ceo and the degree attributable to circumstances beyond his
control.67 The extent to which markets appropriately adjust for circumstances
beyond the ceo’s control is somewhat unclear: although there is some evidence
that relative performance is taken into account (Gibbons and Murphy, 1990),
there is also evidence that it is not (Bertrand and Mullainathan, 2001).
    Another issue is that if managers know they will be assessed in a relative way,
then, consistent with the general point that the act of observation can distort
incentives, such assessment could lead to suboptimal behavior. For instance,
Scharfstein and Stein (1990) present a model in which relative-performance
assessment results in herding in investment decisions: as with wildebeests on
the Serengeti, standing out from the herd is a good way to get picked off by
predators. But while herding can be good for wildebeests and ceos, it can be
quite suboptimal from the perspective of shareholders.
    Despite the difficulties of identifying managerial ability from circumstances,
there are reasons to suspect that markets give too much credit to managers. In
the management literature, Khurana (2002a,b) has made a compelling case that
there is a misguided tendency to treat a number of ceos as superstars. In ad-
dition, experimental work suggests that subjects have a tendency to overweight
the importance of the leader to a team’s success or failure (see, in particular,
Weber et al., 2001).

7.3     Potential Future Research Applying Behavioral Economics
        to Corporate Governance
Although, as discussed above, there is a way in which departures from Bayesian
updating don’t change the basic point of models that assume wholly rational
actors, it is nonetheless worth speculating about what the implications for be-
havioral economics might be for learning-based models of corporate governance.
    Note, first, that it is not necessarily obvious what the effect of these biases
will be. For example, the base-rate fallacy causes observers to overweight cur-
rent performance, which could increase a young executive’s incentives relative
to what they would be if observers were perfect Bayesians. On the other hand,
if the past will be effectively forgotten, the long-run effects that current effort
has on future compensation will be less than a model based on Bayesian up-
dating would predict, which could reduce a young executive’s incentives relative
to the model. Hence, one avenue of research is to determine the theoretical

 67 Wasserman   et al. (2010) find evidence that who the ceo is does matter, but this effect
varies considerably across industries.
                  How Non-Bayesian Updating Affects Governance                            65



consequences if the relevant parties employ updating/inference rules exhibiting
well-documented biases (e.g., will they boost or lessen managerial effort early
in a career).
    A second set of questions stem from the insight that if these biases are
predictable and lead others to behave sub-optimally, then ought there not be
ways for one to make money off of them? That is, why can’t savvy players
effectively “print money” at the expense of the less savvy? One possible answer
is to imagine that there is some process—as yet unmodeled in this context (to
the best of our knowledge)—that causes competition among the savvy players
seeking to capture such rents to somehow drive the relevant institutions to an
equilibrium in which it is as if the institutions were run by rational actors.
    Alternatively, it might actually be profitable in some ways to have a board
made up of bad Bayesians. To wit, consider equation (17) and, to eliminate the
distortion introduced by discounting, set δ = 1. If all boards suffered from the
base-rate fallacy so severely that they mistakenly set τt = 0 (i.e., their estimate
of ability is wholly governed by current performance), then a ceo’s return to
effort is 1, matching the social return: in a world of biased boards, the first best
attains. Admittedly, this is a highly incomplete analysis—and certainly one
can also imagine reasons why a board of bad Bayesians is bad—but it serves to
illustrate one way in which cognitive biases could be a plus.
    Another way cognitive biases could be a plus is by serving as a commitment
device.68 To illustrate this possibility, another well-known learning-related bias
is confirmation bias, the tendency to look for or overweight evidence confirming
a decision and to ignore or underweight contrary evidence. Consider two boards,
one with confirmation bias, one without. Suppose, as in Section 4.1, ceos decide
whether or not to pursue projects. The ceo working for the board without bias
will, for the reasons detailed in conjunction with Proposition 5, never undertake
a project. The story could be different for the ceo working for the board with
bias. If this board wishes to confirm the wisdom of its selection of the ceo, it
will tend to overlook or at least underweight a project failure, while noticing and
overweighting a project success. Although choosing a project still exposes the
ceo to risk, the magnitude of the risk-adjusted upside can exceed the magnitude
of the risk-adjusted downside, which means he could wish to undertake projects.
In short, the boards confirmation bias could commit it to being more lenient
toward failure, which is necessary if the ceo is to have an incentive to pursue
projects at all. Again, this is a highly incomplete analysis—and certainly one
can also imagine reasons why a lenient board is bad—but it is suggestive of
possible lines of future research.
    Empirically, there is much work to be done. Even assuming rationality, there
is a dearth of empirical work related to learning and its effect on governance.
Identifying the extent to which observed learning represents rational Bayesian
updating and to which it represents overreaction because of behavioral biases is

  68 The discussion that follows is somewhat related to a strain of the leadership literature

that deals with delegation. See, e.g., Rotemberg and Saloner (1993, 1994, 2000), Van den
Steen (2005), and Blanes i Vidal and Möller (2007).
                                    Conclusion                                    66



clearly a very important (and difficult) question.
    The existence of behavioral biases raises an important methodological issue
regarding updating. Structural estimation, which has become popular recently,
takes the underlying modeling as a maintained assumption while estimating the
underlying model parameters. The fact that agents are likely to be overreacting
to new information, suggests that the approach of assuming that Bayes Law
holds as one of the maintained assumptions is potentially problematic.
    Another important issue is that biases are typically measured via lab exper-
iments using a somewhat random draw of local undergraduates. Do cognitive
biases evidenced by students playing for small stakes in psychology labs neces-
sarily have bearing in a corporate world in which governance mistakes have the
potential to destroy billions of dollars? Put slightly differently, Bayes Rule is not
a secret formula and the incentives to get matters right are huge, so shouldn’t
boards and others overcome these biases? As noted, there are some hints in
the empirical literature that the answer may nonetheless be “no,” but obviously
how accurately the relevant actors adjust their beliefs is an empirical question,
one in need of more research.
    In summary, there is a natural complementarity between the learning and
assessment approach to governance and behavioral economics. Although, as
noted, it is possible that market forces drive the relevant actors to behave as if
they are good Bayesians, there are also many reasons to suspect that managerial
ability is assessed in such a way that the relevant actors are updating their
beliefs in a decidedly non-Bayesian manner. If so, then our understanding of the
corresponding governance phenomena will be vastly enriched by incorporating
the various insights arising from research on cognitive biases.

8   Conclusion
Research in corporate governance has historically focused on issues of control:
getting those with decision-making authority to make decisions that are as
aligned as possible with the interests of investors. Without minimizing the
importance of these agency problems, this chapter has sought to make the case
that such a focus is incomplete. An equally important role of corporate gov-
ernance is to ensure that those with decision-making authority are the best
people to hold such authority. This means assessing the capabilities of decision
makers—that is, management—and the strategies they are deploying. In the
past few decades, a research program has emerged among corporate governance
scholars that seeks to understand not only such assessment directly, but also
its ancillary effects on the behavior of managers, their compensation, and the
structure of governance itself.
    One consequence of assessment is that the actor being assessed can be
tempted to take actions to affect that assessment. Starting with Holmstrom
(1982) [1999], it has been recognized that assessment creates incentives. The
incentives can be positive; they can, for example, induce a manager to work
harder. They can also be negative; they can, for example, lead a manager to
eschew a positive npv project or behave in other myopic ways. In this chapter,
                                    Conclusion                                    67



we have reviewed a number of models that reflect the good, the bad, and the
ugly of the incentives created by assessment.
     Beyond its effect on managerial behavior, assessment is also important be-
cause it affects the desirability of the manager’s job, particularly how risky it is.
Because what others will ultimately infer about him or her is uncertain ex ante,
a manager is necessarily exposed to risk. People demand additional compensa-
tion to bear risk, so a cost of intense monitoring of a manager is the increased
compensation s/he will demand.
     Assessment also has implications for how governance evolves. Because of the
downside risk in being evaluated, a manager has reasons to seek less vigilant
monitors, which in turn has implications for how independent the board of
directors will be. Because the ability to learn about a manager and dismiss him
if he is a poor performer creates an option value, employers (boards) can have
an incentive to hire executives about which there is uncertainty because that
raises the option value. How valuable that option value is, however, depends
on how vigilant a monitor the board is. Hence, there are relationships between
board independence (propensity to monitor) and the sort of executive employed.
Boards and executives may also wish to bargain about the kind of information
available to the board. In short, as discussed above, assessment entails a number
of consequences for who is hired, how she is monitored, who monitors her, and
the information that will be used in assessing her. An assessment perspective on
governance can thus prove essential for gaining insights into phenomena such as
executive selection and turnover; the evolution of executive salaries and other
forms of non-contingent compensation; and changes in the balance of power
between boards and ceos.
     Not only is there assessment by the board (employers), but also the market
more generally. The more uncertainty there is about a ceo, the more influential
any signal about his ability will be. As discussed above, this can help to explain
the volatility of stock returns over time: the more established a ceo, the less of
an impact any performance metric has in assessing his ability, and thus the less
the market will react to such news.
     Although by no means comprehensive, our discussion of the extant literature
on the assessment-based approach to corporate governance illustrates that this
approach has already yielded considerable insights. Yet it is not a spent force: it
remains a rich approach for future research. This is especially true for empirical
work. Probably the greatest challenge to empirical work in this area is data
given the key variables in the models tend to be unobservable to an outsider: the
assessment itself, managerial effort, managerial career paths, and the question of
whether an observed action is distortionary (how, for instance, does one tell if a
particular investment is myopic)? Yet, the rewards to empirical work are likely
to be large, since the effects the models describe seem a priori very important.
Acting to improve others’ opinions of oneself is a constant element of everyday
life, and it seems likely that such actions provide important motivations and
indirect consequences in ways we do not fully understand.
     A striking feature of the models in this literature is how well suited they are
to testing: as a rule, they offer sharp time-series and cross-sectional predictions.
                           Appendix A: Technical Details                        68



These predictions occur, in large part, because Bayes Theorem is very clear
on the way updating occurs. The magnitude of updating should be negatively
related to the precision of the prior information, positively related to the amount
of information in the signal, and decrease in magnitude over time given that
beliefs about ability are, necessarily, more fixed for old-times than newcomers.
These predictions fall out of from virtually every model based on updating and,
with appropriate data and clever empirical designs, are likely to lend themselves
to interesting and important empirical work.
    One potential shortcoming of the current literature is that it has ignored
the well-documented fact that most people are “bad Bayesians”—they fail, in
systematic and predictable ways, to update their beliefs in a manner consistent
with Bayes Theorem. In particular, the psychology literature has documented in
numerous experiments that people tend to overweight signals relative to prior
information, leading them to update their beliefs when they receive new in-
formation by more than is warranted. As we discussed in detail above (see
in particular the previous section), recognition of this fact opens a number of
avenues of research, both empirical and theoretical. If, as the psychological lit-
erature suggests, actors react to signals more than they should, then many of
the effects identified in models with wholly rational actors are magnified. For
this reason, we believe that assessment-based models are one area of economics
where behavioral considerations are likely to cause the rational models to un-
derstate the effects they describe. A critical issue in this regard is determining
empirically how far real-world belief formation deviates from the Bayesian ideal
in the context of governance.
    In sum, learning and assessment complement agency theory as tools for the
study of corporate governance; in particular, they are a means to provide a uni-
fying framework to a number of disparate phenomena in governance. Further,
it is an approach amenable to empirical analysis and, indeed, a rich empirical
literature has started to emerge that builds implicitly and explicitly on it. Fi-
nally, it offers natural ways to incorporate behavioral insights into the study of
governance and contracting.


Appendix A: Technical Details

Derivation of expression (9). Observe
                       Z                
                          ∞
                                    ηs     √     √
            b1 } =
  E max{−r, α          max −r,               hφ(s h )ds
                   −∞             τ0 + η
                      Z −rτ0 /h √     √        Z ∞
                                                         sh √    √
                 = −r            hφ(s h )ds +                hφ(s h )ds .
                       −∞                        −rτ0 /h τ0

The last step in deriving (9) follows from the following lemma:
                                        Appendix A: Technical Details                     69



Lemma A.1. If φ is the density function of a standard normal, then
                       Z b
                           xφ(x)dx = φ(a) − φ(b) .
                                          a
                                 √
Proof: Recall φ(x) = exp(−x2 /2)/ 2π. Hence,
  Z       b               Z       b           2              2         b
                                         1      x         1      x
              xφ(x)dx =               x √ exp −   dx = − √ exp −
      a                       a          2π     2         2π     2         a

                                                                        = φ(a) − φ(b) .




Lemma A.2. N(µ, σa2 ) dominates N(µ, σb2 ) in the sense of second-order stochas-
tic dominance if σb > σa .
                                   2
Proof: Recall that if x ∼ N(µ, σ ), then its cumulative distribution function
can be written as Φ (x − µ)/σ , where Φ is the cumulative distribution function
of the standard normal (i.e., N(0, 1)). Recall, too, that

                                              Φ(x) = 1 − Φ(−x)                        (49)

for all x (the tails have equal mass).
    As a preliminary,
  Z                  x − µ 
          ∞
           x − µ
        Φ         −Φ              dx =
   −∞       σa            σb
Z µ                x − µ        Z ∞                x − µ 
         x − µ                                x − µ
      Φ         −Φ              dx −       Φ −        −Φ −            dx
 −∞       σa            σb            µ          σa            σb
    Z µ                 x − µ       Z µ             z − µ 
             x − µ                              z − µ
 =        Φ         −Φ              dx −      Φ         −Φ           dz
     −∞       σa             σb           −∞       σa         σb
                                                                               = 0,   (50)

where the first equality follows from (49) and the second from making the change
of variables z = 2µ − x.
    Recall distribution F dominates G in the sense of second-order stochastic
dominance if they have the same mean and
                             Z y
                                                
                                   F (x) − G(x) dx ≤ 0
                                          −∞

for all y. Because Φ is an increasing function and (x − µ)/σa < (x − µ)/σb for
all x < µ,          Z y  
                               x − µ      x − µ 
                           Φ          −Φ             dx < 0              (51)
                     −∞         σa            σb
                           Appendix A: Technical Details                              70



for all y ≤ µ. The lefthand side of (51) goes to zero as y → ∞ by (50). Hence
the lemma must hold if the lefthand side of (51) is monotone in y for y > µ.
The derivative of that lefthand side is
                            y − µ      y − µ
                           Φ         −Φ            >0
                               σa           σb

for all y, where the sign follows because Φ is increasing and (y − µ)/σa >
(y − µ)/σb for all y > µ.

Proof of Lemma 2: Claims (ii) and (iv) are immediate. Claim (iii) follows
because
                       T
                       X −t
                d                        τ0
                  mt =      δj                       > 0.
               dη      j=1
                               (τ 0 + (t + j − 1)η)2

For claim (i), it was shown earlier that mT −1 > mT = 0. Consider t < T − 1.
Observe
                                        XT
                                                   η
                             mt = δ −t       δj
                                       i=t+1
                                                τ i−1

if one reindexes (note the use of (5)); hence,

                                          XT
                   η                                η
  mt − mt+1 = δ       − δ −(t+1) (1 − δ)       δj
                   τt                    i=t+2
                                                  τi−1

                                                               T
                                    η                     η X j              η
                               >δ      − δ −(t+1) (1 − δ)          δ = δ T −t > 0 ,
                                    τt                    τt i=t+2           τt

where the first inequality follows because τt′′ > τt′ if t′′ > t′ .69

Proof of Lemma 3: Noting that
                             √      τ +η √       τ
                      (Y − α
                           b) H = −            α√
                                        b H = −b
                                        α
                                      η           H
                                                                     √ 
                                                       b = Φ −(Y − α
and utilizing Lemma A.1, it is readily seen that ∂V /∂ α           b) H > 0.
Consequently,
                  ∂(V − α b)                   √ 
                              = Φ − (Y − α   b) H − 1 < 0 .              (52)
                     ∂αb



 69 Recall
                                 N
                                 X            δ n − δ N +1
                                       δk =                .
                                 k=n
                                                  1−δ
                          Appendix A: Technical Details                         71



Proof of Proposition 8: The first-order condition for maximizing the board’s
objective function is
                      V − max{0, α b} − ℓd′ (p) = 0 .                   (53)
Given the usual comparative statics, part (i) follows immediately from Lemma 3.
Part           √ via the usual comparative statics, if ∂V /∂τ < 0. Recall (Y −
  √ (ii) follows,
b) H = −b
α          ατ / H, so, from (37),
                                   √                   
                                τ          H           τ
                    V =Φ α   b√       +       φ −b  α√      .
                                 H        τ             H
Using Lemma A.1 and the fact that φ(·) is symmetric about 0, it is readily
shown that
                      √                      
       ∂V          τ   ∂ H/τ                 τ    η + 2τ 3/2
                α√
           = φ −b               = −φ −b   α√             H   < 0.
       ∂τ           H     ∂τ                  H    2ητ 3

Hence, by the usual comparative statics, part (ii) follows. Part (iii) is immediate
from (53) (a shift up in marginal cost reduces the equilibrium action). Finally,
it is readily shown that
                                                     
                      ∂V         τ                 τ
                         =          √ φ −b    α√        > 0.
                      ∂s   2(τ + η) H               H

So part (iv) follows from the usual comparative statics.

Proof of Lemma 4: Consider bargaining with a new ceo. If this bargaining
is unsuccessful, the board can hire yet another ceo, who is ex ante identical to
the new ceo. Hence, Nash bargaining entails choosing P ∗ and w to maximize
                                                                
           P ∗ V0 − ℓ0 d(P ∗ ) − w − U0 × P ∗ Φ(0) +1 − P ∗ b + w .
                                               | {z }
                                                    =1/2

The respective first-order conditions are
                                  
          ′  ∗
                       1 ∗           1                    
 V0 − ℓ0 d (P )      1 − P + w − P ∗ V0 − ℓ0 d(P ∗ ) − w − U0 b = 0 (54)
                         2              2

and                                                           
                                                      1 
             P ∗ V0 − ℓ0 d(P ∗ ) − w − U0 −        1 − P∗ + w       ≤ 0.      (55)
                                                      2
In equilibrium, one new ceo must yield the board the same utility as any other
new ceo; hence,
                         P ∗ V0 − ℓ0 d(P ∗ ) − w = U0 .
Consequently, (55) implies that w = 0. Plugging all this back into (54), we have
V0 − ℓ0 d′ (P ∗ ) = 0. That is the first-order condition for the utility-maximizing
intensity of monitoring for a board with lack of independence ℓ0 . Because P ∗ is
                          Appendix A: Technical Details                              72



monotone in ℓ, it follows that ℓ1 = ℓ0 .

Proof of Proposition 10: Let U E denote the equilibrium expected utility of
the board if it bargains with the incumbent ceo. Recalling that P ∗ (ℓ0 ) is the
board’s most preferred level of monitoring, it must be that
                                                                     
           U E ≤ P ∗ (ℓ0 )V + 1 − P ∗ (ℓ0 ) max{0, α
                                                   b} − ℓ0 d P ∗ (ℓ0 ) .    (56)

Invoking the envelope theorem, the derivative of the righthand side (rhs) of
(56) with respect to α
                     b is
                        (
               ∂rhs       P ∗ (ℓ0 ) ∂V
                                     b > 0 , if α
                                    ∂α          b<0
                     =            ∗         ∗
                                                              ,
                ∂α
                 b        1 − P (ℓ0 ) + P (ℓ0 )Φ > 0 , if α
                                                          b>0

where the second line utilizes (52). So the rhs of (56) is increasing in α      b;
moreover, it tends to positive infinity as α
                                           b does. Differentiating the rhs of (56)
with respect to τ , again invoking the envelope theorem, yields
                                             √
                         ∗             1 η        H
                       P (ℓ0 ) −1 +                 φ < 0.                    (57)
                                       2τ +η     τ2

Suppose α
        b = 0. Because τ > τ0 (first-period performance means more is known
about an incumbent than a replacement), the inequality in (57) implies
                                         
              P ∗ (ℓ0 )V − ℓ0 d P ∗ (ℓ0 ) < P0 V0 − ℓ0 d(P0 ) ≡ U0 .

Hence, U0 > U E if α
                   b = 0. Because the rhs of (56) is continuous and increasing
without bound, but is less than U0 for α
                                       b = 0, it follows that A exists and is
unique.
   Turning to the “moreover” part: we’ve just established that
                                                     
              P ∗ (ℓ0 ) V (A) − A + A − ℓ0 d P ∗ (ℓ0 ) − U0 = 0 .

This holds for all values of ℓ0 , so it is an identity. Differentiating that last
expression with respect to ℓ0 , using the envelope theorem, yields
                                    ∂A               
                  (P ∗ Φ + 1 − Φ)       − d P ∗ (ℓ0 ) + d(P0 ) = 0 .
                                    ∂ℓ0

Proposition 8 implies P ∗ (ℓ0 ) < P0 ; so, the last expression entails ∂A/∂ℓ0 < 0.

Proof of Proposition 14: For t ∈ {E, I} define

                       Wt = Pt∗ Vt + (1 − Pt∗ )µt − ℓd(Pt∗ ) .
                               Appendix A: Technical Details                                73



Observe we can write WI as

                          µI
                       z }| {                    p 
     WI (∆) =   PI∗     (µE + ∆) Φ − YI − (µE + ∆) HI

                               √
                                HI                   p 
                          +        φ − YI − (µE + ∆) HI
                               τI

                                                        + (1 − PI∗ )(µE + ∆) − ℓd(PI∗ ) .

Note that the two terms in boxes sum to VI (the value of the firm if the internal
candidate is hired). Next, keeping in mind (i) ∂V /∂Y = 0;70 (ii) ∂V /∂µ = Φ;71
and (iii) the envelope theorem, differentiating WI (∆) with respect to ∆ yields:

                               WI′ (∆) = PI∗ Φ + (1 − PI∗ ) > 0 .                      (58)

If WI (0) < WE and there exists ∆ such that WI (∆) > WE , then ∆m must exist
by continuity. Using the envelope theorem, we have ∂W/∂τ = P ∗ ∂V /∂τ < 0,
where the inequality follows from Proposition 13. So, since, τI > τE , WI (0) <
WE . Because V − µ > 0, WI (∆) ≥ µE + ∆ − ℓd(0); hence, lim∆↑∞ WI (∆) = ∞.
    Turning to the “moreover” part: 0 ≡ WI (∆m ) − WE . Differentiating that
identity with respect to ℓ, using envelope theorem, yields
                                            ∂∆m
                          0 = WI′ (∆m )         − d(PI∗ ) + d(PE∗ ) .
                                             ∂ℓ
Because µI > µE and τI > τE , Proposition 13 entails PI∗ < PE∗ ; so, because d(·)
is increasing, 0 > WI′ (∆m )∂∆m /∂ℓ. Given (58), this implies ∂∆m /∂ℓ < 0.


 70 Proof:   recall Y = −τ µ/η and
                             Z ∞          r                 
                                 τ µ + ηy   H       H
                        V =                    exp − (y − µ)2 dy .
                              Y    τ +η     2π      2
So
                                   =0
                             z }| { r                 
                       ∂V    τ µ + ηY H       H
                          =−             exp − (Y − µ)2 dy = 0 .
                       ∂Y      τ +η   2π      2

 71 Proof:   recall V can also be written
                                                    √
                                       √              H          √ 
                        V = Φ − (Y − µ) H µ +            φ (Y − µ) H .
                                                      τ
Differentiating with respect µ (keeping in mind the last footnote; i.e., ∂V /∂Y = 0 and
Lemma A.1):
                                                     √
      ∂V                 √                 √          H           √          √
          = Φ − (Y − µ) H + φ − (Y − µ) H µ +             φ (Y − µ) H (Y − µ) H
      ∂µ                                               τ
Simple algebra (recall Y = −τ µ/η) shows the last two terms sum to zero.
                           Appendix A: Technical Details                           74




               √ √ 16: It is immediate from (44) that the greater is
Proof of Proposition
bP ∗ φ − (Y − µ H) H, the greater e∗ must be. Observe
                                                  
                ∗
                           √ √          ∗     τ     √
              bP φ − (Y − µ H) H = bP φ √ µ           H.        (59)
                                                H
If µ decreases, the φ term increases given µ > 0 (the peak of the standard
normal density occurs at zero and the density increases as one moves toward
zero from right of zero). Additionally, from Proposition 13, if µ decreases, P ∗
increases. Putting the two effects together, a decrease in µ increases the value
of (59). This means e∗ will be greater, which establishes result (i).
     Consider the righthand side of (59): the only part of it that depends on ℓ is
P ∗ . From Proposition 13, P ∗ is decreasing in ℓ. This establishes result (ii).

Proof of Lemma 5: Consider α b′ . Fix ζ ∈ (0, 1) and define
                           b>α
                               α
                               bζ = ζ α          α′ .
                                      b + (1 − ζ)b
We need to show
                           αζ ) ≤ ζΠ(b
                         Π(b                       α′ ) .
                                     α) + (1 − ζ)Π(b                             (60)
By definition of a maximum
                                                           
        Π(z) ≥ zγ a∗ (b
                      αζ ) − c a∗ (b        αζ ) + γ a∗ (b
                                   αζ ) = Π(b            αζ ) (z − α
                                                                   bζ ) .        (61)
Consider (61) with z = α b and multiply through by ζ. Do the same with z = α    b′ ,
but multiply through by 1 − ζ. Adding those two expressions yields
                                               
     α) + (1 − ζ)Π(b
  ζΠ(b              α′ ) ≥ Π(bαζ ) + γ a∗ (b                 α′ − α
                                                  b + (1 − ζ)b
                                           αζ ) ζ α               bζ ) = Π(b
                                                                           αζ ) ;
that is, (60), as was to be shown.

Proof of Proposition 20: The conclusion about the owners was shown in the
text. The claim about the ceo follows if F (·|D′ ) disp
                                                    ≥
                                                        F (·|D) implies F (−c(1)|D) >
          ′                              ′ ≥
F (−c(1)|D ). The assumption that F (·|D ) disp F (·|D) implies
                                                                  
              −1   1 ′      −1      ′        −1     1
            F        D −F        ξ D <F                D − F −1 ξ D               (62)
                   2                                2
for all ξ < 1/2. Because the mean and median coincide, F −1 (1/2|D′ ) =
F −1 (1/2|D). Hence, (62) implies, for all ξ < 1/2, that
                              F −1 (ξ|D) < F −1 (ξ|D′ )                          (63)
                  α}, F (−c(1)|D′ ) < 1/2. So substituting F (−c(1)|D′ ) for ξ in
Because −c(1) < E{b
(63) yields                                
                      F −1 F (−c(1)|D′ ) D < −c(1) .
Because F (·|D) is increasing function, this last inequality implies F (−c(1)|D′ ) <
F (−c(1)|D), as was to be shown.
                                     References                                75



                               2
Lemma A.3. Let X ∼ N(µ, σX       ) and Y ∼ N(µ, σY2 ), where σX 2
                                                                   < σY2 . Then
the distribution of X dominates the distribution of Y in the dispersive order.

Proof: Let FX and FY denote the distribution functions of X and Y , respec-
tively. To show FX disp
                    ≥
                        FY , we need to show
                     −1 ′′     −1 ′
                    FX (ξ ) − FX (ξ ) < FY−1 (ξ ′′ ) − FY−1 (ξ ′ )           (64)

if 0 < ξ ′ < ξ ′′ < 1. Expression (64) is equivalent to

                    FY−1 (ξ ′ ) − FX
                                   −1 ′
                                     (ξ ) < FY−1 (ξ ′′ ) − FX
                                                            −1 ′′
                                                              (ξ ) ;

hence FX disp
          ≥
              FY if and only if FY−1 (ξ) − FX
                                            −1
                                               (ξ) is increasing in ξ. Replacing ξ
                                                                
with FX (z) reveals that FX disp FY if and only if FY−1 FX (z) − z is increasing
                              ≥


in z. Recall
                                                             
                             x−µ                          y−µ
                FX (x) = Φ             and FY (y) = Φ              .
                               σX                           σY

Observe, therefore, FY−1 (ξ) = µ + σY Φ−1 (ξ). Consequently,
                                               
                                        z − µ          σY − σX
    FY−1 FX (z) − z = µ + σY Φ−1 Φ                 −z =          (z − µ) ,
                                           σX                σX

which is increasing in z because σY > σX .


References
Adams, Renée B., Benjamin E. Hermalin, and Michael S. Weisbach,
 “The Role of Boards of Directors in Corporate Governance: A Conceptual
 Framework & Survey,” Journal of Economic Literature, March 2010, 48 (1),
 59–108.

Allgood, Sam and Kathleen A. Farrell, “The Match between the CEO and
 Firm,” Journal of Business, 2003, 76, 317–341.

Alter, Adam L. and Daniel M. Oppenheimer, “From a Fixation on Sports
 to an Exploration of Mechanism: The Past, Present, and Future of hot Hand
 Research,” Thinking and Reasoning, 2006, 12, 431–444.

Baker, Erin, “Increasing Risk and Increasing Informativeness: Equivalence
 Theorems,” Operations Research, January–February 2006, 54 (1), 26–36.

Barro, Jason R. and Robert J. Barro, “Pay, Performance, and Turnover
 of Bank CEOs,” Journal of Labor Economics, October 1990, 8 (4), 448–481.
Bebchuk, Lucian Arye and Jesse M. Fried, Pay without Performance,
 Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2004.
                                 References                                 76



Becht, Marco, Patrick Bolton, and Ailsa Röell, “Corporate Governance
 and Control,” in George Constantinides, Milton Harris, and René Stulz, eds.,
 The Handbook of the Economics of Finance, Amsterdam: North-Holland,
 2003.

Berk, Jonathan and Richard Green, “Mutual Fund Flows and Performance
 in Rational Markets,” Journal of Political Economy, 2004, 112, 1269–1295.

Berle, Adolph A. and Gardiner C. Means, The Modern Corporation and
 Private Property, New York: MacMillan, 1932.

Bertrand, Marianne and Sendhil Mullainathan, “Are CEOs Rewarded for
 Luck? The Ones Without Principals Are,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
 2001, 116, 901–932.

Blackwell, David W., James A. Brickley, and Michael S. Weisbach,
  “Accounting Information and Internal Performance Evaluation: Evidence
  from Texas Banks,” Journal of Accounting and Economics, May 1994, 17,
  331–358.

Blanes i Vidal, Jordi and Marc Möller, “When Should Leaders Share In-
  formation with Their Subordinates?,” Journal of Economics & Management
  Strategy, Summer 2007, 16 (2), 251–283.

Bocskocsky, Andrew, John Ezekowitz, and Carolyn Stein, “The Hot
 Hand: A New Approach to an Old ‘Fallacy’,” in “8th Annual MIT Sloan
 Sports Analytics Conference” 2014.

Boschen, John F. and Kimberly J. Smith, “You Can Pay Me Later: The
 Dynamic Response of Executive Compensation to Firm Performance,” Jour-
 nal of Business, 1995, 68, 577–608.

Brickley, James A. and R. Lawrence Van Horn, “Managerial Incentives
 in Nonprofit Organizations: Evidence from Hospitals,” Journal of Law and
 Economics, 2002, 45 (1, Part 1), 227–249.
Burns, Natasha and Simi Kedia, “The Impact of Performance-based Com-
 pensation on Misreporting,” Journal of Financial Economics, 2006, 79, 35–67.

Cebon, Peter and Benjamin E. Hermalin, “When Less Is More: The
 Benefits of Limits on Executive Pay,” Review of Financial Studies, 2015, 28
 (6), 1667–1700.

Cho, In-Koo and David Kreps, “Signaling Games and Stable Equilibria,”
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1987, 102, 179–222.

Chung, Ji-Woong, Berk A. Sensoy, Léa H. Stern, and Michael S.
 Weisbach, “Pay for Performance from Future Fund Flows: The Case of
 Private Equity,” Review of Financial Studies, 2012, 25, 3259–3304.
                                References                                77



Clayton, Matthew C., Jay C. Hartzell, and Joshua Rosenberg, “The
  Impact of CEO Turnover on Equity Volatility,” Journal of Business, 2005,
  78, 1779–1808.
Cornelli, Francesca, Zbigniew Kominek, and Alexander Ljungqvist,
 “Monitoring Managers: Does It Matter?,” Journal of Finance, 2013, 68 (2),
 431–481.

Coughlan, Anne T. and Ronald M. Schmidt, “Executive Compensation,
 Managerial Turnover, and Firm Performance: An Empirical Investigation,”
 Journal of Accounting and Economics, 1985, 7 (1/2/3), 43–66.

Dechow, Patricia M. and Richard G. Sloan, “Executive Incentives and
 the Horizon Problem: An Empirical Investigation,” Journal of Accounting
 and Economics, March 1991, 14 (1), 51–89.

DeGroot, Morris H., Optimal Statistical Decisions, New York: McGraw-Hill,
 1970.

Denis, David J. and Diane K. Denis, “Performance Changes Following Top
 Management Dismissals,” Journal of Finance, 1995, 50, 1029–1057.

  , , and Mark D. Walker, “CEO Assessment and the Structure of Newly
  Formed Boards,” Review of Financial Studies, in press.

Edmans, Alex and Xavier Gabaix, “Executive Compensation: A Modern
 Primer,” Journal of Economic Literature, in press.
  , Vivian W. Fang, and Katharina A. Lewellen, “Equity Vesting and
  Investment,” Review of Financial Studies, in press.

Efendi, Jap, Anup Srivastava, and Edward P. Swanson, “Why Do Cor-
  porate Managers Misstate Financial Statements? The Role of Option Com-
  pensation and Other Factors,” Journal of Financial Economics, 2007, 85,
  667–708.

Eisfeldt, Andrea and Camelia Kuhnen, “CEO Turnover in a Competitive
  Assignment Framework,” Journal of Financial Economics, 2013, 109 (2), 351–
  372.

Eldenburg, Leslie, Benjamin E. Hermalin, Michael S. Weisbach, and
  Marta Wosińska, “Governance, Performance Objectives and Organizational
  Form: Evidence from Hospitals,” Journal of Corporate Finance, September
  2004, 10 (4), 527–548.

Engel, Ellen, Rachel Hayes, and Xue Wang, “CEO Turnover and Proper-
 ties of Accounting Information,” Journal of Accounting and Economics, 2003,
 36 (1–3), 197–226.
                                 References                                78



Erickson, Merle, Michelle Hanlon, and Edward L. Maydew, “Is There
  a Link Between Equity Linked Incentives and Accounting Fraud?,” Journal
  of Accounting Research, 2006, 44, 113–143.
Fama, Eugene F., “Agency Problems and the Theory of the Firm,” Journal
  of Political Economy, 1980, 88 (2), 288–307.

   and Kenneth R. French, “Dividend Yields and Expected Stock Returns,”
  Journal of Financial Economics, 1988, 22, 3–26.

Fudenberg, Drew and Jean Tirole, “A ‘Signal-Jamming’ Theory of Preda-
  tion,” RAND Journal of Economics, Autumn 1986, 17 (3), 366–376.

Gibbons, Robert S. and Kevin J. Murphy, “Relative Performance Eval-
 uation for Chief Executive Officers,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review,
 1990, 43, 30S–51S.

   and , “Optimal Incentive Contracts in the Presence of Career Concerns:
  Theory and Evidence,” Journal of Political Economy, 1992, 100, 468–505.

Gilovich, Thomas, How We Know What Isn’t So: The Fallibility of Human
 Reason in Everyday Life, New York: The Free Press, 1991.
  , Robert Vallone, and Amos Tversky, “The Hot Hand in Basketball:
  On the Misperception of Random Sequences,” Cognitive Psychology, 1985,
  17, 295–314.

Gopalan, Radhakrishnan, Todd Milbourn, Fenghua Song, and An-
 jan V. Thakor, “Duration of Executive Compensation,” Journal of Finance,
 2014, 69 (6), 2777–2817.

Graham, John, Campbell Harvey, and Shiva Rajgopal, “The Economic
 Implications of Corporate Financial Reporting,” Journal of Accounting and
 Economics, 2005, 40, 3–73.

Grossman, Sanford J. and Oliver D. Hart, “An Analysis of the Principal-
 Agent Problem,” Econometrica, 1983, 51, 7–46.

Hermalin, Benjamin E., “Managerial Preferences Concerning Risky
 Projects,” Journal of Law, Economics, & Organization, 1993, 9, 127–135.

  , “Trends in Corporate Governance,” Journal of Finance, 2005, 60 (5), 2351–
  2384.

  , “Corporate Governance,” in Robert S. Gibbons and John Roberts, eds., The
  Handbook of Organizational Economics, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
  Press, 2013.

   and Michael L. Katz, “Moral Hazard and Verifiability: The Effects of
  Renegotiation in Agency,” Econometrica, November 1991, 59 (6), 1735–1753.
                                 References                                79



   and     , “Corporate Diversification and Agency,” in Peter J. Hammond
  and Gareth D. Myles, eds., Incentives, Organization, and Public Economics:
  Papers in Honour of Sir James Mirrlees, Oxford: Oxford University Press,
  2000.

   and Michael S. Weisbach, “The Determinants of Board Composition,”
  RAND Journal of Economics, Winter 1988, 19 (4), 589–606.

   and , “Endogenously Chosen Boards of Directors and Their Monitoring
  of the CEO,” American Economic Review, March 1998, 88 (1), 96–118.

   and    , “Information Disclosure and Corporate Governance,” Journal of
  Finance, February 2012, 67 (1), 195–233.

  , Avery W. Katz, and Richard Craswell, “Contract Law,” in A. Mitchell
  Polinsky and Steven Shavell, eds., Handbook of Law and Economics, Vol. 1,
  Amsterdam: North-Holland, 2007.

Holmstrom, Bengt, “Moral Hazard and Observability,” Bell Journal of Eco-
 nomics, Spring 1979, 10 (1), 74–91.

  , “Managerial Incentive Problems—A Dynamic Perspective,” Review of Eco-
  nomic Studies, January 1999, 66 (226), 169–182.

   and Joan Ricart i Costa, “Managerial Incentives and Capital Manage-
  ment,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, November 1986, 101 (4), 835–860.

Huson, Mark R., Robert Parrino, and Laura T. Starks, “Internal Mon-
 itoring Mechanisms and CEO Turnover: A Long-Term Perspective,” Journal
 of Finance, December 2001, 55 (6), 2265–2297.

Jensen, Michael C., “Agency Costs of Free Cash Flow, Corporate Finance,
  and Takeovers,” American Economic Review, May 1986, 76 (2), 323–329.
  Papers and Proceedings of the Ninety-Eighth Annual Meeting of the American
  Economic Association.

   and Kevin J. Murphy, “Performance Pay and Top-Management Incen-
  tives,” Journal of Political Economy, 1990, 98, 225–264.

   and William H. Meckling, “Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior,
  Agency Costs, and Capital Structure,” Journal of Financial Economics, 1976,
  3, 305–360.

Jenter, Dirk and Fadi Kanaan, “CEO Turnover and Relative Performance
  Evaluation,” Journal of Finance, 2015, 70 (5), 2155–2184.

   and Katharina Lewellen, “Performance-induced CEO Turnover,” 2014.
  Stanford Working Paper.
                                References                               80



Johnson, Shane A., Harley E. Ryan, and Yisong S. Tian, “Managerial
  Incentives and Corporate Fraud: The Source of Incentives Matter,” Review
  of Finance, 2009, 13, 115–145.
Johnson, Simon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and
  Andrei Shleifer, “Tunneling,” American Economic Review, May 2000, 90
  (2), 22–27.

Jones, Edward E. and Victor A. Harris, “The Attribution of Attitudes,”
  Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 1967, 3, 1–24.

Kahneman, Daniel, Thinking, Fast and Slow, New York: Farrar, Strauss, and
 Giroux, 2011.

Kaplan, Steven N. and Bernadette A. Minton, “How has CEO Turnover
 Changed?,” International Review of Finance, March 2012, 12 (1), 57–87.

Khurana, Rakesh, “The Curse of the Superstar CEO,” Harvard Business
 Review, September 2002, 80 (9), 60–65.

  , Searching for a Corporate Savior: The Irrational Quest for Charismatic
  CEOs, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2002.
Kim, Son Ku, “Efficiency of an Information System in an Agency Model,”
 Econometrica, January 1995, 63 (1), 89–102.

Leroy, Stephen and Richard D. Porter, “The Present Value Relation:
  Tests Based in Implied Variance Bounds,” Econometrica, 1981, 49, 555–574.

Levin, Jonathan, “Relational Incentive Contracts,” American Economic Re-
  view, June 2003, 93 (3), 835–857.

Lim, Jongha, Berk A. Sensoy, and Michael S. Weisbach, “Indirect In-
  centives of Hedge Fund Managers,” Journal of Finance, 2016, 71, 871–918.

Maskin, Eric and Jean Tirole, “Unforeseen Contingencies and Incomplete
 Contracts,” Review of Economic Studies, January 1999, 66 (1), 83–114.

Murphy, Kevin J., “Corporate Performance and Managerial Remuneration,”
 Journal of Accounting and Economics, 1985, 7 (1), 11–42.

  , “Incentives, Learning and Compensation: A Theoretical and Empirical In-
  vestigation of Managerial Labor Contracts,” RAND Journal of Economics,
  1986, 17 (1), 59–76.

Narayanan, M.P., “Managerial Incentives for Short-Term Results,” The Jour-
 nal of Finance, 1985, 40 (5), 1469–1484.

Nash, John F., “The Bargaining Problem,” Econometrica, April 1950, 18 (2),
 155–162.
                                 References                                81



Pan, Yihui, Tracy Yue Wang, and Michael S. Weisbach, “Learning
 about CEO Ability and Stock Return Volatility,” Review of Financial Studies,
 2015, 28, 1623–1666.
  , , and , “How Management Risk Affects Corporate Debt,” 2016. Work-
  ing Paper, Ohio State University.

Parrino, Robert, “CEO Turnover and Outside Succession: A Cross-Sectional
 Analysis,” Journal of Financial Economics, 1997, 46, 165–197.

  , Richard W. Sias, and Laura T. Starks, “Voting With Their Feet:
  Institutional Ownership Changes Around Forced CEO Turnover,” Journal of
  Financial Economics, 2003, 68 (1), 3–46.

Pastor, Lubos and Pietro Veronesi, “Stock Valuation and Learning about
 Profitability,” Journal of Finance, 2003, 58, 1749–1789.

   and    , “Was there a NASDAQ Bubble in the late 1990s?,” Journal of
  Financial Economics, 2006, 81, 61–100.

   and , “Learning in Financial Markets,” Annual Review of Financial Eco-
  nomics, 2009, 1, 361–81.
Plath, Christian, “Analyzing Credit and Governance Implications of Man-
  agement Succession Planning,” Technical Report, Moody’s Investors Service
  2008. Available at http://ssrn.com/abstract=1285082.

Plous, Scott, The Psychology of Judgment and Decision Making, New York:
  McGraw-Hill, 1993.

Rogerson, William P., “Repeated Moral Hazard,” Econometrica, January
 1985, 53 (1), 69–76.

Ross, Lee, “The Intuitive Psychologist and his Shortcomings: Distortions in
 the Attribution Process,” in Leonard Berkowitz, ed., Advances in Experimen-
 tal Social Psychology, Vol. 10, New York: Academic Press, 1977, pp. 173–220.

Rotemberg, Julio J. and Garth Saloner, “Leadership Style and Incentives,”
 Management Science, November 1993, 39 (11), 1299–1318.

   and , “Benefits of a Narrow Business Strategy,” American Economic Re-
  view, December 1994, 84 (5), 1330–1349.

   and , “Visionaries, Managers, and Strategic Direction,” RAND Journal
  of Economics, 2000, 31, 693–716.

Sappington, David E.M., “Limited Liability Contracts between Principal
  and Agent,” Journal of Economic Theory, February 1983, 29 (1), 1–21.

Scharfstein, David S. and Jeremy C. Stein, “Herd Behavior and Invest-
  ment,” The American Economic Review, June 1990, 80 (3), 465–479.
                                 References                                 82



Shaked, Moshe and J. George Shanthikumar, Stochastic Orders and their
  Applications, San Diego: Academic Press, 1994.
Shiller, Robert, “Do Stock Prices Move too Much to be Justified by Subse-
  quent Changes in Dividends?,” American Economic Review, 1981, 71, 421–
  436.
Shleifer, Andrei and Robert W. Vishny, “A Survey of Corporate Gover-
  nance,” Journal of Finance, June 1997, 52 (2), 737–783.
Smith, Adam, An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Na-
 tions, Indianapolis: Liberty Press, 1776.
Stein, Jeremy C., “Takeover Threats and Managerial Myopia,” Journal of
  Political Economy, February 1988, 96 (1), 61–80.
  , “Efficient Capital Markets, Inefficient Firms: A Model of Myopic Corporate
  Behavior,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, November 1989, 104 (4), 655–
  669.
  , “Agency, Information and Corporate Investment,” in George M. Constan-
  tinides, Milton Harris, and René Stulz, eds., Handbook of the Economics of
  Finance, Amsterdam: North-Holland, 2003.
Stern, Léa, “A Learning Based Approach to Evaluating Boards of Directors,”
  2016. Working Paper, University of Washington.
Taylor, Lucian A., “Why Are CEOs Rarely Fired? Evidence from Structural
  Estimation,” Journal of Finance, 2010, 65 (6), 2051–2087.
  , “CEO Wage Dynamics: Estimates from a Learning Model,” Journal of
  Financial Economics, 2013, 108, 79–98.
Timmermann, Allan G., “How Learning in Financial Markets Generates
  Excess Volatility and Predictability,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1993,
  108, 1135–1145.
Tversky, Amos and Daniel Kahneman, “Extensional Versus Intuitive Rea-
 soning: The Conjunction Fallacy in Probability Judgment,” Psychological
 Review, October 1983, 90 (4), 293–315.
Van den Steen, Eric, “Organizational Beliefs and Managerial Vision,” Jour-
 nal of Law, Economics, & Organization, Spring 2005, 21 (1), 256–283.
Warner, Jerold B., Ross L. Watts, and Karen H. Wruck, “Stock
 Prices and Top-Management Changes,” Journal of Financial Economics,
 Jan./March 1988, 20 (1/2), 461–492.
Wasserman, Noam, Bharat Anand, and Nitin Nohria, “When Does
 Leadership Matter? A Contingent Opportunities View of CEO Leadership,”
 in Nitin Nohria and Rakesh Khurana, eds., Handbook of Leadership Theory
 and Practice, Boston: Harvard Business School Publishing, 2010.
                               References                               83



Weber, Roberto A., Colin F. Camerer, Yuval Rottenstreich, and
 Marc Knez, “The Illusion of Leadership: Misattribution of Cause in Co-
 ordination Games,” Organization Science, September-October 2001, 12 (5),
 582–598.

Weisbach, Michael S., “Outside Directors and CEO Turnover,” Journal of
 Financial Economics, Jan./March 1988, 20 (1/2), 431–460.

Williamson, Oliver E., “Managerial Discretion and Business Behavior,”
 American Economic Review, December 1963, 53 (5), 1032–1057.

Wolinsky, Asher, “Competition in a Market for Informed Experts’ Services,”
 RAND Journal of Economics, Autumn 1993, 24 (3), 380–398.
