NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ON THE GLOBAL FINANCIAL MARKET INTEGRATION “SWOOSH” AND THE
TRILEMMA
Geert Bekaert
Arnaud Mehl
Working Paper 23124
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23124

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2017

We would like to thank Georgios Georgiadis, Luca Dedola, Frank Moss, Livio Stracca and
participants in an internal ECB seminar for helpful comments and suggestions. We are also
grateful to Dennis Quinn for sharing his data on de jure financial openness pre-World War II. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research, the European Central Bank or the Eurosystem.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Geert Bekaert and Arnaud Mehl. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

On the Global Financial Market Integration “Swoosh” and the Trilemma
Geert Bekaert and Arnaud Mehl
NBER Working Paper No. 23124
February 2017
JEL No. F15,F21,F30,F36,F38,F41,F6,G15,N2
ABSTRACT
We propose a simple measure of de facto financial market integration based on a factor model of
monthly equity returns, which can be computed back to the first era of financial globalization for
17 countries. Global financial market integration follows a “swoosh” shape – i.e. high pre-1913,
still higher post-1990, low in the interwar period – rather than the other shapes hypothesized in
earlier literature. We find no evidence of financial globalization reversing since the Great
Recession as claimed in other recent studies. De jure capital account openness and global growth
uncertainty are the two main determinants of long-run global financial market integration. We use
our measure to revisit the debate on the trilemma between financial openness, the exchange rate
regime, and monetary policy autonomy, and on whether the trilemma has recently morphed into a
dilemma due to global financial cycles. We find evidence consistent with the trilemma and
inconsistent with the dilemma hypothesis, both throughout history and for the recent decades;
non-US central banks still exert more control over domestic interest rates when exchange rates
are flexible in economies open to global finance.

Geert Bekaert
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
3022 Broadway, 411 Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
gb241@columbia.edu
Arnaud Mehl
European Central Bank
Sonnemannstrasse 20
60314 Frankfurt am Main
Arnaud.Mehl@ecb.int

The process of international financial integration is not a gentle climb towards ever higher
peaks. This is true both from a short-run and from a long-run perspective. Bekaert and Harvey (1995),
focusing on the post-1990 financial globalization wave in emerging equity markets, suggested that de
facto integration may exhibit reversals and does not become necessarily stronger over time. Evidence
that financial globalization might have partly reversed has resurfaced in the wake of the Great
Recession (see e.g. Rose and Wieladek (2014), van Rijckeghem and Weder (2014), Giannetti and
Laeven (2012, 2016)). These recent papers have focussed on banks, or bonds, but not on equity
markets. There is also a thriving literature documenting the recent surge in capital controls in
emerging markets, along with their economic effects (see e.g. Jeanne and Korinek (2010), Ostry et al.
(2012), Forbes, Fratzscher and Straub (2013), Pasricha et al. (2015), among many others).
From a long-run perspective, there is an old-standing debate among macroeconomists and
economic historians as to whether international financial integration was, in fact, “stronger” pre-1913,
a period also known as the first era of financial globalization, compared to the globalization wave
which started with capital account liberalizations in advanced economies in the 1980s and in
emerging markets in the 1990s, a period also referred to as the modern era of financial globalization.
Bordo and Flandreau (2003), Bordo and Murshid (2006) and Quinn (2003) deem the early period
more globalized. Bordo, Eichengreen and Irwin (1999), Mauro et al. (2002), and Quinn and Voth
(2008) claim the opposite is true. Bordo and Flandreau (2003), Obstfeld and Taylor (2003, 2004), and
Goetzmann et al. (2005) argue that global financial integration follows a U-shape pattern with equal
degrees of integration before 1914 and after 1970. Volosovych (2011), focusing on sovereign bond
markets, claims that global financial integration is rather characterised by a J-shape pattern, with a
trough in the 1920s. Rangvid et al. (2016) look at equity market integration over 1875-2012 and find
that financial integration in the later part of their sample is “very high” relative to earlier periods.
The interest from macroeconomists in measuring international financial market integration
over long time periods has been spurred by recent policy debates on the trilemma, the trade-offs
between the exchange rate regime, financial openness and monetary policy autonomy (see e.g.
Shambaugh (2004), Obstfeld, Shambaugh, and Taylor (2005), Miniane and Rogers (2007), Bluedorn
2

and Bowdler (2010), Klein and Shambaugh (2013), Aizenmann, Chinn and Ito (2014), Pasricha et al.
(2015)). In particular, several articles (e.g. Rey (2013), Miranda-Agrippino and Rey (2014), Bruno
and Shin (2015a, 2015b), Passari and Rey (2015) as well as Obstfeld (2015) for a discussion) stress
the critical role played by the US dollar and US monetary policy in setting global liquidity and credit
conditions. They suggest that non-US central banks have lost their ability to influence domestic longterm interest rates, even in the presence of flexible exchange rates, due to the existence of “USdriven” global financial cycles in liquidity and credit. As a result, the trilemma may have morphed
into a dilemma between financial openness and monetary policy autonomy.
In this paper, we propose a simple measure of equity market integration which can be
computed back to the first era of financial globalization for 17 countries. The key strengths of our
measure are that it describes integration at relatively high monthly frequencies; captures de facto, and
not simply de jure, integration; and provides a framework to test formally for the various shapes of the
temporal pattern of integration hypothesized in earlier literature. We can also use our measure to
distinguish global from regional patterns of integration and to uncover the economic sources of
financial integration, both at the global and regional level.
The measure employs conditional betas of a country’s stock return with respect to global and
regional equity market returns. While betas may be affected by both cash flow comovements and
discount rates, they provide an economically meaningful measurement of the sensitivity of a country’s
equity market to global and regional shocks. Moreover, they do not suffer from the volatility bias
plaguing simple correlation statistics, which arises because much of the time-variation in correlations
is accounted for by changes in factor volatilities (see e.g. Forbes and Rigobon (2002), Dungey et al.
(2004), Bekaert, Harvey and Ng (2005), Bekaert et al. (2014)). In contrast, the fundamental change in
risk occurring upon capital market liberalization naturally increases dynamic betas (see Chari and
Henry (2004) for a simple model). Empirical studies focusing on liberalizations in emerging markets,
such as Bekaert and Harvey (1997), European equity markets, such as Baele (2005) and American
Depository Receipt introductions (a firm-specific liberalization), such as Lewis (2015), show jumps in
betas around these events.
3

We use this measure to test several hypotheses.
First, we assess which factors explain the time series and cross-country variation in de facto
financial market integration over the long run. We find that de jure financial openness is a statistically
significant determinant of de facto integration, while trade openness and financial development are
not, which confirms the results of Bekaert et al. (2011) for the modern era of financial globalization.
In terms of explained variation, however, we find that global growth uncertainty explains an equally
important share of global financial market integration, while a third significant determinant, namely a
variable measuring the incidence of high volatility across markets, explains only a minuscule share.
Second, we formally test whether the long-run temporal pattern of de facto financial market
integration follows a flat line, a U shape, a J shape or even a “swoosh” shape (i.e. the trademark logo
of a famous athletic shoe and clothing manufacturer). In so doing, we distinguish explicitly between
global and regional financial market integration patterns. We fail to reject the presence of a swoosh
pattern for de facto global financial market integration, i.e. high pre-1913, still higher post-1990, low
in the interwar period, but statistically reject the other shapes previously hypothesized. We do not find
a clear regional financial market integration pattern.
Third, we use the measure to test whether the Great Recession has been associated with a
reversal in the process of de facto financial globalization, as claimed by recent studies, and do not find
evidence in support of this claim.
Fourth, we use our measure of de facto global financial market integration to revisit the
debate on the existence of a monetary policy trilemma in history. We find evidence that pass-through
from base country to domestic interest rates – at both short and long maturities – depends on whether
an economy is open to global finance or closed, and on whether it has pegged or flexible exchange
rates, in line with the trilemma hypothesis. For the recent period, the evidence also points on balance
more toward the trilemma than the dilemma, even though it is difficult to conduct inference in an
increasingly globalized world.
The paper is organized as follows. Section I presents the empirical framework which we use
to measure global financial market integration over the long run and discusses how de facto
4

integration evolves over time. Section II presents our formal test of the long-run temporal pattern of
financial market integration and provides evidence consistent with a swoosh shape. Section III
employs our measure to revisit the debate on the trilemma versus dilemma hypothesis.

I. Measuring Global Financial Market Integration over the Long Run

This section outlines the model we estimate, elaborates on the concept of time-varying de
facto financial market integration, and discusses how integration evolves over time.

A. The Factor Model

A.1. General Specification
We formulate an international factor model with two factors – a global market factor, and a
Glob
Reg
regional market factor, Ft ' = [ Ft , Ft ] . The two factors are value-weighted market indices, so

that the model potentially embeds different conditional CAPMs as special cases. When the beta on the
first factor is zero, the model becomes a regional CAPM; when the beta of the regional factor is set to
zero, the model can act as a world CAPM. As in any factor model, the correlation between portfolios
is increasing in the factor exposures of the portfolios and the magnitude of the factor volatilities. The
use of these two factors ensures that the model satisfactorily fits comovements across countries. 1
The full model is:
glo
reg
reg
Ri ,t = α i + lt + βi,tglo Ft glo ,\ i + βi,treg Ft reg ,\ i + γ glo
i, t ' X i, t − k + γ i, t ' X i, t − k + e i ,t

(1)

βi,tglo = b0glo + b 1glo'X glo
i, t − k

(2)

βi,treg = b0reg + b 1reg'X reg
i, t − k ,

(3)

1
The analysis in Bekaert, Hodrick, and Zhang (2009), Bodnar, Dumas, and Marston (2003), and Brooks and Del Negro
(2006) motivates the use of both global/international and domestic factors from a statistical perspective, even for developed
markets. Rangvid et al. (2016) use the cross-country dispersion of stock returns as their main measure of global financial
market integration but they also calculate a measure based on a world-CAPM in robustness checks.

5

where Ri,t is the excess return on the local equity index in country i during month t, expressed in
dollars (i.e., the dollar equity return minus the 10-year U.S. Treasury yield in monthly units), α is a
country fixed effect, λ is a year effect, Ftglo is the global market factor, Ftreg is the regional market
factor and X is a vector of control variables designed to capture time and cross-sectional variation in
factor exposures. These variables are country-specific, and are typically lagged by one year. If the
dimension of X is k, the vectors b1glo and b1reg are k × 1. When the model includes control variables X,
the conditional mean also depends automatically on lagged Xs. The sample period is January 1885 to
June 2014. It contains up to 1,554 monthly observations for each of 17 country-equity portfolios,
which are split into three regions (Europe, Northern America and Asia-Pacific).2
To avoid adding-up constraints and spurious correlations, the factors are value-weighted
across countries, but exclude returns of country i itself. To obtain an intuitive interpretation of the
estimates of the factor loadings, we orthogonalize the two factors as in Bekaert, Harvey and Ng
(2005), Bekaert, Hodrick, and Zhang (2009) and Bekaert et al. (2014). The regional market factor is
orthogonalized by regressing regional market returns on global market returns over the full sample
period and then using the residuals of this regression as the regional market factor. The
orthogonalized factors are estimated for each country individually as country i itself is excluded from
the market factors. This enables us to distinguish global from regional patterns of financial market
integration. Table I contains an overview of the data and selected descriptive statistics. Further details
on the sources of the data and on the methodology used to assemble them are provided in Appendix
A.
Table I

A.2. Instruments to Model Cross-Sectional and Time Variation in Exposures
Equations (1) to (3) contain a set of lagged instruments, Xi,t-k, which are used to model the
cross-sectional and time variation in the factor loadings βi,tglo and βi,treg. This practice has a long

2

The three regions include Europe (Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Italy, Netherlands, Norway,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, and the U.K.), Northern America (the U.S., and Canada) and Asia-Pacific (Australia, and
Japan).

6

tradition in finance; see, for example, Ferson and Harvey (1991) and Dumas and Solnik (1995). 3 We
entertain seven potential instruments, which are listed in Table I, to distinguish between different
channels and hypotheses regarding the sources of financial market integration, both at the global and
regional level. 4
The first three channels include measures of external exposures through trade and financial
openness. Several studies have suggested that equity return comovements increase with financial and
economic integration (see e.g. Mendoza and Quadrini (2010), Brière, Chapelle, and Szafarz (2012),
Fratzscher (2012)). The trade channel in particular has often been associated with international
spillovers and, in some cases, contagion (see e.g. Kaminsky and Reinhart (2000), Forbes (2004),
Caramazza, Ricci and Salgano (2004), and Baele and Inghelbrecht (2009)). Hence, we use trade
openness, measured as exports plus imports scaled by GDP in country i and year t, as a first potential
determinant of the cross-sectional and time variation in factor exposures. Another potential
determinant, specific to regional financial integration, is regional trade openness, which is defined as
the sum of country i’s exports and imports of goods to/from its neighbours, that is the countries
belonging to the country i’s region, scaled by total trade in year t.
A third potential determinant is de jure capital account openness, a natural determinant of de
facto financial integration (see Kose et al. (2006), Bekaert et al. (2011)). We use the indices of capital
account openness assembled by Quinn and Voth (2008) and Quinn and Toyoda (2008). These indices
measure the extent of restrictions to capital outflows and inflows by residents and nonresidents in
country i and year t.
Domestic financial development is the fourth potential determinant of the cross-sectional and
time variation in factor exposures we consider. Several researchers have stressed that poorly
developed financial systems may impair financial integration (see Bekaert and Harvey, (1995);
Bekaert et al. (2011)). Equity market illiquidity is one reason preventing foreign institutional investors
3

Note that we do not mean to suggest that these “instruments” are “exogenous” in the strict sense of econometric
identification. In the asset pricing literature, as discussed in Ferson and Harvey (1991) for instance, this term is simply used
for variables that are not returns, are pre-determined (in a temporal sense) and are used to model time-variation in factor
exposures or prices of risk. Also, the instruments are too slow-moving to reflect public information that may instantaneously
change prices and potentially cause contagion (see Connolly and Wang (2003)).
4
We use annual observations to fill in for monthly observations.

7

from investing in emerging markets according to some surveys (see e.g. Chuhan (1994)). Poor
liquidity as a priced local factor may also lead to valuation differentials and different betas relative to
global benchmarks (see Acharya and Pedersen (2005) or Bekaert, Harvey and Lundblad (2007) for
models incorporating liquidity risks). The metric of financial development we use is the ratio of
equity market capitalization to output, which we obtained from Rajan and Zingales (2003) and Beck,
Demirgüç-Kunt, and Levine (2010).
Factor exposures may also vary over time with global shocks, such as oil and other
commodity price shocks or shifts in global risk aversion. Data limitations prevent us from casting a
wide net in terms of variables. We consider just two specific variables. The first one is a measure of
global oil price spikes, defined as the deviation (in logarithms) between the current oil price and its
five-year moving average. Hamilton (2005) shows that 9 out of 10 U.S. recessions since World War II
were preceded by a sudden increase in oil prices. A global recessionary shock induced by changes in
oil prices is likely to increase global factor exposures. Increases in (global) risk aversion may generate
the opposite effect. Higher risk aversion may lead investors to retreat away from foreign equity
markets considered as risky towards domestic equity markets or other financial assets considered as
safe, leading to a divergence in valuations and increased segmentation (see the discussion in Bekaert
et al. (2011), for instance). In almost any model, high risk aversion should increase the volatility of
stock returns (see e.g. Bekaert, Engstrom and Xing (2009)) so we measure risk aversion indirectly
through volatility. Specifically, we measure the share of countries in the sample with high equity
market volatility in a given month. We estimate the conditional volatility of stock returns for each
country of our sample using a GARCH(1,1) model. We normalise the conditional volatilities of each
country’s stock returns and define the high market volatility variable as the proportion of the 17
country-specific volatilities in excess of 1.65 in a given month. This yields a global “volatility spike”
time series with monthly observations over January 1885-June 2014. Note that high return volatility
itself may lead to higher return correlations not associated with financial integration, which is
captured in our model through the factor volatilities and does not affect our integration measure (see
section B.5 for further discussion).
8

The last potential determinant of the time variation in factor loadings is uncertainty in
earnings growth, which is another possible source of financial market segmentation. For instance, in a
pricing model with stochastic growth opportunities and discount rates, Bekaert et al. (2011) show that
under a strong notion of integration, encompassing both financial and economic integration, the timevarying components of industry price-to-earnings ratios are identical across countries, and are
determined entirely by variation in the world discount rate and world growth opportunities. However,
even under the null hypothesis of full financial and economic integration, industry earnings yield
differentials between a country and the world market can still arise because of differences in earnings
growth volatility. Because harmonised and consistent data on earnings growth are not directly
available for our century-long panel, we use real GDP growth instead. Measuring a conditional
volatility is challenging and we use three different measures. The first is the logarithm of the standard
deviation of real GDP growth in each country over non-overlapping windows of 5 years, which yields
17 country-specific times series of annual observations on local growth uncertainty which are kept
constant over 5-year intervals.5 Analogously, we use the logarithm of the standard deviation of real
GDP growth in each country over overlapping windows of 5 years centred around the current
observation (with one year increments), which yields for each country local growth uncertainty
measures varying in each year. These two measures are imperfect indictors of country-specific real
uncertainty both requiring a number of time series observations to obtain a proxy for an estimate at
time t. An alternative metric we employ is the natural logarithm of the cross-sectional dispersion of
real GDP growth for the 17 countries of our sample in a given year. This yields a global time series
with annual observations over 1885-2014. The cross-sectional variance can be decomposed into an
estimate of the country-specific variance (the average country-specific volatility minus the “world”
variance) and an estimate of the variance of the country averages (see Bekaert, Harvey, Kiguel and
Wang (2016)). It is therefore correlated with the times series uncertainty of growth opportunities
worldwide. Because of its second component, it also measures the divergence of growth opportunities

5

The rationale for using logs rather than levels is that the distribution of real GDP growth is heavily fat-tailed because of
two observations in 1945 and 1946, when output collapsed (or jumped from an extremely low base) in several countries in
the wake of the end of World War II and the move to a postwar economy.

9

across countries at a given point in time. Increases in both components of this global growth
uncertainty measure would tend to decrease de facto integration.

B. Model Estimation and Measuring Time-Varying Financial Market Integration

B.1. Model Estimation
We estimate our model for all countries jointly by means of pooled OLS. Standard errors account
for heteroskedasticity and are clustered by country. Note that the instruments Xi,t-k are lagged by one
year to prevent an unobserved factor from simultaneously influencing both returns and the
fundamental X in a given period and thereby generating a spurious relationship between both.6
When estimating the full model in equations (1) to (3), we consider two different model
specifications. In a first step, we include each of the instruments individually. In a second step, we
build on the work of David Hendry (see, for instance, Hendry and Krolzig (2005)) to pare down the
regression to a more manageable number of independent variables. We start out with the full model
including all instruments simultaneously, and then step-by-step reduce the model by excluding the
interaction variables with insignificant parameters. If all interaction effects are insignificant, the
variable is dropped from the regression. This approach aims to reduce the dimension of the model and
to arrive at a model that can be interpreted in an economically meaningful way. Convergence was
reached in two steps.

B.2. Measuring Time-Varying Global and Regional Financial Market Integration
We define a benchmark, β

glo

, for global market integration as the (weighted) average across

countries and time of the βi,tglo estimates, i.e.

β glo =

1 1 N T
∑ ∑ wi,t βiglo,t ,
N T i =1 t =1

(4)

6

The trend deviation of oil prices and the high volatility variable, which are available at the monthly frequency, are lagged
by one month instead.

10

where here N = 17 and T = 1,554. The relative global market integration of country i at time t then is

β
defined as β iglo
,t

glo

. Similarly, the benchmark β

reg

for regional market integration is the

(weighted) average across countries and time of the βi,treg estimates, i.e.

β reg =

1 1 N T
∑ ∑ wi,t βireg,t ,
N T i =1 t =1

(5)

and the relative regional market integration of country i at time t is defined as β ireg
β reg
,t

B.3. The Temporal Pattern of Financial Market Integration
Table II reports pairwise correlations of the instruments in vector X. The correlations, albeit
statistically significant, are generally low in terms of economic magnitude (at around 15-20% or less
in absolute value in most cases, and close to 40% for only a few pairs of variables). This suggests that
each instrument has the potential to contribute specific information regarding the underlying
determinants of the cross-sectional and temporal variation in global and regional financial market
integration. The only exception, unsurprisingly, is the correlation between global and local growth
uncertainty measures, which reaches almost 60%.
Table II
Next, Table III reports the estimates of the conditional global and regional beta estimates
from the full model equations (1) to (3). Each instrument is included individually in the estimates
reported in columns 2 to 7, while all seven instruments are included in column 8. Note that we do not
report estimates including the local growth uncertainty measures, which are never significant in
multivariate specifications. Moreover, in univariate specifications only the interactions with the global
factor were significant – albeit with the expected (negative) sign – which suggests that our results are
driven primarily by global growth uncertainty.
We obtain a parsimonious model in column 9 by excluding the variables with insignificant
parameters. All the estimates control for country fixed effects, year effects and for the direct effects of
the instruments included in vector X (whose coefficients are not reported to save space). In column
(1), we report a specification without instruments; the global factor beta is 0.68 and the regional factor
11

beta is 0.29, both significantly different from zero. The model estimates suggest that de jure capital
account openness exerts a positive and statistically significant effect on global betas, an effect that is
preserved in the multivariate specifications. Trade openness and financial development are
statistically significant determinants of global betas individually, but not in the multivariate
specification, which confirms earlier results in Bekaert et al. (2011) for the modern era of financial
globalization. The global oil price variable is statistically significant individually, but it is not in the
multivariate specification. Higher uncertainty in real earnings growth reduces global betas
significantly, in line with the model predictions of Bekaert at al. (2011). Global betas tend to increase
significantly in periods of heightened market volatility, although the economic magnitude of the effect
is economically very small (more on this below). Finally, while there are some significant univariate
results, among all the instruments only de jure capital account openness exerts a statistically
significant – and positive – effect on regional betas, both in the univariate and multivariate
specifications. Therefore, the final specification reported in column (9) contains capital openness (for
both regional and global betas), growth uncertainty and the market volatility variable (the latter two
only for global betas). We now further analyse the implications of this model for the time-variation in
financial market integration.
Table III
Figure 1 shows the evolution between 1885 and 2014 of the unweighted (thick grey lines) and
value-weighted (light grey lines) cross-country averages of the measures of financial market
integration along with the corresponding conditional beta estimates. Global measures are shown in
Panel A, while regional measures are in Panel B.
Figure 1
That the temporal pattern of global financial market integration follows a swoosh shape is
apparent from the figure. During the first era of financial globalization, de facto global financial
market integration was close to its century-long average. It then decreased significantly in the wake of
World War I, but recovered temporarily until the early 1930s. A nadir was reached immediately after
World War II, when de facto global financial market integration stood at roughly 90% below its
12

century-long average. Since the 1950s, de facto global financial market integration has increased
steadily. However, it exceeded pre-1913 levels only after 1990. De facto global financial market
integration has remained at historically high levels since the global financial crisis broke out in 2007,
at about 30% above its century-long average in 2014, notwithstanding the capital controls and other
financial protectionist measures taken in some countries, recently. The temporal pattern of regional
financial market integration seems less clear, being in-between a swoosh and a U-shaped pattern.
A complementary perspective is provided by Figures 2 and 3 which show the conditional
global and regional beta estimates for each country and for selected years, namely: 1913, 1928, 1945,
1973, 1990, and 2008. The temporal pattern of global financial market integration is nicely swooshshaped in all countries, which suggests that it is not only a broad overall trend but also a country-level
phenomenon. The temporal pattern of regional financial market integration is less clear.
Figures 2, 3

B.4. Determinants of Variation in Financial Market Integration
What is the relative economic importance of the determinants of global financial market
integration? Figure 4 gets at the issue by showing the evolution between January 1885 and June 2014
of the value-weighted averages of the conditional global beta estimates of our 17 countries when only
one of each of the three significant instruments of vector X remains active, in turn. This is achieved
by setting the loadings on the other significant instruments at their respective means. The figure
makes clear that de jure capital account openness and effective global financial market integration go
hand in hand. It also makes clear that heightened global growth uncertainty pulls in the opposite
direction, reducing global financial market integration in an economically meaningful way. In
contrast, the economic importance of high market volatility periods on financial market integration is
comparably much smaller, as is evident from the figure.
Figure 4
That de jure capital account openness and global growth uncertainty opportunities explain the
lion’s share of the predictable variation in global equity returns is confirmed more directly by the
13

variance ratio analysis of Table IV. For each of the three statistically significant instruments j (i.e. de
capital account openness, global growth uncertainty and high market volatility periods) of the
parsimonious specification, we calculate the variance ratio for the conditional global beta estimates as

ˆ glo glo
cov[bˆ 1glo'X glo
i, t − k , b1, j X i ,t − k ]
VR =
var[bˆ glo'X glo ]
j

1

i, t − k

By definition, these variance ratios sum to one. The analysis confirms our earlier
observations. De jure capital account openness explains 53% of global financial market integration,
against 47% for global growth uncertainty. The proportions are statistically significantly different
from zero but we cannot reject that they are equal. In contrast, high market volatility periods explain a
negligible part of global financial market integration, which is statistically insignificant. As for
regional equity returns, recall that their predictable variation is fully explained by de jure capital
account openness.
Table IV

B.5. Model Validation
As stressed e.g. by Cochrane (2001), Lewellen and Nagel (2006) and Brusa, Ramadorai and
Verdelhan (2014), a challenge to our conditional factor model is that it requires the econometrician to
know the ‘‘true’’ state variables. Lewellen and Nagel (2006) propose a methodology to circumvent
this problem which does not require specifying the set of conditioning information. As long as betas
are relatively stable within a certain period, simple factor regressions estimated over a short window –
using no conditioning variables – provide direct estimates of assets’ conditional betas. Using rolling
5-year windows of observations, it is possible to obtain time series of time-varying betas. In
particular, the windows are “forward” and non-overlapping. That is, we split the sample in 5-year
periods and compute the betas over these 5 years. For each starting point of a 5 year period, the beta
is set equal to that rolling beta; for periods in-between the beta is a linearly interpolated number
between the previous and next beta. The choice of a forward window is consistent with the idea that

14

our factor model produces conditional betas. A well specified factor model should then produce beta
estimates that are insignificantly different from the rolling beta estimates.
Figure 5 shows the evolution between 1885 and 2014 of the conditional global (Panel A) and
regional (Panel B) betas (both shown as thick grey lines) together with 90% confidence bands
obtained from the corresponding pooled rolling beta estimates (shown as light grey lines) and the
point estimates (shown as black dashed lines). Our factor model does, in fact, pretty well. The simple
rolling global beta estimates also follow a swoosh shape. The conditional betas fall mostly well within
the confidence bands of the simple rolling beta estimates. The conditional global (regional) betas fall
within the bands 81% (82%) of the time. When conditional betas are outside the bands, they tend to
be quite close to them. The conditional betas overestimate the extent of global financial market
integration relative to what rolling betas would predict during World War I a bit, which might suggest
that the conflict led to a reversal in financial globalization that was partially unexpected, but they do a
good job during World War II. Excluding the two world wars, the conditional global and regional
betas fall within the bands 82% and 84% of the time, respectively, which is a marginal improvement
relative to the full sample. It is only starting from the early 2000s that the conditional betas
underestimate systematically the extent of global financial market integration relative to what rolling
betas would predict. Because this is indirect evidence that financial globalization did not reverse since
the Great Recession in 2007-2009, as claimed in other studies, we come back to this finding below.
Figure 5
Figures B1 and B2 in Appendix B show the corresponding betas and confidence bands broken
down by country. The figures confirm that the country-specific conditional betas mostly fall well
within the confidence bands of the simple rolling beta estimates.
A simpler measure to quantify de facto integration is the average correlation between equity
markets (see Quinn and Voth (2008)). However, correlations suffer from the volatility bias described
in the seminal work of Forbes and Rigobon (2002). As volatilities tend to dramatically increase during
crises, increased correlations are not necessarily indicative of higher interdependence between equity
markets. Under the null of our model, the comovement between equity markets is determined by the
15

factor exposures (the betas) and the variance-covariance matrix of the factors. Such a model can
potentially fit the observed increase in correlations during a crisis through an increase in factor
volatilities, while betas – the true measure of interdependence – remain stable. Assuming uncorrelated
factors, this is true because the correlation between a particular equity market and a factor is then the
beta with respect to that factor, times the ratio of factor to equity market volatility, which can be
shown to be increasing in the factor’s volatility (see also the discussion in Bekaert et al. (2014) for
further details). This is of particular importance during the global financial crisis of 2007-2008 when
volatility reached exceptionally high levels, which could have biased upwards correlations in
international equity markets. As a result, if the conditional betas of our reduced-form factor model did
not increase during the global financial crisis, while unconditional correlations did, this is additional
evidence that the model is well specified.
We examine the difference between our beta measures and a correlation measure in Figure 6.
It shows the evolution between 1885 and 2014 of the unweighted averages of the conditional global
and regional beta estimates (shown as thick grey lines) together with 1-year forward rolling (nonoverlapping) pooled correlations between the equity excess returns Ri,t and the global and regional
market factors, respectively. The correlation between the two global measures is relatively high, at
0.80, but it is a paltry 0.15 for the two regional measures, suggesting that betas and correlations may
produce different inferences. The differences are indeed pronounced during the recent global crisis.
Consider Panel B of Figure 6 first. Bilateral correlations between country returns and the regional
market factor peak at the time of the collapse of Lehman Brothers, which is suggestive of a possible
volatility bias. In contrast, the conditional regional betas remain more stable. For global market
integration, the correlation between the beta and correlation measures varies substantially over time.
For the recent globalization period (2001-2014) it is in fact zero, but even that number hides very
different sub-sample behaviour. Over the 2001-2007 pre-crisis period, the correlation is -0.67,
whereas over the recent crisis period (2008-2014) it is 0.44. Thus, while a correlation measure may
reproduce some of the long-run patterns of long-run financial integration as Figure 6 demonstrates, it
cannot really be used to make precise inferences.
16

Figure 6

II. The Swoosh in Financial Market Integration

While the swoosh pattern in de facto financial market integration is apparent in our full model
estimates, we here attempt to formally test for it. This section sets out a framework to do so and
reports the results.

A. Testing for a Swoosh Pattern
To test for the swoosh pattern, we start by estimating the following simple variant of our twofactor model:
glo ,\ i
reg ,\ i
Ri ,t = α i + lt + (β glo
+ (β reg
+ e i ,t
j ' D j ) Ft
j ' D j ) Ft

(6)

where j =1, 2, … k; and Dk denotes a dummy variable which equals one over time period k and zero
otherwise. All variables are defined similarly as before, and we include the same two factors – a
global market factor, and a regional market factor. In practice, we set k = 3 and focus on three
subperiods of interest, namely: 1885-1913 (which is often referred to as the first era of financial
globalization; see e.g. Bordo, Cavallo, and Meissner (2010)); 1914-1990, which includes the interwar
period (when several countries adopted protectionist and capital control measures in the run-up to
World War II), the Bretton Woods period (when capital controls, albeit possibly leaky, were still
prevalent), and its immediate aftermath; the third subperiod is 1990-2014, which is often referred to as
the second era of financial globalization, despite the alleged reversal since the Great Recession. This
model embeds a simple constant-beta model, which can be straightforwardly tested through a simple
Wald test.
However, we can also formally test whether the temporal pattern of de facto international
financial integration follows a U shape, as hypothesised by e.g. Bordo and Flandreau (2003), Obstfeld
and Taylor (2003, 2004), and Goetzmann et al. (2005); a J (or L-inverted) shape, as argued by
Volosovych (2011); or a swoosh shape, as we posit. All tests can formally distinguish between global
17

and regional financial integration patterns. Considering again the three aforementioned subperiods
(i.e. pre-1913, 1914-1990 and 1990-2014) and three dummy variables Dk, j =1, 2, 3, the corresponding
Wald restriction tests are, respectively

H 0 : β1f = β 3f , β1f > β 2f , β 3f > β 2f
for the U shape hypothesis,

H 0 : β1f = β 2f , β 3f > β1f , β 3f > β 2f
for the J (or L-inverted) shape hypothesis, and

H 0 : β1f > β 2f , β 3f > β1f , β 3f > β 2f
for the swoosh shape hypothesis, with f = glo, reg.

B. Empirical Results

B.1. Simple Constant-Beta Model Estimates
Table V reports the unconditional beta estimates from the constant-beta version of the model
in equation (6) obtained by OLS in columns 1 to 3. Estimates obtained by excluding outliers from the
sample (i.e. excess equity returns larger than 30% within a month in absolute value) are reported in
column 4. Those obtained with a random-effect estimator are reported in column 5. The estimates of
columns 3 to 5 control for both country and year effects. The unconditional global beta is about 0.7,
while the regional market factor beta is estimated to be about 0.3. The economic magnitude of these
estimates is not too far off those obtained over much shorter samples. For instance, Bekaert et al.
(2014) obtain unconditional beta estimates for a sample of 415 country-sector portfolios over the
period January 1995-March 2009 of about 0.4 for both their global financial and US equity market
factors, as well as about 0.5 for their domestic market factor. However, their portfolios included many
emerging market portfolios. The R-squared of the regression is on the order of 20%-30%, which is in
the same ballpark as the goodness of fit of the models estimated by e.g. Bekaert et al. (2014). What is
also striking is that the estimates remain remarkably robust across estimation methods. The rho
18

statistic indicates that the country fixed effects are in fact not that important, which is also obvious
comparing the results in columns (1) and (2) with the rest.
Table V
In Table C1 in Appendix C. we report estimates of the constant-beta model in which factors
are GDP-weighted rather than value-weighted. The estimated betas remain largely unaltered in terms
of sign, statistical significance and economic magnitude relative to our base estimates, suggesting that
our results do not hinge upon a particular weighting scheme.
Table VI reports estimates of the constant-beta model obtained by OLS on the full sample (in
column 1) together with estimates obtained on alternative subperiods, namely: pre-1913, 1914-1990,
1990-2014, 1990-2006 and 2007-2014 (in columns 2 to 6). The time variation in betas confirm the
swoosh pattern we detected with our dynamic model. The estimate for the unconditional global beta
prior to 1913 is close to the full sample estimate, at about 0.7. It is 25% larger than the estimate for
the period between 1914 and 1945 (i.e. roughly 0.5), which is consistent with the decline in global
financial market integration in the interwar period noted by previous scholars, and the adoption by
several countries of protectionist and capital control measures then. Global financial market
integration picks up between 1945 and 1990, with the estimated global beta increasing to 0.6, albeit
still remaining lower than prior to World War I. It is only after 1990 that global financial market
integration exceeds pre-1913 levels. Our global beta estimate reaches indeed about 0.9 for the 19902006 period, and 1.1 for the 2007-2014 period. Regional betas decrease from 0.36 in the pre-war
period to 0.21 in the 1914-1990 period, but then increase again to exceed 0.50 in the post-1990 period.
Table VI
A formal test of the constant-parameter model is in Table VII, which presents estimates of
model equation (6) with three period dummies (pre-1913, 1914-1990 and 1990-2014). A Wald test
overwhelmingly rejects the null of equality of the global and regional beta coefficients over the three
subperiods (see the first row of Panel C in Table VII). Parenthetically, there is not only substantial
heterogeneity in betas over time, but also across countries. This is suggested in Figure B3 in
Appendix B which shows country-by-country estimates over the full sample of the global and
19

regional market factor betas obtained from the simple constant-beta model. Global betas are as low as
0.4 in Austria and Japan, and as high as over 0.8 in the Netherlands, Germany and Canada. Regional
betas are as low as almost zero for Australia and as high as 0.6 for the US or Germany.

B.2. Testing Temporal Patterns of Financial Market Integration
We now test formally whether financial market integration follows a U shape, a J (or Linverted) shape, or a swoosh shape, along the lines described in Section II.A, which requires the
testing of equality and inequality restrictions.
The results of the corresponding Wald restriction tests, based on the estimates of model
equation (6) on the full sample, are in Table VII (see the second to fourth row of Panel C). We can
reject the null hypotheses that de facto global financial market integration over the last century is
characterised by a U-shape process, as hypothesised by e.g. Bordo and Flandreau (2003), Obstfeld
and Taylor (2003, 2004), and Goetzmann et al. (2005), or by a J-shape process, as posited by
Volosovych (2011). However, we cannot reject the hypothesis that the temporal pattern follows a
swoosh shape. In other words, de facto global financial market integration was high in the first era of
financial globalization before World War I, but not as high as during the second era after 1990. Still,
de facto global financial market integration in both eras was substantially stronger than during most of
the twentieth century, namely between 1914 and 1990.
Interestingly, the results for de facto regional financial market integration are different.
Although we can clearly reject the hypothesis that its temporal pattern follows a flat line, we fail to
reject either the U, J or swoosh shapes. Nevertheless, the coefficient pattern is numerically consistent
with a “swoosh”. It is also possible that the temporal pattern followed by regional financial market
integration in the last century is different from the global pattern, but we lack statistical precision and
power to distinguish different shapes.
Table VII
We also formally test whether effective financial market integration has partly reversed since
the onset of the global financial crisis in 2007, as some observers have argued recently in the face of
20

the capital controls and other financial protectionist measures taken by advanced and emerging market
economies (in line with evidence in e.g. by Ostry et al. (2012), Forbes, Fratzscher and Straub (2013),
Pasricha et al. (2015), and many others) and lingering public interventions in the financial sector of
advanced economies, such as bank nationalizations, aimed at influencing the quantity and/or price of
loans that banks from one country make to borrowers resident in another country (as stressed e.g. by
Rose and Wieladek (2014)). This question is addressed in Table VIII which presents estimates of
model equation (6) with two period dummies (1990-2007 and 2007-2014). Wald tests
overwhelmingly reject the hypothesis that the global betas in the two subperiods are equal. They also
reject the hypothesis that the precrisis beta is higher than the postcrisis beta. The converse hypothesis
is not rejected. This evidence suggests that the process of de facto global financial market integration
has not reversed since the Great Recession, despite claims made in recent studies. Because the
subperiod 2007-2009 coincided with the acute phase of the global financial crisis it may be
contaminated by contagion effects (see Bekaert et al. (2014)). We therefore obtained estimates of
model equation (6) with three period dummies (1990-2006, 2007-2009 and 2010-2014) reported in
Table C2 in Appendix C. The hypothesis that the global betas in subperiods 2007-2009 and 20102014 are equal is not rejected, however.
Table VIII

III. Revisiting the Monetary Policy Trilemma in History

We now use our benchmark measure of de facto financial market integration over 130 years
to revisit the debate on the monetary policy trilemma in history. Standard macroeconomic theory
posits that an economy can have at most two out of an open capital account, a fixed exchange rate and
an independent monetary policy. Specifically, if capital is allowed to move freely across borders,
domestic interest rates can deviate from interest rates abroad only if the exchange rate is flexible.
Alternatively, if policy-makers seek to stabilise the exchange rate under free capital mobility,

21

domestic interest rates have to shadow foreign interest rates. This is the classic Mundell-Flemming’s
“trilemma” or “impossible trinity”.
Early empirical tests of the trilemma suggest that it describes reasonably well the trade-offs
between international capital mobility, the choice of the exchange rate regime and monetary policy
autonomy over the last century or so (e.g. Obstfeld, Shambaugh and Taylor (2005)). More recently,
however, it has been argued that the classic trilemma had morphed into a “dilemma” and the
impossible trinity into an “irreconcilable duo”. Central banks outside the U.S., the world’s foremost
financial centre, would have lost their ability to influence domestic long-term interest rates, even in
the presence of flexible exchange rates, due to the existence of global financial cycles that are set in
motion by US monetary policy impulses (see Rey (2013), Miranda-Agrippino and Rey (2014), and
Passari and Rey (2015)). 7 There is related evidence that bank leverage cycles are key determinants of
the global transmission of US financial conditions across borders through banking sector capital flows
Bruno and Shin (2015a) and that spillovers between US monetary policy, cross-border capital flows,
and the US dollar exchange rate through the banking sector are substantial (Bruno and Shin (2015b)).
This has triggered strong interest in testing for the trilemma empirically (see e.g. Miniane and Rogers
(2007), Bluedorn and Bowdler (2010), Klein and Shambaugh (2013), Aizenmann, Chinn and Ito
(2014), Pasricha et al. (2015), Obstfeld (2015)).
Note that the trilemma hypothesis regards general capital mobility, which includes bond and
equity flows, whereas our measure of financial market integration is based on equity market data only.
While equity and bond flows may not be perfectly correlated, it is typically the case that international
capital restrictions are comprehensive and apply uniformly to bond and equity markets (see
Fernández, Klein, Rebucci, Schindler and Uribe (2015) for an analysis of recent data). In fact, many
countries were either largely open or closed in terms of de jure capital market openness over several
periods. We use this information in computing our de facto integration measure. It would be
interesting to investigate bond market integration as well, but government bond markets were in

7

Farhi and Werning (2014) study a small open economy model in which, in contrast with the Mundellian view, capital
controls are desirable even when the exchange rate is flexible as they help to lean against the wind and smooth out capital
flows.

22

several cases less well developed and liquid in the early part of our sample than were equity markets
(although corporate debt markets were in some cases quite developed).

A. Testing the Trilemma Hypothesis

As a starting point, we rely on Obstfeld, Shambaugh and Taylor’s benchmark regression
model (which is also in the spirit of the specification used by Shambaugh (2004), Klein and
Shambaugh (2013), and Obstfeld (2015))

∆Ri ,t = a0 + b∆Ribase
+ u i ,t ,
,t

(7)

where Ri,t is the domestic interest rate at time t, Rbasei,t is the base interest rate at time t in the anchor
country; and ∆ is the difference operator (see Obstfeld, Shambaugh and Taylor (2005), p. 427). Under
full capital mobility and a credible peg, it is expected that b = 1, i.e. domestic and base-country
interest rates move one for one, which implies that monetary policy in the pegging country is fully
dependent on monetary policy in the base country. In contrast, b = 0 implies full independence from
monetary policy in the base country, which is to be expected if the exchange rate is floating, or if
capital does not move freely across borders.
First, we seek to replicate Obstfeld, Shambaugh and Taylor’s results by estimating equation
(7) using similar yearly averages of monthly data, similar time periods and similar country groups as
they have. 8 We take the U.K. as the base country prior to 1914 (classical gold standard); the mean of
the U.K. and the U.S. as the base for the 1920s (gold exchange standard); the U.K., U.S. and Germany
as base countries for the sterling bloc, U.S. dollar bloc and Reichsmark bloc, respectively, for the
1930s; the U.S. as the base country for the Bretton Woods period (1959-1970); Germany as the base
country for European countries (in the European Monetary System) and the U.S. for the remaining
8

Specifically, the time periods and country groups we consider for the replications are: 1885-1914 (gold standard), 19591970 (Bretton Woods), and 1973-2000 (post-Bretton Woods), peggers vs. nonpeggers, countries highly integrated into
global finance vs. countries highly segmented from global finance. Nonpeggers are defined as countries having floating or
freely falling exchange rates according to the updated classification of Ilzetzki, Reinhart, and Rogoff (2004). Peggers are
defined as the remaining countries, including those which were on the classical gold standard or gold exchange standard
prior to World War II according to the classification of Reinhart and Rogoff (2011). Countries with high (low, respectively)
( glo
, respectively).
global financial market integration in period t are defined as those for which β i ,glo
t > 1 β i ,t ≤ 1

23

countries, respectively, for the period 1973-1999; and the U.S. for all countries for the period 19992014. 9 As measures of interest rates we use both short-term policy rates and long-term government
bond yields. See Appendix A for details on the data.
Next we modify equation model (7) to the form

∆Ri ,t = a0 + b1∆Ribase
+ b2 peg i ,t + b3 b i ,glo
,t
t

(8)

base
glo
glo
+ c1 (∆Ribase
,t × peg i ,t ) + c2 ( ∆Ri ,t × b i ,t ) + c3 ( peg i ,t × b i ,t ) ,
glo
+ d1 (∆Ribase
,t × peg i ,t × b i ,t ) + u i ,t

to test explicitly for the monetary policy trilemma hypothesis conditionally on the exchange rate
regime and the degree of de facto global financial market integration, where peg is a binary dummy
variable which equals one if country i in period t is a pegger and zero otherwise. In so doing, we
extend Obstfeld, Shambaugh and Taylor’s study in three ways. First, we investigate both short-term
and long-term interest rates whereas Obstfeld, Shambaugh and Taylor focused on short-term interest
rates. Second, we extend the time dimension of their sample, insofar as we consider almost half a
century of additional data by looking at the periods 1914-1945 and 2001-2014 as well. Third, in terms
of data measurement, we employ a measure of de facto global financial market integration over the
full sample period.10 From equation (8) one can derive the elasticity of the domestic interest rate with
respect to the base interest rate for both peggers and nonpeggers, respectively, conditional on the
degree of global financial market integration, namely:

∂∆Ri ,t
∂∆Ribase
,t

= b1 + (c2 × b i ,glo
t ) if peg i , t = 0 , and

9

Our base countries are the same as those of Obstfeld, Shambaugh and Taylor for the pre-1914 period, Bretton Woods
period and 1973-1999 period (they did not consider the interwar period and the period 1999-2014; more on this below). That
Germany is considered as the base country for European countries for the period 1973-1999 is motivated by the “German
dominance hypothesis” (see e.g. Giavazzi et al. (1986); Giavazzi and Pagano (1988); von Hagen and Frattiani (1990)).
Germany’s monetary policy was so central in the E.M.S. that many European countries simply shadowed the Bundesbank’s
interest rates. In fact, one reason why some countries pushed for the creation of the euro was to end the dominance of
Germany’s monetary policy by sharing Germany’s influence and credibility through the single currency.
10
Obstfeld, Shambaugh and Taylor (2005) relied on more limited data on capital market openness and assumed that all
countries had open capital markets during the gold standard era, that none did during Bretton Woods, and that the official
I.M.F. coding from the Exchange Rate Arrangements yearbooks was a reasonable approximation for measuring the use of
capital controls during the post-Bretton Woods era. Our metric of global financial market integration provides a direct
measure for 17 countries over the full sample period. The cross-sectional dimension of Obstfeld, Shambaugh and Taylor
(2005)’s panel is larger than ours for the Bretton Woods and post-Bretton Woods periods, however.

24

∂∆Ri ,t
= (b1 + c1 ) + (c2 + d1 ) × b i ,glo
if pegi ,t = 1 .
t
base
∂∆Ri ,t

[

]

If a country maintains a peg, capital controls are necessary to maintain monetary policy independence.
That is, we expect d1 > 0. When the exchange rate is fully floating, capital controls are not a necessary
condition for monetary policy independence. That is, b1 = 0 no matter what the degree of financial
market integration is. However, it is conceivable that increased capital market integration increases
international interest rate dependence (that is c2 > 0). A pegged exchange rate should only constrain
monetary policy independence when markets are integrated, so the sign of c1 is not necessarily clear
ex-ante. If β i,glo
= 0 represents fully binding capital controls, then c1 may in fact be zero and passt
through only increases when β i,glo
t increases and capital is more mobile.

B. Empirical Results

We first review unconditional estimates of our test of the trilemma hypothesis in Section
III.B.1., then condition the estimates on our measure of de facto global financial market integration in
Section III.B.2., and finally test the trilemma hypothesis against the dilemma hypothesis in Section
III.B.3.

B.1. Unconditional estimates
As a starting point, Table IX reports the estimates of the parameters of the unconditional
model in equation (7) using short-term policy interest rates, in the spirit of Obstfeld, Shambaugh and
Taylor (2005). Column 1 reports pooled estimates, Columns 2 to 4 report estimates over three
subperiods, namely: the classical gold standard era (pre-1914); the Bretton Woods regime (19591970); and the post-Bretton Woods era (1973-2000) (these subperiods match those of Obstfeld,
Shambaugh and Taylor). Columns 5 to 8 report estimates by country groups (peggers vs. nonpeggers;
high vs. low global financial market integration). Our estimate of b, the degree of pass-through from
25

base country to domestic policy interest rates, for the full sample is about 0.30. 11 Our estimates by
subperiod are qualitatively consistent with those of Obstfeld, Shambaugh and Taylor. Interest rate
pass-through is found to be higher during the classical gold standard and post-Bretton Woods era,
with estimates for the coefficient b of 0.19 and 0.57, respectively, than during the Bretton Woods
regime, with a b-estimate of 0.10. Obstfeld, Shambaugh and Taylor’s estimates are 0.42 (gold
standard), -0.20 (Bretton Woods) and 0.36 (post-Bretton Woods), respectively. The country group
estimates suggest that there are no discernible differences in the extent of interest rate pass-through
between peggers and nonpeggers, insofar as the b-estimate, at about 0.30, is virtually identical for
both groups of countries. 12 Of course, this result may reflect differences in the extent of de facto
global financial market integration between and within groups. Indeed, when the sample is restricted
to countries highly integrated into global finance, the b-coefficient is close to 0.40, but when it is
restricted to countries segmented from global finance, it drops to 0.14 only, a finding consistent with
that of Obstfeld, Shambaugh and Taylor whose estimates are 0.56 (no capital controls) and 0.26
(capital controls).
Table IX
The results for long-term interest rates are in line with those for short-term policy rates. The
estimates are somewhat larger in economic magnitude, which points to a stronger degree of
transmission of base interest rate movements to domestic interest rates at the long end of the yield
curve relative to the short end, a finding consistent with Obstfeld (2015). Our estimate of b for the full
sample is about 0.43. 13 We again find that interest rate pass-through is higher during the classical gold
standard and post-Bretton Woods era, with b-estimates of 0.25 and 0.53, respectively, than during the
Bretton Woods regime, with a b-estimate of about 0.12. The magnitude of the differences in interest
rate pass-through between peggers and nonpeggers (0.46 vs. 0.40) is economically small for long-

11

This is remarkably close to Hofmann and Takáts (2015)’s estimate of 0.34 for a panel of 30 emerging market and
advanced economies over the period 2000-2014.
12
This is unlike Obstfeld, Shambaugh and Taylor’s estimates, which point to differences between peggers (0.43) and
nonpeggers (0.26).
13
This is somewhat lower than estimates for the recent period. For instance Hofmann and Takáts (2015) find an estimate of
0.59 in a panel of 30 emerging market and advanced economies over the period 2000-2014.

26

term interest rates, too. Again, a higher degree of global financial market integration results in higher
pass-through estimates, i.e. 0.50 for integrated countries relative to 0.29 for segmented countries.

B.2. Conditional estimates
How does interest rate pass-through change if we condition on global financial market
integration and the exchange rate regime? We now turn to the estimation of the parameters of the
conditional model in equation (8). The estimates for short-term policy interest rates are reported in
columns (9) to (10) of Table IX (where the latter column considers a specification excluding the
world war periods). The estimates for long-term interest rates are reported in the corresponding
columns of Table X.
Table X
Consider short-term interest rates first. The full sample estimate for the direct pass-through
effect of base-country policy interest rates to domestic policy interest rates, b1, is about half the
economic magnitude of the unconditional estimate, i.e. 0.18 (0.16 excluding World War I and II)
versus 0.30 (see column 9 (10) of Table IX). It is still significantly different from zero at the 10%
level, however. Moreover, interaction effects between interest rates, global financial market
integration, and the exchange rate regime are statistically significant and strong in economic
magnitude. This suggests that pass-through from base to domestic policy interest rates depends on
whether an economy is open to global finance or closed, and on whether it has pegged or flexible
exchange rates, potentially in line with the trilemma hypothesis. The c1 coefficient is negative
suggesting that a pegged exchange rate system can decrease pass-through. However, we also find that
c2 is positive (only significant at the 15% level), that is, financially open countries experience more
pass-through, and d1 is positive and statistically significant at the 5% level, suggesting that
dependence on openness is more pronounced for countries with pegged exchange rate systems.
How large are these effects economically? Figure 7 plots the estimated pass-through from
base short-term policy interest rates to domestic policy interest rates against the extent of de facto
global financial market integration for both peggers and nonpeggers, as implied by the full sample
27

estimates reported in column (10) of Table IX (see Panel A of Figure 7). First, the extent of financial
market integration has little effect on pass-through coefficients for nonpeggers; pass-through is
relatively low, increasing from about 0.10 for fully segmented countries to about 0.30 for fully
integrated countries. This is largely consistent with the trilemma hypothesis, as floating exchange
rates should suffice to guarantee monetary policy independence. Second, for peggers financial market
integration dependence is much more pronounced. Specifically, pass-through of peggers well
integrated into global finance is high, at about 0.60. Segmentation from global finance should protect
domestic policy interest rates from movements in base-country policy interest rates. Indeed, passthrough is nil or even negative for peggers with integration levels lower than 0.5, which suggests that
they can decouple from movements in base-country policy interest rates, or even lean against them.
These findings again support the trilemma hypothesis, and are statistically significant. The positive
estimate for the triple interaction coefficient d1, which is significant at the 1% level, shows that
financial integration dependence is stronger for peggers than nonpeggers in a statistically significant
manner. Third, pass-through of nonpeggers well integrated into global finance is only half as large as
that of peggers. This again suggests that a flexible exchange rate acts as a shock absorber of
movements to base-country policy interest rates, in line with the trilemma hypothesis. The difference
is positive and statistically significant for values of global financial market integration above 1.17 (i.e.
17% above the average across countries and time). 14 This comprises roughly 30% of the observations
in our sample, i.e. those mainly immediately before World War I and after 1985 (basically the two
waves of global financial integration highlighted in the literature).
Figure 7
Consider now long-term interest rates. The full sample estimates for the direct pass-through
effect of base-country long-term interest rates to domestic interest rates, b1, is similar in economic
magnitude to the unconditional estimate, i.e. about 0.45 (see columns 9 and 10 of Table X). Passthrough from base to domestic long-term interest rates again depends on whether an economy is open
14

The difference between peggers and nonpeggers is significant at the 10% level for values of β i,glo
such that
t
glo
glo ˆ
glo 2
glo
1
/
2
(cˆ1 + β i ,t d1 ) /[(Var (cˆ1 ) + β i ,t Var (dˆ1 ) + 2 β i ,t Cov(cˆ1 , dˆ1 )] > 1.65 i.e. β i ,t > 1.17 given our sample estimates of 0.0272, 0.0316

and -0.0288 for Var (cˆ1 ), Var (dˆ1 ) and Cov(cˆ1 , dˆ1 ) .

28

to global finance or closed, and on whether it has pegged or flexible exchange rates, in line with the
trilemma hypothesis, as evidenced by the statistically significant interaction effects. The only
exception is the interaction between interest rates and de facto global financial market integration.
Panel B of Figure 7 sheds light on the economic magnitude of these effects. First, the extent of
financial market integration has no effect on pass-through coefficients for nonpeggers; pass-through
remains constant, at 0.45, and does not depend on the extent of de facto global financial market
integration. This is again consistent with the trilemma hypothesis, as floating exchange rates should
suffice to guarantee monetary policy independence although the degree of pass-through remains
relatively high. Second, for peggers financial market integration dependence is again much more
pronounced in a statistically significant manner as evidenced by the estimate for the triple interaction
coefficient d1. Pass-through to domestic long-term interest rates of peggers well integrated into global
finance is even higher than for short-term policy rates, at about 0.75. Segmentation from global
finance again dampens pass-through: for peggers which are largely or fully closed to global finance,
pass-through is nil or even negative, as predicted by the trilemma hypothesis. The difference is
positive and statistically significant for values of global financial market integration above 1.26 (i.e.
26% above the average across countries and time). This comprises roughly 20% of the observations in
our sample. The observations featuring such high degrees of freedom correspond mostly to the second
wave of globalization, post-1985.
How has interest rate pass-through evolved over the last century? Figure 8 shows the
evolution between 1885 and 2014 of the average pass-through estimates from base to short-term
(Panel A) and long-term (Panel B) interest rates for peggers and nonpeggers, respectively, as
predicted by the full sample estimates reported in column (10) of Table IX and X. 15 Pass-through on
the short end of the yield curve for peggers follows a nice swoosh shape, which largely reflects the
temporal pattern of de facto global financial market integration over the last century. Pass-through for
nonpeggers is more stable over time, in contrast. Interestingly, short-term interest rate pass-through

15

There are no estimates for peggers during World War I because only the U.S. had stuck to the gold standard in this period.
The 14 countries shown in the figure were all nonpeggers as they had either suspended gold convertibility or, in the case of
Spain, were previously not on gold.

29

remains appreciably higher for peggers than for nonpeggers in the modern era of financial
globalization, at about 0.50 and 0.30, respectively, on average in the 2000s (see Panel A of Figure 8).
This suggests that central banks outside the U.S. still exert more control on their domestic short-term
interest rates in the presence of flexible exchange rates, which can act as a shock absorber, despite the
potential existence of global financial cycles set in motion by US monetary policy impulses. This
finding is consistent with the trilemma hypothesis, but not with the dilemma hypothesis. Long-term
interest rate pass-through for nonpeggers follows a nice swoosh shape, too, while pass-through for
nonpeggers is stable over time. In addition, long-term interest rate pass-through is also much higher
for peggers than for nonpeggers in the modern era of financial globalization, at about 0.70 versus
0.45, respectively, on average in the 2000s (see Panel B of Figure 8).
Figure 8

B.3. Trilemma vs. dilemma hypotheses
While our full sample results do not point to evidence in favour of a “dilemma,” this
hypothesis has surfaced only recently emphasizing the increasing importance of U.S. financial cycles
in the world economy.
It is important to qualify what our results indicate about the recent dilemma/trilemma debate.
The results in the extant studies (e.g. Rey (2013), Miranda-Agrippino and Rey (2014), Passari and
Rey (2015)) concern the worldwide transmission of global financial cycle shocks which seem to be
correlated with the VIX, an indicator of option implied volatility on the S&P500 stock index. The
period considered is post-1990. Here we narrowly focus on the transmission of short-term and longterm interest shocks over a very long historical period. Yet, it remains interesting to translate the
dilemma/trilemma debate more precisely to our setting. Essentially, the dilemma hypothesis would
suggest that pass-through is now large, irrespective of the exchange rate regime. That is, peggers can
no longer as easily escape the global financial or interest rate cycle by introducing capital controls.
Also, presumably, even countries with a floating exchange rate should experience pass-through, as the
exchange rate no longer plays the role of a shock absorber in increasingly globalized markets.
30

With this translation in hand, what do our results really contribute to the debate?
First, our results are overall certainly inconsistent with the dilemma hypothesis: peggers can
achieve a high degree of monetary autonomy when global financial integration is low and are less
exposed to foreign interest rate shocks; and countries with floating exchange rate regimes are subject
to much less-pass through than pegged currency countries when capital markets are financially
integrated globally, and significantly so when the degree of financial integration is very high (see
Figure 7).
However, in interpreting these findings, it is important to recall our results on the “integration
swoosh.” These results strongly suggest that the degree of global financial integration is very high for
the countries in our sample post-1990, and higher than in the earlier globalization wave. As Figure 7
further shows, we therefore do observe a positive non-negligible pass-through for floating-exchangerate countries for both short and long-term interest rates, consistent with the dilemma hypothesis. 16
However, for the most integrated countries and the largest part of our sample period, our model
predicts significantly more pass-through for peggers than for non-peggers, which remains inconsistent
with the dilemma hypothesis.
Second, our results may be erroneous if the model parameters are unstable. Perhaps the model
parameters have changed recently and become more consistent with the dilemma hypothesis. Upon
reflection, examining this is fraught with difficulty, exactly because of the previous point we made.
The identification of our conditional model relies on substantial time and cross-country variation in
the degree of financial integration and exchange rate regimes. However, post-1990 this heterogeneity
has diminished, which challenges the identification of the model.17 This also makes it conceivable that
the significance results at high levels of integration is based on full sample observations rather than on
recent data. To examine this a bit more formally, we re-estimated the model allowing all parameters
to break in 1990 (see Table XI). We do find that a likelihood ratio test rejects the null of no break at
the 5% level for both short and long-term rates. However, the parameter changes do not support the
16

For short-term interest rates, this is purely as an artefact of the higher degree of financial globalization.
In particular, 38% of the observations are peggers post-1990, against 74% pre-1990; for instance in Europe
peggers comprise EU currencies managed within the Exchange Rate Mechanism in the 1990s, versus only
Denmark and Switzerland in the 2000s.
17

31

dilemma hypothesis and very much confirm the identification problems discussed above. For
example, for short-term interest rates, only one parameter change is significant at the 10% level. But
the change indicates that for countries with pegged exchange rates, financial integration decreases
pass-through, which makes little sense. For both short and long term interest rates, we find that the b1
coefficient increases (overall pass-through), which is true in a statistically significant manner for longterm interest rates, but that global financial integration reduces pass-through and more considerably so
for countries with pegged exchange rate systems. This model would imply that pass-through is lower
than before for reasonably integrated countries. Although this is not very plausible, it is surely
inconsistent with the dilemma hypothesis.
Table XI
Finally, it is conceivable that the recent dilemma results are heavily influenced by the Great
Recession, where economic conditions in the US spilled over into other countries. Of course, trying to
estimate the conditional model over such a short period with even more homogenous integration and
currency regimes is likely to be even less advisable. We therefore propose a simpler methodology to
provide an alternative test of the implications of our conditional model for the dilemma/trilemma
hypotheses. We divide the data post 1990 in four compartments, analogously to the aggregate results
in Tables IX-X, namely peggers versus non-peggers and high versus low financial integration. 18 This
immediately reveals the problem with the analysis. We have only four observations that qualify as
“low financial integration” and thus cannot provide a meaningful statistical analysis for that regime
(see Table XII). While the empirical estimate of pass-through for the low financial integration regime
is indeed low, statistically this has little meaning. For the high financial integration regime, we find
that there is significant pass-through for both peggers and for non-peggers and for both short-term and
long-term interest rates. For short-term interest rates, the estimate is 0.437 for peggers and 0.323 for
non-peggers. For long-term interest rates, the corresponding numbers are 0.653 and 0.510. This
confirms our discussion above. In a world where capital controls are no longer in place, pegging a

18

As aforementioned in footnote 9, countries with high (low, respectively) global financial market integration in period t are
( glo
, respectively).
defined as those for which β i ,glo
t > 1 β i ,t ≤ 1

32

currency exposes the country to shock transmission. But this is simply the trilemma at work. Floatingcurrency countries also experience significant interest rate spillovers from the base countries, but the
coefficient is lower than it is for countries attempting to peg their currencies – which is in line with
the trilemma, too – albeit not significantly so, which might reflect the relatively low number of
observations from which we can draw inference. In any case, the dilemma findings are hard to
interpret in a world of largely globalized capital flows.
Table XII

IV. Conclusions
We propose a simple measure of de facto global and regional equity market integration using the beta
exposure of the stock market returns of 17 markets to either the global or regional equity market
portfolio. The beta exposure depends significantly on de jure market integration and global growth
uncertainty, both accounting for about 50% of the total variation.
When viewed over time from 1885 to 2014, we uncover a “swoosh pattern” in de facto global
financial market integration. That is, global financial market integration was high pre-1913, still
higher post-1990, and low in the interwar period. In fact, we statistically reject the presence of other
shapes hypothesized in earlier literature, such as a flat line, a U shape, a J shape, but cannot reject this
distinct “swoosh” pattern. For regional integration, we do not find a clear statistically significant
pattern. Also, we do not find integration to have reversed after the recent global crisis, contrary to
claims in a number of recent papers.
Our results have implications for the recent debate on the trilemma hypothesis, which posits
that a country can only run two of the three following policies: open capital markets, an independent
monetary policy and a pegged exchange rate. We investigate the role of de facto financial market
integration and the exchange rate regime on monetary policy interdependence measured by the
sensitivity of local interest rate changes to international base rate changes, using both short and longterm interest rates.

33

Our evidence is consistent with the trilemma hypothesis. First, for countries with flexible
exchange rates, interest rate pass-through is rather limited and is not affected by the extent of de facto
financial market integration. However, for peggers, a higher degree of financial integration increases
interest rate pass-through, undermining monetary policy independence. For segmented markets,
interest rate pass-through is close to zero or even negative, hence enabling these countries to decouple
from base interest rates. For integrated markets, in contrast, pass-through can be as high as 0.60 for
short and 0.75 for long-term interest rates. For the recent period, we find that the trilemma is alive and
well and has not morphed into a dilemma as recent papers claim, although it is natural to witness
larger pass-through in more globalized markets.

34

REFERENCES
Acharya, Viral, and Lasse Pedersen, 2005, Asset pricing with liquidity risk, Journal of financial
Economics 77, 375-410.
Aizenmann, Joshua, Menzie Chinn, and Hiro Hito, 2014, Monetary policy and the trilemma in the
new normal, mimeo, University of Southern California, University of Wisconsin and Portland
State University.
Baele, Lieven, 2005, Volatility spillover effects in European equity markets, Journal of Financial and
Quantitative Analysis 40, 373-401.
Baele, Lieven, and Koen Inghelbrecht, 2009, Time-varying integration and international
diversification strategies, Journal of Empirical Finance 16, 368-387.
Beck, Thorsten, Aslı Demirgüç-Kunt, and Ross Levine, 2010, Financial institutions and markets
across countries and over time: the updated financial development and structure database, World
Bank Economic Review 24, 77-92.
Bekaert, Geert, and Campbell R. Harvey, 1995, Time-varying world market integration, Journal of
Finance 50, 403-444.
Bekaert, Geert, and Campbell R. Harvey, 1997, Emerging equity market volatility, Journal of
Financial Economics 43, 29-77.
Bekaert, Geert, Campbell R. Harvey, and Angela Ng, 2005, Market integration and contagion,
Journal of Business 78, 39-70.
Bekaert, Geert, Eric Engstrom and Yuhang Xing, 2009, Risk, uncertainty and asset prices, Journal of
Financial Economics 91, 59-82.
Bekaert, Geert, Campbell R. Harvey, and Christian Lundblad, 2007, Liquidity and expected returns:
Lessons from emerging markets, Review of Financial Studies 20, 1783-1831.
Bekaert, Geert, Robert Hodrick, and Xiaoyan Zhang, 2009, International stock return comovements,
Journal of Finance 64, 2591-2626.
Bekaert, Geert, Campbell Harvey, Christian Lundblad and Stephan Siegel, 2011, What segments
equity markets?, Review of Financial Studies 24, 3847-3890.

35

Bekaert, Geert, Michael Ehrmann, Marcel Fratzscher, and Arnaud Mehl, 2014, The global crisis and
equity market contagion, Journal of Finance 69, 2597-2649.
Bekaert, Geert, Campbell Harvey, Andrea Kiguel, and Xiaozheng Wang, 2016, Globalization and
asset returns, Annual Review of Financial Economics, Vol. 8, 221-288.
Bluedorn, John, and Christopher Bowdler, 2010, The empirics of international monetary transmission:
identification and the impossible trinity, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 42, 679-713.
Bodnar, Gordon M., Bernard Dumas, and Richard D. Marston, 2003, Cross-border valuation: The
international cost of equity capital, NBER Working Paper 10115.
Bordo, Michael, and Marc Flandreau, 2003, Core, periphery, exchange rate regimes, and
globalization, National Bureau of Economic Research Conference Report M.D. Bordo, A.M.
Taylor, J.G. Williamson (Eds.), Globalization in Historical Perspective, University of Chicago
Press, Chicago, 417-472.
Bordo, Michael, and Antu Panini Murshid, 2006, Globalization and changing patterns in the
international transmission in financial markets, Journal of International Money and Finance 25,
655-674.
Bordo, Michael, Barry Eichengreen, and Douglas Irwin, 1999, Is globalization today really different
from globalization a hundred years ago? S.M. Collins, R.Z. Lawrence (Eds.), Brookings Trade
Forum 1999, Brookings Institution Press, Washington, 1-72.
Bordo, Michael, Alberto Cavallo, and Christopher Meissner, 2010, Sudden stops: Determinants and
output effects in the first era of globalization, 1880-1913, Journal of Development Economics 91,
227-241.
Brière, Marie, Ariane Chapelle, and Ariane Szafarz, 2012, No contagion, only globalization and flight
to quality, Journal of International Money and Finance 31, 1729-1744.
Brooks, Robin, and Marco Del Negro, 2006, Firm-level evidence on international stock market
comovement, Review of Finance 10, 69-98.
Bruno, Valentina, and Hyun Song Shin, 2015a, Cross-border banking and global liquidity, Review of
Economic Studies, 82, 535-564.

36

Bruno, Valentina, and Hyun Song Shin, 2015b, Capital flows and the risk-taking channel of monetary
policy, Journal of Monetary Economics, 71, 119-132.
Brusa, Francesca, Tarun Ramodorai, and Adrien Verdelhan, 2014, The international C.A.P.M. redux,
mimeo, University of Oxford and M.I.T.
Caramazza, Francesco, Luca Ricci, and Ranil Salgano, 2004, International financial contagion in
currency crises, Journal of International Money and Finance 23, 51-70.
Chari, Anusha, and Peter Blair Henry, 2004, Risk sharing and asset prices: evidence from a natural
experiment, Journal of Finance 59, 1295-1324.
Chinn, Menzie and Hiro Ito, 2006, What matters for financial development? Capital controls,
institutions, and interactions, Journal of Development Economics 81, 163-192.
Chuhan, Punam, 1994, Are institutional investors an important source of portfolio investment in
emerging markets? World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 1243.
Cochrane, John H., 2005, Asset pricing (Princeton University Press, Princeton).
Connolly, Robert A., and Fukuo A. Wang, 2003, International equity market comovements:
Economic fundamentals or contagion? Pacific‐Basin Finance Journal 11, 23-43.

Dumas, Bernard, and Bruno Solnik, 1995, The world price of foreign exchange risk, Journal of
Finance 50, 445-479.
Dungey, Mardi, Renee Fry, Brenda Gonzalez-Hermosillo, and Vance L. Martin, 2004, Empirical
modeling of contagion: A review of methodologies, Quantitative Finance 5, 9-24.
Farhi, Emmanuel, and Ivan Werning, 2014, Dilemma not trilemma? Capital controls and exchange
rates with volatile capital flows, IMF Economic Review, 62, 569-605.
Fernández, Andrés, Michael, Klein, Alessandro Rebucci, Martin Schindler, and Martín Uribe, 2015,
Capital controls measures: a new dataset, NBER Working Paper 20970.
Ferson, Wayne, and Campbell Harvey, 1991, The variation of economic risk premiums, Journal of
Political Economy 99, 385-415.
Fisman, Raymond, and Inessa Love, 2004, financial development and intersectoral allocation: a new
approach, Journal of Finance 59, 2785-2807.
37

Fratzscher, Marcel, 2012, Capital flows, push versus pull factors and the global financial crisis,
Journal of International Economics 88, 341-356.
Forbes, Kristin, and Roberto Rigobon, 2002, No contagion, only interdependence: Measuring stock
market comovements, Journal of Finance 57, 2223-2261.
Forbes, Kristin, 2004, The Asian flue and Russian virus, the international transmission of crisis in
firm-level data, Journal of International Economics 63, 59-92.
Forbes, Kristin, Marcel Fratzscher, and Roland Straub, 2013, Capital controls and macroprudential
measures: What are they good for? MIT-Sloan Working Paper 5061-13.
Giannetti, Mariassunta, and Luc Laeven, 2012, The flight home effect: Evidence from the syndicated
loan market during financial crises, Journal of Financial Economics 104, 23-43.
Giannetti, Mariassunta, and Luc Laeven, 2016, Local ownership, crises, and asset prices: evidence
from US mutual funds, Review of Finance, 20, 947-978.
Giavazzi, Francesco, Alberto Giovannini, David Begg, and Louka Katseli, 1986, The EMS and the
dollar, Economic Policy 1, 455-485.
Giavazzi, Francesco and Marco Pagano, 1988, The advantage of tying one’s hands: EMS discipline
and central bank credibility, European Economic Review 32, 1055-1082.
Goetzmann, William, Lingfeng Li, and Geert Rouwenhorst, 2005, Long-term global market
correlations, Journal of Business 71, 1-38.
Hamilton, James, 2005, Oil and the Macroeconomy, The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics,
(Palgrave Macmillan, London), 201-228.
Hendry, David F., and Hans-Martin Krolzig, 2005, The properties of automatic “GETS” modelling,
Economic Journal 115, C32-C61.
Hofmann, Boris, and Előd Takáts, 2015, International monetary spillovers, BIS Quarterly Review,
September 2015, 105-118.
Ilzetzki, Ethan, Carmen Reinhart, and Kenneth Rogoff, 2004, Exchange rate arrangements into the
21st century: will the anchor currency hold? mimeo, Harvard University.
38

Jeanne, Olivier, and Anton Korinek, 2010, Excessive volatility in capital flows: a pigouvian taxation
approach, American Economic Review 100, 403-407.
Kaminsky, Graciela, and Carmen M. Reinhart, 2000, On crises, contagion, and confusion, Journal of
International Economics 51, 145-168.
Klein, Michael, and Jay Shambaugh, 2013, Rounding the corners of the policy trilemma: sources of
monetary policy autonomy, NBER Working Paper 19461.
Kose, M. Ayhan, Eswar Prasad, Kenneth S. Rogoff, and Shang-Jin Wei, 2006, Financial
globalization: a reappraisal, NBER Working Paper 2484.
Lewellen, Jonathan, and Stefan Nagel, 2006, The conditional CAPM does not explain asset-pricing
anomalies, Journal of Financial Economics 82, 289-314.
Lewis, Karen, 2015, Do risk exposures of cross-listed firms reflect market changes?, mimeo, Wharton
school, University of Pennsylvania.
Maddison, Angus, 2010, Statistics on world population, GDP and per capita GDP, 1-2008 A.D.,
University of Groningen, Groningen.
Mauro, Paulo, Nathan Sussman, and Yishay Yafeh, 2002, Emerging market spreads: then versus now,
Quarterly Journal of Economics 117, 695-733.
Mendoza, Enrique G., and Vincenzo Quadrini, 2010, Financial globalization, financial crisis and
contagion, Journal of Monetary Economics 57, 24-39.
Miniane, Jacques, and John Rogers, 2007, Capital controls and the international transmission of U.S.
money shocks. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 39, 1003-1035.
Miranda-Agrippino, Silvia, and Hélène Rey, 2014, World asset markets and the global financial cycle,
mimeo, London Business School.
Mitchell, Brian, 1998a, International historical statistics, Europe, 1750-1993 (McMillan, 4th edition,
London).
Mitchell, Brian, 1998b, International historical statistics, Africa, Asia & Oceania, 1750-1993
(McMillan, 4th edition, London).

39

Mitchell, Brian, 1998c, International historical statistics, the Americas, 1750-1993 (McMillan, 4th
edition, London).
Obstfeld, Maurice, and Allan Taylor, 2003, Globalization and capital markets, Globalization in
Historical Perspective, Bordo, Michael, Allan, Taylor, and Jeffrey Williamson (Eds.), University
of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Obstfeld, Maurice, and Allan Taylor, 2004, Global capital markets: integration, crisis, and growth,
Cambridge University Press, New York/Cambridge.
Obstfeld, Maurice, Jay Shambaugh, and Alan Taylor, 2005, The Trilemma in history: Tradeoffs
among exchange rates, monetary policies, and capital mobility, Review of Economics and Statistics
87, 423-438.
Obstfeld, Maurice, 2015, Trilemmas and trade-offs: living with financial globalization, BIS Working
Paper No. 480.
Ostry, Jonathan, Atish Ghosh, Marcos Chamon, and Mahvash Qureshi, 2012, Tools for managing
financial stability risks from capital inflows, Journal of International Economics 88, 407-421.
Passari, Evgenia and Hélène Rey, 2015. Financial Flows and the International Monetary System,
Economic Journal, 584, 675-698
Pasricha, Gurnain, Matteo Falagiarda, Martin Bijsterbosch, and Joshua Aizenmann, 2015, Domestic
and multilateral effects of capital controls in emerging markets, NBER Working Paper 20822.
Quinn, Dennis, 2003, Capital account liberalization and financial globalization, 1890–1999: a
synoptic view, International Journal of Finance and Economics 8, 189-204.
Quinn, Dennis, and A. Maria Toyoda, 2008, Does capital account liberalization lead to growth?
Review of Financial Studies 21, 1403-1449.
Quinn, Dennis, and Hans-Joachim Voth, 2008, A century of global equity market correlations,
American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings 98, 535-540.
Rangvid, Jesper, Pedro Santa-Clara, and Maik Schmeling (2016) Capital market integration and
consumption risk sharing over the long run, Journal of International Economics, 103, 27-43.

40

Rajan, Raghuram, and Luigi Zingales, 2003, The great reversals: the politics of financial development
in the twentieth century, Journal of Financial Economics 69, 5-50.
Rey, Hélène, 2013, Dilemma not trilemma: the global financial cycle and monetary policy
independence. Proceedings, Economic Policy Symposium, Jackson Hole, 1-2.
Reinhart, Carmen, and Kenneth Rogoff, 2011, From financial crash to debt crisis, American
Economic Review 101, pp. 1676-1706.
Rose, Andrew, and Tomasz Wieladek, 2014, Financial protectionism? First evidence, Journal of
Finance 69, pp. 2127-2149.
Shambaugh, Jay, 2004, The effect of fixed exchange rates on monetary policy, Quarterly Journal of
Economics 119, 301-352.
Schularick, Moritz, 2006, A tale of two globalizations: capital flows from rich to poor in two eras of
global finance, International Journal of Finance and Economics 11, 339-354.
Van Rijckeghem, Caroline, and Beatrice Weder di Mauro, 2014, Deglobalization of banking: The
world is getting smaller, CEPR Discussion Paper 10139.
Volosovych, Vadym, 2011, Measuring financial market integration over the long run: Is there a Ushape? Journal of International Money and Finance 30, 1535-1561.
Von Hagen, Jürgen and Michele Fratianni, 1990, German dominance in the EMS: evidence from
interest rates, Journal of International Money and Finance 9, 358-375.
Wurgler, Jeffrey, 2000, Financial markets and the allocation of capital, Journal of Financial
Economics 58, 187-214.

41

0

0

.2

.4
.6
Global beta

.8

Global financial market integration
.25
.5
.75
1
1.25
1.5

1

Panel A. Global Financial Market Integration and Conditional Global Betas

1900

1920

1940

1960

Unweighted

1980

2000

Weighted

0

0

.1

.2
.3
.4
Regional beta

.5

Regional financial market integration
.25
.5
.75
1
1.25

.6

1.5

Panel B. Regional Financial Market Integration and Conditional Regional Betas

1900

1920

1940
Unweighted

1960

1980

2000

Weighted

Figure 1. Average conditional betas – 1885-2014. The figure shows the evolution between 1885 and 2014 of
the unweighted (thick grey lines) and value-weighted (light grey lines) averages (17 countries) of our measures
of financial market integration (defined in equations (4) and (5)) and corresponding conditional beta estimates
obtained from the full model equations (1) to (3). Global estimates are shown in Panel A and regional estimates
in Panel B.

42

austria

belgium

canada

denmark

finland

france

germany

italy

japan

netherlands

norway

spain

sweden

switzerland

0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1
0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1

Global betas

0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1

australia

1900

2000

1900

1950

2000

1900

1950

2000

us

0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1

uk

1950

1900

1950

2000

1900

1950

2000

Graphs by cty
Figure 2. Conditional global betas – Breakdown by country and selected years. The figure shows the conditional global beta estimates obtained from the full model
equations (1) to (3) for each country of our sample in selected years, namely: 1913, 1928, 1945, 1973, 1990, and 2008.

43

austria

belgium

canada

denmark

finland

france

germany

italy

japan

netherlands

norway

spain

sweden

switzerland

0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1
0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1

Regional betas

0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1

australia

1900

2000

1900

1950

2000

1900

1950

2000

us

0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1

uk

1950

1900

1950

2000

1900

1950

2000

Graphs by cty

Figure 3. Conditional regional betas – Breakdown by country and selected years. The figure shows the conditional regional beta estimates obtained from the full model
equations (1) to (3) for each country of our sample in selected years, namely: 1913, 1928, 1945, 1973, 1990, and 2008.

44

Global beta
.25
.5
.75

1

Global growth uncertainty

0

0

Global beta
.25
.5
.75

1

De jure capital account openness

1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 2000

1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 2000

0

Global beta
.25
.5
.75

1

High market volatility

1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 2000

Figure 4. Economic importance of the instruments for global financial market integration – 1885-2014. The figure shows the evolution between 1885 and 2014 of the
value-weighted averages (17 countries) of the estimates of the conditional global betas obtained from the full model equations (1) to (3) when only one of each instrument in
vector X remains active, in turn. This is achieved by setting the loadings on the other instruments at their respective means.

45

0

Global beta estimates
.25
.5
.75

1

1.25

Panel A. Global Betas – Conditional vs. Rolling

1900

1920

1940

1960

Conditional global beta
- 1.65 * (5-year rolling S.E.)

1980

2000

+ 1.65 * (5-year rolling S.E.)
5-year rolling estimate

-.25

Regional beta estimates
.5
.75
0
.25

1

1.25

Panel B. Regional Betas – Conditional vs. Rolling

1900

1920

1940

Conditional regional beta
- 1.65 * (5-year rolling S.E.)

1960

1980

2000

+ 1.65 * (5-year rolling S.E.)
5-year rolling estimate

Figure 5. Average conditional betas vs. 5-year rolling betas – 1885-2014. The figure shows the evolution
between 1885 and 2014 of the unweighted averages (17 countries) of the estimated cross-sectionally
heterogeneous and time-varying parameters βi,tglo and βi,treg (thick grey lines) obtained from the full model
equations (1) to (3) together with 90% confidence bands (light grey lines) obtained from pooled estimates with a
5-year rolling forward window, with non-overlapping observations, of βtglo and βtreg, and the point estimates
(shown as black dashed lines).

46

0

Correlations/beta estimates
.25
.5
.75

1

Panel A. Global Betas vs. Correlations

1900

1920

1940

1960

Conditional global betas

1980

2000

1-year rolling correlations

Correlations/beta estimates
0
.25
.5

.75

Panel B. Regional Betas vs. Correlations

1900

1920

1940

Conditional regional betas

1960

1980

2000

1-year rolling correlations

Figure 6. Average conditional betas vs. 1-year rolling correlations – 1885-2014. The figure shows the
evolution between 1885 and 2014 of the unweighted averages (17 countries) of the conditional global and
regional beta estimates (thick grey lines) together with 1-year rolling (non-overlapping) bilateral pooled
correlations between equity excess returns Ri,t and the global and regional market factors, respectively.

47

-.5

Short-term interest rate pass-through
-.25
0
.25
.5
.75
1 1.25

Panel A. Short-Term Interest Rates

0

.25

1
.5
.75
Global financial market integration
Peggers

1.25

1.5

1.25

1.5

Nonpeggers

-.5

Long-term interest rate pass-through
-.25
0
.25
.5
.75
1
1.25

Panel B. Long-Term Interest Rates

0

.25

.5
.75
1
Global financial market integration
Peggers

Nonpeggers

Figure 7. Estimated interest rate pass-through vs. global financial market integration. The figure plots the
estimated pass-through from base (i.e. US, UK or German) short-term (Panel A) and long-term (Panel B)
interest rates to domestic interest rates against the extent of global market integration for both peggers and
nonpeggers as predicted by the full sample estimates reported in column (10) of Table IX and X, respectively.
90% confidence bands are shown as dotted lines.

48

Average short-term interest rate pass-through
.8
0
.2
.4
.6
-.2

Panel A. Short-Term Interest Rates

1900

1920

1940

1960

Peggers

1980

2000

Nonpeggers

Average long-term interest rate pass-through
-.2
0
.2
.4
.6
.8

Panel B. Long-Term Interest Rates

1900

1920

1940
Peggers

1960

1980

2000

Nonpeggers

Figure 8. Estimated interest rate pass-through: peggers vs. nonpeggers – 1885-2014. The figure shows the
evolution between 1885 and 2014 of the average (14 countries) pass-through estimates from base (i.e. US, UK
or German) short-term (Panel A) and long-term (Panel B) interest rates to domestic interest rates for peggers and
nonpeggers as predicted by the full sample estimates reported in column (10) of Table IX and X, respectively.

49

Table I
Data Overview
The table reports summary statistics for the various variables used in the model. All statistics shown in the table are calculated for the sample’s 17 economies over the period
January 1885-June 2014.

Variables

Units

Frequency Definition

Unit of
observation

Source

Returns
Equity returns
Risk free rate

in % per month
in % per month

M onthly
M onthly

Exact return of the local equity market index in dollar terms
10-year US Treasury yield in domestic currency terms

Country
Country

Global Financial Data
Global Financial Data

0.48
0.37

0.44
0.30

Instruments
Trade openness

% of GDP

Annual

Sum of total exports and imports of goods relative to output

Country

M itchell (1998a, 1998b and 1998c)
47.23
and IM F Direction of Trade Statistics

Regional trade openness

% of total trade

Annual

Sum of a country's exports and imports of goods to/from its
neighbours relative to total trade

Country

Capital account openness

index from 0 to 100

Annual

Country

Financial development

in %

Annual

Extent of the restrictions to capital outflows and inflows from
residents and nonresidents
Equity market capitalization relative to output

Oil prices

in %

M onthly

Global

Global growth uncertainty

in % points per year

Annual

Local growth uncertainty

in % points per year

Annual

High market volatility periods

%

M onthly

Log. deviation of the dollar price of an oil barrel from a 5-year
moving average
Logarithm of the standard deviation of real GDP growth across
countries in the sample
Logarithm of the standard deviation of real GDP growth in each
country over non-overlapping windows of 5 years
Share of the countries with normalised log conditional volatility of
stock returns from GARCH(1,1) models above 1.65 in a given
month

Other data
Equity market capitalization

in %

Annual

Equity market capitalization relative to total sample capitalization

Country

Central bank policy rates
Peggers

in % per year
M onthly
Dummy variable (0/1) Annual

Country

Global
Country
Global

M ain policy interest rate in domestic currency terms
Country
Dummy variable which equals zero for nonpeggers (floats, managed Country
floats or freely falling exchange rates) and one for peggers (other
countries, including those on the gold standard)

min.

max.

6.57
0.19

-92.45
0.12

179.64
0.12

40.10

34.40

2.40

352.80

M itchell (1998a, 1998b and 1998c)
51.28
and IM F Direction of Trade Statistics

59.00

24.03

0.00

100.00

Quinn and Voth (2008) and Quinn
and Toyoda (2008)
Rajan and Zingales (2003) and Beck,
Demirgüç-Kunt, and Levine (2010)
Global Financial Data

73.59

80.00

30.20

0.00

100.00

60.40

50.00

46.00

3.00

323.00

6.92

4.48

27.21 -107.38 123.10

M addison (2010) and IM F World
Economic Outlook
M addison (2010) and IM F World
Economic Outlook
Authors' calculations

1.02

0.99

0.68

-0.36

3.31

1.13

1.22

0.56

0.21

3.78

15.14

11.76

17.24

0.00

100.00

5.88

1.90

10.58

0.00

56.40

4.93
0.67

4.50
1.00

2.95
0.47

0.00
0.00

90.00
1.00

Rajan and Zingales (2003) and Beck,
Demirgüç-Kunt, and Levine (2010)
Global Financial Data
Ilzetzki, Reinhart, and Rogoff (2004)
and Reinhart and Rogoff (2011)

mean median s.d.

50

Table II
Pairwise correlations of the instruments
The table reports the pairwise correlations of the variables contained in vector X. The local growth uncertainty variable reported below is the logarithm of the standard
deviation of real GDP growth in each country over non-overlapping windows of 5 years. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels,
respectively.

Trade
openness

Trade openness
Regional trade
Capital account openness
Financial depth
Oil prices
Global growth uncertainty
Local growth uncertainty
High market volatility periods

1.00
0.43
0.30
0.15
0.11
-0.23
-0.20
0.06

Regional
trade

***
***
***
***
***
***
***

1.00
0.02
-0.19
0.01
-0.09
-0.20
-0.02

Capital
account
openness

***
***
**
***
***
***

1.00
0.30
0.06
-0.37
-0.26
-0.13

Financial
depth

***
***
***
***
***

1.00
-0.01
-0.10 ***
-0.10 ***
0.02 ***

Oil prices

1.00
-0.06 ***
-0.03 ***
-0.16 ***

Global
growth
uncertainty

1.00
0.59 ***
0.13 ***

Local
growth
uncertainty

1.00
0.13 ***

High
market
volatility
periods

1.00

51

Table III
Full Model Estimates
The table reports the estimates of the parameters βi,tglo and βi,treg from the full model equations (1) to (3). Each
instrument is included individually in the estimates reported in columns 2 to 7, while all seven instruments are
included in column 8. We then obtain a parsimonious model in column 9 by excluding the variables with
insignificant parameters. All the estimates control for country fixed effects, year effects and for the direct effects
of the instruments included in vector X (whose coefficients are not reported to save space).The standard errors
reported in parentheses are robust to heteroskedasticity and clustered heterogeneity. ***, **, *, and + indicate
statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, 10%, and 15% levels, respectively.
(1)
Global factor

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(7)

0.892***
(0.036)
0.425***
(0.087)

0.640***
(0.036)
0.290***
(0.077)

(8)

(9)

Constant

0.315**
(0.132)

0.700+
(0.430)

-0.538
(0.650)

-0.921*
(0.444)

0.430*** 0.443***
(0.139) (0.106)
-0.087 -0.129*
(0.104) (0.062)
0.000
(0.001)
0.002
(0.001)
0.004*** 0.004***
(0.001) (0.001)
0.006*** 0.006***
(0.002) (0.001)
0.011
(0.053)
-0.087
(0.083)
0.001
(0.001)
-0.001**
(0.000)
-0.254***
-0.167***-0.175***
(0.031)
(0.036) (0.029)
-0.133***
-0.026
(0.037)
(0.042)
0.001*** 0.002*** 0.002***
(0.000) (0.000) (0.000)
-0.000
-0.001
(0.001) (0.001)
-0.283
-0.047 0.228* -0.653
0.401
(0.287) (1.167) (0.128) (0.491) (1.627)

Country fixed effects
Year effects
Instrument main effects
Observations

YES
YES
YES
20,800

YES
YES
YES
20,546

YES
YES
YES
20,587

YES
YES
YES
18,142

YES
YES
YES
20,798

YES
YES
YES
20,778

YES
YES
YES
20,800

YES
YES
YES
17,850

YES
YES
YES
20,587

R2

0.209

0.270

0.228

0.221

0.210

0.223

0.210

0.311

0.233

Regional factor
Global factor × trade openness
Regional factor × regional trade
Global factor × capital openness
Regional factor × capital openness
Global factor × financial development
Regional factor × financial development
Global factor × oil prices
Regional factor × oil prices

0.679*** 0.515*** 0.198** 0.643*** 0.678***
(0.033) (0.083) (0.087) (0.047) (0.032)
0.286*** 0.117 -0.145** 0.346*** 0.283***
(0.083) (0.117) (0.062) (0.094) (0.086)
0.003*
(0.002)
0.004**
(0.002)
0.006***
(0.001)
0.007***
(0.001)
0.100+
(0.063)
-0.087
(0.070)
0.001*
(0.001)
-0.001*
(0.000)

(6)

Global factor × growth uncertainty
Regional factor × growth uncertainty
Global factor × high market volatility
Regional factor × high market volatility

52

Table IV
Variance Ratio Analysis
The table reports the estimates of a variance ratio analysis. For each statistically significant instrument j (i.e. de
jure capital account openness, global growth uncertainty and high market volatility periods) of our parsimonious
specification, we calculate the variance ratio for the conditional global beta estimates as

ˆ glo glo
cov[bˆ 1glo'X glo
i, t − k , b1, j X i ,t − k ]
VR =
,
var[bˆ glo'X glo ]
j

1

i, t − k

and where the standard errors are estimated by bootstrap with 1,000 replications. Each replication in the
bootstrap consists in scrambling the residuals from the parsimonious model (shown in column 9 of Table III),
recreating the dependant variable using the data’s independent variables and the estimated parameters, and reestimating the model. We then re-compute the variance ratios as indicated above. ***, **, and * indicate
statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

Capital
account
openness
Variance contribution

Global growth
uncertainty

High market
volatility
periods

0.528 ***

0.471 ***

0.001

(0.060)

(0.059)

(0.007)

53

Table V
Constant-Beta Model Estimates
The table reports the estimates of the following model:

Ri ,t = α i + lt + β 0glo Ft glo ,\ i + β 0reg Ft reg ,\ i + e i ,t
Estimates obtained by OLS are reported in columns 1 to 3; estimates obtained by excluding outliers from the
sample (i.e. returns larger than 30% within a month in absolute value) are reported in column 4; estimates
obtained with a random effects estimator are reported in columns 5. The estimates of columns 2 to 5 control for
country fixed (or random) effects. The estimates of columns 3 to 5 control for year effects. The ρ-statistic in
column (5) is the percent contribution to the total variance of the panel-level variance component. The standard
errors reported in parentheses are robust to heteroskedasticity and clustered heterogeneity. ***, **, *, and +
indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, 10% and 15% levels, respectively.

Global factor
Regional factor
Constant

Country fixed/random effects
Year effects
Observations
2

R
# panel units
ρ

(1)
OLS

(2)
OLS

(3)
OLS

(4)
Outliers

(5)
Random
effects

0.707***
(0.031)
0.300***
(0.081)
0.018
(0.033)

0.707***
(0.032)
0.300***
(0.081)
-0.007
(0.017)

0.679***
(0.033)
0.286***
(0.083)
0.315**
(0.132)

0.665***
(0.032)
0.287***
(0.081)
-0.336***
(0.089)

0.679***
(0.033)
0.286***
(0.084)
0.471*
(0.254)

NO
NO
20,800

YES
NO
20,800

YES
YES
20,800

YES
YES
20,719

YES
YES
20,800

0.199

0.199

0.209

0.285

0.209
17
0.000

54

Table VI
Estimates for Alternative Sample Periods
The table reports the estimates of the following model:

Ri ,t = α i + lt + β 0glo Ft glo ,\ i + β 0reg Ft reg ,\ i + e i ,t
Estimates obtained by OLS on the full sample are reported in column 1; estimates obtained on alternative
subperiods (pre-1913, 1914-1990, 1990-2014, 1990-2006 and 2007-2014) are reported in columns 2 to 6. The
estimates control for country fixed effects and for year effects. The standard errors reported in parentheses are
robust to heteroskedasticity and clustered heterogeneity. ***, **, *, and + indicate statistical significance at the
1%, 5%, 10%, 15% levels, respectively.

(1)
Full sample

(2)
Pre-1913

(3)
1914-1990

(4)
1990-2014

(5)
1990-2006

(6)
2007-2014

0.679***
(0.033)
0.286***
(0.083)
0.315**
(0.132)

0.669***
(0.055)
0.357+
(0.176)
-0.184
(0.119)

0.536***
(0.046)
0.212**
(0.076)
0.210
(0.944)

0.943***
(0.041)
0.586***
(0.145)
-0.283
(0.418)

0.860***
(0.049)
0.558***
(0.146)
0.937***
(0.222)

1.091***
(0.064)
0.502***
(0.163)
0.523*
(0.248)

Country fixed effects
Year effects
Observations

YES
YES
20,800

YES
YES
1,071

YES
YES
14,748

YES
YES
4,981

YES
YES
3,468

YES
YES
1,513

R2

0.204

0.177

0.119

0.598

0.473

0.783

Global factor
Regional factor
Constant

55

Table VII
Testing for the Shape of Global Financial Market Integration over the Last Century
The table reports in Panel A the estimates of the following model:
glo ,\ i
reg ,\ i
+ (β reg
+ e i ,t
Ri ,t = α i + lt + (β glo
j ' D j ) Ft
j ' D j ) Ft

(6)

where j =1, 2, 3; D1 denotes a dummy variable equal to one between 1885 and 1913 and zero otherwise; D2 a
dummy variable equal to one between 1914 and 1990 and zero otherwise; and D3 a dummy variable equal to one
between 1990 and 2014 and zero otherwise. The estimates, obtained by OLS, control for country fixed effects
and for year effects. The standard errors reported in parentheses are robust to heteroskedasticity and clustered
heterogeneity. ***, **, *, and + indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, 10%, 15% levels, respectively. In
addition, Panel B reports four hypothesized shapes that may characterise global financial market integration
over the last century, while Panel C reports the p-value of Wald restriction tests on the estimated coefficients of
the betas interacted with D1, D2 and D3 corresponding to each of the four hypothesized shapes.

Panel A.
Full sample estimates (1885-2014)

Global factor × D 1
Global factor × D 2
Global factor × D 3
Regional factor × D 1
Regional factor × D 2
Regional factor × D 3
Constant

0.669***
(0.051)
0.536***
(0.046)
0.943***
(0.041)
0.355**
(0.160)
0.212**
(0.076)
0.585***
(0.146)
0.338**
(0.118)

Year effects
Country fixed effects
Observations

YES
YES
20,800

R2

0.221

Panel B.
Hypothesized
shape

Panel C.
p-value of Wald test

Straight line

β 1glo = β 2glo = β 3glo : 0.000

β1

β 1reg = β 2reg = β 3reg : 0.009

β2

β3

U-shape
β1

β 1glo = β 3glo : 0.000 , β 1reg = β 3reg : 0.276

β3

β 1glo > β 2glo : 0.965 , β 1reg > β 2reg : 0.798
β 3glo > β 2glo : 0.999 , β 3reg > β 2reg : 0.998

β2
J (or inverted L)shape
β3

β 1glo = β 2glo : 0.068 , β 1reg = β 2reg : 0.404
β 3glo > β 1glo : 0.999 , β 3reg > β 1reg : 0.861
β 3glo > β 2glo : 0.999 , β 3reg > β 2reg : 0.998

β1

β2

Swoosh-shape
β3
β1

β 1glo > β 2glo : 0.965 , β 1reg > β 2reg : 0.798
β 3glo > β 1glo : 0.999 , β 3reg > β 1reg : 0.861
β 3glo > β 2glo : 0.999 , β 3reg > β 2reg : 0.998

β2

56

Table VIII
Testing for a Reversal in Global Financial Market Integration since the Great Recession
The table reports in Panel A the estimates of the following model:
(6)

glo ,\ i
reg ,\ i
Ri ,t = α i + lt + (β glo
+ (β reg
+ e i ,t
j ' D j ) Ft
j ' D j ) Ft

where j = 1, 2; D1 denotes a dummy variable equal to one between 1990 and 2006 and zero otherwise; D2 a
dummy variable equal to one between 2007 and 2014 and zero otherwise. The estimates, obtained by OLS,
control for country fixed effects and for year effects. The standard errors reported in parentheses are robust to
heteroskedasticity and clustered heterogeneity. ***, **, *, and + indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%,
10%, 15% levels, respectively. In addition, Panel B reports the p-value of Wald restriction tests on the estimated
coefficients of the betas interacted with D1 and D2.

Panel A.
Full sample estimates (1885-2014)
0.860***
Global factor × D 1
(0.049)
1.091***
Global factor × D 2
(0.063)
0.558***
Regional factor × D 1
(0.146)
0.500***
Regional factor × D 2
(0.162)
Constant
0.155
(0.119)

Year effects
Country fixed effects
Observations

YES
YES
20,800

R2

0.155

Panel B.
p-value of Wald test H0

β 1glo = β 2glo :
glo

glo

0.010

> β2 :

0.005

β 1glo < β 2glo :

0.995

β 1reg = β 2reg :

0.554

β1

reg

reg

> β2 :

0.723

β 1reg < β 2reg :

0.277

β1

57

Table IX
Testing for the Monetary Policy Trilemma in History – Short-Term Interest Rates
The table reports the estimates of the parameters of the unconditional model equation (7) using short-term policy interest rates, in the spirit of Obstfeld, Shambaugh and
Taylor (2005). Column 1 reports pooled estimates, Columns 2 to 4 report estimates over three periods. Columns 5 to 8 report estimates by country groups. The estimates of
the parameters from the conditional model equation (8) are reported in columns 9 and 10 over the full sample. The standard errors reported in parentheses are robust to
heteroskedasticity and clustered heterogeneity. ***, **, *, and + indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, 10%, and 15% levels, respectively.

Pooled

Interest rate
Global market integration

Unconditional estimates à la Obstfeld, Shambaugh and Taylor (2005)
Conditional estimates
By time period
By country group
1885-2014
Gold
Bretton
PostPeggers Nonpeggers High global Low global Full sample Ex. World
standard
Woods
Bretton
financial
financial
War I & II
(Pre-1914) (1959-1970) Woods
market
market
(1973-2000)
integration integration

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

0.305***
(0.040)

0.187***
(0.052)

0.096**
(0.035)

0.567***
(0.118)

0.306***
(0.049)

0.304***
(0.035)

0.393***
(0.032)

0.136*
(0.077)

-0.002***
(0.000)

0.002*
(0.001)

0.010***
(0.003)

-0.001
(0.002)

-0.002
(0.001)

-0.001
(0.003)

-0.007***
(0.001)

0.005***
(0.002)

0.176*
(0.082)
-0.021***
(0.004)
-0.012***
(0.004)
0.105+
(0.063)
-0.433**
(0.165)
0.013**
(0.006)
0.447**
(0.178)
0.019***
(0.003)

0.163*
(0.084)
-0.026***
(0.005)
-0.015**
(0.006)
0.112+
(0.064)
-0.420**
(0.166)
0.015**
(0.006)
0.439**
(0.178)
0.025***
(0.004)

1,715
0.0880

326
0.120

168
0.0658

392
0.0976

1,149
0.0842

552
0.0986

1,006
0.172

709
0.0123

1,551
0.0990

1,417
0.0995

Peg
Interest rate × global market integration
Interest rate × peg
Global market integration × peg
Interest rate × global market integration × peg
Constant

Observations
Adjusted R 2

58

Table X
Testing for the Monetary Policy Trilemma in History – Long-Term Interest Rates
The table reports the estimates of the parameters of the unconditional model equation (7) using long-term government bond yields. Column 1 reports pooled estimates,
Columns 2 to 4 report estimates over three subperiods. Columns 5 to 8 report estimates by country groups. The estimates of the parameters from the conditional model
equation (8) are reported in columns 9 and 10 over the full sample. The standard errors reported in parentheses are robust to heteroskedasticity and clustered heterogeneity.
***, **, *, and + indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, 10%, and 15% levels, respectively.

Pooled

Interest rate
Global market integration

Unconditional estimates
Conditional estimates
By time period
By country group
1885-2014
Gold
Bretton
PostPeggers Nonpeggers High global Low global Full sample Ex. World
standard
Woods
Bretton
financial
financial
War I & II
(Pre-1914) (1959-1970) Woods
market
market
(1973-2000)
integration integration

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

0.432***
(0.074)

0.250**
(0.092)

0.124+
(0.076)

0.529***
(0.113)

0.459***
(0.114)

0.404***
(0.064)

0.502***
(0.086)

0.286***
(0.062)

0.000
(0.001)

0.006***
(0.001)

0.016***
(0.004)

0.003
(0.004)

0.001
(0.002)

-0.001
(0.002)

-0.000
(0.001)

0.002
(0.002)

0.455**
(0.188)
-0.023***
(0.006)
-0.025
(0.017)
-0.053
(0.145)
-0.588**
(0.219)
0.030*
(0.016)
0.626**
(0.229)
0.021**
(0.007)

0.440**
(0.195)
-0.026***
(0.007)
-0.027+
(0.018)
-0.043
(0.151)
-0.624***
(0.189)
0.031*
(0.016)
0.654***
(0.206)
0.024**
(0.008)

1,232
0.139

174
0.0241

167
0.0101

132
0.369

779
0.111

453
0.191

624
0.298

608
0.0332

1,199
0.151

1,097
0.188

Peg
Interest rate × global market integration
Interest rate × peg
Global market integration × peg
Interest rate × global market integration × peg
Constant

Observations
Adjusted R 2

59

Table XI
Testing for the Monetary Policy Trilemma vs. Dilemma Hypotheses – Stability Tests
The table reports stability test results for a break in the coefficients of model equation (8) in 1990 and 2007,
respectively, using two interaction dummy variables: the first dummy is denoted prebreak and equals one before
1990 (respectively 2007) and zero afterwards; the second dummy is denoted postbreak and equals zero before
1990 (respectively 2007) and zero afterwards. The results are obtained using the full sample and short-term
policy rates (in columns 1 to 3) and long-term government bond yields (in columns 4 to 6). Columns 1 and 4
report the estimates without breaks, columns 2 and 5 the estimates with a break in 1990, and columns 3 and 6
the estimates with a break in 2007. The standard errors reported in parentheses are robust to heteroskedasticity
and clustered heterogeneity. ***, **, *, and + indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, 10%, and 15%
levels, respectively.

Interest rate
Global market integration
Peg
Interest rate × global market integration
Interest rate × peg
Global market integration × peg
Interest rate × global market integration × peg
Interest rate × prebreak

Short-term interest rates
Full sample
Break in
Break in
1990
2007
(1)
(2)
(3)

Long-term interest rates
Full sample
Break in
Break in
1990
2007
(4)
(5)
(6)

0.176*
(0.082)
-0.021***
(0.004)
-0.012***
(0.004)
0.105+
(0.063)
-0.433**
(0.165)
0.013**
(0.006)
0.447**
(0.178)

0.455**
(0.188)
-0.023***
(0.006)
-0.025
(0.017)
-0.053
(0.145)
-0.588**
(0.219)
0.030*
(0.016)
0.626**
(0.229)

Global market integration × prebreak
Peg × prebreak
Interest rate × global market integration × prebreak
Interest rate × peg × prebreak
Global market integration × peg × prebreak
Interest rate × global market integration × peg × prebreak
Interest rate × postbreak
Global market integration × postbreak
Peg × postbreak
Interest rate × global market integration × postbreak
Interest rate × peg × postbreak
Global market integration × peg × postbreak
Interest rate × global market integration × peg × postbreak
Constant

0.019***
(0.003)

0.100
(0.192)
-0.001
(0.010)
-0.012**
(0.005)
0.217
(0.286)
-0.520+
(0.297)
0.008
(0.010)
0.498
(0.380)
0.289
(0.956)
-0.018***
(0.004)
-0.174***
(0.052)
0.010
(0.644)
1.238
(1.301)
0.119***
(0.038)
-0.792
(0.892)
0.009+
(0.005)

0.190**
(0.083)
-0.010*
(0.005)
-0.007*
(0.004)
0.097+
(0.061)
-0.469**
(0.158)
0.003
(0.006)
0.479**
(0.171)
-4.359+
(2.816)
-0.030***
(0.005)
0.242
(0.235)
3.343+
(2.017)
-6.453*
(3.423)
-0.160
(0.179)
4.660*
(2.524)
0.013***
(0.003)

0.021**
(0.007)

0.821***
(0.259)
-0.015
(0.013)
-0.026
(0.021)
-0.683**
(0.254)
-1.037***
(0.308)
0.031
(0.023)
1.333***
(0.367)
2.813***
(0.841)
-0.019**
(0.007)
-0.098*
(0.050)
-1.730**
(0.577)
0.608
(0.973)
0.072*
(0.035)
-0.289
(0.654)
0.015+
(0.010)

0.283
(0.188)
-0.014*
(0.007)
-0.024
(0.017)
0.122
(0.152)
-0.493*
(0.233)
0.026+
(0.017)
0.531*
(0.265)
2.080**
(0.906)
-0.027***
(0.007)
-0.127*
(0.067)
-1.265*
(0.599)
1.300
(1.006)
0.097*
(0.047)
-0.731
(0.698)
0.016*
(0.008)

Observations

1,551

1,551

1,551

1,199

1,199

1,199

Adjusted R 2
log likelihood
p -value of likelihood ratio test
(H 0 : Full sample model nested in alternative model with break)

0.0990
1145

0.107
1155
0.005

0.104
1153
0.036

0.151
1533

0.182
1559
0.000

0.158
1542
0.021

60

Table XII
Additional Tests of the Dilemma Hypothesis
The table reports the estimates of the parameters of the unconditional model equation (7) using short-term
interest rates (Panel A) and long-term government bond yields (Panel B) using a sample restricted to
observations post-1990 and for various country groups. The standard errors reported in parentheses are robust to
heteroskedasticity and clustered heterogeneity. ***, **, *, and + indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%,
10%, and 15% levels, respectively.
(1)
Peggers

(2)
Nonpeggers

(3)
High
financial
integration

(4)
Low
financial
integration

(5)
High
financial
integration
& peggers

(6)
(7)
High
Low
financial
financial
integration integration
&
&
nonpeggers nonpeggers

A. Short-term interest rates
Interest rate
Constant

Observations
Adjusted R2
Log likelihood

0.442***
(0.108)
-0.027***
(0.006)

0.306***
(0.050)
-0.017**
(0.006)

0.364***
(0.036)
-0.021***
(0.003)

0.111
(1.963)
-0.097
(0.245)

0.437***
(0.107)
-0.027***
(0.007)

0.323***
(0.042)
-0.015**
(0.005)

1.667
(0.943)
-0.292
(0.118)

151
0.184
127.5

199
0.108
159.7

360
0.143
301

4
-0.499
2.717

150
0.181
126.6

196
0.121
159.6

3
0.351
5.886

B. Long-term interest rates
Interest rate
Constant

Observations
Adjusted R2
Log likelihood

0.653***
(0.098)
-0.008**
(0.002)

0.511***
(0.104)
-0.011***
(0.001)

0.547***
(0.083)
-0.010***
(0.001)

0.316
(0.218)
-0.055
(0.025)

0.653***
(0.098)
-0.008**
(0.002)

0.510***
(0.105)
-0.011***
(0.001)

0.316
(0.218)
-0.055
(0.025)

67
0.650
117.3

193
0.326
253.2

257
0.393
356.3

3
0.166
8.488

67
0.650
117.3

190
0.326
248.4

3
0.166
8.488

61

Appendix A. Data definitions, coverage, and sources

This appendix outlines the data definitions, coverage, and sources. The sample includes 17
economies, namely: Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Italy,
Japan, Netherlands, Norway, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the U.K., and the U.S. The data are
sampled at the monthly frequency. The baseline estimation period is January 1885 to June 2014. We
have an unbalanced panel due to missing observations, with up to 1,554 observations per economy.
Equity prices: We take data on local equity market indices – initially gathered from national
sources – from Global Financial Data (G.F.D.). G.F.D. assembled long time series using benchmark
national indices (market capitalisation-weighted) at given points in time that are chain-linked with one
another. The resulting long time series are expressed in nominal local currency terms. They are not
systematically adjusted for dividend payments. The data are available since January 1885 for
Australia, Germany, the U.K. and the U.S.; January 1897 for Belgium; January 1898 for France;
September 1905 for Italy; January 1906 for Sweden; September 1912 for Finland; January 1914 for
Norway; July 1914 for Japan; January 1915 for Spain; January 1916 for Switzerland; January 1918
for Canada; January 1919 for the Netherlands; January 1921 for Denmark; and January 1922 for
Austria.
Risk free rate: We take the 10-year US government yield as a proxy for the risk free rate,
also from G.F.D., which is available since January 1885 (T-bill rates are not available for the preWorld War I period, in contrast). G.F.D. initially gathered these data from a range of scholarly and
official sources. 19 Yields on Treasury securities at constant, fixed maturity were constructed by the
U.S. Treasury department based on the most actively traded marketable Treasury securities. Yields on

19
G.F.D. used the 4% U.S. government bond of 1907 from January 1885 to January 1895; from February 1895 until
September 1918, the 4% U.S. government bond of 1925 (when no trades were recorded during a given month, the previous
month’s yield was used). The source for this data was William B. Dana Co., The Financial Review, New York: William B.
Dana Co. (1872-1921) which reprinted data published by The Commercial and Financial Chronicle. Beginning in 1919, the
Federal Reserve Board’s 10-15 year Treasury bond index was used and 10-year bonds were used starting in 1941. The data
dating back to 1919 were taken from the Federal Reserve, National Monetary Statistics, New York: Federal Reserve Board,
which was published in 1941, 1970 and annually since then. To obtain constant maturity yields, Treasury staff constructed a
yield curve each business day and yield values were obtained from the curve at fixed maturities.

62

these issues are based on composite quotes reported by U.S. government securities dealers to the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Dollar exchange rates: We take the exchange rate against the U.S. dollar of the currency of
the 16 economies of our sample (i.e. all economies minus the U.S.) from G.F.D. to convert local
currency returns to U.S. dollar returns. The exchange rate is defined as the number of local currency
units per U.S. dollar (i.e. an upward movement indicates a depreciation of the local currency relative
to the U.S. dollar). We adjusted the data for re-denominations. They were available since January
1885 for Austria, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Netherlands, Norway, Sweden,
Switzerland, the U.K. and the U.S; April 1901 for Australia; January 1910 for Canada; January 1914
for Spain; and January 1920 for Belgium and Finland.
Trade openness: Our measure of trade openness is defined as the sum of total exports and
imports of goods scaled by output. We took the data from Mitchell (1998a, 1998b and 1998c) for the
period 1885-1947, and from the I.M.F.’s Direction of Trade Statistics (D.O.T.S.) for the period 19482013. Missing observations were replaced with their last known values. The data were available since
1885 for Australia, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Norway, Sweden, the
U.K. and the U.S, against 1900 for the Netherlands; 1901 for Spain; and 1913 for Austria, Belgium
and Switzerland.
Regional trade openness: We split the sample into three regions, namely: Europe (Austria,
Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, and the U.K.); Northern America (the U.S., and Canada) and Asia-Pacific (Australia, and
Japan). Regional trade is defined as the sum of a country’s exports and imports of goods to the
countries in the same region, scaled by total trade.20 We took the data from Mitchell (1998a, 1998b
and 1998c) for the period 1885-1947, and from the D.O.T.S. for the period 1948-2013. Missing
observations were replaced with their last known values. 21 We obtained long time series that start in

20

Note that the U.S. is Canada’s sole regional trading partner (and vice-versa). Likewise, Australia is Japan’s sole regional
trading partner (and vice-versa).
21
Insofar as bilateral trade data were available for a subset of the 13 European countries prior to 1948, we used the share of
intra-European trade obtained from this subset as a proxy, and rebased it to the actual share of intra-European trade (i.e. the
share obtained with all 13 European countries) in 1948.

63

1885 for Australia, Austria, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, Norway,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the U.K. and the U.S; 1897 for Belgium; 1910 for Canada; and 1920 for
Finland.
Capital account openness: We use the de jure index of financial openness of Quinn and
Voth (2008) for the pre-World War II period as well as the index of Quinn and Toyoda (2008) for the
post-World War II period. This index measures the extent of restrictions to capital outflows and
inflows by residents and nonresidents in a given country. It runs from 0 (financial autarky) to 100
(complete financial openness). Annual data for all our countries were available for the period 18901931 and for the period 1950-2007. In other words, these indices leave gaps for parts of our sample.
To fill in the missing observations between 1932 and 1949, we assumed that each country index
evolved commensurately with the global index calculated by Quinn and Voth (see Quinn and Voth
(2008), Table 1, p. 536). When there were large discrepancies between our own estimates and those of
Quinn and Toyoda (2008) for 1950, however, i.e. in cases when a country’s capital account openness
had, in fact, evolved quite differently from the global average, we used linearly interpolated
observations between 1931 and 1950 instead. 22 We used 2008 observations to fill in missing values up
to 2014. This is consistent with the observation that none of the economies in our sample changed
capital account regulations in the global financial crisis, an observation supported by the data base of
Chinn and Ito (2006) which compile information reported to the I.M.F. up to 2012 and confirm that,
indeed, none of our economies took such measures. 23
Financial development: We took the ratio of equity market capitalization to output as our
metric of financial depth from Rajan and Zingales (2003) for the period 1913-1999 and from Beck,
Demirgüç-Kunt, and Levine (2010) for the period 2000-2011. 24 We obtained updates for 2012 and

22
This was the case of Finland, Japan, Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland and the U.S. for which the discrepancy
between our own estimates and those of Quinn and Toyoda (2008) for 1950 exceeded 20 percentage points.
23
This is also consistent with the observation that capital controls were introduced in recent years by emerging market
economies, but not by advanced economies (with the exception of Greece, Cyprus and Iceland, which, as readers will
remember, are not in our sample).
24
The Rajan and Zingales data were available for selected years only and were linearly interpolated to annual data. Rajan
and Zingales gathered these data from an array of sources, including the official publication of the stock exchanges; those of
the Fédération Internationale des Bourses Valeurs (FIBV); private guides to stock exchanges; estimates based on a stock
exchange handbook in 1913 (or the closest year before 1913) to identify the number of domestic companies listed, the

64

2013 observations using data from Bloomberg (for equity market capitalization) and the I.M.F.’s
World Economic Outlook database (for nominal GDP in U.S. dollars).
Oil prices: We first took data on the dollar price of an oil barrel (West Texas Intermediate),
as assembled from G.F.D. from an array of primary and secondary sources. 25 Then we calculated the
deviation (in logarithms) between oil prices and a five-year moving average to capture periods of
“high” and “low” global oil prices.
Global growth uncertainty: Natural logarithm of the cross-sectional dispersion of real GDP
growth for the 17 countries of our sample in a given year. This yields a global time series with annual
observations over 1885-2014. Real GDP growth is calculated as the sum of real GDP per capita
growth and population growth using data from Maddison (2010). Observations for 2010-2014 are
taken from the I.M.F.’s World Economic Outlook database.
High market volatility periods: Share of the 17 countries in our sample with high equity
market volatility in a given month. We estimate the conditional volatility of stock returns for each
country of our sample using GARCH(1,1) models. We normalize the conditional volatilities of each
country’s stock returns and define high market volatility periods as the proportion of the 17 countryreturns in excess of 1.65 in a given month. This yields a global time series with monthly observations
over January 1885-June 2014.
Market capitalization: Market capitalization data are typically not available for our centurylong time period. For instance, MSCI value weights extend only to the 1970s (see e.g. Brusa,
Ramodorai, and Verdelhan (2014)). To obtain rough estimates of equity market capitalization relative
to world output, we multiplied each country’s equity market capitalization-to-output ratio with its
share in world output (itself taken from Maddison (2008)). 26 We then derived each country’s equity

number of shares of each company, and the price per share; and various issues of the Bulletin of the International Institute of
Statistics.
25
Data for the period 1885-1987 are taken by G.F.D. from The Derrick's Hand-Book of Petroleum, Oil City, PA; those from
1898 to 1912 from the NBER; those from 1912 to 1941 refer to the price of an oil barrel in Oklahoma City; G.F.D. used data
collected by Platt’s for the period 1941-1968, and by the Bureau of Labour Statistics for the period 1969-1982; G.F.D. also
used the price for West Texas Intermediate Crude Oil for the period 1983-2014.
26
The Maddison data on GDP weights end in 2008. We updated them with IMF World Economic Outlook data on country
shares in world GDP at purchasing power parity exchange rates.

65

market capitalization relative to the total sample capitalization from the latter metric. 27 To replace
missing observations prior to World War I, we used the observations in 1913 for all countries, except
Finland and Spain (for which data were not available prior to 1989 and 1980, respectively). 28 We used
the observations in 2011 to replace missing observations between 2012 and 2014.
Central bank policy rates: We took data on the main central bank policy interest rate from
G.F.D., which assembled long time series using data from national sources on the main policy interest
rate used at a given point in time. 29 The data are expressed in annual percent and in local currency
terms. They were available since January 1885 for Austria, Belgium, France, Germany, Denmark,
Finland, Italy, Japan, Norway, Netherlands, Spain, Sweden and the U.K.; against June 1907 for
Switzerland; November 1914 for the U.S.; July 1920 for Australia; and March 1935 for Canada.
Domestic bond yields: We took data on government bond yields from G.F.D. We took the
10-year maturity for all countries, with the exception of Finland (5-year bond yield) and the U.K. (5year note yield) due to the absence of long term series for longer maturities. G.F.D. initially gathered
these data from national sources and assembled long time series using yields on the benchmark bonds
closest to the stated maturity, albeit not exceeding it, at given points in time. The resulting series are
expressed in annual percent and in nominal local currency terms. They were available since January
1885 for Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Netherlands,
Norway, Spain, Sweden, and the U.S.; November 1899 for Switzerland; January 1902 for the U.K.
and August 1910 for Finland.
Peggers vs. nonpeggers: dummy variable which equals zero for nonpeggers and one for
peggers. Nonpeggers are defined as countries having floating, managed floating or freely falling
27
Global GDP at market prices was not calculated prior to World War II. Existing historical series are later reconstructions.
As Schularick (2006) notes, Maddison’s estimates for real GDP in constant 1990 ‘international’, i.e. purchasing power
adjusted, dollars were ‘deflated to historical market value’ by the U.S. GDP deflator, a method which hinges on a purchasing
power parity assumption, but which also remains the best –albeit crude – available approximation. Although this method
may lead to overestimates of the GDP of developing economies, readers should note that the bias should be smaller and
similar across our sample of advanced economies.
28
Our estimates are broadly consistent with estimates obtained from other sources for the modern period. For instance, we
find that the U.S. accounts for 52% of total sample market capitalization at the end of our baseline period, against e.g. 8% for
Japan and 4% for Canada. This compares with 51%, 10% and 6%, respectively, according to the estimates of the World
Federation of Exchanges for end-2012, and with 55%, 8% and 4% according to the MSCI World index (in May 2014).
29
For instance, for the U.S. G.F.D. used the Fed’s discount rate from 1914 to 1950 (there are no data prior to 1914 insofar as
the Federal Reserve was established in December 1913 only); the Fed fund market rate from 1951 to 1979 and the Fed fund
target rate from 1980 to 2014.

66

exchange rates according to the classification of Ilzetzki, Reinhart, and Rogoff (2004). Peggers are
defined as the remaining countries, including those which were on the classical gold standard or gold
exchange standard prior to World War II according to the classification of Reinhart and Rogoff
(2011).

67

Appendix B. Supplementary Figures

austria

belgium

canada

denmark

finland

france

germany

italy

japan

netherlands

norway

spain

sweden

switzerland

-1 0 1 2
-1 0 1 2

Global beta estimates

-1 0 1 2

australia

1900

2000

1900

1950

2000

1900

1950

2000

us

-1 0 1 2

uk

1950

1900

1950

2000

1900

1950

2000

Conditional global beta
- 1.65 * (5-year rolling S.E.)

+ 1.65 * (5-year rolling S.E.)

Graphs by cty
Figure B1. Conditional global betas vs. 5-year rolling betas – 1885-2014. The figure shows the evolution between 1885 and 2014 of the conditional global beta estimates
(thick grey lines) obtained from the full model equations (1) to (3) for each country of our sample together with 90% confidence bands (light grey lines) obtained from 5-year
rolling (non-overlapping) global estimates.

68

austria

belgium

canada

denmark

finland

france

germany

italy

japan

netherlands

norway

spain

sweden

switzerland

-2 -1 0 1 2
-2 -1 0 1 2

Regional beta estimates

-2 -1 0 1 2

australia

1900

2000

1900

1950

2000

1900

1950

2000

us

-2 -1 0 1 2

uk

1950

1900

1950

2000

1900

1950

2000

Conditional regional beta
- 1.65 * (5-year rolling S.E.)

+ 1.65 * (5-year rolling S.E.)

Graphs by cty
Figure B2. Conditional regional betas vs. 5-year rolling betas – 1885-2014. The figure shows the evolution between 1885 and 2014 of the conditional regional beta
estimates (thick grey lines) obtained from the full model equations (1) to (3) for each country of our sample together with 90% confidence bands (light grey lines) obtained
from 5-year rolling (non-overlapping) regional beta estimates.

69

Panel A. Unconditional Global Betas by Country
austria
japan
denmark
spain
belgium
finland
uk
australia
norway
us
switzerland
italy
sweden
france
netherlands
germany
canada
0

.2

.4

.6

.8

Panel B. Unconditional Regional Betas by Country
australia
japan
uk
canada
austria
switzerland
sweden
netherlands
denmark
finland
spain
norway
belgium
france
italy
us
germany
0

.2

.4

.6

Figure B3. Unconditional betas – 1885-2014. The figure shows the full sample country-by-country estimates
of the β0glo and β0reg parameters obtained from the model equation (6)

70

Appendix C. Supplementary Table
Table C1
Constant-Beta Model Estimates with GDP-Weighted Factors
The table reports the estimates of the following model:

Ri ,t = α i + lt + β 0glo Ft glo ,\ i + β 0reg Ft reg ,\ i + e i ,t
in which both the global factor and the regional factor are GDP-weighted (rather than value-weighted as in the
estimates of Table V). Estimates obtained by OLS are reported in columns 1 to 3; estimates obtained by
excluding outliers from the sample (i.e. returns larger than 30% within a month in absolute value) are reported
in column 4; estimates obtained with a random effects estimator are reported in column 5. The estimates of
columns 2 to 5 control for country fixed (or random) effects. The estimates of columns 3 to 5 control for year
effects. The ρ-statistic in column (5) is the percent contribution to the total variance of the panel-level variance
component. The standard errors reported in parentheses are robust to heteroskedasticity and to clustered
heterogeneity. ***, **, *, and + indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, 10%, and 15% levels,
respectively.

(1)
OLS

(2)
OLS

(3)
OLS

(4)
Outliers

(5)
Random
effects

0.697***
(0.032)
0.262***
(0.076)
0.019
(0.034)

0.698***
(0.032)
0.262***
(0.076)
-0.007
(0.017)

0.664***
(0.032)
0.249***
(0.076)
0.331**
(0.143)

0.655***
(0.030)
0.253***
(0.073)
-0.375***
(0.068)

0.664***
(0.032)
0.249***
(0.076)
0.402+
(0.269)

Country fixed effects
Year effects
Observations

NO
NO
20,800

YES
NO
20,800

YES
YES
20,800

YES
YES
20,719

YES
YES
20,800

R2
# panel units
ρ

0.196

0.196

0.205

0.281

0.205
17
0

Global factor
Regional factor
Constant

71

Table C2
Testing for a Reversal in Global Financial Market Integration since the Great Recession Robustness
The table reports in Panel A the estimates of the following model:
(6)

glo ,\ i
reg ,\ i
+ (β reg
+ e i ,t
Ri ,t = α i + lt + (β glo
j ' D j ) Ft
j ' D j ) Ft

where j =1, 2, 3; D1 denotes a dummy variable equal to one between 1990 and 2006 and zero otherwise; D2 a
dummy variable equal to one between 2007 and 2009 and zero otherwise; and D3 a dummy variable equal to one
between 2010 and 2014 and zero otherwise. The estimates, obtained by OLS, control for country fixed effects
and for year effects. The standard errors reported in parentheses are robust to heteroskedasticity and clustered
heterogeneity. ***, **, *, and + indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, 10%, 15% levels, respectively. In
addition, Panel B reports the p-value of Wald restriction tests on the estimated coefficients of the betas
interacted with D1, D2 and D3.

Panel A.
Full sample estimates (1885-2014)
Global factor × D 1
0.860***
(0.049)
Global factor × D 2
1.115***
(0.052)
Global factor × D 3
1.076***
(0.083)
Regional factor × D 1
0.558***
(0.146)
Regional factor × D 2
0.352**
(0.151)
Regional factor × D 3
0.588***
(0.182)
Constant
0.155
(0.119)

Year effects
Country fixed effects
Observations

YES
YES
20,800

R2

0.161

Panel B.
p-value of Wald test H0

β 1glo = β 2glo :

0.003

β 1glo = β 3glo :

0.039

glo

0.492

glo

> β2 :

0.001

β 1glo > β 3glo :

0.020

glo

β2

glo

β1

= β3 :

glo

0.754

glo

< β2 :

0.999

β 1glo < β 3glo :

0.980

glo

β2

glo

β1

glo

> β3 :

glo

< β3 :

0.246

β 1reg = β 2reg :

0.102

β 1reg = β 3reg :

0.781

β 2reg = β 3reg :

0.091

β2

reg

0.949

reg

> β3 :

0.390

β 2reg > β 3reg :

0.045

reg

β1

reg

β1

reg

> β2 :

reg

0.051

reg

< β3 :

0.610

β 2reg < β 3reg :

0.955

β1

reg

β1

< β2 :

72

