NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INFLATION: THEORY AND EVIDENCE

Bennett 1. McCallum

Working Paper No. 2312

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 1987

This paper has been prepared for the North-Holland Handbook of Monetary Economics,
edited by Benjamin M. Friedman and Frank Hahn. The author is indebted to W.A.
Brock, Zvi Eckstein, Stanley Fischer, Benjamin Friedman, Douglas Gale, Marvin
Goodfriend, David Laidler, Ching—Sheng Mao, Alvin Marty, and Don Patinkin for
helpful comments and to the National Science Foundation for financial support
(SES 84-08691). The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. Any opinions expressed are those
of the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2312

July 1987

Inflation: Theory and Evidence

ABSTRACT

This survey attempts to cover an extremely broad topic by organizing
around three sets of issues:
ongoing (steady state) inflation; cyclical
interaction of inflation with real variables; and positive analysis of
monetary policy behavior.
With regard to ongoing inflation, the paper
demonstrates that the principal conclusions of theoretical analysis are not
highly sensitive to details of model specification, provided that the latter
posits rational agents free of money illusion.
Whether one assumes
finite—lived or infinite—lived agents, such models suggest that steady—state
inflation rates will conform fairly closely to money stock growth rates, that
superneutrality is not strictly implied but departures should be minor, and
that socially optimal inflation rates correspond to the Chicago Rule. The
first two of these conclusions are consistent with available evidence. With
regard to the cyclical Interaction of inflation with aggregate output and
employment, there is much less professional agreement:
four classes of

aggregate—supply (or Phillips curve) theories are currently in use by
researchers and at least two have been able thus far to withstand attempts at
refutation. With regard to policy, a leading question is why the authorities

have behaved, over the postwar era, in a manner that has resulted in a
many—fold increase in the price level in most industrialized nations. A full

answer will require a better theory of the political process than is now
available, but an important insight regarding inflationary bias is suggested

by models that focus on the effects of "discretionary" period—by—period
decision making by a monetary authority that seeks to avoid unemployment as
well as inflation.

Bennett T. McCallum
GSIA
Carnegie—Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
(412) 268—2347

1. Introduction

Inflation is a topic that is so broad as to be almost co-extensive with
monetary economics.

Consequently, there are many ways in which the

present chapter overlaps with others in this Handbook. In particular, various

topics that are considered in detail in other chapters are treated more
briefly here.' It needs to be emphasized, accordingly, that the main purpose

of the present discussion is riot to attempt authoritative treatments of those
specialized topics, but instead to provide a moderately general overview of

the subject of inflation.

To a significant extent, the aim is offer a

framework for coherent thought on that subject, both in terms of relevant
theory and evidence regarding competing hypotheses.

During the dozen years that have passed since the preparation 'of the

ambitious survey article by Laidler and Parkin (1975), the nature of
research in monetary economics has changed considerably. Rational
expectations has become the mainstream hypothesis concerning expectat lanai

behavior, the "Ricardian equivalence theorem" has become a familiar notion

in policy discussions, issues involving overlapping-generations models and
cash-in-advance constraints have become common fare, "bubble' and "sunspot"

phenomena have been extensively investigated, and problems associated with

dynamic inconsistency of policy have been pondered. It is natural, then, that

the outline of a survey today would be different from that of the Laidler-

Parkin contribution, just as its outline differed from those of earlier
surveys (e.g., Bronfenbrenner and Holtzrnan (1963) and Johnson (1963).)

Nevertheless, one of the Laidler-Parkin organizational principles
remains extremely useful.

That principle is provided by the distinction

1

between steady ongoing inflation, which will be anticipated by rational
agents, and irregular cyclical outbursts of above- or below-normal inflation

rates, which are likely to be unanticipated. While this distinction may be
somewhat unclear in practice, it is an essential one in terms of theoretical
analysis since the effects of anticipated and surprise inflation may be very

different. Certain effects of the former, moreover, may be quantitatively

important only if maintained over a lông span of time. Accordingly, our
discussion will make significant use of this distinction, with Sections 2 and

3 concerned with ongoing inflation and Section 4 pertaining to cyclical
aspects of price level changes.
Of the various new directions in monetary economics alluded to above,

there are two that are evidently of fundamental importance. The first of
these is the increased tendency of theoretical researchers to conduct their
analyses in general equilibrium models in which private agents are depicted

as solving dynamic optimization problems. The second is the increased
interest in understanding why macroeconomic policy makers--the monetary

and fiscal authorities--behave as they do. The first of these two tendencies

is clearly reflected in the present survey, with all of the analysis of
Sections 2 and 3 being of a general equilibrium type. The second is also
reflected to a substantial extent, though explicit recognition appears only
toward the end of the paper. There, in Section 5, we consider a line of
analysis that is designed to explain the fact that inflation rates in industrial

nations have been, over the past 40 years, positive to an overwhelming
extent.

There is one contentious issue that it will be useful to address at the

2

outset, before beginning the main analytical discussion. That issue is the
extent to which validity should be assigned to Milton Friedman's famous
dictum that "Inflation is always and everywhere a monetary phenomenon'

(1963, p. 17). That particular statement has been strongly disputed by
leading economists, including one of the editors of this volume (Hahn, 1983).

I would suggest, nevertheless, that there is in fact little professional
disagreement with Friedman's position, when the latter is properly
interpreted. In that regard it is essential to keep in mind that in the essay
in question Friedman states that "inflation" will be taken to mean "a steady

and sustained rise in prices" (1963, p. 1). Thus his proposition does not
constitute a denial of the fact that a shock which reduces an economy's

productive capacity--a drought, a capital-destroying earthquake, or an
increase in the real price that must be paid for imported goods--will in the

absence of any monetary response lead to an increase in the general price
level.

2

Nor does the Friedman position imply that an economy's ongoing

inflation rate is determined solely by the rate of monetary growth; certainly

the normal rate of output growth (Friedman, 1963, p. 23) and the pace of
technical change in the payments industry are relevant.

3

But neither of

those factors can plausibly contribute more than a few percentage points per

year, and their contributions tend to work in opposite directions. Thus their

net effect can account for only (say) 0-2 percentage points per year on a

sustained basis, a magnitude that is small in comparison to the
contribution, during substantial inflations, of money growth.

4

With respect to fiscal policy, matters cannot be summarized quite so

briefly. But unless tax and spending patterns are such as to generate an

3

unsustainable path--a possibility that will be described below in Section
2.3--different fiscal rules will imply different ongoing inflation rates (as

distinct from price levels) only if they result in different money stock
growth rates. Basically, Friedman's dictum relies only on the presumption
that money demand behavior is reasonably stable in real terms and that the
volume of real transactions does not respond on a sustained basis to changes
-

in the rate of money creation.
The

one notable way in which substantial long-lasting inflation could in

principle result without excessive money growth is via the route of
speculative "bubble" effects on the general price level. It is not clear that
many economists actually believe in the empirical relevance of this type of

phenomenon, but there has been considerable interest in It as a matter of
theory. The idea will, accordingly, be briefly considered (in Section 3.2).
Another topic that can usefully be mentioned here is that of money stock

exogeneity. In this regard, the emphasis given by Friedman and Schwartz

(1963) to various historical episodes involving autonomous shifts in
monetary policy has led some critics to conclude that Friedman and other

"monetarist" economists hold the view that monetary policy actions are
exogenous. But while it is understandable how such a conclusion could be

drawn, the conclusion is nevertheless seriously mistaken. For monetary
policy actions to be exogenous, they would have to be entirely unresponsive to

Whether there is any
current and past macroeconomic conditions.
researcher who holds such a belief is doubtful, and certainly monetarist
economists do not. Friedman (1960) and Bruriner and Meltzer (1983) may

believe that money stock exogeneity would be desirable, but--as their

4

writings abundantly demonstrate--they do not believe that such
unresponsiveness has in fact prevailed.

A limitation of the discussion in this chapter is that it pertains to. a
closed economy. From a practical point of view that limitation is serious,
as policy toward inflation in actual economies is significantly intertwined
with terms-of-trade and exchange-rate considerations. But space constraints

dictate the elimination of many relevant topics, and it is at least possible
that theoretical clarity on essentials is actually enhanced by the absence of
S

open-economy complications.

Organizationally, the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 begins with
the development of a simplified but dynamic general equilibrium framework

for the analysis of steady-state inflation. Some welfare considerations are
included.

Next, Section 3 discusses an alternative framework, the

possibility of price level bubbles, and some relevant empirical evidence. In

Section 4 attention is then shifted to the case of cyclical fluctuations, the
main emphasis being given to alternative theories of the link between real
and nominal variables--i.e., to Phillips-curve relationships. Again' empirical
evidence is briefly reviewed. Section 5 is, as mentioned above, concerned

with analysis of policy behavior arid, in particular, the explanation of a
possible inflationary bias in the policy process. Finally, a few concluding
comments are provided in Section 6.

5

2. Basic Analysis of Ongoing Inflation

This section is devoted to a preliminary analysis of an economy with
steady. ongoing inflation. But even though the analysis is concerned with

alternative steady states, it begins with the specification of a general
equilibrium model in which agents are depicted as solving dynamic
optimization problems. Steady-state equilibria then emerge as special cases
of more general dynamic equilibria. This procedure lessens the -danger that
agents' optimization problems are posed in a restrictive manner.

Two major simplifying devices will, on the other hand, be employed.

First, all agents will be treated as alike in teçms of preferences

and

production capabilities. Distributional matters are therefore neglected.
Second, the model will be non-stochastic. Thus the effects of uncertainty on

agents' choices and utility levels are also neglected. The presumption is
that these two omissions--which permit substantial simplification of the

analysis--will not seriously affect the principal conclusions concerning
steady states. Some consideration of the effects of uncertainty will be
provided in Subsection 2.5.

2. 1 The Sidrauski Models

The framework to be utilized is a discrete-time, perfect-foresight version

of the well-known model of Sidrauski (1967), modified in ways to be
described as we proceed. To avoid inessential clutter, we shall utilize a
version with no depreciation or population growth. Thus we consider an
economy composed of a large number of similar households, each of which
seeks at time t to maximize

(2.1) u(c,mt) +

u(c÷i,m÷j)

+

2 u(c+2,mt+2) +
6

Here c is consumption in period t while rn = Mt/Pt, with Mt denoting the
household's nominal money stock at the start of t and
the money price of
the consumption good. The discount factor equals I / C I +p), where p is a

positive time-preference parameter. Each household has access to a
production function that is homogeneous of degree one in its two inputs,

capital and labor.

In the first version. of the model labor is supplied

inelastically, however, so the production function can be written as

(2.2) Yt = f(kt),
where

is output and kt is capital held at the start of t. The function f is

taken to be well-behaved (Sidrauski, 1967, p.535 ), so a unique positive
value for k÷i will be chosen in each period. Capital is output that is not

consumed, so its price is the same as that of the consumption good. The

real rate of return on capital held from t to t+l is the marginal product
f'tk
't+I
An issue that arises immediately concerns the reason for the inclusion of

as an argument of the function u. The basic idea, described by many
writers, is that holdings of the medium of exchange facilitate an agents'
transactions. One way of expressing that idea Is to assume that households

derive utility only from consumption and leisure but the acquisition of
6

consumption

goods requires "shopping which reduces the time available for

leisure or employment. In a monetary economy, however, the amount of
shopping time required for a given amount of consumption depends negatively

(up to some satiation level) upon the quantity of real money balances held by

the household. If the shopping time is functionally related to c and
substitution into the basic utility function yields art indirect utility function
7

This formalization does not justify every detail of

in which mt appears.

Sidrauski's specification (2.1) as it brings in labor time as another
argument and leads to somewhat different presumptions regarding the
derivatives of u.

8

But it provides support for the general approach. For

expositional reasons, our strategy will be to continue for the moment with
Sidrauski's specification (2.1), in which u is assumed to be well-behaved,
but to make modifications in what follows.

Regarding interactions with the government, it- is assumed that in t each

household receives transfers (net of taxes) in the real amount v. These are

lump-sum in nature, i.e., the magnitude is regarded by each household as

independent of its own assets and actions. A typical household's budget
constraint for period t can then be written as

(2.3) f(k) + v = c + kt+j - kt + (l+Trt) m+i (Pj-P)/P is the inflation rate between t and t+1. At time t,
the household maximizes (2.1) subject to a sequence of constraints like
where

9

(2.3), one for each period. Under the assumption that u and £ are both well-

behaved, the first-order Euler conditions for the maximum problem can be

written as equalities holding for each period. In the perfect-foresight case,
these conditions become

(2.4) uj(c,m) -

=0

=

(2.5) u2(c+i,m+l) - X(l+7r) +
(2.6)

0

+ ÷i [f'(k÷1) + 1] = 0.

In addition, there are two transversality conditions:

t-

(2.7) urn m+j

X(l+7r)

0

8

10

(2.8) urn kt÷l
t—

= 0.

the setting that has been specified, conditions (2.3)-(2.6) are necessary
11
for a maximum while (2.3)-(2.8) are jointly sufficient. Thus if (2.7) and
In

(2.8) are satisfied, the household's choices of c,

m+j, k+j, and

will be

described (for given initial assets and paths of v and 7rt) by the difference
equations (2.3)-(2.6).

To complete the model we turn to the government.

Abstracting

temporarily from the possibility of borrowing, we write the government's
budget constraint--in per-household terms--as follows:

Mt+I Mt =

(g+v)

Here

is real government p.irchases of output during t. Dividing by'P and
using the definitions of ir and m,, this constraint can be expressed in real

terms as
(2.9)

(I+7rt) m÷i - m =

+

v.

It will be noted that together the government and household budget
constraints (2.9) and (2.3) imply the following overall resource constraint
(or national income identity):

(2.10) f(k) = c + k+j - kt +
Because of this dependence, only two of these three constraints will be
needed in the description of any equilibrium.

Consider now a situation in which time paths for Mt and

the government.

'

are chosen by

Conditional upon those policy cnoices, competitive

equilibrium paths for c, k÷j, mt,
9

and

v are determined by

equations (2.3)-(2.6) and (2.9), plus the definitional identities

(2.11) rntMt/Pt

(2.12) t =
2.2 Steady-State Analysis

Using the foregoing model, we now consider properties of steady states,

i.e., dynamic equilibria in which every variable grows at some constant
rate. Under present assumptions, with no technical progress or population

growth, this condition requires that

k,

v, ' c, and m must be

constant over time, i.e., have growth rates of zero. To derive that
implication, note that constant growth requires the ratio X+j/Xt to be

constant, and that (by virtue of (2.6)) implies zero growth for kt. Equation
(2. 10) then implies that c +

must be constant, which can only be the case

if both of those variables are constant.

Condition (2.4) then implies zero

growth for m, while (2.9) does the same for v.

Given that these six variables must be constant over time, it is then

possible to eliminate ' Mt, and
(2.13)

u2(c,rn)

=

u1(c,rn)

and express the system as follQws:

[i+7r-}

1 = S[flk) + 1]
rm = g + v

Here the first expression comes from (2.4) and (2.5); the second from
(2.6);

the third from (2.3)

and (2.9); and the fourth from (2.9). With g and

15

w given by policy, these four relations determine the steady-state values of
c,k,rn, and v.

10

The implication that mt is constant in a steady state means, of course,
that the inflation rate will equal the (per-capita) money growth rate (denoted

p). That equality would not be implied, however, if there were technical
change that progressively shifted the production function or the shoppingtime function. If, for example, (2.2) were replaced with

(2.2) ' = (1+a)t f(k)

a> 0

k, and c would be required to grow at some positive rate. The
same would be true for m, moreover, implying that inflation would be
smaller than money growth. The difference between r and p would,
then

nevertheless, be fixed by technological considerations that are independent of

p itself.

Of more interest, in the present context, is the question regarding
'superneutrality": are the steady-state values of c, k, and y independent of r

(and p)7 But in the present model it is a simple matter to determine by

inspection of equations (2.13) that the answer is yes'. Specifically, the
value of k is determined by the second of equations (2.13) alone. Then with

g given by policy, the third equation determines c. Thus we see that k, c,

and y =

f(k)

can be solved for without reference to the value of r.

Alternative settings for the latter will have no effect on steady-state values
of the main real variables.

Of course there is one real variable that is affected by ir, namely rn.
Since u1 > 0, different settings for

will, via the first of equations (2. 13),

require different levels of real money holdings.

Indeed, the comparative

steady-state derivative dm/dw is equal to uj(u22-u12u2/u1)/ so with u22u12u2/u1

<0

16

real balances will be smaller the higher is the rate of
11

inflation (i.e., the cost of holding money). A terrninological question that.

arises is whether this non-invariance of m to the inflation rate means that
the Sidrauski model does not have the property of superneutrality. In my
opinion, that interpretation of the term would render it almost useless, since

the set of interesting monetary models in which m is invariant to r is
probably empty. Thus the reasonable defining characteristic of
17
is
the
invariance
across steady states of all real variables
superneutrality
excepting real money balances. This definition agçees with that of Patinkin
(1987).

But while superneutrality thus defined is a property of the Sidrauski

model as originally formulated, it does not survive even modest
modifications. To demonstrate the non-robustnes of the property, 'let us
now drop the assumption--unreasonable in any event--that labor is supplied
inelastically. Then the model's utility and production functions become
(2. 1 )

u(ct,mt,nt)

+ u(ct÷i ,m+j ,n+ +

and

(2.3) y = f(n,kt)
where n is the quantity of labor expended in production by a typical
household during period t. It is of course assumed that u3 < 0 with
< 0, that f2 > 0 with f22 < 0, and that the functions continue to yield
interior solutions.

In the presence of these modifications, the following

equation must be appended to the Euler equations (2.3)-(2.6) above:

(2.i4)

u3(ct,m,nt) +

£iit'kt)

= 0.

Reinterpretation of expressions involving u and f is also required, of course.

12

The resulting steady-state conditions that determine c,k,m,v, and n then
become:

(2.15)

u2(c,m,n) = u1(c,m,n)
u3(c,rn,n)

I =

[1+ir-&]

-uj(c,rn,n) f1(n,k)

[f2(n,k) +

1]

f(n,k)=c+g
irm g +

V.

The crucial difference is that the third of these relations no longer involves
only

one variable. Thus it alone

subset

cannot determine k.

Indeed, there is no

of equations (2.15) that can be solved for real variables without the

involvement of r. Thus with this simple and appropriate modification, the
Sidrauski model does not possess super-neutrality--a point expressed learly
byBrock (1974).

Nevertheless, it warrants mention that if the ratio u3(c,m,n)/u1(c,m,n)
does not depend on m, then a subsystem of (2.15) can be solved
c

for k, n, and

without involving m or ir. Super-neutrality will then prevail in this special

case. Such a condition will obtain, moreover, if the function u(c,m,n) is of

the Cobb-Douglas form in terms of c, m, and 1-n. As such a form seems
often to provide a good approximation to the data, it is perhaps reasonable

to conclude that the modified Sidrauski model does not imply strict
superneutrality, but does suggest that departures from superneutrality may
be quantitatively unimportant.

2.3 Extensions

At this point, it will be useful to add to the model a third asset. One
obvious possibility would be private bonds, but with households all alike the
13

18

It is more
equilibrium quantity held by each would have to be zero.
This inclusion,
interesting, therefore, to include government bonds.
furthermore, has the benefit of modifying the government's budget constraint

in a way that permits a clearer distinction to be drawn between monetary
and fiscal policy actions.
To extend the model to include government bonds, let us specify that there

are one-period securities that are sold in t at a money price of

and

redeemed in t+1 for one unit of money. Their nominal rate of return is then

Rt =

and

their real rate r is defined by l+r = (1+Rt)/(1+7rt).

The number of such bonds purchased in t by a typical household is B+j. If
we define bt = Bt/Pt,t household budget constraint for t then becomes
(2.16)

f(k) + v = c + kt+l kt + (i+)m+j - m

+ (l+rt) b÷j - b
instead of (2.3). This change has no effect on the Euler conditions (2.4)(2.6) but adds to that set the following:
(2.17)

t(1+rt)1 +

= 0.

The latter condition is written as an equality to reflect an implicit
assumption that households can choose positive or negative values for B--

i.e., can lend to or borrow from the government.

In addition, the

household's problem now features a new transversality condition, which is
(2.18)

lim b+j

Xt(1+rtY1 = 0.

This has the effect of placing limits on the household's willingness to
accumulate bonds.

14

With the inclusion of government bonds, the government's budget
constraint becomes

m+i -

(2.19)

+ (1+rtY1

b+j - b =

+ Vt,

while this condition and (2.16) imply (2.10) just as (2.3) and (2.9) did
before. With the additional asset recognized, government policy can specify
time paths for three of the four variables Mt, g v, and Bt, with the fourth
determined by (2.19).

Within this extended model, let us now consider a competitive
equilibrium under the assumption that the government is specifying time

paths for Mt,

and

v.

Then, provided that the three transversality

conditions are satisfied, equations (2.4), (2.5), (2.6), (2.11), (2.12),
(2.16), (2.17), and (2.19) determine time paths for c, kt,
rt, and bt. A compressed steady-state version of the system, analogous to
(2.13), can moreover be written as
(2.20)

u2(c,m) = u1(c,m) [1+ir-]

r = f(k)
f(k) = c+g
rrn - br/(1+r) = g+v.

These five equations determine steady-state values of c,m,k,r, and b.

A striking property of the system just summarized is that the values of
variables other than b are unaffected by the government's choice of v. That
can be shown by noting that the first four of equations (2.20) can be solved

for c,k,r, and m (given the policy-set values of g and Tr). Any change in v

15

then merely implies a change in b as dictated by the fifth equation, the
is invariant to v,
government budget restraint. Even the time path for
since the path of M is exogenous and m is determined in the previouslydiscussed block.

This result--the invariance of other variables to bond-financed changes in
tax receipts--is typically referred to as the "Ricardian Equivalence Theorem"

since the offsetting nature of taxes and bonds was clearly recognized, as a

matter of theory, by Rlcardo (1817 ). Today's considerable interest in
models with this Ricardian property stems primarily from the work of
Barro (1974) (1984).

21

That the Ricardian equivalence result does not hold when tax/transfer

magnitudes are geared to income or factor payments may be shown as
follows. Suppose that vt is replaced in the household and government's
budget constraints by r f(kt), with r being a tax rate on production. Then

the first-order condition (2.6) will have (i-r) multiplying f'(kt+j) so the
second and third of equations (2.20) will have (1-r) f(k) instead of f(k).
Thus the values of c,k,m, and r determined by the first four of equations

(2.20) will depend on the value of r. But that value will be linked to the

value of b by the fifth of equations (2.20), so changes in b will lead to
responses in c,k,m, and/or r.

Now consider again the case with lump-sum tax/transfer magnitudes.
Since different paths of v and b imply different values for the government's

budget position yet have no effect on other variables, the question arises

whether it is possible to have an equilibrium with a permanent positive
budget deficit. There is no problem if the deficit is financed by issuing

16

money, but imagine an attempt to keep Mt constant and finance a positive

deficit by the continuing sale of bonds.

In this case, as it happens, the

answer depends on the definition of "deficit" that is used. If the deficit is
defined exclusive of interest payments, i.e., as the right-hand side of (2.19),

then a positive value for

+

v

and a constant Mt together imply that

must grow at a rate equal to the steady-state interest rate, which leads to
the violation of the transversality condition (2.18). That fact is hot itself
conclusive, as transversality conditions are not in all cases necessary for
22

optimality,

but it can be shown that in the case at hand the irplied path for

b is inconsistent with individual optimality (McCallum 1984a, p. 130). If,
on the other hand, the 'deficit" is defined more conventionally as inclusive of
interest payments, as in

-- v + btRtj/(1+Rtj),
then it is possible to have an equilibrium path with d > 0 in which all
(2.21)

dt =

variables except v and bt are constant. In this case bt grows according to

b÷j = b

+ d(1+r) so its growth is more than overcome by the geometric

shrinkage of ,&,

leading

to the satisfaction of (2.18). Thus it is possible

to have a zero-inflation equilibrium with d > 0 and an ever-growing stock of

debt. But with dt and

constant, (2.19) shows that taxes

will also be

ever-growing. Indeed, the result at hand, taken from McCallurn (1 984a),
does not violate the condition that the budget must be balanced in presentvalue terms when revenue from money creation is regarded as a tax.

Each of the results in this subsection remains valid, it should be added, if

the model is generalized to permit (1) depreciation, (ii) population growth
within each household, and (iii) variable labor supply as in (2. 1') and (2.3').

17

2.4 Welfare
We now wish to consider effects of alternative steady inflation rates on
the utility of a typical household. To keep the results from being excessively

special, let us use the version of the model that treats labor supply as a
variable--i.e., the non-superneutrality version with utility and production

functions (2.i) and (2.3). In this case, the steady-state values of c,k,m,n,
and v are given (for policy-set values of g and 7r) by equations (2.1 5).

To evaluate the desirability of these equilibrium values, we now consider

the "social planning" problem of choosing at t
1, say, time paths of
variables needed to maximize (2.1 ) subject only to the economy's overall
resource constraints. In per-household terms, these constraints are
(2.22)

for t =

t,kt) = c + kt+j - kt +
1,2

The first-order conditions for this problem are (2.22) and

those that follow, where

0 is the Lagrangian multiplier associated with

(2.22):
=0

(2.23)

ui(c,mt,nt) -

(2.24)

u2(c,m,nt) = 0

(2.25)

u3(c,mt,nt) + P fi(nt,kt)

= 0

(2.26) -p + t+l[f2(nt÷l,kt+l) + 11
(2.27)

0 with

0

= 0.

0 by (2.23), that = 0--i.e., that

Now the last of these implies, since

government purchases of output must be zero. But this result obtains only
because our setup has assigned no useful role to government purchases--by

18

assumption these do not constitute capital or provide srvices valued by
households. Consequently, since these assumptions are dubious at best, the
=

0

condition should not be taken literally as a conclusion regarding
= 0 in what Follows only to assist in the

optimal Fiscal policy. We set

investigation of the optimal inflation issue.

Proceeding then with g

0, the steady-state version of the optimality
-

conditions becomes
(2.28)

u2(c,rn,n) = 0
u3(c,m,n) + u1(c,m,n) f1(n,k) = 0

1 = [f2(n,k) +

1]
-

{f(n,k) = c
These

determine optimal values of n,k,c, and m for g = 0 and the policy-set

value of ir. The question is, are these values the same as those provided by
the competitive equilibrium? Inspection of (2.15) indicates readily that the

answer will be "yes' if and only if the right-hand side of the first of
equations (2.15) equals zero, thereby satisfying the First of equations
(2.28). And since u1 is strictly positive, this equality will obtain only if
1 + r - ,S = 1. Thus social optimality requires an inflation rate of r =
Interpretation of the latter is straightforward.

In view of the steady-

state condition 1 = {f2+iJ, the requisite inflation rate is given by
=

+ 1 /P) - 1

(2.29)

=

_______

(1

+f2)1 -

1,

or

=

1

+ f2, or

-f2(n,k)

Pt+1

But this is, of course, immediately recognizable as the famous "Chicago
19

Rule" developed most notably by Friedman (1969): deflate at a rate equal to
1

the

real rate of interest.

23

The logic of this requirement is simply that it is

inefficient not to satiate agents with something--in this case, real money
balances--that is socially costless to produce yet provides valuable services.

One matter that has received inadequate attention to this point is the
behavior of the marginal-yield function u2(c,rn,n). In particular, satiation

with real money balances requires that u2 =

0

for some •adeqtiately large

value for m. The shopping-time parable of footnote 7 clearly supports the
existence of such a value: it is possible to hold more money than would be
useful in a period under any circumstances. It is. unclear, however, whether
it is better to think of u2 as becoming negative or as remaining equal to zero

for m in excess of the satiation level.

The optimality result that we have obtained relies, it should be said, on

the assumption that transfers (taxes) are administered in a lump-sum
fashion. If instead government revenues--it is certainly appropriate to
presume that some will be needed to finance positive government spending--

are raised by income or factor-payment taxes, conditions (2.15) would be
altered and would fail to match conditions (2.28) even with r = - 1. It
has been argued by Phelps (1973) that in this type of situation, the optimal

rate of inflation would be determined by the condition that all utilized
revenue sources have the same marginal deadweight loss per unit of
revenue. But this argument does not establish that a positive inflation rate
would be optimal. First, it has been shown by Marty (1976) and Barro and

Fischer (1976) that for the inflation tax this marginal "collection cost" is

where is the elasticity of money demand with respect to the

20

24

A value of -0.25 for. " would then imply a marginal
collection cost of 33%, which seems quite high. From this type of
interest rate.

consideration, Barro and Fischer (1976, p. i46) conclude that "while the
Phelps proposition that inflationary finance should be chosen as part of the
optimal public finance package is incontestable in principle, it may be that,

quantitatively, this argument would not lead to the choice of very much
monetary expansion (and would likely lead to a negative rate of inflation)

25

Recently, a more definite and striking result has been developed.
Specifically, Kimbrough (1986) has argued that with money helping to

facilitate transactions, the inflation tax is analogous to a tax on an
intermediate good and therefore does not belong in an optimal tax package.

Assuming that money's transaction effects appear as described ab'ove in
footnote 7, Kimborough shows this to be the case in a setting in which there
is a consumption tax and a fixed capital stock.

26

A similar result was

previously obtained by Lucas and Stokey (1983) using a variant of the cashin-advance constraint. The Kimbrough and Lucas-Stokey arguments serve to

restore the optimality of the Chicago Rule under the assumption that
government revenue must be raised without lump-sum taxation.

The foregoing discussion has been concerned only with the "shoe-leather"

cost of inflation, the failure to satiate agents with a service-yielding asset
that is costless to produce. As many writers have emphasized, this cost is

quite small in magnitude for inflation rates of (say) 20% per annum or
below. Since rates well below that figure seem to give rise to considerable
distress in actual economies, an important question is "why?" This topic has

been extensively examined by Fischer in a series of papers that are

21

summarized in Fischer (1984). Further summarization of the points is
difficult, but in general the significant non-shoe-leather costs identified by
Fischer are either due to the non-adaptation of institutional features designed
for a noninflationary world (e.g., non-indexation of government debt and tax

schedules) or to relative price variability that is not actually associated with
inflation in any tight logical way. Thus anyone who believes that "inflation is

associated with the decline of public morality, the rise and fall of nations,
and more weighty matters than money triangles, and the efficiency of the
price system" (Fischer, i984, pp. 45-6) will be somewhat disappointed by
the outcome of Fischer's review. But, as he says, "with no long-run tradeoff
between inflation and unemployment, there is nothing to be said for moderate

rates of inflation except that they are costly to reduce" (1984, p. 46).
Furthermore, the non-adaptations mentioned above may be of great practical

importance. If, for example, the non-indexation of tax schedules is taken as
given, then the cost of inflation might be regarded as including the resource

misallocation--possibly quite substantial--induced by the interaction of
inflation and inflation-sensitive taxes.
2.5 Stochastic Shocks

One significant limitation of the analysis of the previous four subsections

is its neglect of uncertainty. It is my impression that propositions of the
comparative steady-state type, with which this section is concerned, are not
very sensitive to the presence or absence of uncertainty. A bit of interesting

theoretical evidence relating to one of the topics--i.e., superneutrality--has

recently been provided by Danthine, Donaldson, and Smith (1986). These

authors investigate the effects of stochastic shocks to the production
22

function in a model otherwise similar to that of subsection 2.1 above.
They find that the existence of this type of technological uncertainty leads to

the negation of the strict superneutrality result implied by equations (2.13)
above.

27

The magnitude of this effect is, however, tiny.

For a

IrepresentativeH set of parameter values, stochastic simulations indicate
that the mean value of the steady-state distribution of the capital stock

changes only from 0.18485 to 0.18629 when the money growth rate is
changed

from zero to 500% per period.

28
-

A consideration of the robustness of Ricardian equivalence results to the

recognition of uncertainty has been undertaken by -Chan (1983). His basic

result is that debt-tax equivalence continues to hold in the presence of
uncertainty if each household's share of an uncertain future tax buden is
fixed and if there exist private securities that can be combined to act as a
perfect substitute for the government's bonds. In cases in which these
conditions do not obtain, a bond-financed tax change will typically have some

effect on current aggregate demand, but the direction of the effect is--as

conjectured by Barro (1974, p. 11 15)--dependent upon the precise
specification of the utility function and other aspects of the environment.
Mention should also be made of the theoretical approach suggested by
Blanchard (1985), which involves agents with uncertain lifetimes. If these

agents do not have bequest motives, then some departure from Ricardian
properties is implied.

In addition, it would be of considerable interest to know whether the
'tChicago Rule" for optimal inflation would remain valid--as a prescription

for the average inflation rate--in the presence of stochastic shocks to the

23

system.

Intuition suggests that the situation would be similar to that

pertaining to superneutrality, i.e., that the conclusions based on
deterministic models would be approximately valid. In terms of formal
analysis, I have not found investigations in terms of the Sidrauski model
itself but Lucas and Stokey (1983) have considered the matter using a model

of the cash-in-advance type. Since they specify that the cash-in-advance
constraint pertains to only a subset of the consumption goods--frmally, to
one of the model's two composite goods--with credit purchases possible for

the other, their model is quite similar to a one-good Sidrauski setup; see

their p. 80.

In this setting, with randomly - fluctuating government
expenditures, Lucas and Stokey indicate that efficiency "requires ... a
nominal interest rate identically zero, brought about by a deflation iiduced
29

by

continuous withdrawals of money from circulation" (1983, p. 82). It

must be said that the model in question includes no capital goods, but
introduction of these would not seem to affect the necessity of monetary
satiation, which would be induced by an inflation path that kept the private
cost of holding money close to zero.

24

3. Issues Regarding Ongoing Inflation
Having presented a basic outline of one contemporary model for analyzing

ongoing inflation, we now turn to important areas of disagreement and
relevant evidence. First, in subsection 3.1 we consider the extent to which
our previous conclusions are affected by adoption of an analytical framework

in which agents have finite lifetimes, in.contrast to the Sidrauskiassurnption

of everlasting households. Second, in 3.2 the much-discussed possibility of

"hyperinflationary" speculative bubbles is briefly reviewed. Then in 3.3

some consideration of existing empirical evidence--and difficulties in
bringing evidence to bear on the outstanding issues--is provided.
3. 1 Overlapping-Generations Models

The last decade has witnessed a significant volume of monetary analysis
conducted in the context of models in which a new generation of individual

agents, each with a finite life span of two (or more) periods, is born each
period. These agents' perspectives on consumption versus saving naturally
change as they age, so at any point in time the economy includes agents with
different desires regarding the accumulation of wealth, even if agents are all

born with the same lifetime utility function and production possibilities.

This feature makes the overlapping-generations (OG) framework an
attractive vehicle for the analysis of theoretical issues regarding saving and
the accumulation of wealth.

Of the monetary analysis that has been conducted in OG models, a
substantial fraction has incorporated the point of view according to which "it

is not legitimate to take fiat money to be an argument of anyone's utility
function or of any engineering production function" (Wallace, 1980, p. 49).
25

Adherents to that point of view have also avoided relationships such as the
shopping-time function of footnote 7 above or the cash-in-advance constraint

favored by Lucas (1980a) and others. The resulting models have generated
predictions regarding inflation and other monetary phenomena that are very
30

different from those of the Sidrauski-type framework.

It has been argued, however, that most of the unusual features of these
models stern from their neglect of 'the medium-of-exchange function of

money. McCallüm (1983a) shows, for example, that three of the most
striking implications of the Wallace (1980) model vanish if it is modified,
31

by

the addition of shopping-time considerations,, to reflect this function.

Incisive arguments of a similar nature have been put forth by Tobin (1 980b)
and Patinkin (1983).

The basic point of this line of argument is that it is the transactionfacilitating property of money that makes it a distinctive asset, so any

model that totally neglects that property is apt to yield misleading
conclusions regarding actual monetary phenomena. It is unfortunate,
perhaps, that the representation of such phenomena cannot be incorporated in
a more satisfying manner than by making money an argument of a production

or utility function, but to "capture" this property in that inadequate way is
better than to miss it entirely.

32

Adopting this latter point of view, a number of writers have used CC
models with cash-in-advance or money-in-the-utility-function features to
33

analyze questions regarding inflation or other monetary phenomena.

The

issue to be addressed here is whether these monetary CC models, with

finite-lived agents, yield different conclusions than those obtained in

26

Section 2 above.

With respect to superneutrality, it is well-known to be the case that the

OG model does not generally have that property; this is implied by the
analyses of Stein (1971), Drazen (1981), and others. In fact, Drazen shows

that under a fairly wide set of conditions the capital-labor ratio will be

positively related to the inflation rate.

It is possible to argue,
-

however,

34

that such effects are unlikely to be quantitatively important.

In

any event, since the Sidrauski model implies exact superneutrality only with

an unrealistic assumption, there is no major disagreement in this regard.

Next there is the Ricardian property of the Sidrauski model, i.e., the
invariance of other variables to debt-financed alterations in the magnitude of

lump-sum tax collections. In this case, the OG model does yield a different
35

prediction.

In particular, as Diamond's (1965) pioneering analysis

demonstrated in a non-monetary setting, the -steady-state values of important

macroeconomic variables will depend (for given time paths of the money
stock and government purchases) upon the magnitude of a tax-transfer
variable analogous to v of Section 2.

The third main conclusion of Section 2 was that, with lump-sum taxtransfer magnitudes, social optimality requires adherence to the Chicago
Rule prescription: a rate of deflation equal to the marginal product of
capital. For the CC model with money, McCallum (i987a) shows that this
condition is again necessary for optimality in the following sense: if the
36
economy does not have an overabundance of capital, then unless the Chicago

Rule condition obtains it would be possible to enhance one generation's
utility without reducing the utility of any other generation. Since the

27

analyses of Scheinkman (i980b), Tirole (1985), and McCallum
(1987a) indicate that capital overaccumulation will not occur in a
competitive equilibrium in any economy that possesses a positive quantity of
a nonaugrnentable and productive asset such as land, the conclusion regarding

Pareto optimality is much the sameas in Section 2.

It should be said that the foregoing conclusion prtains to a Pareto-type
comparison recognizing different generations and an arbitrary initial stock of

capital. If instead the analysis seeks to determine the inflation rate that

will yield the highest steady-state utility--the same for all generations--then
there will be a relevant tradeoff, with increased -real money balances being

associated with reduced levels of the capital stock. In this case, different

specifications of utility and production functions will result in different
optimal inflation rates but these will typically be greater than the Chicago

Rule rate--see Fischer (1986).

But Abel (i987) has demonstrated the
following: if there is also a fiscal instrument available--i.e., lump-sum
intergenerational transfers--then the optimal steady-state policy will involve

Golden-Rule capital accumulation and monetary satiation.

The latter is

attained by equalization of the pecuniary rates of return on money and
capital, just as called for by the Chicago Rule.

Before moving on, let us briefly return our attention to the class of CC

models that does not give any transaction-facilitating role to the asset
termed money. In such models it is possible, despite this omission, to
devise assumptions that will permit the coexistence of valued money and

other assets.

That can be accomplished, for example, by assuming that

money and other assets have different risk characteristics (Wallace, 1982)

28

or by assuming that certain groups are prevented by law from holding
particular assets (Sargent and Wallace, 1982). In such settings it will
frequently be the case that open-market swaps of money for other assets,
undertaken by the monetary policy authority, will have no effect on aggregate

output or the price level--a result that Wallace (1981) attributes to a
"Modigliani-Miller theorem." The important thing to recognize about these
results is merely that money does not, in the relevant models; serve as a
medium of exchange. If it did, then its rate of return would be lower (in the
absence of satiation-inducing policy) than on other assets with similar risk

characteristics, and open-market swaps for similar-risk assets would have
the traditionally-posited type of effect on aggregate demand. One way of

explaining' this is to note that while a tax-financed increase in'

(e.g.)

government bond holdings would have no effect on aggregate demand in a
Ricardian model because of tax capitalization, a tax-financed increase in the

money stock would have a positive effect (as there is no implied change in
future taxes necessitated by the changed money stock). But an appropriate

combination of the two operations is analytically equivalent tO an open
market operation, so it follows that an open market purchase of bonds has a

positive net effect on nominal wealth. The same type of effect obtains,
moreover, in a non-Ricardian model although its workings are weaker and

the analysis less transparent. The upshot of these considerations is that
nominal "Modigliani-Miller" results for open market operations do not obtain

in models in which money has a transaction-facilitating role. Such results
hold in the Wallace and Sargent-Wallace examples only because they pertain

to assets swaps in which the two assets serve as media of exchange to

29

precisely the same extent. These swaps are not open-market operations in
the usual sense of the term.

A distantly related but quite distinct piece by Sargent and Wallace
(1981), entitled "Some Unpleasant Monetarist Arithmetic," has been one of

the most widely-discussed publications of recent years on the subject of
inflation. The main reason for this attention is the apparent suggestion that
an economy's monetary authority cannot, by its own base-money creation
choices, prevent inflation if an irresponsible fiscal- authority embarks upon a

course of action that implies continuing deficits (defined net of interest).
Formally, the paper's argument is only that paths of base money and fiscal
variables are unavoidably related by the government budget constraint in a
way that makes noninflationary base-money creation inconsistent' with

continuing real deficits. Whether the monetary authority has control over

inflation thus depends on "which authority moves first, the monetary
authority or the fiscal authority? In other words, who imposes discipline on

whom?" (1981, p. 7). But the paper's analysis assumes that the fiscal
authority "moves first," in the sense that a real deficit sequence is taken as
given.

In this way the paper seems to suggest that in fact a monetary

authority, which can adjust the monetary base by open-market operations,
may be technically dominated by a fiscal authority. But consideration

indicates that this suggestion is misleading. To see this, suppose that the
monetary authority seeks to avoid inflation (by creating base money slowly)

while the fiscal authority attempts to follow a purchase/taxation plan that

implies a continuing real deficit.

In a case of this type, the monetary

authority will be technically able to force the fiscal authority to submit to

30

its discipline, in contrast with the Sargent-Wallace assumption. The reason

is that the monetary authority has direct control over the monetary base
while the fiscal authority does not have direct control over the deficit; it has

direct control only over taxes and its bond offerings. In the case under
consideration, then, the fiscal authority will be unable to carry out its plart

because it will simply not have the requisite purchasing power. It can
achieve its planned purchases, but only by increasing taxes and departing
from its planned deficit path. Thus a truly deterrnined monetary authority
will always have its way. It is of course true that actual fiscal authorities

often use political means to induce monetary authorities to cooperate in
irresponsible undertakings, but the Sargent-Wallace (1981) analysis is not

designed to investigate such political forces.

The analysis provides,
consequently, no reason for believing that a monetary authority cannot
prevent inflation, if it wishes to do so.
In sum, the messages regarding inflation generated by CC models are not

significantly different than those stemming from Sidrauski-type models,
provided that the transaction-facilitating services of money are treated the
same in each case.
3.2 Bubble Inflation

A great deal of professional attention has been given, during the last
dozen years, to the possible existence of rational asset-price bubbles--i.e., to
equilibria in which a component of the price process exists only because it is

arbitrarily expected to exist, yet does so in a manner that does not violate
37

expectational rationality.

In its simplest form, this sort of phenomenon
31

can be represented as follows. Suppose that market clearing in period t
requires that

(3.1) t'+i = 0,
where .p is an excess demand function, P is the current price in question,

and P+i is the period-t expectation of

In a perfect-foresight

but (3.1) will remain a condition designed to
context P+i will equal
In
on the basis of the given expectational magnitude
explain

particular, (3. 1) is not an ordinary difference equation relating P÷ to a
given value of

This has been stressed by Whiteman (1984).

One approach to solving the model (3.1) is to find a function that
expresses P in terms of the system's relevant state variables. Since no
other non-expectational variables appear in (3. 1), a natural conj ectire in

this case is that
= P,

The conjectured solution is
is constant over time.
with P to be determined. Since under this conjecture it will also be

= P, the relation p(P,P) = 0 can be solved for P.
true that
=
But suppose that instead the analyst conjectures that
7r(Pj), i.e.,

that

is functionally dependent on its most recent value. Then it must also

be true that

=

7r(P).

Substitution into (3.1) in this case gives

p[P,ir(Pt)] = 0 which serves to determine the function w. But adoption of
this latter solution = 7r(Pj) instead of P = P is tantamont to assuming
that agents base their expectations on 'extraneous" state variables, for the
implied dependence of P1 on is not dictated by the model (3. 1). In that
sense, = 7r(Pti) defines a family of bubble or bootstrap solutions, one for
Unless that value happens by
each conceivable initial value for
= P. And the
chance to equal P, the time path will then differ from

32

discrepancy P -

P

will in this case constitute the bubble or bootstrap

component of the solution.

The sort of phenomena illustrated in the foregoing arises much more

generally, in models in which the price at which some market clears is
dependent upon current expectations of future values of that price. An issue

that has been extensively investigated is whether the assumption of
competitive equilibrium with optimizing, forward-looking agents is
sufficient to rule. out bubble equilibria of the type described. The answer
seems to be that while some types of bubble phenomena are precluded--e.g.,

paths with exploding relative prices--others are not. In particular, it seems
that in an economy with fiat money, optimizing behavior does not rule out

bubbles in which real money balances fall continually, asymptotically
approaching zero.

43

This implies the possibility of an ever-increasing price

level in an economy with a constant money stock--a situation which may be
termed an inflationary bubble. The existence of this logical possibility has

been taken by Hahn (i983, pp. 1 1-3, 7i) as grounds for objecting to the
monetarist notion that, in his words, "a necessary and sufficient condition
for inflation is an increasing stock of money."

That competitive theory fails to exclude inflationary bubbles does not
mean, however, that they occur in actual economies. Accordingly, this

becomes an appropriate point to begin our review of empirical evidence
relating to the issues of Sections 2 and 3.

33

3.3 Empirical Evidence

Interesting attempts to determine whether bubble behavior prevailed
during the famous German hyperinflation of 1920-23 have been conducted by

Flood and Garber (1980) and Burrneister and Wall (1982). These test
attempts are not entirely convincing., however, because of the restrictiveness

of the utilized assumptions regarding behavior of the monetary authorities--

in particular, the maintained assumption that the money supply is generated

exogenously. In addition, they suffer from a technical problem, created by

the existence of an exploding regressor, regarding the asymptotic
distribution theory needed for formal tests. This problem is briefly
44

mentioned by Flood and Garber (1980) in their footnote 18 (p. 754).

One extremely simple test procedure, proposed by Diba and Grossman
(1984), has been implemented for the German hyperinflation by Hamilton
and Whiteman (1985). The basic idea is that the existence of an inflationary

bubble implies that the bubble component of the price level process is
explosive. In a model with a log-linear demand function, this implies that
will not be obtained by differencing

stationarity of the time series for log

that series the same number of times as is just adequate to induce
stationarity of log Mt. Thus the graphs presented by Hamilton and Whiternan

(i985, p. 369), which show that second differencing is just adequate to
eliminate a growing mean for both log Mt and log

constitute evidence

against the hypothesis that the German hyperinflation represented an
inflationary bubble. Unfortunately, the logic of this simple test seems to
rely on the assumption of a log-linear money demand function. Researchers

who consider that assumption dubious may then find the conclusion
34

unpersuasive.

In any event, it cannot be claimed that any type of formal test for the
presence of bubbles has been conducted for a wide variety of inflationary
episodes.

Thus there currently exists no compelling body of evidence

adequate to firmly rule out bubble inflation. There is no formal evidence
tending to support its existence, however. This writer would hazard a guess

that continued study of the issue will not lend support to the not ion that
inflationary bubble. phenomena are of empirical significance.

Let us now turn to issues raised in Section 2. In attempting to bring
evidence to bear on propositions concerning steady-state properties of an
economy, one is faced with the necessity of using data that do not conform

neatly to comparative steady-state experiments. Instead, actual data sets
reflect the experiences of economies undergoing fluctuations due to various

types of shocks and administered by monetary authorities that rarely (if

ever) make clear-cut policy regime changes of the type envisioned by
comparative steady-state analysis. Now, in principle this fact need not deter

the researcher, who can proceed by estimating a fully-specified dynamic
model--one that tracks the economy's period-by-period fluctuations--and then

determining its steady-state properties by analytical means. In practice,
however, the approach is unappealing because of the necessity of specifying

and estimating a model that satisfactorily reflects the economy's dynamic
behavior. To do so, one must not only model portfolio balance and saving vs.

consumption behavior, as in the examples of Section 2, but also the
aggregate-supply or Phillips-curve relationship that we have yet to discuss.

And, as Section 4 will indicate, there is little agreement concerning this

35

critical component of any dynamic macroeconomic model.

Consequently, attempts have been made to reach conclusions regarding

superneutrality--by means of

steady-state properties--in particular,

strategies that do not rely upon specification of the system's period-to-period
dynamics. Most notably, Lucas (1980b) and Geweke (1986) have devised

procedures for investigating low-frequency relationships among variables in
analytical settings that are (except for the list of relevant variables) model-

free. The general idea of the approach seems to be that "low frequency"
corresponds to "long run," with the latter concept in turn presumably related

to steady-state properties including superneutrality. Before discussing a
weakness with the approach, let us note that both Lucas and Geweke report
findings that are ostensibly supportive of the hypothesis of neutrality. In
particular, Lucas (1980b) shows that inflation rates are related to money
growth rates with a coefficient near to unity when a low-pass filter is used
-

to remove high-frequency components of the two series.

45

Similarly,

Geweke (1986) finds that output and ex post real interest rates are not
significantly influenced by past money growth rates when only the lowest46
His finding
frequency component of his measure of influence is considered.
that real money balances are influenced by money growth is, as indicated in
Section 2.2, consistent with an appropriate definition of superneutrality.

A difficulty with this type of test has been described in McCallum
(1 984b), which shows that the presumption that low-frequency measures will

reflect comparative steady-state properties is not generally warranted. The
problem is that the relevant steady-state relationships pertain to anticipated
47

movements, while low-frequency statistics will usually reflect a mixture

36

of anticipated and unanticipated effects. The weak link in the test strategy is

essentially the same as that discussed definitively by Sargent (1971): in
any system in which responses are different to anticipated and unanticipated

variations, sums of distributed-lag coefficients will not correspond to
comparative steady-state effects. [Also, see Lucas (1972b).] McCallum's
(1984b) demonstration merely emphasizes that this principle remains true-

if the data series are subjected to Fourier transforms prior to analysis.

Cross-section evidence, pertaining to time-averaged experiences of
different economies, is not subject to the above-mentioned difficulty. Thus

it is arguable that such evidence provides a more reliable guide to
comparative steady-state properties than single-economy studies.

In this

regard, the cross-country data sets compiled by Narberger (1978) and Barro

(1984) exhibit a tendency to support the hypothesis that inflation rates vary

approximately point-for-point with money growth rates. This type of
examination has its own flaws, of course. - For example, it relies on an
implicit assumption that within a given economy the same money growth rate

is achieved in each period included in the sample.

Consequently, such

evidence is certainly not adequate to sustain any conclusions regarding the
rather delicate issue of superneutrality.

The other positive issue raised in Section 2 is the extent to which actual

economies exhibit Ricardian properties. Empirical studies conducted prior

to 1986 have recently been reviewed by Seater (1985), Bernheim (1987),

and Leiderman and Blejer (1986). Seater concludes that 'the [Ricardian]

hypothesis is supported by virtually all the direct tests of it" (1985, p.
124) but recognizes that most of this "evidence consists of failures to reject

37

the hypothesis and therefore may be of questionable power" (p. 125).

In

addition, he recognizes that contradictory indirect evidence has been provided

by various studies of the consumption function which reject variants of the

(The latter topic, currently the subject of
intensive investigation by a number of scholars, cannot adequately be
permanent-income hypothesis.

reviewed here.) Bernheim (1987). expresses doubt "that it is possible toidentify in a convincing way the relevant structural relationships through
macro time series." But, partly on the basis of "indirect" and cross-country
evidence, he finds the data to be strongly anti-Ricardian. By contrast, the
conclusions of Leiderman and Blejer cannot be categorized so easily. They

mention studies that seem to give both types of answers, and leave the
reader with the impression that it is not yet settled whether the Ricardian
proposition provides a reasonably good empirical approximation.

38

4. Inflation and Output Fluctuations

In this section we shift our attention from steady states to cyclical
fluctuations. This shift leads to a variety of issues pertaining to Phillipscurve phenomena--i.e., to the relationship between inflation (or money
growth) and employment (or output) levels measured relative to their normal

or 'natural-rate" values.

Since it is by way of this relationship that
48

monetary policy actions have their main effects on employment and output,

the precise nature of the relationship is of critical importance irt the context
of macroeconomic stabilization policy. Consequently, the area is one of the

most extensively studied in all of economics. Nevertheless, there remains

much disagreement concerning the Phillips (or aggregate supply)
relationship. A cynic might guess that this lack of consensus stems from
the desire on the part of researchers for intellectual product differeniation,

but such a guess would in my opinion be unjustified.

Instead, the main

reason for a lack of consensus is the combined importance and difficulty of

the subject. Specifically, it is inherently difficult to devise a theory to
explain the nature of a relationship between real and nominal variables while

respecting the axiom, fundamental to neoclassical economic theory, that
rational agents are concerned only with real variables.

Relevant aspects of the story begin with A.W. Phillips's (1958)
hypothesis that changes in money wage rates are induced primarily by recent

values of the unemployment rate, the latter being a measure of the excess
supply of labor. This hypothesis attracted much support because of its policy

relevance, the interesting U.K. evidence reported by Phillips, and the fact
that this sort of wage-change relation was just what was needed to convert

39

the static Keynesian rnodel---as interpreted by Modigliarii (1944) and others,

with its inexplicably given level of the money wage--into a usable dynamic

framework. But, as is well known, Friedman (1966) (1968) and Phelps
(1967) argued convincingly that the relationship should be expressed in
terms of real, not nominal, wage changes. The modified relation would still
be usable with the Keynesian model of aggregate demand, but would avoid an

implausible implication of Phillips's original formulation,, - i.e., that
unemployment could be kept permanently low (or output permanently high) by

acceptance of a constant but "high" rate of inflation. The Friedman and
Phelps versions involved expected changes in real wage rates and used the
rather mechanical adaptive expectations formula €o account for expectational
behavior.

Lucas then developed the case for rational expectations and
explored its implications in papers (1972a) (1973) that set the stage for
contemporary debates.

In the following sections we shall review the leading alternative Phillips
curve hypotheses (as of 1986) as well as selected bits of evidence that are

useful in discriminating among them.

Because of the impossibility of

covering the enormous literature in any detail in the space permitted, these

reviews will be extremely brief and will mention only a small fraction of
the worthwhile work that has been done in the area.

4. 1 Alternative Theories
Currently there are four basic types of Phillips-curve or aggregate-supply

theories that attract substantial support from knowledgeable economists.
These may be categorized as follows.

40

(1)

flexible-price, monetary misperception models

(ii) sticky-price expectational models
(iii) NAIRU models

(iv) Real business cycle models

The characteristics of the four classes will be described in turn.
49

Models of type (1), developed

primarily by Lucas (1972a) (1973), posit
the existence of suppliers who base their production-rate decisions on the

relative prices of their own products.

The two cited papers rely upon
different relative price variables. In particular, Lucas's (1972a) generalequilibrium model emphasizes the current own-product price in relation to
the expected value of a future general price level, a comparison that reflects
the

expected rate of return from current savings.

50

By contrast, his (1973)

model compares the current own-product price with the current general price
level.

51

The two models are alike, however, in assuming that individual

suppliers are ignorant of the current general price level and the current
aggregate money stock. Their optimizing choices must accordingly be based

on uncertain perceptions regarding these nominal aggregative magnitudes.
Thus when a seller finds that his own product price--the "local" price, in one

terminology--is unusually high, that may be because the aggregate money
stock is unusually large or because relative demand conditions are unusually
favorable to his product. The rational supply response, then, is a weighted
average of the responses that would be appropriate to the two possibilities if
known to prevail, with weights depending on the (known) extent to which local

price variability is on average a consequence of the two possibilities.

41

In each of the Lucas models aggregate output responds to inflation only if

it is unanticipated; high or even increasing rates of inflation will induce no
output response if they are predictable on the basis of suppliers' knowledge

of the economy's workings. For some plausible ways of completing the
model, consequently, the Lucas supply theories both give rise to policy
ineffectiveness propositions. Both result in models, that is, possessing the
property that the stochastic behavior of output is entirely unaffe.cted by the
monetary authority's choice of parameters characterizing systematic aspects
-

of policy behavior.

52

This striking property induced, not surprisingly, a large volume of
research designed to explore the robustness of the ineffectiveness proposition
under

the assumption of rational expectations.

53

One of the more notable

contributions was Fischer's (1977) development of a model that is
54

representative of our class (ii), i.e., models with rational expectations but
prices that are not free to adjust to market-clearing values within each

period. In Fischer's specification, nominal wages for periods t and t+1 are

set for half of the workforce at the start of each period t. The values
pertaining to periods t and t+ 1 may be different and each of them is set, in

light of existing price level expectations, so as to make the expected real
wage for each period equal to its (expected) market-clearing value. Shocks

occur, however, which typically result in price levels different from those

anticipated, so real wages will usually be unequal to the market-clearing

values. Employment and output are then determined so as to equate the
marginal product of labor to the current real wage.

42

55

With preset nominal wages, surprise inflation will result in a lower-than-

expected real wage (for both groups of workers) and therefore, with
Fischer's employment-determination assumption, a greater-than-normal level

of aggregate output. But this model does not have the policy-ineffectiveness
property:

if demand shocks are serially correlated, then monetary policy

rules can be designed to affect the variance of the output process--essentially

because policy can in this case be made to respond to shocks that ocur after

some currently-prevailing wages were set. -

The

unconditional mean of the

output process cannot be affected by the choice of policy-rule parameters,
however,

if effects of the type discussed in Section (2.2) are ruled out.

56

In

this sense, then, the Fischer model satisfies the natural rate hypothesis as
defined by Lucas (1972b): there is no monetary policy that will keep ,output

permanently high in relation to its natural-rate path. The same will be true,

moreover, for other models of class (ii) in which prices are preset at
expected market-clearing levels.

A third category of aggregate supply models is one which builds on the
concept of a mnon_acceleratinginflation rate of unemployment' (NAIRU).
Each such model posits a stable Phillips-type relation between unemployment

(or output relative to its reference path) and the acceleration magnitude,

i.e., the period-to-period change in the inflation rate.

Iistributed—lag

specifications may be employed, as in Tobin's (1980a, p. 68) formulation,

which explains each quarter's inflation rate by the previous quarter's
unemployment irate and an average of the previous eight quarters' inflation
rates. In NAIRU models it is not always clear whether past inflation values

enter as proxies for inflationary expectations or to reflect "catch-up' or
43

"inertia" effects that have no justification in terms of neoclassical theory.

In any event, NAIRU models do not satisfy the natural-rate property: if
there exists a stable negative relationship between unemployment and the
change in inflation, then the unemployment rate can be permanently lowered

by permanent acceptance of an increased value of the acceleration
57

magnitude.

The last category in our four-way classification scheme pertains to socalled real business cycle" models. In' these models the specification of the

Phillips-curve relationship is a simple one; it i assumed that there is rio
such relation. There is, more precisely, no wage-price mechanism that
would transmit monetary disturbances into output or unemployment effects.

58

Any observed correlations between output and (say) money growth are,
according to This viewpoint, the consequence of "reverse causation;" i.e.,
responses of the money stock to output fluctuations brought about by real
shocks to technology or perhaps preferences. This line of research, initiated

by Kydland and Prescott (1982), Long and Plosser (1983), and King and
Plosser (1984), has been quite prominent in recent years (i.e., 1984-86).
In part this popularity is no doubt due to the theoretical attractiveness of the

basic notion that there is no Phillips relation; as mentioned before, it is
difficult to account for such a relation on the basis of strict neoclassical
reasoning.

There is one important formulation whose position in terms of the
foregoing categorization is unclear, namely, the staggered-wage models of

John Taylor (1979) (1980). In these models nominal wages (or prices) are
set each period for a fraction of the sellers, as in the Fischer (1977) setup,

44

and maintained for two or more periods. And again the preset values are
selected on the basis of rational and forward-looking expectations. But the
principle governing the level at which they are set is not to equate expected

supply and demand quantities, but rather to keep in step with wages (or
prices) pertaining to the other portion of the workforce, with an adjustment

reflecting expected excess demand. In the two-group, two-period case this
-

approach gives rise to a relation of the form
(4.1)

x = O.5Ej {(x+j+x )] + O.SyE

+

y> 0

where x is the log of the wage set (for half the workforce) at the start of t
and

-

is a logarithmetic measure of output relative to normal. Now

clearly this equation can be rearranged to yield

(4.2) 0 = (E ix+j-x) -

(x-x) + yE

+

And with rational expectations it must be true that realized values of x and

will differ only randomly from expected values. Consequently, the
last equation can be seen to imply that different acceleration magnitudes will

be permanently associated with different levels of excess demand. Thus
Taylor's formulation, like NAIRU models, does not satisfy the natural rate

The nature of the implied association is unlike that of the
NAIRU models, however: higher values of x1 - zxt give rise to lower
hypothesis.

values of

-

Thus

Taylor's approach does not fall cleanly into either

category (ii) or (iii).
4.2 Evaluation of Alternative Theories

A very large number of empirical studies have been conducted with the

object of determining which type of Phillips-curve theory conforms most

45

closely to the facts, but conclusions are not clear-cut. A major reason for

this inconclusiveness is one that plagues attempts to test economic
propositions of many types, namely, that any formal statistical test must
rely upon maintained hypotheses that are about as dubious as the proposition

under explicit scrutiny.

In evaluating the evidence, consequently, it is

necessary to utilize a. subjective blend of statistical and theoretical
59

.

-

findings.

The empirical studies conducted by Barro (1977a) (i978 provided a
substantial boost toward acceptance of the monetary misperception models of

Lucas, since the results suggested that unanticipated changes in U.S. money
growth rates have strong effects on employment and output with anticipated

changes having insignificant effects. Barro's results relied, however, on
some debatable assumptions concerning the basic specification 'of the
monetary policy rule and the presence of lagged money surprise terms in the
60

unemployment (or output) equation.

Both features can be defended, but the

defense leaves room for skepticism. Later studies by Gordon (1982) arid
Mishkin (1982) yielded conclusions that conflict with Barro's by attributing

significant explanatory power to anticipated money growth rates, a finding
that is inconsistent with Lucas's models.

A line of argument that may be more convincing to some readers relies

on the observation that information regarding aggregate money stock
magnitudes (and price indices) is available to the public both promptly and

cheaply. And since knowledge of current money stock magnitudes would
61

eliminate the effect of monetary surprises on output in the Lucas models,

this observation tends to turn the misperceptions theory into one of the real

46

business cycle

class (iv).

62

With regard to the latter, one reason for its recent popularity is the
demonstration by Kydland and Prescott (1982) that simulations with a
model, in which a stochastic technology shock provides the sole source of
fluctuations, provides a fairly good match to actual U.S. data in several
63

respects.

A second likely reason is Sims's (1980) demonstration that

monthly money stock innovations explain very little of the variance of
industrial production when a nominal interest rate is included in a small

It has been argued,

64

however, that this fact is easily
reconciled with a belief in the potency of monetary policy surprises.
VAR system.

Basically, the argument is that there is no reason to interpret money stock
residuals in a VAR system with surprise actions of the monetary authority,
especially when the latter typically focuses his attention on monthly interest
rate movements.

A third boost for real business cycle models has come from recent
recognition that arguments of Nelson and Plosser (1982) concerning
alternative data detrending procedures--i.e., differencing versus linear trend

removal --are conceptually interesting and quantitatively important. The
Nelson-Plosser suggestion that it is possible to separate trend from cyclical

components of observed time series, and that the cyclical component
contributes comparatively little variability to GNP and employment series,

is open to objection (McCallum, 1986). But it is possible to reject this
specific suggestion and still view other considerations raised by Nelson and
Plosser to be of considerable importance. Eichenbaurn and Singleton (1986)

have shown, for example, that analysis with differenced series indicates

47

much weaker Granger causality from monetary to real variables than does

analysis with series detrended by removal of linear trend terms. There is
currently much activity in this area of research; some time will probably be
needed before reliable conclusions can be drawn.

With regard to the NAIRU class of models, the main point would seem to

be that their key implication--i.e., that output can be permanently raised
(relative to normal) by monetary means--is implausible enough to warrant

rejection on purely theoretical grounds.

Empirically, fUrthermore,

experiences with accelerating inflation seem not to have been accompanied by
unusually high output levels.

The remaining class of theories is type (ii), sticky-price models that do

not imply irrationality on the part of individual agents. In this case, the
class is wide enough that it is difficult to conceive of evidence that' would

reflect badly on all its members. For example, to whatever extent the
failure of real wages to move countercyclically tends to discredit the
Fischer (1977) mechanism,

65

this failure is not at all inconsistent with

specifications in which nominal wages are set a la Fischer but employment

is demand-determined at preset product prices with current real wages
irrelevant for employment decisions.

66

The main objection to the broad

class of theories, consequently, has stemmed from the analytical difficulty
of explaining why price stickiness relevant for quantity determination would

pertain to nominal as opposed to real prices. In other words, if prices are
to be preset (for whatever reason) why are they not preset in real terms by
means of indexation (or linkage) arrangements? One possibility, suggested
in McCallum (1986), is that for many specific product prices the benefits to

48

individuals of the insurance provided by such arrangements would be
extremely small. If this is so, then the transaction costs necessitated by
such arrangements might be adequate to inhibit their use, even though these

costs are themselves very small. And the aggregate consequences could be
substantial, as the argument of Akerlof and Yellen (1985) illustrates.
On the basis of the foregoing considerations, empirical and theoretical, it

would appear that there is at present no evidence or reason that clearly
compels one to reject theories of either the stiky-price or real-business
cycle type. Such evidence should in principle be obtainable,, however, as the

theories have implications that differ more markedly than is the case with
sticky-price and monetary misperception models.

-

4.3 Other Sources of Nonneutrality

At this point we need briefly to consider cyclical output-inflation
correlations that are brought about not via the Phillips-curve mechanisms
discussed above, but by monetary "nonneutralities" that work by altering the

natural-rate path of output. That such nonneutralities may exist should be
apparent from the discussion in Sections 2 and 3, where it was concluded
that precise steady-state superneutrality is not implied by 00 models or by
models of the Sidrauski type except under stringent restrictions. Clearly,

the same behavior patterns that cause (per capita) values of capital,
employment, and consumption to depend upon inflation rates, when
comparisons are made across steady states, will give rise to related effects
of anticipated inflation on a period-by-period basis.

If, for example, the
steady-state capital stock is increased by anticipated inflation, as in the
model of Drazen (198 1), then output may also be related to inflation at
49

business-cycle frequencies.

There are two reasons, however, for devoting much less attention to these

sources of nonneutrality than to those discussed in Section 4.1. The first of

these concerns the fundamentally different nature of the implied cyclical
variations.

In particular, variations resulting from effects of anticipated

inflation on the capital stock (or on the capital-labor ratio) are appropriately

thought of as variations in the natural rate of output, rather than departures
from the latter, for these variations would occur even with perfectly flexible
prices and complete information on the part of individual agents.

67

They do

not involve inefficiencies in the utilization of existing resources, as is the
case with output variations of the Phillips-curve type.

Secondly, there are various reasons for believing that monetary effects on

natural-rate values of output are not empirically of great importance. Cf

these reasons, three will be mentioned. First, the magnitude of the full
effect of anticipated inflation on output is unlikely to be large. Even though
precise superneutrality is not predicted by the models of Sections 2 and 3, it

is apt to provide a good approximation to actuality. Second, such effects as
do occur would tend to affect output slowly, for the existing capital stock is

large in relation to plausible variations in annual investment flows. Finally,

the direction of effect predicted by theoretical analysis is unclear. While

higher inflation unambiguously increases output in Drazen's (1981)
overlapping-generations setup, it does the opposite in other models such as
those of Stockman (1981) and Kim brough (1986).

In sum, it would appear that monetary effects on output at business cycle
frequencies are probably due primarily to fluctuations in output in relation to

5Ô

its natural or normal values, rather than fluctuations in normal values
themselves.

51

5. Positive Analysis of Monetary Policy

In this section we turn our attention to a topic of a different type,
namely, why it is that substantial (positive) inflation has been, a predominate
feature

of the postwar era.

68

Of course the models of Sections 2 and 3

suggest that sustained inflation will not occur in the absence of excessive
69

money growth,

but acceptance of that view just alters the form of the

question, which then becomes: why do current-day monetary authorities
permit money growth rates that result on average in positive inflation? In

response, it is tempting to point to the demise of commodity-money
standards. But suppose that it was agreed that adherence to such a standard

would prevent sustained inflation.

This agreement would still leave

unanswered the question of why the monetary authority, in an economy with a

fiat money system, would not choose a zero or negative average rate of
inflation.

70

The most prominent attempt to address this issue appears in a line of
work initiated by Barro (1983) and Barro and Gordon (1 983a), who built
upon insights developed by Calvo (1978) and especially Kydland and Prescott

(1977). In this section we shall discuss the basic model used in this line of
work, briefly consider extensions involving reputational considerations, and

touch upon a few more general matters regarding the positive analysis of
monetary policy.

5.1 Effects of Discretionary Policy Implementation

In the prototype model developed by Kydland and Prescott (1977) and

spelled out by Barr-c and Gordon (1 983a), the monetary authority's
objectives are represented by a loss function in which the arguments are the

52

squared deviations of unemployment and inflation from values determined by

considerations of allocatiorial efficiency.

7 1,72

It will simplify matters

without distortion of the argument, however, if we simply take the loss

function to be decreasing in the current money growth surprise
(unanticipated money growth reduces unemployment) and increasing in the
73

There are also discounted values of
square of money growth itself.
similar terms included for all future periods, but for the moment these can
be ignored. If, with such an objective function, the monetary authority were

to adopt a policy rule by choosing among constant money growth rates, he

would recognize that surprise values will average to zero whatever his
choice so that the chosen money growth rate would, be zero. .Sirniiarly, an

average growth rate of zero would be implied by the optimal choice of a
rule when a broader class of rules is considered.

But suppose that, instead, the authority implements his objectives in a
so-called discretionary manner,

74

i.e., by selecting current money growth
rates on a period-by-period basis. In each period, that is, the prevailing

expected money growth rate is taken as a given piece of data--an initial

condition. The current surprise is then apparently under the authority's
control, so the loss-minimizing choice of the current money. growth rate is
that which just equates the marginal benefit of surprise money growth to the

marginal cost of money growth per Se.
specified,

With the objective function as

this optimal value will be strictly positive. But rational private

agents understand this policy process well enough that their expectations

regarding money growth are correct on average.

Thus the surprise

magnitude is zero on average, over any large number of periods, even though

53

the magnitude within each period is under the control of the monetary

Consequently, there is on average no benefit--no extra

authority.

On average, then, the
employment--materializing from surprises.
discretionary regime features more money growth (i.e., inflation) but the
same amount of surprise money growth (i.e., unemployment) as with an
optimal rule.

As a matter of positive analysis, this model suggests that excessive
money growth (i;e., positive inflation) is attributable to the fact that actual

monetary authorities are not bound by rules, either self-imposed rules or
ones stipulated externally. Instead, they conduct policy in a way that
involves repeatedly taking account of the fact that for given expectations a
lower money growth rate would result temporarily in more unemployment,
while repeatedly ignoring the effect of these growth rates on the expectations
that are subsequently given.
These

-

points can be succinctly illustrated by means of a specific

algebraic example, utilized by Barro and Gordon (1983b). In this example,
the monetary authority seeks at time t to minimize the loss function

(5.1) z + z+j +

+

where $ is a discount factor (0 < < 1). The per-period losses are given by

(5.2) z (a/2) ir - b(7rt-1r),
where

a,b> 0

represents inflation or money growth in t with

the previously-

formed expectation of

choice of

Rule-like optimization involves a once-and-for all
values under the condition that
7r will, for whatever

choice, equal zero on average. In these circumstances, the optimal choice
= 0 for all t. But if
will be
is taken as given in period t, and

54

for j = 1,2,..., then the value of
that will minimize (5.1) is the discretionary value = b/a > 0. This will,
values are viewed as independent of

under discretion, be chosen at each t.

There are alternative interpretations that can be given to the foregoing
model. In particular, the beneficial aspect of actual money growth can be
thought of as reflecting goverru-nent revenues from money creation. And
although the details of an appropriate specification would then be different,
the conclusion regarding the inflationary tendency of a discretionary regime

would again be obtained (Barro, 1983). An interpretive issue is whether the

policyrnaker's objective function should be viewed as accurately reflecting

preferences of the public. The affirmative position taken by Barro and
Gordon (1983a, pp. 593-4) has been challenged by Cukierman (1986,' P. 9).

But whatever the outcome of that dispute, it is germane primarily to the
normative uses of the model. From the perspective of understanding why

inflation is observed, all that matters is whether the specification of the
75

policymaker's objectives is sufficiently accurate, empirically.

An interesting elaboration of the foregoing model has been provided by

Cukierrnan and Meltzer (1986), who begin with a framework like that of
Barro and Gordon (1983a) but extend it so as to accommodate imperfect
control of, and noisy announcements about, money growth rates. In addition,

Cukierrnan and Meltzer postulate stochastically-chariging objectives of the

monetary authority and assume that these fluctuations in objectives are not

directly observable by the public. Two examples of the additional results
that are obtained from this extended framework are, first, that the monetary
authority will choose to have relatively looser control procedures if his rate

55

of time preference is relatively high and, second, that looser control leads to
a higher average rate of money growth.
There are a number of objections to the basic Barro-Gordon framework

that could be raised. One, mentioned by Grossman and Van Huyck (1986), is

that the excessive money-growth result is not obtained if the objective
function is respecified to reflect a dislike for expected (rather than actual)

This seems to be a criticism directed more at the model's
normative merits, however, than at its merits, as a positive theory of
inflation, for actual policy makers seem to be concerned with costs of
inflation.

realized inflation, rather than the ones emphasized by economic theorists.

From this positive perspective, however, another objection might be that

actual policyrnakers have not based their period-by-period optirnality
calculations on models in which private agents' expectations are rational.
While rationality may in fact have prevailed, so the argument goes, the Fed

and other central banks have not recognized that to be the case and have

modelled (perhaps implicitly) agents' expectations by means of fixed
forecasting formulae.

To consider the force of this last objection, let us examine an example in

which the monetary authority has the specific loss function (5.1) (5.2) but
believes, in contrast to the previous example, that agents form expectations
according to the fixed formula
(5.3)

=

05t-1t-2

Now in this case the monetary authority believes that his choice of
will
e
affect future expectations, i.e.,et+i and ir2.
His optimal choice at t of
inflation or money growth is then as follows:

56

.

(b/a)

[1-0.5(+)] = 0,1,2,...

Thus instead of the value b/a chosen under the Barro-Gordon expectational
assumption, the

value will depart from zero only to the extent that the

authority's preferences exhibit impatience (i.e., 8 < 1).

But it would

seem extremely likely that the objectives of actual monetary authorities do
have that property, so the point of view suggested by this objection continues

to predict a positive inflation rate. That rate remains undesirable,
moreover, in the sense that the experienced inflation induces no extra
employment. It should be added that while this example does not Feature the

rules vs. discretion distinction, it does not contradict the normative Force of

the Kydland-Prescott demonstration as pertaining to an economy in which
expectations are rational and the policy authority recognizes that ratiorality.

5.2 Reputational Considerations

The objection to the basic model that has been most prominent in the
literature is neither of the ones mentioned above, but one that is based on its

neglect of reputational effects.

In particular, recent papers by Barro and

Gordon (1983 b), Barro (1986), Backus and Driffi 11 (1985), Grossman and
Van Huyck (1986), and others have proceeded in repeated-game formulations

that explore the possibility that reputational forces can lead to outcomes
closer to those obtained under rules than discretion in the basic KydlandPrescott setup.
•

In the model of Barro and Gordon (1 983b), it is assumed that the

monetary authority announces the intention to create money or inflate at a

specified rate, say Tr*, that is smaller than the discretionary value r.
Private agents expect this value to be chosen in each period so long as the
57

authority's actual choices do not depart from

7r*. If, however, at some

date to there occurs a discrepancy, ° * r*, then agents expect that the
discretionary value ir will prevail in t + I and possibly for some additional

periods, after which expectations revert to ir

Tr*.

Under these

assumptions, the equilibrium outcomes tend to concentrate on the value ir*,

and that value is shown to lie between G and w, i.e., between the values

pertaining to the pure cases discussed previously.

Thus reputational

considerations are helpful, according to the analysis, but do not provide a
complete substitute for the cresence of a well-designed rule. Two problems
with this particular model have, however, been pointed out by Barro (1986)

and Rogoff (1986). First, it requires the monetary authority to have an
infinite planning horizon: if the horizon is finite the purely discretionary
outcome will prevail in each period. Second, the number of periods, for
which the expected inflation rate is r (rather than 7r*) after the occurence of

r*

discrepancy, is arbitrary and the equilibrim value of 7r* itself
depends on that number. These problems are, as Barro and Rogoff
a

*

recognize, quite serious in the context of the issues at hand.

Partly for that reason, Barro (1986) has considered an alternative
approach that involves uncertainty on the part of agents about the "type" of

policymaker that is in office as the monetary authority. Different types, in
this context, correspond to different degrees of commitment to low inflation,

with these differences apparently reflecting preferences--or some sort of

political affiliation--since the same commitment technology would
presumably be available to all potential policymakers. The model's
attractiveness is considerably enhanced, in view of this interpretation, by

58

Rogoff's (1986) extension to a case with a continuum of policymaker types--

an extension that has the virtue of eliminating the need to assume a
randomized strategy on the part of the policyrnaker. Each new incumbent

begins his term, according to the model, with zero money growth for a

number (possibly zero) of periods.

Afterwards, an uncommitted

policyrnaker, who has been masquerading as a committed type in order to

develop exploitable expectations of• low inflation, switches to the
discretionary value. During the initial interval, agents' expectations involve

the subjective probability (which is revised as experience accumulates) of
the incumbent policymaker being of the uncommitted type.

Because the

policymaker who is uncommitted succeeds in generating a positive monetary

surprise at the end of his term, the model implies that, conditional upon the

public's prior subjective probability regarding types, the expected value of
the loss function is lower for the uncommitted type. Expected losses for

either type are, however, smaller the greater is the subjective probability
that the policymaker will be of the committed type. Institutions that more
frequently place committed inflation-avoiders in the policymaking office

therefore produce better outcomes on average (over a large number of
terms), according to the assumed loss function, as well as lower average
inflation rates.

While this alternative framework avoids the two particular problems
noted above, it has weaknesses of its own. As Barro (1986, p. 20) notes, it
"would seem preferable to generate predictions for inflation that depended

less on individual traits of policyrnakers and more on basic institutional
factors." To that might be added the related objection that the analysis is

59

incomplete, so long as it includes no description of the process determining

the "type" of policymaker that is selected each term. In a setting in which
types matter, the type that attains office should be treated as an endogenous
variable.

5.3 Private Objectives of the Monetary Authority

The models described above are open to the criticism that they
unrealistically presume altruistic behavior on the part of the monetary
authority. Actual policy decisions are made by -purposeful individuals or

groups of individuals whose actions are strongly influenced by matters
affecting their own income, prestige, and working conditions--none of which

are represented in the Barro-Gordon objective function. In this vein,
insightful discussions of Federal Reserve behavior have been provided by
Hetzel (1985), Lom bra and Moran (1980), Kane (1982), and others.

It seems clear that the point of view represented by these authors has
much merit; full understanding of policy behavior requires some attention to

the actual motives of policyrnakers. But it also seems clear that a truly

satisfactory analysis of this type will be extremely difficult.

For

policymakers' objectives are partly concerned with attainment and retention

of policy positions, the filling of which is part of a nation's political
process. Adequate treatment of this aspect of behavior then requires an
adequate model of the political system--including voter behavior, if the
nation in question is one in which the democratic process plays a significant
76

role. And despite many worthwhile efforts,

the profession is currently a
77

long way from having a widely-accepted model of that type.

There is one way, nevertheless, in which reasoning about the private
60

interest of policymakers seems highly relevant to the concerns of this
chapter.

In particular, Friedman (1985, pp. 60-61), has suggested that

the prestige and subsequent income of the top monetary policymaker--e.g.,
the Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System-depends strongly on the amount of attention accorded his actions by the news

media. And this amount is certainty strongly increased by. the perception

that his office has discretionary power: a legislated rule For monetary
policy would sharply reduce the media's attentiofl to the Fed's Chairman.
Now, the evidence to date indicates that it is wrong to think of this
argument as applying literally to the subsequent pecuniary income of the

Chairman; the personal histories of Eccies, Martin, and Burns do not
But in terms of prestige the suggestion is perhaps' more
conform.
convincing. And it is almost certainly better to interpret the argument in a

manner that is not so highly personalized, but refers to many more
individuals. Thus it would appear to be true that the utility--and in some

cases subsequent income-- of Board Members and various professional
employees of the Fed (including researchers) is enhanced by the public's
perception that the Fed has important discretionary power. To the extent

that this viewpoint is accepted, it seems unlikely that the Fed will
willingly adopt behavioral rules that would eliminate the discretionary
aspects--and, according to the analysis of Section 5. 1, the inflationary
bias--of U.S. monetary policy behavior.

61

6. Concluding Remarks

It may have been noted that the discussion in this chapter has devoted
little explicit attention to the topic of hyperinflation, on which there is a

substantial literature initiated by the famous study of Cagan (1956) and
given a large boost by the innovative analysis of Sargent and Wallace
78
(1973). The reason for our lack of emphasis is that most of the relevant
theoretical points are subsumed in our general discussion. Furthermore,
much of the recent work on hyperinflation has been principally concerned
with the development and application of econometric techniques appropriate
under the hypothesis of rational expectations. Unless bubble phenomena

were operative during the relevant episodes, which seems unlikely, the main

substantive question that needs to be understdod is why the monetary
authorities permitted the outlandish money stock growth rates that
occurred. Despite interesting historical investigations by Sargent (1982),
Capie (1986), and others, this question remains unanswered.

Also slighted in our discussion has been the recent outburst of writings

on commodity-money arrangements arid, more generally, on monetary
standards; a prominent example is provided by papers in the July 1983 issue

of the Journal of Monetary Economics. Much of the work on monetary
standards has been stimulating and continuing efforts may ultimately aid in
the design of institutions that would avoid the inflationary tendency discussed

above in Section 5.1. At present, however, it remains unclear how to
aQhieve the adoption of such a standard or to prevent the violation of one that
is nominally in force.

It is a difficult matter to summarize what is already a fairly compressed

62

summarization. It may nevertheless be useful to conclude this chapter with

an attempt briefly to identify the main themes that are, implied by the
discussion of Sections i-S. The first of these is that, with regard to ongoing

inflation, the principal conclusions of theoretical analyses are not very
sensitive to details of model specification, so long as the latter posits
rational agents devoid of money illusion. Whether one assumes finite-lived

or infinite-lived agents, such models suggest (I) that steady-state inflation

rates will conform fairly closely to money growth rates, (ii) that
superneutrality is not strictly implied but departures should be minor, and

(iii) that socially optimal inflation rates are probably zero or negative.
Bubble inflation provides a possible exception to point (i) as a matter of
theory, but there is little reason to believe that such a phenomenon' is of
significance empirically. With regard to irregular inflation, and the cyclical

interaction of nominal and real variables, there is considerably less
professional agreement. Four classes of aggregate-supply or Phillips-curve

theories are currently in use by researchers and at least two of these have

been able thus far to withstand attempts at refutation. Perhaps the most
important issue regarding inflation is why policy authorities have behaved,

over the last 40 years, in a manner that permitted a many-fold increase in

the price level in most industrial nations. A full answer to that question
will require a much better theory of the political process than is currently

available. An important hypothesis regarding inflationary bias has been
suggested, nevertheless, by models that focus on the effects of period-byperiod (i.e., "discretionary") decision-making by a monetary authority that
seeks, in a fiat-money regime, to avoid unemployment as well as inflation.

63

Footnotes

1. The relationship between monetary and fiscal policy, necessitated by the
government budget constraint, is treated much more extensively in Brunner

and Meltzer's Chapter 13, while bubbles and certain issues involving
overlapping-generations models are explored in Brock's Chapter 7. Also
Bewley's Chapter 9 provides a more detailed consideration of the optimal
inflation rate while Chapters 19 and 21 by Blanchard and by King and
Aschauer are concerned with aggregate supply or Phillips-curve issues.
2. An increase in monopoly power would, of course, do the same. But these

are all examples of one-time effects on the pr-ice level, not the ongoing
inflation rate. It is presumably agreed by both critics and supporters,
incidentally, that Friedman's statement is a substantive proposition to the

effect that inflation is brought about by money stock changes, not a
tautological restatement of its definition as an ongoing decline in the value of
money.

3. The point is that these are the only two determinants of inflation (beside

the money stock growth rate) in a steady state. This is so because all
sensible monetary models imply relationships--be they ad hoc money-demand

functions in Keynesian macroeconometric models or Euler equations in
optimizing general equilibrium models--that link money balances willingly

held to a real transaction measure (like output) and an opportunity-cost
interest rate, the last of which must be constant over time in a steady state.
In the model of Section 2.1 below, for example, the Euler equations (2.4),

(2.5) and (2.6) together imply the relation u2(ct+l,mt+j)/uj(ct+j,mt+l) =

+ f'

+

'' (k1).

(Symbols are defined below.)

The

right-hand-side of the latter will be equal to the nominal interest rate

the steady-state relation is u2(c,m)/uj(c,rn)

so

R. Technical change in the

payments process would shift the u function, as explained in footnote 7.

4. This last statement might be disputed by pointing to the United States's
experience of 1983-86, a period during which inflation rates averaged about
8% lower than money growth rates (measured by M 1). A span of four years

might arguably be considered as long enough to represent "sustained" in
which case the evidence could appear to contradict Friedman's dictum. But
it is important to recognize that the cost of holding money balances declined

dramatically over this period, both because of interest rate reductions and
regulatory changes that led to the introduction of checkable deposits (included

in Ml) on which interest is paid. Such a reduction would be expected to
result in a sizeable increase in the quantity of real Ml balances held.

If

the money demand function were of the constant elasticity form and the

elasticity with respect to the interest-cost variable were -0.20, for
example, a reduction in the holding-cost measure from 0.12 to 0.02 would

call for an increase in real balances of about 43%! (-.2[log .02-log .12] =
log

1.43). The transitional effect is, in other words, large enough to keep

inflation substantially below money growth rates for several years if the
effects are spread over time.

5. Empirical results are, of course, impaired by this neglect.
6. The model as written explicitly recognizes the existence of only one
good. It is intended to serve, however, as a simplified representation of an
economy in which each household sells a single product and makes purchases

(at constant relative prices) of a large number of distinct consumption goods.

That such an interpretation can be rigorously justified has been
demonstrated by Lucas (1980a, p. 134), who remarks: "I imagine that this

sort of elaboration is what we always have in mind when we work with
aggregative models."

7. Suppose that the basic within-period utility function is i(c,t) where
is leisure in period t. Also suppose that shopping time in a period is
'p(ct,rnt) with 'Pi > 0 and 'P2 < 0. Then if the total time available per period
is normalized at 1.0 and n is used to denote labor time,
= I -

and substitution yields (ct,1-nt-p(c,mt)) u(ct,mt,n). Changes in
payments technology will alter the function ip and therefore u. It should be
noted that the "cash-in-advance" constraint is simpiy a special case of the
1p(ct,rn)

shopping-time model, one in which 'P > 1 when rn/c < I and 'P =

0

for

rn/c 1.
8. See McCallum (1983a, p. 30). A more complete discussion of related
matters is provided by Feenstra (1986).
9.

The general equilibrium nature of the model could be emphasized by
permitting the household's supply of labor to differ from the amount used in

production and likewise for capital, with discrepancies satisfied via
competitive markets. But with all households alike, the equilibrium
discrepancies would be zero. Consequently, the possibility isnot recognized
in (2.3) for the sake of notational simplicity.

10. The role of the transversality conditions is to rule out paths that satisfy

(2.3)-(2.6) but are undesirable to the household on a longer-term basis.
They prevent the household, for example, from indefinitely accumulating

assets at a rate so high that "future" consumption benefits are never

obtained.

11. See Brock (1975). It should be mentioned that the contributions of
Brock (1974) (1975) to the perfect-foresight analysis of the present type of
model are so extensive that the class might justifiably be termed SidrauskiBrock models.

12. Other possibilities are that the government chooses paths for Mt and v

or for

and

v.

Choice of a path for M is equivalent, it should be noted

to the choice of a path for the money-stock growth rate

defined as

=

-

(M÷i Mt)/Mt.
13. Provided that the transversality conditions are satisfied.

14. This follows from the useful fact that if (say) z x +
and y can all grow at constant rates only if x and

rate. That is so because zt/zt (x/zt)

+

then

z, x,

each grow at the same

(y/z)

Thus the

faster-growing of x and y has an increasing influence on the growth rate of
-

zt.
15. The sense in which r is given by government choice will be explained in

the next sentence.

16. This condition is implied by Sidrauski's (1967, p. 535) assumption that

neither c nor m is inferior.
17. Invariance, that is, to alternative inflation rates.

18. That would not prevent determination of the rate of interest on such
bonds, however. The additional Euler equation would give rise to a steadystate requirement that the nominal rate of interest be equal to f(k) + r +

rf

(k).

19. We are still assuming that the system's transversality conditions are
satisfied.
20. A similar result holds, it should be added, outside the steady state. The

Set of equations (2.4) (2.5) (2.6) (2.10) (2.17) and the identities for m and
make no reference to either v or b. Those seven equations therefore
determine values of

c, k, mr,. '

' and r without reference to

when the government sets paths for g, M, and either v or b.

21. In particular, Barro (1974) shows that the result may hold with'finitelived individuals if they care about the utility of their offspring and leave
non-zero bequests.

22. In the case at hand, however, the production and utility functions possess

enough concavity that Weitzrnan's (1973) conditions are satisfied and the
transversality conditions are in fact necessary.
23. While an early and incisive discussion of the Chicago Rule was provided

by Marty (1961), the earliest statement that I have found is that of
Friedman (1960, p. 70).
24. Both Marty's analysis and that of Auernhumer (1974), on which Barro
and Fischer draw, rely upon areas under money demand functions for their
cost estimates. The agreement between our general-equilibrium result and

that of Friedman (1969) leads me to guess that the money-demand approach
is not misleading.

25. In generals the Barro-Fischer (1976) paper provides an excellent brief

summary of matters discussed in the present section. That paper asks,
however, "why would the private sector hold any real capital at all when the

opportunity cost of holding money is driven all the way down to zero?"

(1976, p. 144). The answer is that any reduction in the stock of capital
would raise its yield above that on money and lead asset holders to moveback into capital.

26. The significance of the latter condition warrants investigation.

27. This result can be obtained by noting that the relevant version of (2.6)

+ \]. Since
and k+j are not independent, it
is not possible to cancel out EX. Consequently, the system does not
becomes E.X = E[Xf'(k)

decompose in the way that (2.13) does.

28. More precisely, the comparison is for p = 0 and p = 5; see Danthine,
Donaldson, and Smith (1986, p. 23). The case under discussion features a
Cobb-Douglas production function and non-separable preferences with constant

relative risk aversion.
29. A similar result has been obtained by Krugman, Persson, and Svensson
(1985).

30. See, for example, Wallace (i980) or Bryant and Wallace (1979).

31. Wallace's three implications are that money will not be demanded if its
growth rate exceeds that of output; that steady-states with valued money will

be Pareto-optimal if and only if money growth is non-positive; and
that open-market operations have no effect on the price level.
32. This position is developed most extensively by McCallurn (1983a).

33. Examples include Stein (1971), Drazen (1981), Helpman and Sadka
(1979), Weiss (1980), McCal lum (1983 a), Lucas (198 Oa), and Woodford
(1987).
34. If the ratio of the marginal utility of consumption (MUC) when old to the

MUC when young is independent of money holdings, then departures from
superneutrality will occur only to the extent that money is a significant form

of wealth. But in the U.S., the value of outside money is only about 1% of
the valueof tangible real assets.
35. Here t'he term "OG model" is being used in a sense that does not include

setups, like those of Barro (1974), that feature operative intergenerational
altruism.

36. That is, does not have so much capital that the net marginal product is

less than the rate of aggregate output growth. The possibility of such a
situation has been stressed by Diamond (1965), Phelps (1966), Cass and
Yaari (1967), and many others.

37. I know of no general-purpose survey of the topic. Specific aspects have

been usefully discussed by Taylor (1986), Brock (1987), and .Woodford
(1984).

38. An example is provided by the Cagan (1956) model of the price level
with rational expectations and a constant money stock.

39. More generally, the conjecture would be that P depends only on the
variables that explicitly appear in the model at hand.

40. Here I am assuming that this solution for P exists and is unique. The
non-uniqueness that results from bubbles is of a different type, one that will
be described momentarily.

41. There may be more than one solution for ir, only one of which will
normally give the same stationary value for P as the P defined above.

42. This multiplicity arises because the model (3.1) itself does not refer to
any lagged price; It suggests that historical initial conditions are irrelevant.
43. Important contributions in this line of analysis have been made by Gale
(1973),

Brock (1975), Calvo (1979), and Obstfeld and Rogoff (1985).

44. Recently, a test strategy that avoids this problem has been mp1emented
in

a preliminary manner by Casella (1986).

developed

The strategy was previously

in a different context by West (1985).

45. Lucas's sample consists of Mi and CPI rates of change for the U.S. over
the

period 1955-1975. One observation, for the second quarter, was used

for each
46.

year.

Geweke's concept, termed feedback," is essentially a measure of the

extent to which Granger causality occurs, one designed so as to permit a
decomposition by frequency. Geweke's (1986) data is also for the United
States, but his tests involve quarterly postwar time series as well as annual
observations for 1870-1978, with tests pertaining to subperiods designed to
reflect different policy regimes.
47. Reference here is to results based on model-free procedures of the type
under discussion.

48. This claim will be discussed in Section 4.3.
49. Significant elaborations were provided by Barro (1976) and Cukierman
(1979).

SO. In the (1972a) model, non-interest bearing money is the only store of
value.

51. The idea behind this particular comparison, together with the
informational discrepancy mentioned below, has been described by Sargent

(1979, P. 381) as reflecting the notion that "the labor supplier works in one
market but shops in many other markets" so that he cares about the price of
his own services in relation to the current price of "an economy-wide bundle

of goods."

There seems, however, to be a logical flaw with this

interpretation: how can the purchaser of these various goods fail to discover

their current prices? Also, Lucas's (1973) model posits market clearing
only in the aggregate, not in each market separately. In general, the logic of

the (1973) model is different from, and less satisfactory than, that of the
(1972a) model.

52. This property was brought to the profession's attention most notably by

Sargent and Wallace (1975). The proposition presumes that systematic
components of policy can be related to past, but not current, values of
variables.

53. Reviews of that literature are provided by Barro (1981), McCallurn
(1980), and
54.

Taylor (i985).

Others include Phelps and Taylor (1977), Gray (1976), and--subject to

caveats mentioned below--Taylor (1979) (1980).

55. Barro (1977b) has emphasized that this assumption regarding
employment determination is as critical for the model's properties as the

He has pointed out that other employment
wage-setting feature.
determination rules could be combined with the staggered wage process and
that some would yield higher levels of utility, ex post, for workers and
employers.

56. It is entirely appropriate to rule out such effects in the context of the
issue at hand. The point is not that such effects are non-existent, but rather
that they should be thought of as affecting the "normal" or natural rate" level

of output, not the deviation of output from that reference value. The issue at

hand is the effectiveness of stabilization policy, which is concerned with
these deviations.

57. It might be objected that in actual practice accelerations are never
permanent. But that does not constitute a denial that the NAIRU models
possess a distinctive feature. And if that feature is judged plausible
(implausible), then it constitutes a mark in favor of (against) the class of
models even if the hypothetical experiment used in defining the feature never
occurs.

58. Thus we are again abstracting from effects of the type discussed in
Section 2.2.
59. For a thoughtful alternative evaluation, see King and Dotsey (i 987).

60. Lagged surprise terms need to be rationalized by some argument that
has them entering to reflect adjustment-cost effects, which might be more
directly expressed in terms of a lagged value of the employment or output
variable.

Sargent (1976) showed that if lagged money surprises are

permitted, identification of unanticipated money changes must rely upon
exclusion restrictions that presume considerable knowledge of monetary
policy behavior.

61. It has been suggested that this difficulty might not prevail if the "true"
monetary aggregate were unobservable and thus measured with error. It was
shown by King (1981), however, that if observations are available on a proxy

variable that differs only randomly from the true aggregate, then output (or

employment) should be unrelated to movements in measured monetary
aggregates. This suggestion seems unsatisfactory, therefore, for one who
accepts the facts to be as indicated by the Barro (1 977a). (1978), Gordon
(1982), or Mishkin (1982) studies.

-

62. It should be kept in mind that this objection to Lucas's theory would not

be applicable to prewar periods, when aggregate data was much more
difficult to obtain. The greater availability of such data may, in accordance

with the Lucas models, be one reason for the reduced severity of bisiness
cycle fluctuations in the postwar period.

63. In particular, real GNP autocorrelations, correlations of GNP with
other variables, and variances of other variables are reasonably well
matched provided that the variance of GNP is itself consistent with actual
data. The latter condition is obtained in the Kydland-Prescott (1982) study
by choice of the variance of the (unobserved) technology shock. There are
various respects in which the Kydland-Prescott model does not provide a good

match with actual data.

On this subject, see Summers (1987) and

McCallum (1987b).

64. See, e.g., McCallum (1 983b). The point, that a neglect of monetary
policy operating procedures may seriously distort econometric results, is
applicable in a variety of issues.

65. This failure can not entirely discredit the Fischer model, as technology

shocks will lead to procyclical real wages even under its assumptions. If
these predominate over demand shocks, then the gross correlations could be
as observed.

66. This sort of scheme has been described by McCallum (1982). Reasons
why current wages may be unimportant in employment determination have
been explored at length by Hall (1980), whose analysis complerrients that of

Barro (1977b).

67. Typically, "natural rate" values would be defined relative to such
reference conditions. No general definition is here attempted, however, for
the appropriate definition will differ from model to model.

68. For the United States, for example, the price level in mid 196 (as
measured by the CPI) stands at 5.6 times its 1946 value. By way of
comparison, it is interesting to note that the 1940 price level, as measured

by the WPI, was only 1.3 times its value as of 1776. (This calculation
splices the official WPI to the Warren and Pearson values in 1890.)

69. What rate is excessive depends, as mentioned in Section 1, on output

growth and the rate of technical progress in transaction technology. But

these factors are both small and tend to oppose each other so a noninflationary money growth rate will be within I or 2 (annual) percentage
points of zero.

70. That this choice lies within the monetary authority's power seems
indisputable, for large economies or ones with floating exchange rates, since
the time span under discussion is a matter of decades.

7 i. The unemployment term is of the form (Unt - kOn)2 with

natural-rate value of Un and k < i.

the

The latter condition reflects the

assumption tht the monetary authority's "target' value of unemployment is

below the natural-rate value. Barro and Cordon (1983a) interpret this as
reflecting some externality that makes the socially optimal value of tint less

than CJnt, and are consequently able to claim that there is •no discrepancy

between the policymaker's objectives and private agents' preferences. The

analysis would remain the same, of course, if The k < I condition was

interpreted as merely reflecting a desire by the policymaker for an
-

excessively low rate of unemployment.

72. The analysis relies upon the plausible assumption that deviations of

inflation from the efficient rate are increasingly costly at the margin. Use
of the squared deviation is designed to reflect that condition in a tractable
manner.
73.

In this setup there

-

is

no need to distinguish between money growth and

inflation rates. Accordingly, we shall

here use the terms interchangably.

The allocationally-efficient rate of growth is taken to be zero only for
convenience; in principle it would be whatever rate leads to the optimal
steady inflation rate.

74. This terminology is due to Kydland and Prescott (1977). It does riot
agree with that used in earlier versions of the 'rules vs. discretion" debate,

which were (in today's terms) actually concerned with non-activist vs.
activist policy. That a rule can be activist--i.e., be responsive to recent
conditions--should need no explanation here.

75. With regard to actual Federal Reserve objectives, interesting support

for the view that the principal aims are avoidance of inflation and
unemployment is provided by Piece (1.974).

76. A recent example is provided by Alesina (1987).
77. Cukierrnan and Meltzer (1986) interpret the stochastic objectives of the

policymaker in their model as reflecting desires to remain •in office, with
the chances of doing so believed by the policyrnaker to depend on inflation and

employment. Further, the relative importance of these two determinants of
popularity "shifts in unpredictable ways as individuals within the decision-

making body of government change their positions, alliances, and views"
(1986, p. 11.03). Treatment of political influences as stochastic and
exogenous illustrates the absence of a well—developed theory of such
influences.

78. As is well-known, Cagan's study attempted to lend support to the
hypothesis that money demand functions do not shift about erratically by

showing that such functions remained in place through the exceptionally
stressful periods of seven 20th century European hyperinflations (Austria
1921-22;

Germany 1922-23; Greece i943-44; Hungary 1923-24; Hungary

1945-46;

Poland 1923-24; and Russia 1921-24).

remarkable for its time,

undermined

the

but his principal conclusion was somewhat

by econometric procedures that would today be judged as flawed;

basic regression specification included

regressor

Cagan's work was

an endogenous variable as a

and took no account of severly autocorrelated residuals. Also, as

Benjamin Friedman (1978) has noted, Cagan's dynamic stability analysis
incorrectly

applied a stability condition appropriate for a continuous-time

formulation to an empirical model estimated with discrete-time data.

References

Abel, A.B. (1987) "Optimal Monetary Growth," Journal of Monetary
Economics 20: forthcoming.

Akerlof, G.A., and J. Yellen (1985) "Can Small Deviations from
Rationality Make Significant Differences to Economic Equilibria?"
American Economic Review 75: 708-720.

Alesina, A. (1987) "Macroeconomic Policy in a Two-Party System as a
Repeated Game," Quarterly Journal of Economics 102: forthcoming.

Auernheimer, L. (1974) "The Honest Government's Guide to Inflationary
Finance," Journal of Political Economy 82: 598-606.

Backus, 0., and J. Driffill (1985) "Inflation and Reputation," American
Economic Review 75: 530-538.

-

Barro, R.J. (1974) "Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?"

Journal of

Political Economy 82: 1095-1117.
Barro, R.J. (1976) "Rational Expectations and the Role of Monetary Policy,"

Journal of Monetary Economics 2: 1-32.
Barro, R.J. (1977a) "Unanticipated Money Growth and Unemployment in the

United States," American Economic Review 67: 101-115.

Barro, R.J. (1977b) "Long Term Contracting, Sticky Prices, and Monetary
Policy," Journal of Monetary Economics 3: 305-316.
Bar-ro, R.J. (1978) "Unanticipated Money, Output, and the Price Level in the

United States," Journal of Political Economy 86: 549-580.

Barro, R.J. (1981) "The Equilibrium Approach to Business Cycles," in
Money, Expectations, and Business Cycles. New York: Academic Press.

Bar-re, R.J. (1983) "Inflationary Finance under Discretion and Rules,"

Canadian Journal of Economics 16: 1-16.

Barro, R.J. (1984) Macroeconomics. New York: Wiley.

Barro, R.J. (1986) "Reputation in a Model of Monetary Policy with
Incomplete Information," Journal of Monetary Economics 17: 3-20.

Barro, R.J., and S. Fischer (1976) "Recent Developments in Monetary
Theory," Journal of Monetary Ecànomics 2: 133-167.

Barro, R.J., and D.B. Cordon (1983.a) "A Positive Theory of Monetary
Policy in a Natural Rate Model," Journal of Political Economy 91: 589-

610.
Barro, R.J., and D.B. Gordon (1983b) "Rules, Discretion, and Reputation in

a Model of Monetary Policy," Journal of Monetary Economics 12: 101121.

*

Bernheim, B.O. (1987) "Ricardian Equivalence: An Evaluation of Theory and

Evidence," NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1987: forthcoming.

Blanchard, O.J. (1985) "Debt, Deficits, arid Finite Horizons," Journal of
Political Economy 93: 223-247.
Brock, W.A. (1974) "Money and Growth: The Case of Long-Run Perfect
Foresight," International Economic Review 15: 750-777.
Brock, W.A. (1975) "A Simple Perfect Foresight Monetary Modef," Journal

of Monetary Economics 1: 133-150.

Bronferibrenner, M., and F.D. Holzman (1963) "A Survey of Inflation
Theory," American Economic Review 53: 593-66 1.

Brunner, K., and A.H. Meltzer (1983) "Strategies and Tactics for Monetary
Control," Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 18: 59-

104.

Bryant, J., and N. Wallace (1979) "The Inefficiency of Interest-Bearing
National Debt," Journal of Political Economy 87: 365-38 1.

Burmeister, E., and K. Wall (1982) "Kalman Filtering Estimation of
Unobserved Rational Expectations with an Application to the German
Hyperinflation," Journal of Econometrics 20: 255-284.

Cagan, P. (1956) "The Monetary Dynamics of Hyperinflation," in M.
Friedman (ed.), Studies in the Quantity Theory of Money.

Chicago:

University of Chicago Press.

Calvo, 0. (1978) "Optimal Seigniorage from Money Creation," Journal of
Monetary Economics 4: 503-5 17.
Calvo, G. (1979) "On Models of Money and Perfect Foresight," International

Economic Review 20: 83-103.
Capie,

-

F. (1986) "Conditions in Which Very Rapid Inflation has Appeared,"

Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 24: 115-168.

Casella, A. (1986) "Testing for Price Level Bubbles:

The German

Hyperinflation Once More," Working Paper, MIT.

Cass, D., and M.E. Yaari (1967) "Individual Saving, Aggregate Capital
Accumulation, and Efficient Growth, in K. Shell (ed.), Essays in the
Theory of Optimal Economic Growth. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Chan, L.K.C. (1983) "Uncertainty and the Neutrality of Government
Financing Policy," Journal of Monetary Economics 11: 35 1-372.

Cukierrnan, A. (1979) "Rational Expectations and the Role of Monetary
Policy: A Generalization," Journal of Monetary Economics 5: 213-230.
Cukierman, A. (1986) "Central Bank Behavior and Credibility--Some Recent

Developments," Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review 68:

forthcoming.

Cukierrnan, A., and A.H. Meltzer (1986) "A Theory of Ambiguity,
Credibility, and Inflation Under Discretion and Asymmetric Information,u

Econometrica 54: forthcoming.
Danthine, J.P., J.B. Donaldson, and L. Smith (1986) "On the Superneutrality
of Money in a Stochastic Dynamic Macroeconomic Model," Working Paper.

Diamond, P.A. (1965) "National Debt in a Neoclassical Growth Model,"
American Economic Review 55: 1126-1150.

Diba, B.T., and F-LI. Grossman (1984) "Rational Bubbles in the Price of
Gold," National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No. 1300.

Drazen, A. (1981) "Inflation and Capital Accumulation Under a Finite
Horizon," Journal of Monetary Economics 8: 247-260.

Eichenbaum, M., and K.J. Singleton (1986) "Do Equilibrium Real Business

Cycle Theories Explain Postwar U.S. Business Cycles?" N.B.E.R.
Macroeconomics Annual 1: forthcoming. Feenstr'a,

R.C. (1986) "Functional Equivalence Between Liquidity Costs and

the Utility of Money," Journal of Monetary Economics 17: 271-291.

Fischer, S. (1977) "Long-Term Contracts, Rational Expectations, and the

Optimal Money Supply Rule," Journal of Political Economy 85: 191206.
Fischer, S. (1984) "The Benefits of Price Stability," in Price Stability and
Public Policy. Kansas City: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City.

Fischer, S. (1986) "Monetary Rules and Commodity Money Schemes Under
Uncertainty," Journal of Monetary Economics 17: 2 1-35.

Flood, R.P., and P.M. Garber (1980) "Market Fundamentals vs. Price Level

Bubbles: The First Tests," Journal of Political Economy 88: 745-770.

Friedman, B.M. (1978) "Stability and Rationality in Models of
Hyperinflation," International Economic Review 19: 45-64.

Friedman, M. (196O A Program for Monetary Stability. New York:
Fordham University Press.

Friedman, M. (1963) Inflation: Causes and Consequences. New York: Asia
Publishing House.

Friedman, M. (1966) "Comments," in G.P. Shultz and R.Z. Aliber (eds.),

Guidelines, Informal Controls, and the Market Place.

Chicago:

Univeysity of Chicago Press.

Friedman, M. (1968) "The Role of Monetary P6licy," American Economic

Review 58: 1-17.
Friedman, M. (1969) The Optimum Quantity of Money and Other Essays.
Chicago: Aldine.

Friedman, M. (1985) "How to Give Monetarism a Bad Name," in
Monetarism, Inflation, and the Federal Reserve. Joint Economic
U.S.
Committee, Congress of the United States. Washington:
Government Printing Office.

Friedman, M., and A.J. Schwartz (1963) A Monetary History of the United

States, 1867-1960. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Gale, 0. (1973) "Pure Exchange Equilibrium of Dynamic Economic Models,"

Journal of Economic Theory 6: 12-36.

Geweke, J. (1986) "The Superneutrality of Money in the United States: An
Interpretation of the Evidence," Econometrica 54: 1-22.

Gordon, R.J. (1982) "Price Inertia and Policy Ineffectiveness in the United

States, 1890-1980," Journal of Political Economy 90: 1087-1117.
Gray, J.A. (1976) "Wage Indexation: A Macroeconomic Approach," Journal

of Monetary Economics 2: 221-236.

Grossman, H.I., and J.B. Van Huyck (1986) "Seigniorage, Inflation, and
Reputation," Journal of Monetary Economics 18: 21-31.
Kahn, F. (1983) Money and Inflation. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Hall, R.E. (1980) "Employment Fluctuations and Wage Rigidity," Brookings

Papers on Economic Activity, No. 1: 91-.i23.
Hamilton, J.D., and C.!-!. Whitemnan (1985) "The Observable Implications of

Self-Fulfilling Expectations," Journal of Monetary Economics 16: 353-

374.

-

Harberger, A.C. (1978) "A Primer on Inflation," Journal of Money, Credit,

and Banking 10: 505-521.
Helpman, E., and E. Sadka (1979) "Optimal Financing of the Government's
Budget: Taxes, Bonds, or Money?" American Economic Review 69: 152-

160.

Hetzel, R.L. (1986) "A Congressional Mandate for Monetary Policy," Cato

Journal 5: 797-820.
Johnson, H.G. (1963) "A Survey of Theories of Inflation," Indian Economic
Review 6:

Kane, E.J. (1982) "External Pressure and the Operations of the Fed," in R.E.

Lombra and W.E. Witte (eds.), Political Economy of International and

Domestic Monetary Relations. Ames, Iowa:
Press.

Iowa State University

Kimbrough, K.P. (1986) "Inflation, Employment, and Welfare in the Presence

of Transaction Costs," Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 18:
127-140.
King, R.O. (1981) "Monetary Information and Monetary Neutrality," Journal

of Monetary Economics 7: 195-206.
King, R.G., and M. Dotsey (1987) "Rational Expectations and the Business

Cycle," The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economic Theory and
Doctrine. London: Macmillan Press, Ltd.

King, R.G. and C.I. Plosser (1984) 'Money, Credit, and Prices in a Real
Business Cycle," American Economic Review 74: 363-380.

Krugrnan, P.R., T. Persson, and L.E.O. Svensson, 'Inflation, Interest Rates,
and Welfare," Quarterly Journal of Economics 100: 677-695.

Kydland, F.E. and E.S. Prescott (1977) "Rules Rather than Discretion: The
Inconsistency of Optimal Plans," Journal of Political Economy 85: 473-

491.

Kydland, F.E. and E.S. Prescott (1982) "Time to Build and Aggregate
Fluctuations," Econometrica 50: 1345-1370.

Laidler, 0., and M. Parkin (1975) "Inflation: A Survey, Economic Journal

85: 741-809.
Leiderman, L., and M.I. Blejer (1986) "Modelling and Testing Ricardian
Equivalence," Working Paper, International Monetary Fund.

Lornbra, R. and M. Moran (1980) "Policy Advice and Policymaking at the
Federal Reserve," Carnegie-Rochester Confernce Series on Public Policy

13: 9-68.
Long, J.B., Jr. and C.I. Plosser (1983) "Real Business Cycles," Journal of

Political Economy 91: 39-69.
Lucas, R.E., Jr. (i972a) "Expectations and the Neutrality of Money," Journal

of Economic Theory 4: 103-124.

Lucas, R.E., Jr. (1 972b) "Econometric Testing of the Natural Rate
Hypothesis," in 0. Eckstein (ed.), The Econometrics of Price
Determination. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System.

Lucas, R.E., Jr. (1973) "Some International Evidence on Output-Inflation
Tradeoffs," American Economic Review 63: 326-334.
Lucas, R.E., Jr. (1980a) "Equilibrium in a Pure Currency Economy," in J.H.

Kareken and N. Wallace (eds.), Models -of Monetary Economies.
Minneapolis: Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.

Lucas, R.E., Jr. (1980b) "Two Illustrations of the Quantity Theory of
Money," American Economic Review 70: 1005-10 14.

Lucas, R.E., Jr. (1985) "Models of Business Cycles," Yrjo Jahnsson
Lectures, Helsinki.

Lucas, R.E., Jr., and N. Stokey (1983) "Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy
in an Economy without Capital," Journal of Monetary Economics 12:

55-93.
Marty, A.L. (1961) "Gurley and Shaw on Money in a Theory of Finance,"

Journal of Political Economy 69: 56-62.
Marty, A.L. (i976r'A Note on the Welfare Cost of Money Creation," Journal

of Monetary Economics 2: 121-124.

McCallum, B.T. (1980) "Rational Expectations and Macroeconomic
Stabilization Policy: An Overview," Journal of Money, Credit, and

Banking 12: 716-746.
McCallum,

B.T. (i982) "Macroeconomics After a Decade of Rational

Expectations: Some Critical Issues," Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond

Economic Review 68: 3-12.

McCallum, B.T. (i983a) "The Role of Overlapping-Generations Models in
Monetary Economics," Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series in Public

Policy 18: 9-44.
McCallum, B.T. (1983b) "A Reconsideration of Sims's Evidence Concerning

Monetarism," Economics Letters 13: 167-171.

McCallum, B.T. (1984a) "Are Bond-Financed Deficits Inflationary? A
Ricardian Analysis," Journal of Political Economy 92: 123-135.

McCallum, B.T. (1984b) "On Low-Frequency Estimates of Long-Run
Relationships in Macroeconomics," Journal of Monetary Economics 14:

3-14.

McCallurn, B.T. (1986) "On Real and Sticky-Price Theories of the
Business Cycle," Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 18: 397-414.

McCallurn, B.T. (1987a) "The Optimal Inflation Rate in an OverlappingGenerations Economy with Land," in W.A. Barnett and K.J. Singleton
(eds.), New Approaches in Monetary Economics. Cambridge: Cambridge

University Press.

McCallurri, B.T. (i987b) "Real Business Cycle Models," Working Paper,
Carnegie-Mellon University.

Mishkin, F.S. (1982) "Does Anticipated Monetary Policy Matter? An
Econometric Investigation," Journal of Political Economy 90: 22-51.

Modigliani, F. (1944) "Liquidity Preference and the Theory of Interest and

Money," Econometrica 12: 45-88.

Nelson, C.R., and C.I. Plosser (1982) "Trends and Random Walks in
Macroeconomic Time Series: Some Evidence and Implications," Journal

of Monetary Economics 10: 139-162.

Obstfeld, M. and K. Rogoff (1983) "Speculative Hyperinflations in
Maximizing Models: Can We Rule Them Out?" Journal of Political
Economy 91: 675-687.

Patinkin, 0. (1987) "Neutrality," in The New Palgrave: ADfctionary of
Economic Theory and Doctrine. London: Macmillan Press, Ltd.

Patinkin, 0. (1983) "Monetary Economics," in E.C. Brown and R.M. Solow

(eds.), Paul Sarnuelsori and Modern Economic Theory.

New York:

McGraw-Hi 11.

Phelps, E.S. (1966) Golden Rules of Economic Growth. New 'York:
W.W. Norton and Co.

Phelps, E.S. (1967) "Phillips Curves, Expectations of Inflation, and Optimal
Unemployment over Time," Econornica 34: 254-281.

Phelps, ES. (1973) "Inflation in a Theory of Public Finance," Swedish
Journal of Economics 75: 67-8 2.
Phelps, E.S., and J.B. Taylor (1977) "Stabilizing Powers of Monetary Policy

Under Rational Expectations," Journal of Political Economy 85:

163-

190.
Phillips, A.W. (1958) "The Relation Between Unemployment and the Rate of

Change of Money Wage Rates in the United Kingdom, i861-1957,"
Economica 25: 283-300.
Pierce, J.L. (1974) "Quantitative Analysis for Decisions at the Federal

Reserve,' Annals of Economic and Social Measurement 3: 11-19.

Ricardo, 0. (1817) Principles of Political Economy and Taxation. London:
Murray.

Rogoff, K. (1987) "Reputational Constraints on Monetary Policy: Credible
Rules or Incredible Theories?" Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on
Public Policy 26: forthcoming.
Sargent, T.J. (1971) "A Note on the Accelerationist Controversy,' Journal of
Money, Credit, and Banking 3: 50-60.

Sargent, T.J. (1976) "The Observational Equivalence of Natural and
Unnatural Rate Theories of Macroeconomics," Journal of Political
Economy 84: 63 1-640.

Sargent, T.J. (1979) Macroeconomic Theory. New York: Academic Press.

Sargent, T.J. (1982) "The Ends of Four Big Inflations,' in R.E. Hail' (ed.),
Inflation. Chicago: University of Chicago Press for N.B.E.R.

Sargent, T.J., and N. Wallace (1973) "Rational Expectations and the
Dynamics of Hyperinflation," International Economic Review 14: 328-

350.

Sargent, T.J., and N. Wallace (1975) "Rational Expectations, the Optimal
Monetary Instrument, and the Optimal Money Supply Rule," Journal of
Political Economy 83: 24 1-254.

Sargent, T.J., and N. Wallace (1981) "Some Unpleasant Monetarist
Arithmetic," Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review 5:
1-17.

Sargent, T.J., and N. Wallace (1982) "The Real Bills Doctrine vs. the
Quantity Theory: A Reconsideration," Journal of Political Economy 90:

12 12-1236.

Scheinkman, J.A. (1980a) "Discussion," in J.H. Kareken and N. Wallace
(eds.), Models of Monetary Economies. Minneapolis: Federal Reserve
Bank of Minneapolis.

Scheinkman, J.A. (1980b) "Notes on Asset Trading in an Overlapping
Generations Model," University of Chicago, Working Paper.

Seater, J. (1985) "Does Government Debt Matter? A Review," Journal of
Monetary Economics 16: 121-13 1.
Sidrauski, M. (1967) "Rational Choice and Patterns of Growth in a Monetary
Economy," American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 57: 534-

544.
Sims, C.A. (1980) "A Comparison of Interwar and Postwar Business Cycles:

Monetarisrn Reconsidered," American Economic Review Paper's and
Proceedings 70: 250-257.

Stein, J.L. (1971) Money and Capacity Growth. New York: Columbia
University Press.

Stockman, Alan C. (1981) "Anticipated Inflation and the Capital Stock in a
Cash-in-Advance Economy," Journal of Monetary Economics 8: 387-393.

Summers, Lawrence H. (1987) "Some Observations on Real Business Cycle
Theories," Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review.

Taylor, J.B. (1979) "Staggered Wage Setting in a Macro Model," American
Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 69: 108-113.
Taylor, J.B. (1980) "Aggregate Dynamics and Staggered Contracts," Journal

of Political Economy 88: 1-23.

Taylor, J.B. (i985) "Rational Expectations Models in Macroeconomics," in

K.J. Arrow and S. Honkapohja (eds.), Frontiers of Economics. Oxford:
Basil Blackwell, Ltd.
Taylor, LB. (1986) "New Econometric Techniques for Macroeconomic Policy

Evaluation," in Z. Griliches and M.D. Intriligator (eds.), Handbook of
Econometrics, Vol. 3. Amsterdam: North-Hal land.

Tirole, J. (1985) "Asset Bubbles arid Overlapping Generations,"
Econorrietrica 53: i071-iiOO.
Tobin, J. (1980a) "Stabilization Policy Ten Years After," Brookings Papers

on Economic Activity No. 1: 19-7 1.

Tobin, J. (1980b) "Discussion," in J.H. Kareken and N. Wallace (eds.),
Models of Monetary Economies. Minneapolis: Federal Reserve Bank of
Minneapolis.

Wallace, N. (1980) "The Overlapping Generations Model of Fiat Money," in

J.H. Kareken and N. Wallace (eds.), Models of Monetary Economies.
Minneapolis: Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.

Wallace, N. (1981) "A Modigliani-Miller Theorem for Open-Market
Operations," American Economic Review 71: 267-274.
Wallace, N. (1983) 'A Legal Restrictions Theory of the Demand for Money

and the Role of Monetary Policy," Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis

Quarterly Review 7: 1-7.
Weiss, L. (1980) "The Effects of Money Supply on Economic Welfare in the

Steady State," Econometrica 48: 565-576.

West, K.D. (1986) "A Specification Test for Speculative Bubbles," NBER

Working Paper o. 2067.

Whiteman, C.H. (1984) Linear Rational Expectations Models: A User's
Guide. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

Woodford, M. (1984) "Indeterminacy of Equilibrium in the OverlappingGenerations Model: A Survey." Working Paper, Columbia University.
Woodford, M. (1987) "Interest and Prices in a Cash-in-Advance Economy," in

W.A. Barrett and K.J. Singleton (eds.), New Approaches in Monetary
Economics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

