NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

KEEPIN' 'EM DOWN ON THE FARM:
MIGRATION AND STRATEGIC INVESTMENT IN CHILDREN'S SCHOOLING
Robert Jensen
Nolan H. Miller
Working Paper 23122
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23122

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2017

Financial support from the Center for Aging and Health Research at the National Bureau of Economic
Research, the Women and Public Policy Program, the Dean's Research Fund and the William F. Milton
Fund at Harvard University is gratefully acknowledged. Institutional Review Board approval was obtained
from Harvard University. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.¸˛
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2017 by Robert Jensen and Nolan H. Miller. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Keepin' 'em Down on the Farm: Migration and Strategic Investment in Children's Schooling
Robert Jensen and Nolan H. Miller
NBER Working Paper No. 23122
February 2017
JEL No. D1,I21,J14,O12,O15
ABSTRACT
In rural areas of most developing countries, intergenerational coresidence is both widespread and an
important determinant of well-being for the elderly. Most parents want at least one adult child to remain
at home (e.g., so they can work on the family farm or provide care and assistance around the house).
However, children themselves may prefer to migrate when they grow up, and parents cannot directly
prevent them from doing so. We present a model where parents may strategically limit investments
in some children's education so that they will not find it optimal to migrate when they reach maturity,
and will thus voluntarily choose to remain home. We provide evidence for the model’s predictions
using an intervention that provided recruiting services for the business process outsourcing industry
in randomly selected rural Indian villages. Because awareness of these high-paying, high education,
urban jobs was limited at baseline, the intervention increased the attractiveness of migration for educated
children. Consistent with the model, in response to the treatment we find declines in school enrollment
among children that parents reported wanting to remain home at baseline. Children that parents want
to migrate have increased enrollment, and parents want more children to migrate.

Robert Jensen
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6302
and NBER
robertje@wharton.upenn.edu
Nolan H. Miller
College of Business
University of Illinois
4033 BIF
515 East Gregory Drive
Champaign, IL 61820
and NBER
nmiller@illinois.edu

I. INTRODUCTION
In most developing countries, children play an important role in the well-being of their
parents in old age. Adult children provide financial support, labor on the family farm or business,
insurance in case of illness or disability, physical care and assistance around the home, protection
and security, as well as attention and affection. These benefits are often provided through parents
and children living together. Over 70 percent of individuals in the developing world age 60 and
older live with their children, with rates as high as 80 to 90 percent in countries such as Bangladesh,
India, Pakistan and Senegal (UN 2005).1
Increasing urban economic opportunities associated with economic development cause
many children to migrate either temporarily or permanently out of rural areas. For many
households, migration is a critical strategy for increasing wealth, with children sending money
home. However, parents cannot always rely on these transfers, and the amount sent may be less
than what the parents would prefer, or what they would get if the child stayed on the farm and the
parent, rather than the child, controlled the distribution of wealth between them. Further, marketbased substitutes for the other benefits of coresidence, such as care and assistance around the home,
are often imperfect or non-existent.2 In short, in rural areas of most developing countries,
intergenerational coresidence is among the most important determinants of the well-being of the
elderly, and most parents hope that at least some of their children will live with or near them when
they get older.3
Parents’ hopes that their children will live with them are complicated by the fact that
parents cannot directly control whether their children migrate, and what the child finds optimal
may deviate from what parents would prefer. This creates an incentive problem between the
parents and their children. While parents cannot directly control their children’s migration
decisions, parents do control the amount of schooling they provide their children, and as such may

1

Similar patterns held in currently-wealthy countries in the past. In the U.S., 70 percent of the elderly lived
with their adult children in the mid- to late-19th century (Costa 1998, 1999, Ruggles 2007).
2
Knodel et al. (2007) note that while migration led to financial gains for rural elderly in Thailand, migrant
children are much less likely to provide care and other services around the home. Though Knodel et al.
(2010) note that extended households adapt to the changes brought about by migration, and that
technologies such as cell phones and faster transportation reduce the losses caused by not living together.
3
In wealthier countries, the elderly may prefer to live on their own when they can afford to. Costa (1999)
and McGarry and Schoeni (2000) show that social security reduced intergenerational coresidence in the
U.S. In contrast, Manacorda and Moretti (2006) argue that coresidence is a normal good for Italian parents.
They also present evidence that the preference for coresidence may vary across countries.
1

be able to limit their children's potential future benefits from migration. In this paper, we test
whether some parents strategically limit investments in their children's education so that the
children will not find it optimal to migrate when they reach maturity, and thus will voluntarily
choose to remain "down on the farm."
We first present a simple model of rural human capital investment in the face of possible
urban migration that captures the principal-agent problem between a parent and child. The key
feature of the model is that when parents cannot control their children’s migration decisions
directly, they must offer children a share of household income greater than what the child could
earn (net of any remittances) in the city in order to induce him to remain at home. Since urban
earnings increase with education, the resources needed to keep the child “down on the farm,”
which we call the incentive cost of education, increases as well.
The model predicts that when parents control schooling but not migration decisions, when
the urban returns to schooling increase, more rural parents will be better off if their children
migrate (via greater expected remittances). Parents who are better off with their children migrating
will also give them more education. Both predictions are consistent with standard models.
However, our model also yields the unique prediction that parents who are better off if their
children remain at home may respond to increases in the urban returns by decreasing their
children's schooling so that those children will later choose not to migrate. This prediction is driven
by the fact that as urban returns to schooling increase, parents must offer children a greater share
of household resources in order to induce them to remain at home, but this incentive cost of
education can be reduced if children are given less education.
We test these predictions using an intervention that, in effect, increased urban economic
opportunities for households in randomly selected rural Indian villages. For three years,
professional recruiters were employed to help young men and women become aware of and secure
jobs in the newly burgeoning (at the time of our study) business process outsourcing (BPO)
industry (e.g., call centers, online technical support, etc.). The BPO industry presents an ideal
setting for testing our theory because jobs in this sector are almost exclusively urban-based, require
more education than traditional jobs, and pay more than other jobs with comparable education
requirements, thus raising the urban returns to schooling (while largely leaving rural opportunities
unchanged). And because the sector was so new at the time of our study, awareness of these jobs
was low in rural areas, which allows the intervention to serve as a shock to perceived urban returns
2

to schooling (while largely leaving rural returns unchanged) and the desirability of future migration
for more educated children. Jensen (2012) uses the same experiment, but with a different set of
villages where recruiters only assisted women with BPO placement, to examine the role of labor
market opportunities in women’s education, work, marriage and fertility outcomes.
Using a panel survey of rural households, we find support for the theory of strategic
investment. The survey asked parents where they would prefer each of their children to live when
they are older; parents want about 44 percent of boys to live in the same dwelling as them, and
another 24 percent to live in the same village. Thus, parents express a strong preference for sons
to remain nearby.
Overall, the net effect of the treatment on the likelihood of enrollment for boys is very close
to zero. However, those boys that parents stated at baseline they would like to remain in their home
or in the same village experience large reductions in school enrolment in response to the treatment,
consistent with the strategic investment motive. By contrast, enrollment does increase for those
boys that parents report at baseline wanting to migrate. Further, parents want more boys to migrate
at endline than baseline. The treatment increased schooling for girls, almost none whom are
expected to remain at or near home, due to prevailing marriage patterns.
We believe that the conditions that generate our predictions, namely a highly rural
population with limited means of old age support and a strong preference for having children
remain nearby, alongside increasing urban returns and opportunities, are common in low income
countries. Beyond providing insight into educational decision-making in such countries, the results
may help explain some recent trends and patterns in educational investments. For example, despite
apparent large increases in the urban returns to schooling in many developing countries, education
levels, particularly at the secondary level, have not grown as rapidly. The model and results may
also help explain the more recent phenomenon in many developing countries that girls' schooling
has been increasing more rapidly than that of boys, and in some cases overtaking it (since in most
countries, the elderly typically live with sons, not daughters). The results also suggest that factors
and policies outside of the education sector, such as social security, health or nursing care, or the
functioning of land and labor markets, may affect educational attainment, through their potential
effects on the well-being of the elderly in the absence of coresidence. Finally, the results may also
provide an additional rationale for compulsory schooling laws, since parents do not appear to
always invest in a way that promotes the child's best interest.
3

Previous studies have explore the conflict arising from the fact that although parents decide
and pay for investments in their children’s schooling, the returns directly accrue to children. For
example, Chakrabarti, Lord and Rangazas (1993) argue that since parents can't contract with their
children, uncertainty over future support can lead to inefficiently low educational investments.4
Though we share this prediction, a key distinction is our model's prediction of declines in education
for some children in response to increases in urban returns, as opposed to just a weaker response.
Our study is also related to two other literatures. First, others have considered whether
parents act to ensure greater attention or support from children in old age. Bernheim, Shleifer and
Summers (1985) argue that parents strategically condition bequests in order to maximize attention
provided by their children. Hoddinott (1991) finds broadly similar results for Western Kenya with
respect to children's contributions of both money and time. Manacorda and Moretti (2006) argue
that Italian parents use transfers to "bribe" their children into living with them.
Additionally, many studies have considered the effects of migration on education. Most
studies focus on the potential for increased schooling, either due to greater household income (e.g.,
Yang 2008) or increased returns to education. Kochar (2004) finds that rural education in India
increases in response to increases in the returns in the nearest urban labor market. She also finds
that the gains are smaller for households with the most land, where children are more likely to
remain home rather than migrate. A few studies have considered the possibility that migration
could worsen educational outcomes. de Brauw and Giles (forthcoming) find that increasing urban
migration possibilities in rural China cause declines in high school enrollment. They argue that
this is due to increases in the opportunity cost of schooling, via an increase in the local wage rate
(due to decreased local labor supply) or by the high wage opportunities for unskilled workers
available through migration. McKenzie and Rapoport (2010) also find that migration may harm
education because when an adult leaves, their time inputs in the production of children's human
capital is lost, and children may also have to take over household production activities.5 Antman
(2011) similarly finds a negative effect of parental migration to the U.S. on children in Mexico,
with children spending less time in school and more time working. Though our study shares with
these papers a common finding of some declines in education associated with migration, our
4

Baland and Robinson (2000) and Bommier and Dubois (2004) argue that child labor may be inefficient if
parents don't internalize, respectively, the child's reduced future earnings or disutility of labor.
5
They also note that if international migrants can only get unskilled jobs in the destination country because
most migration is illegal, the returns to education may be lower than without migration.
4

primary emphasis is specifically on testing the strategic investment motive for the decline. We will
also show that the mechanisms underlying these other papers are unlikely to explain our results.
The remainder of this paper proceeds as follows. Section II discusses the model and the
testable predictions. Section III discusses the data, empirical strategy and experimental design.
Section IV shows the results and Section V concludes.

II. THE MODEL
In this section, we present a simple model of schooling investment in a two sector economy
with migration. Our goal is not to provide a complete model of such behavior, but rather to
demonstrate the key dynamics that generate testable predictions. We discuss the importance of key
simplifying assumptions at the end of the section. In particular, we consider a household where
the parent seeks to maximize income and there is only a single child. Doing so allows us to clearly
identify the driving force behind our results: if increasing education makes migrating to the city
marginally more attractive to the child, a parent who wishes to prevent the child from migrating
may respond to an increase in the marginal returns to education in the city by reducing the child’s
education in order to reduce the relative attractiveness of migration, which we call the “incentive
cost” of education. Having identified this basic force, we go on to discuss how the same idea would
arise in other models, such as with multiple children or bilateral altruism, with more complete
models incorporating these factors presented in the appendixes.
The economy has two sectors, a rural or agricultural sector and an urban sector. Each
household consists of a parent and a child. In the rural sector, parents are endowed with a unit of
land. If the child lives on the farm, he supplies one unit of labor, i.e., the quantity of labor is
inelastic. However, their productivity does depend on their education. Let f(e) be farm output as a
function of the child’s education, where f ' >0, f '' <0. Parents do not work (alternatively, they are
not very productive or their labor supply is inelastic). We assume for now that both land and labor
markets do not exist, so the parent is unable to sell or rent their land or hire-in labor to work on the
farm.
Children can either stay at home (H) or migrate (M) to the urban area. If the child migrates,
they send home a fraction, r, of their earnings to their parents. For simplicity, we take r to be

5

exogenous.6 There is also a cost t associated with migration, which for simplicity we assume is
paid by the child. While we treat t as a fixed parameter for the theoretical analysis, which considers
decision making within a household, t is a source of heterogeneity across households. Thus,
children from households with high migration costs due to factors such as distance or
cultural/linguistic differences will be less likely to migrate, while households with lower migration
costs will be more likely to migrate. A model relying on variation in the desirability of migration
driven by heterogeneity in endowments, child's ability (and thus either productivity or the returns
to schooling), the parent’s idiosyncratic taste for coresidence, etc., would yield similar results.
Let w(e) be the wage earned by the child if he migrates to the city, where w' >0 and w''<0.
We assume that productivity is higher in farm work at low levels of education, f(0) > w(0), but
that productivity increases more rapidly in education in the urban sector, i.e., w'(e) > f'(e), so that
at higher levels of education, productivity is higher in the urban sector, i.e., w(e) > f(e), for some
sufficiently large e. The cost of education is c(e), an increasing and convex function of the level
of education. The results do not change if education instead has a constant marginal cost.
Parents and children are assumed to be risk neutral and maximize wealth. The decisions to
be made are how much education, e, the child should receive and whether the child should migrate
to the city.

II.A. Parent Controls Education and Migration
We begin by considering the outcome when the parent makes all decisions, i.e., the level
of education and whether the child should migrate, and chooses them in order to maximize total
household wealth. Since there are no incentive problems in this case, it represents the household’s
efficient, or first-best, outcome. The analysis first derives the optimal level of education for a child
who remains at home and for a child who migrates, and then considers the question of whether it
is better for the family to have the child migrate or stay at home.
If the child remains at home, total household wealth is the difference between output on
the farm and the cost of schooling, f(e) – c(e). Let eh* denote the optimal education level in this
case, where f'(eh*) = c'(eh*). If the child migrates, total household wealth is given by w(e) – c(e) –

6

If parents are risk averse, any uncertainty over the amount the child will remit (or the child's income if

they migrate) will reinforce the predictions of the model by lowering expected utility in old age under the
scenario where the child migrates.
6

t. Let em* denote the optimal education level for children who migrate, where w'(em*) = c'(em*).
Under the assumption that w'(e) > f'(e), i.e., the marginal product of education is greater in the
city, then schooling levels will be higher among children who migrate, em* > eh*.
If the parent keeps the child at home, the child gets eh* years of education. If the parent lets
the child migrate, he gets em*. The former is preferred to the latter whenever:

f  eh*   c  eh*   w  em*   c  em*   t ,
which implies that households with t ≥ t* choose to keep their children at home, where:



 

t *  w  em*   c  em*   f  eh*   c  eh* 



In other words, as one expects, the parent sends the child to the city whenever the maximized
surplus in the city exceeds the maximized surplus at home by at least the cost of migration.

II.B. Parent Controls Schooling but Cannot Control Migration
This above solution will arise if the parent is able to choose the child’s level of education
as well as whether the child migrates. However, in reality while parents are able to exercise control
over education decisions, they are less able to control migration decisions, which gives rise to an
incentive problem between the parent and the child. Further, in real contexts there is an additional
incentive issue that arises due to the fact that once a child has left the parent’s home, the parent is
no longer able to control the allocation of the child’s income. To the extent that parents are unable
to appropriate all of the child’s income, this may affect their schooling and/or migration decisions.
We now consider such situations.
If the parent cannot control whether the child migrates, we can recast the problem as a twostage principal-agent problem between parent and child. In the first stage the parent chooses the
level of education. In the second stage, the child chooses whether to migrate. We continue to
assume, that the child remits home a fraction r of their earnings if they migrate.
In this version of the problem, the parent and child each choose strategies to maximize their
own wealth (as opposed to the parent maximizing total household wealth, as in the previous
section). If the child goes to the city, he remits fraction r of his wage, leaving him net wealth
v = (1-r) w(e) – t.7 Thus, in order to induce the child to choose to remain at home, the parent must
7

While for simplicity, we take the remittance rate r as exogenous here, in Appendix A we show that the
main comparative statics of interest hold in a model where a child who migrates endogenously chooses how
much income to remit to the parent.
7

offer him a share of household wealth of at least v. To simplify the analysis and focus on the
interesting cases, we assume that v > 0 for relevant levels of e and t. That is, the child is always
tempted to move to the city. If we were to relax this assumption, then there could be a range of t
and e for which v < 0. In this case, the child would choose to stay home even if the parent gave
him no resources.
In order to induce the child to remain at home, the parent must give the child share s of
household resources, where s ≥ v. This leaves the parent wealth f(e) – c(e) – s. Since the parent
will never choose to give the child more resources than necessary to keep him at home, this
expression becomes:
f  e  – c  e  – 1 – r  w  e  – t  .

(1)

Written this way, the term [(1−r) w(e) − t] represents the additional cost to the parent of educating
a child and keeping him at home given that the parent can no longer control the migration decision.
The more education the parent gives the child, the more attractive the child finds migration, and
thus the more resources the parent must give the child to prevent him from migrating. We refer to
this cost as the incentive cost of education.
If the parent wants the child to stay at home, they choose eh to maximize (1), which occurs
at:

f '  eh**   1  r  w '  eh**   c '  eh**  .
On the other hand, the parent’s net surplus if the child leaves is given by r w(e) – c(e), which is
maximized at em**, where r w'(em**) = c'(em**).
Using these conditions, we can state the following propositions:
Proposition 1: If r < 1, when parents cannot control migration decisions, children who stay home
and those who migrate receive less education than they do when the parent can control the
migration decision. If r = 1, then both levels of schooling are efficient.
When the parent cannot control the migration decision, both types of children receive less
education than when the parent can control migration, but for different reasons. For children who
migrate, the parent reduces education because the remittance rate less than one implies parents
receive less than the full marginal benefit of education. For children who do not migrate, parents
lower the child’s education because of the incentive cost of education. That is, as education

8

increases, the child’s ability to claim household resources increases, which reduces the marginal
return to the parent of education. 8
While both types of children receive less education when the parent cannot control
migration decisions, it nevertheless remains true that children who migrate receive more education
than children who do not.
Proposition 2: em** > eh**: children who migrate receive more education than children who do not.
Proof: It is sufficient to show that r w' (e)>f'(e) – (1−r)w'(e). But, note that
w ' e  f ' e
rw '  e   1  r  w '  e   f '  e 
rw '  e   f '  e   1  r  w '  e  . ■

Our main comparative static of interest is what happens to education levels and migration
decisions when parents cannot control migration decisions and the urban returns to education
increase, as they did in our BPO recruiting experiment. To consider the impact of an increase in
returns to education in the city, for simplicity we replace the wage function w(e) with θ w(e), where
θ > 0. Here, an increase in θ represents an increase in the returns to education in the city. When
migration cannot be controlled by the parent, the solution to the parent’s problem, (eH, eM, t*)
solves:

f  eh**   c  eh**   [1  r  w  eh**   t ** ]  r w  em**   c  em**  ,
f '  eh**   1  r  w '  eh**   c '  eh**  , and
r w '  em**   c '  em**  .
Implicitly differentiating these conditions with respect to θ yields Proposition 3:

8

Parents may have other instruments available to either keep children at home or ensure an optimal level
of transfers from migrated children, such as threatening to withhold inheritance (in rural areas of poor
countries, this would primarily take the form of land), as in Bernheim, Shleifer and Summers (1985).
However, if the urban returns are sufficiently high or the value of land or other assets sufficiently low, the
child could still be better off forgoing inheritance in favor of migration. Further, since rural land markets
are relatively thin in many low income countries, bequests often require the child to return to the rural area
to get value from the bequests, which may make remaining in the urban area and forgoing the bequest
optimal. Finally, there many landless households, for whom bequests are generally very small.
9

Proposition 3: An increase in the returns to education (θ) increases education for children who
migrate (e'm (θ) > 0), decreases education for children who stay home (e'h (θ) < 0), and increases
the set of households whose children migrate, (t'(θ)>0).
Proof: Let em(θ), eh(θ), and t(θ) denote the parameterized version of the solution. Implicitly
differentiating the above conditions and simplifying using the first-order conditions yields the
following, from which the proposition is immediate:
t '    1  r  w  eh**   rw  em**   0

1  r  w '  eh** 
eh '   
0
f ''  eh**   1  r   w ''  eh**   c ''  eh** 
e   
'
m

rw '  em** 

c ''  em**   r w ''  em** 

0

The intuition underlying Proposition 3 is driven by the idea that, in order to keep the child
from choosing to migrate, the parent must give him share v = (1 – r) w(e) – t of household wealth,
which represents the incentive cost of education. As described above, the optimal choice of
education for children who remain at home sets the marginal product of education on the farm,
f'(e), equal to the sum of the marginal cost of education, c'(e), and the marginal incentive cost of
education, (1 – r) θ w'(e). Since an increase in θ increases the marginal incentive cost of education,
education becomes less attractive to the parent as θ increases. The result is a reduction in the
parent’s optimal choice of education for children who remain at home.
While these children do receive less education, it is important to note that there is a
countervailing benefit in the form of a greater claim on household assets. This benefit will, at the
very least, reduce the harm done by the reduction in education. In fact, in cases where the reduction
in education is small, these children may even be better off overall following an increase in the
returns to urban education, as their increased claim on household assets more than compensates
for the loss in education.
In the case where a parent chooses to allow the child to migrate, he does so because the
incentive cost of inducing the child to remain at home is too large relative to the additional income
that could be earned by allowing him to migrate. An increase in θ only makes this gap even larger.
For children who migrate, the increase in θ increases the marginal return to education and increases
education even further, while for children who were nearly indifferent between migrating and not,
the increase in city wages following the increase in θ results in the parent no longer being willing
10

to give up enough resources to keep them at home. The result is that more children migrate after
the increase in θ.9
Thus, an increase in the urban returns to education decreases schooling of children who
remain in the rural area, and increases it among children who migrate. If enough children will
remain in the rural area, the net, overall education of rural children could decrease. Additionally,
these effects will lead to greater inequality in educational attainment among rural children.
Finally, since an increase in the urban returns to education increases the parents’ cost of
inducing children to stay at home and increases remittances in the event that children migrate, it
becomes optimal for parents to allow more children to migrate. That is, after the returns to
education increase the set of transportation cost parameters, t, for which migration is optimal
grows.
The incentive cost of education is the primary factor that leads to the prediction that parents
who wish their children to remain at home may respond to increases in the returns to education in
the city by reducing the child’s education. This force will be present in a wide variety of models.
For example, although our simple model takes the parent as maximizing income, similar
predictions would arise in a model where the parent is altruistic if, given those altruistic
preferences, the parent wishes the child to remain at home while the child prefers to migrate. If
this is the case, then the parent will have to dedicate more of the household’s resources to the child
to keep him from migrating than what is ideal even when the parent is altruistic. Thus, a parent
who ideally would like to split household resources evenly between parent and child might have
to divert 60 percent of household resources to the child to keep him from migrating. An increase
in the returns to education in the city would increase the child’s temptation to migrate, causing the
parent to have to divert even more resources to the child to prevent migration. However, if the
parent can reduce the relative attractiveness of migration by reducing the child’s education, then

Although the parameterization of the returns to schooling as w(e) allows us to easily compute the effects
of an increase in θ on education levels and t**, the result holds more generally. In particular, the same
qualitative conclusions hold if we instead consider a general upward shift in w'(e). To see this, note that eH
is defined by f '(eH) – (1−r)w'(eH) = c'(eH). An upward shift in w' (e) decreases the left-hand side, which
decreases the optimal choice of eH and lowers the parent’s maximal surplus from keeping the child at home.
Similarly, eM is defined by rw'(eM) = c'(eM), and an upward shift in w' (e) increases the left-hand side, which
increases the optimal choice of eM and increases the parent’s optimal surplus from letting the child migrate.
t** then necessarily increases because the cut-off level of t is where:
9

t **  r w  eM   c  eM    f  eH   c  eH   1  r  w  eH 

11

the parent may respond to an increase in the urban returns by reducing the child’s education. See
Appendix A for a treatment of this case.
The incentive cost of education can also arise in a model with multiple children. Briefly,
consider a parent with N total children who wishes to keep H of them at home and to allow M = N
– H to migrate. In order to prevent the H children from migrating, the parent will have to ensure
that they are as well off at home as they would be if they migrated. This constraint gives rise to
the incentive cost of education. Beginning with the case where the parent has optimally chosen
education levels for the children and which should migrate, an increase in the returns to education
will increase the temptation to migrate of those who stay at home. Once again, if the parent wishes
to prevent the children from migrating, they will have to be given more income. However, the
parent can also reduce the temptation to migrate by reducing the children’s education. We show
in Appendix B that reducing education in response to an increase in the returns to education may
be optimal for the parent.10
We have abstracted thus far from the portfolio decision allocating education and migration
across multiple children. In such a setting, for any particular child the education and migration
effects of increasing urban returns are likely to be influenced by what is optimal across the
collection of siblings. Thus for example, in response to an increase in the urban returns, credit
constrained parents may find it optimal to focus their limited resources on fewer children, with
some gaining at the expense of others. Parents with two children may decide that rather than
providing both with an intermediate amount of schooling, they should instead now provide one
with a high level of education (and/or higher quality or more expensive private schooling) so they
can get a BPO job, requiring a schooling reduction for the other. 11 Whether this is optimal from
the parent's perspective will depend on the shape of both the urban and rural returns functions and
the schooling cost function. Such cross-sibling effects could also occur through a reallocation of
time in household production activities (the child expected to remain at home takes on more so
that the child expected to migrate can focus more on schooling, leaving the former with less time
for school). We will not analyze this portfolio decision, since our focus is on testing the down on

10

When there are multiple children at home, one complication is that reducing the education for any one
child affects the marginal productivity of the other children. Under relatively weak assumptions, it can be
shown (Appendix B) that it remains optimal for the parent to reduce education for all children who remain
home following an increase in the returns to education in the city.
11
See Appendix C for an illustration of how this might occur.
12

the farm hypothesis. However, the multiple child case does raise an important issue for the
empirical analysis, since both our model and credit or household production constraints when there
are multiple children predict gains for children expected to migrate alongside losses for children
expected to stay at home. We address this further in Section III.F.
As noted in the introduction, there are several reasons other than income why parents may
not want children to migrate. For example, children may provide services for which market
substitutes are imperfect or effectively non-existent, such as physical care, attention, affection or
protection from crime or violence. Alternatively, parents may place greater value on maintaining
traditional ties to ancestral land than children do, worry more about the "corrupting influences" of
cities or place less value on their social amenities. In any of these cases, children are more likely
to migrate to the city than parents would prefer. If parents do not directly control the migration
decision but do control the education decision, and if lower levels of education reduce the child's
reward from moving to the city, similar results would arise under these alternative motives.
Distinguishing among motives will not be possible with our data. Our primary interest is whether
parents engage in strategic behavior to influence their child's migration decision, so our analysis
will focus simply on how education responds based on whether parents want a given child to
migrate, regardless of the underlying reason.
We made several other assumptions in setting up the model. First, we assumed there were
no land markets. If the parent could simply sell their land for the discounted stream of future
output, they would not need to have a child stay to work the land. Alternatively, they could lease
the land to someone else to farm (either for rent or as part of a share cropping arrangement).
However, land markets are often imperfect in many rural areas, and there are not many transactions
in practice, so that this assumption remains a crude but fair approximation for many households.
There are a few reasons that these markets are limited. In rental markets, for example, there are
problems in contract enforcement, and differing incentives between landlord and renter with
respect to the short vs. long term health and productivity of the land (i.e., some agricultural
techniques result in higher short-term yields at the expense of longer-term yields). With respect to
land sales, one limitation is imperfect titling and tenure security. In addition, it would typically be
difficult to store wealth from a sale, since there is little access to banks or other formal savings
instruments, particular in rural areas, and less formal means of wealth accumulation may not be
sufficiently safe, or protected from the demands of relatives. Further, individuals may attach a
13

psychic value to land that has been in their family for generations (which the market will not
compensate), and want their sons to keep it in the family. Additionally, in some areas of the
developing world, households may have only usufructury rights to land, meaning they have rights
to the exclusive use of a given parcel of land, and can bequeath those rights to their children, but
they cannot sell the land or rent it to others. Under such arrangements, if the land is unused, village
authorities may reassign it to other households, without compensation. The inability to sell the
land means that the only way for the parent to extract the future value of that land is if their child
remains at home on the farm (or, if they can hire in labor, as discussed below). Although in practice
land markets in rural areas are often not very robust for these reasons, we of course would not
argue that there is no land market at all. However, there are strong factors that favor retaining
owned land, which creates an additional wedge that the higher expected contributions of migrating
children must overcome. And it is also worth noting that even with perfect land markets, our results
would still hold if parents don't want children to migrate primarily because there are no market
substitutes for the other benefits of coresidence or because of an aversion to children living in the
city, since then what matters to the parent is just whether the child physically stays or migrates,
not whether the parent can maintain income by selling their land.
We also assumed that there were no labor markets. With perfect labor markets where
parents can hire-in workers to replace migrating children, there would be again be less financial
reason to prefer a child remain at home. However, labor markets are often imperfect as well. Hired
labor may not yield as a high a return to the parent, such as due to greater monitoring and
enforcement costs. Foster and Rosenzweig (2011) estimate that using hired-in labor rather than
family labor as much as doubles the shadow price of labor, such as due to higher supervisory costs.
Additionally, a temporary worker who may change from season to season will also not have the
farm-specific human capital or "specific knowledge" that a child growing up and working on that
farm over many years will have. Rosenzweig and Wolpin (1985) use specific knowledge to jointly
explain the predominance of extended families, the predominant use of family labor on farms, and
the relative scarcity of land transactions in rural India. Finally, there may also be an unwillingness
to hire-in labor that may expose women in the household to men outside of the family (restrictions
such as purdah are practiced by about 10 percent of households in our study area). Again, we
would not argue that agricultural labor markets don't exist, but rather there are strong factors that
favor the use of family labor, as has been documented by others, and which is frequently observed
14

in practice. And again, even with perfect labor markets, children who migrate are unable to provide
the non-financial benefits of coresidence for which there are no market substitutes, so parents may
still prefer a child remain at home.

III. DATA AND EMPIRICAL STRATEGY
III. A. Study Area and Survey Information
We focus on rural areas outside of Delhi, one of the major centers of the Indian BPO sector.
Because we wanted to test our model where awareness of BPO jobs was low, we used experienced
BPO recruiters from Delhi to define the areas outside of the city where recruiters were not visiting,
due solely to distance or population size, i.e., the time and cost per potential recruit was high
enough that it was not worthwhile to search for potential recruits there.12 This primarily meant
focusing on areas approximately 50 to 150km outside of the city, in the states of Haryana, Punjab,
Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh. Within this area, we drew 160 villages at random from a list of all
villages. In each village, we worked with local officials to draw up a list of all households, then
randomly selected 20 households per village.
We conducted a baseline survey from September to October of 2003. The survey consisted
of a household questionnaire, an adult questionnaire and a survey of village characteristics
conducted with knowledgeable local officials. We also gathered information on all household
members, or children of members, who were temporarily or permanently living away from home.
Thus, for example we know about school enrollment for children who have migrated.
A follow-up survey with the same households was conducted from September to October
of 2006. We also tracked, and where possible interviewed, all individuals who left home between
rounds, such as for work or marriage. Means and standard deviations of key variables are provided
in Table I.

III. B. Testing Predictions of the Model
The key testable predictions of the model from Proposition 3 are that for rural areas, an
increase in the urban returns to schooling should lead to:
12

At this range, due to poor road quality and high congestion around Delhi, a Delhi-based recruiter might
need to spend a whole day, and considerable travel expenses, just to reach one village. And any given
village may have only a few individuals with enough education for a BPO job. Since recruiters typically
earn a fee per recruit they find, it is far more profitable to focus on Delhi than on outlying rural areas.
15

Prediction 1: An increase in schooling for children whose parents want them to migrate;
Prediction 2: A decrease in schooling for children whose parents do not want them to migrate;
Prediction 3: An increase in the number of children parents want to migrate.

The two biggest challenges in testing these predictions are, 1) classifying children based
on their parents' preferences towards migration, and 2) a source of exogenous variation in the urban
returns to schooling. We discuss each of these in detail below.

III. C. Classifying Children by Parent's Migration Preferences
A number of factors may affect whether a parent wants a given child to migrate, including
birth order, sex, the amount of land owned, the quality of labor and land markets, beliefs about the
child's altruism or their ability in both rural and urban occupations, expectations about health and
life expectancy, preferences over factors like keeping land in one's family or the corrupting
influence of city life, etc. Our survey cannot provide a complete accounting of all the determinants
of migration intentions. Instead, we use a direct elicitation of intentions or preferences.
Respondents were asked, for each of their living children, "When you are older and your child is
an adult, do you want or hope [child’s name] will live: 1. in this dwelling or in another dwelling
on this land or compound; 2. in a separate household or dwelling in this village; 3. in a different
village, nearby; 4. in a different village, far away; 5. in a city in India; 6. in a country other than
India."13 We take the response to this question as a summary, reduced-form measure of parents'
migration preferences.
There are of course concerns in using self-reported preferences or expectations.14 However,
an increasing number of studies have shown that such measures can be good predictors of actual
13

Since some migration may be temporary, additional follow-up questions were asked. For the first four
responses, a follow-up asked: "Do you hope [child’s name] will go live and work in a city at any time in
the future for at least 6 months, even if they return after that?" For responses other than 1 or 2, a follow-up
was also asked: "Do you hope [child’s name] will eventually return and live with you in the same dwelling
or in another dwelling on this land or compound, or in a separate household or dwelling in the same village?"
14
Classifications based on more objective variables have limitations. For example, in some areas, by custom
only the oldest son inherits land or is expected to remain home with his parents. However, this norm is not
universal, so birth order is not a useful classifying measure. Another alternative is land holdings, since those
with little or land would not expect their children to stay to work their land. However land is also wealth,
which might affect education. And parents without land might still want their children to remain nearby to
provide care or assistance or to run a family non-farm business.
16

future outcomes, as well useful indicators of underlying beliefs that can be used for testing theories
in the way we wish to here.15 In addition, any concerns about whether subjective measures
accurately capture the underlying factor of interest should cause the variable to contain less true
signal about migration preferences and thereby weaken our test of the model, which will rely on
differences in parental migration intentions across children. One concern is whether this measure
simply proxies for other factors that influence schooling (e.g., parents want more intelligent
children to migrate and less intelligent children to remain home). However, the key distinguishing
prediction of our model is that an increase in the urban returns will have a negative impact on
schooling for children that parents want to stay at home; though many factors may cause parents
to not increase their children's schooling in response to these new opportunities, it is difficult to
think of factors that would cause a decrease, unless it is directly tied to not wanting children to
take advantage of the new opportunities, as in our model. Thus for example, parents may
understandably not give their less intelligent children more education following our intervention
because they don't think those children can get BPO jobs, but it is unclear why they would give
them less education in response to the treatment, other than to keep them from trying to migrate
for the job. Though below, we will consider the possible effects of credit constraints (investing
less in one child so you can invest more in another), changes in local labor market conditions or
changes in household time allocation.
We also note that if parents simply report what they believe is fait accompli, i.e., the child
has already made it clear whether they will migrate, rather than what the parents themselves prefer,
this should not generate our results; there is no reason to expect that parents who have resigned
themselves to the child having decided to stay home would respond to the increased urban
opportunities by giving them less schooling.
Table II shows baseline responses to the questions about migration preferences for children
aged 6 to 18 at baseline. Parental preferences for boys show considerable variation. Parents want
about 44 percent of boys to live with them in the same physical dwelling or compound when they

15

For example, Finkelstein and McGarry (2006) find that subjective beliefs of the likelihood of entering a
nursing home predict the decision to purchase long-term care insurance and actual future nursing home
entry. They also use this variable to distinguish risk aversion from adverse selection. Similarly,
Jayachandran and Kuziemko (2010) test a model of breastfeeding duration based on how close a respondent
is to self-reported "ideal family size." Manski (2004), Hurd (2009) and Deavande, Giné and McKenzie
(2011) provide discussions of measures of subjective expectations and their limitations.
17

are older, and want another 24 percent to live in the same village. The desire to have a son stay
nearby is even stronger than this implies, since many couples have more than one son; over 80
percent of parents want at least one of their sons to live with them when they are older. Parents
want 15 percent of boys to migrate to a city. However, there is very little desired rural-to-rural
migration (either to nearby or distant villages) or migration outside of India. Finally, about 5
percent of responses were "don't know," "whatever the child wants," or "up to god."
Preferences for girls differ notably. Parents want very few girls to live in the same dwelling
or village as them, instead wanting about 48 percent to live in another rural area (either nearby or
further away). These preferences are consistent with the common practice of patrilocal exogamy,
where marriages take place across rather than within villages, with girls leaving their birth
household to join their husband's family. Parents want 23 percent of girls to migrate to a city, but
want very few to leave India. There were also more instances in which parents reported don't
know/whatever the child wants/up to god (16 percent). Because parents report wanting so few girls
to remain home or in the same village, there is little need for strategic underinvestment to keep
them from leaving. Thus, we will not be able to test Prediction 3 for girls.
We note that because these preferences predict that boys may experience the strategic
reductions in schooling but girls will not, our model shares a common prediction with Munshi and
Rosenzweig (2006). They find that increases in the returns to English language education in
Bombay driven by the financial sector and other white collar industries caused increased
enrollment in English language schools for girls but not boys. They attribute the difference to
caste-based job networks, which women were not a part of and that appear to limit men's
occupational mobility. Our studies share the prediction of how a cultural practice or institution can
cause a seemingly gender neutral increase in the returns to schooling to have heterogeneous effects
on children by sex, and in particular predicting that the gains may be greater for girls.
For testing our predictions for boys, we will use the fifth response, wanting the child to live
in a city, as our indicator of parents wanting them to migrate, and the first two responses, wanting
the child to live in the same dwelling or compound, or in the same village, as not wanting the child
to migrate. In terms of the latter, many of the roles that sons (and/or their wives) play in the lives
of their elderly parents, such as working on their land or providing care around the home can best

18

be provided, or are most likely to be provided, when they coreside.16 However, much of the same
can also be accomplished without living in the same physical dwelling, provided children are
nearby, such as in the same village, as noted for example by Bian, Logan and Bian (1998) for
China.17 And, for some motives, such as simply not wanting a child to live in a city because of
perceived dangers, the parent should be indifferent between living together or having the child in
the same village. The key issue for our analysis is that when there are new opportunities available
in the city, some parents will want their children to take advantage of those opportunities, and
some will want their children not to, and in particular will want them to remain nearby. The first
and second responses seem the most appropriate way to capture this latter category. We do not
include the other responses (wanting the child to live in another village, nearby or far away, or to
live outside of India) in our analysis.18
III. D. Variation in the Returns to Schooling: The Recruiting Experiment19
Testing the model also requires variation in the urban returns to schooling. We make use
of an experimental intervention that in effect assigned greater urban opportunities to randomly
selected rural villages by using recruiters for the BPO industry. The BPO industry covers a range
of activities such as call centers, data entry and management, claims processing, secretarial
services, voice-to-text transcription and online technical support. The sector has grown rapidly
over the past two decades in India due to technological changes in telecommunications and
networking infrastructure, such as the deployment of fiber optic cable networks, and regulatory
16

A son's wife may remain behind even if the son migrates, and provide labor, care and support to her inlaws. Though this certainly happens, there is in total less help provided when the son migrates, and
additionally, many men who migrate will bring their wives and children with them.
17
Living in a city also does not preclude visiting parents, providing seasonal labor or occasional care around
the home. However, it is likely that the amount of such activity will be greater on average when the child
lives nearby. The same holds for responses 3 and 4, wanting the child to live in a nearby or distant village.
Though if parents' primary concern about migration relates simply to not wanting their child to live in a
city, we might expect parents to reduce education for this group as well.
18
For our tests, wanting the child to live outside of India should not be included as wanting the child to
migrate. The experiment increased the returns to schooling in urban India. If a parent wanted their child to
live and work outside of India, we would not expect them to alter their education investments based on
these new opportunities (unless it changed whether parents want them to stay in India, and the amount of
education for the desired overseas work differs from what is required for BPO jobs).
19
As noted in the introduction, the experiment we use to test our model was originally designed to examine
the effects of labor market opportunities on human capital and work/family outcomes for women, as
explored in Jensen (2012). We later independently developed the model presented in the current paper, and
subsequently realized that a set of villages from the original experiment could be used to test this model.
19

changes, such as allowing foreign investment in the telecommunications sector. This growth
created a sharp and sudden increase in the demand for educated workers. To help BPO firms meet
this demand, a specialized recruiting sector grew, which included small and medium sized firms
that would seek out and screen potential employees, either freelance or under contract (some larger
BPO firms also developed their own in-house recruiting divisions).
The BPO sector is well-suited for testing our predictions. First, BPO jobs require at least a
high school degree, and offer much higher salaries on average than other jobs with similar
educational requirements. Entry-level salaries typically ranged from 5,000−10,000 Rupees ($U.S.
110−220) per month in 2003, which was about twice the average salary for workers with a high
school degree working in other sectors. Therefore, the growth of the BPO sector represents an
increase in the returns to schooling. Oster and Millett (2013) similarly treat the BPO sector as a
shock to the returns to schooling and Shastry (2012) uses the information technology sector in
India more broadly in a similar way.
Second, at the time of our study, BPO jobs were located almost exclusively in urban areas,
thus there was specifically an increase in urban returns to schooling, as in our model, leaving the
rural returns largely unchanged (we test this in more detail below). Third, because the sector was
so new at the time we began our study, there was very limited awareness of the BPO sector itself
or how to get a BPO job, particularly in rural areas, which we will focus on. In our 2003 baseline
survey, discussed below, less than five percent of respondents reported they had ever heard of call
center jobs.20 And no household had a member, including those living temporarily or permanently
away from home, working in this sector. This allows us to in effect increase the urban returns to
schooling from the perspective of rural parents by increasing awareness of these jobs and making
it easier for qualified individuals to get them, as detailed below.
Finally, the high education requirements of BPO jobs (typically a minimum of 10 or 12
years of schooling) will help us treat our intervention as increasing the future urban returns to
schooling for currently young children, while largely leaving the employment opportunities for
older adults in their household unchanged. One concern in analyzing the effects of labor market
conditions on contemporaneous changes in schooling is that the labor market affects both children
in the future as well as adults in the current period. It can therefore be difficult to determine how

20

Oster and Millett (2013) find that perceptions of the higher returns to schooling created by the presence
of a call center in a town does not spread more than a few kilometers from the actual call center.
20

much of any associated change in education is driven by the anticipated future benefits of
schooling, as opposed to changes in their parents' or older siblings' current employment or earnings
(and thus changes in household income, time allocation or the bargaining power of one parent
relative to the other). Not only are few adults with school aged children in our sample qualified for
a BPO job, but we can exclude any direct effects of getting a BPO job on children's schooling by
restricting the sample to households where no member could get a BPO job because they all have
too little education. We discuss this in more detail below.
For our intervention, we hired eight experienced BPO recruiters working in Delhi. Each of
the recruiters was randomly assigned to one of 80 randomly selected treatment villages. Between
December 2003 and February 2004, recruiters visited the treatment villages. After first making
contacts and introductions, the recruiters would return a few weeks later and conduct information
and recruiting sessions, open to all members of the community.21
The sessions followed a fixed format, including: an overview of the BPO sector and the
types of jobs and level of compensation available; information on the names of employers
currently or frequently looking for workers; strategies for how to apply for jobs (creating and
submitting resumes, lists of websites and phone numbers); interview skills lessons and tips; mock
interviews; assessment of English language skills; and a question and answer session. The
recruiters also emphasized that the jobs were very competitive, and that employment was not
guaranteed. The sessions were well-attended and drew a great deal of interest.
The recruiters provided "booster shots" one and two years after the initial treatment,
visiting the same villages and conducting the same sessions. Recruiters also left their contact
information for free follow-up, additional information or assistance. The recruiters were contracted
to provide support for anyone from the designated villages. Thus, the intervention consisted of
three in-depth sessions plus three years of continuous, free placement support.
The last three columns of Tables I and II report summary statistics separately by treatment
status, as well as tests of treatment-control covariate balance at baseline. The variables overall
appear balanced between the control and treatment groups. Formal tests suggest that randomization
was successful: the p-value for the F–test that baseline characteristics jointly predict treatment is
21

In a second set of treatment villages, we provided recruiting services for women only. Jensen (2012) uses
these villages to test whether labor market opportunities for women affect human capital, marriage and
fertility. Since parents want few girls to stay home, and since the women-only intervention did not directly
alter the opportunities for boys, we do not use these villages for the present study.
21

0.63 and variable-by-variable individual t-tests in the final column cannot reject equality of means
for the treatment and control groups for almost all variables.

III.E. Empirical Specification
Our test of Predictions 1 and 2 (gains in enrolment for children that parents want to migrate
and declines for those they want to stay home) consists of regressing Round 2 school enrolment
for children 6−18 on an indicator for residing in a treatment village, separately for subsamples
based on baseline parental preferences regarding the child's future residential location (remain at
or near home vs. migrate),22 𝐸𝑛𝑟𝑜𝑙𝑙𝑒𝑑𝑖 =β0 +β1 Treatmenti +εi , where Treatment equals one if
child i lives in a village that was exposed to the recruiting intervention. Though randomization
should result in treatment-control covariate balance in expectation, in any particular sample there
can be small differences. Therefore, in additional specifications we also add baseline controls, Z,
that are predictors of enrolment (parent's education, log of food expenditure per capita, family size
and child age), and, separately, a fixed effects specification using changes between Rounds 1 and
2. For girls, we present the overall effect of the treatment for the full sample, since Table II showed
that parents want few girls to stay at home or nearby.
Although we did not stratify our randomization by parental baseline preferences, the
bottom panels of Table I show that baseline variables are still balanced between the treatment and
control groups within these subsamples.
For testing Prediction 2, we use the same specifications, but with the parent's migration
preferences for each child as the dependent variable. All regressions are estimated using linear
probability models, but the results are robust to alternative limited dependent variable
specifications. Standard errors are clustered at the village level.

III.F. Distinguishing Down on the Farm Effects from Credit Constraints
As noted above, credit constraints or household production in the presence of multiple
children could yield similar predictions to the down on the farm model. Without ruling out that
such effects may cause reductions in schooling for some boys in our treatment villages, we can
test our model in a setting where such are unlikely to explain our results. For example, if we see

22

We use baseline values to avoid stratifying by an endogenous variable. Since the treatment may cause
parents to want more children to migrate, this likely biases us against finding the effect we predict.
22

schooling declines for boys expected to remain home in families with just one child, it cannot be
because parents are instead investing more in another child. However, single child families are
rare in our sample. As an alternative, we consider households where there is currently only one
school-eligible child; for example, they are the last born child and as of Round 1 all of their earlier
born siblings are past schooling age or have already permanently dropped out of school.23 In such
cases, credit constraints may cause parents to not provide more schooling to the child in response
to the treatment, but they should not cause a reduction, since there is no other child to invest in.
And even if parents always intended for these children to get less education than their siblings,
there is no reason to decrease their education in response to an increase in the urban returns. If
anything, having older siblings who work (either away from home or at home) rather than attend
school should reduce credit constraints or household production labor needs.
IV. RESULTS
IV. A. Tests of the Predictions
We begin by first discussing the net effects of the treatment, before turning to the test of
our hypothesis of interest. The results are presented in Table III. The first two sets of columns
show results for the full sample of boys and girls. For girls, the treatment increased the likelihood
of enrollment by about 5−6 percentage points. The coefficient is robust across the three
specifications, and statistically significant at the 1 percent level in all cases. These results are
consistent with those found in Jensen (2012).
By contrast, the treatment had little to no net effect on education for boys. The coefficients
across all three specifications are negative, but they are small and not statistically significant.
Again, on its own, the finding of no net effect for boys is consistent with many possible
explanations beyond the offsetting effects predicted by our model; for example, there may have
already been high returns for boys even without the BPO sector.24
The last two sets of columns in Table IIII split boys based on parents' baseline migration
preferences for children. For the group of boys that parents want to stay at or near home, the

23

Even children who report having permanently left school could in principle return to school. However,
in our sample, we only observe four cases where such a child at baseline is enrolled in Round 2.
24
Oster and Millett (2013) find that call centers lead to enrollment gains for boys and girls in India.
However, they examine the effect of the local presence of a call center; with call centers nearby, boys could
get a BPO job without migrating, reducing the need to strategically reduce their education. We focus on
more remote rural areas where there were no call centers, thus requiring migration.
23

treatment had a negative effect on enrolment. Across the three specifications, the treatment reduced
enrolment by about 4−5 percentage points, with results statistically significant at the 5 percent
level or better. This result indicates that there is a clear set of youths who lose when urban returns
increase, consistent with our model of strategic investment.
By contrast, for the group of boys that parents want to migrate, the treatment had a positive
impact on schooling. School enrolment increased by about 6 percentage points, though the effects
are less precisely estimated (perhaps in part due to the smaller sample sizes, since parents want
fewer boys to migrate). Though consistent with more standard models of investment in schooling,
this result, as well as the schooling gains for girls, is of interest in its own right because it suggests
that for some children, poverty and credit constraints or supply-side limitations may not be as
important as demand-side constraints in limiting investment, i.e., parents may be providing little
education to some children not because they can't afford to or because schools are too far away,
but because they don't find it optimal to, due to low expected returns. Our experiment did not
change credit constraints, wealth, school quality, distance to schools or any other factor; the
anticipated higher return to schooling was sufficient, for some children, to induce greater
schooling, as in Foster and Rosenzweig (1996), Heath and Mobarak (2015), Munshi and
Rosenzweig (2006), Jensen (2010, 2012) and Abramitzky and Lavy (2014).
Table IV shows the results for the sample of last remaining children, which enables us to
test our hypothesis more cleanly by effectively eliminating cross-sibling effects (i.e., they cannot
be reducing one child's education in order to give another child more education, since there are no
other children in the household to give schooling to).25 This restriction also reduces our sample
size considerably. The results are less precisely estimated than before, but we again see the same
patterns as for the full sample of children. The point estimates of the effects of the treatment are
still positive for girls and negative for boys, though in neither case are they statistically significant.
For boys expected to migrate, the effect of the treatment is positive in all specifications, and
moderately sized, but no longer statistically significant, perhaps in part due to the sample size
being reduced to just 119. With regards to the strategic investment motive however, education
again declines for those boys that parents want to remain at home. The magnitude is in fact slightly

25

Though we can't rule out that some parents reduce their children's education to finance the education of
children outside of the household (e.g, nieces or nephews). However, the treatment was not associated with
an increase in transfers or payments made on behalf of people outside the household.
24

larger than for the full sample of boys,26 and statistically significant at the five percent level for
the specifications with controls or fixed effects (for the specification with no additional controls,
the effect is only significant at the 10 percent level). Thus, we find evidence supporting our model,
in a setting where the results cannot be due to credit constraints. And as noted above, while there
may be a concern that wanting a child to stay home is proxying for some other omitted child or
household attribute that causes parents to give those children lower levels of schooling on average,
or that may make them not want to increase their child's schooling in response to the new
opportunities (e.g., the feel the child is not intelligent enough to get one of the jobs), there is no
obvious such factor that would cause households to respond to an increase in returns by decreasing
schooling, unless it has to do with wanting to prevent that child from migrating in response to the
new opportunities. We discuss some alternatives more fully below.
Finally, we can test the prediction that parents should want more children to migrate in
response to an increase in the urban returns to schooling. Table V shows that in response to the
treatment, parents do indeed want more children to migrate. For boys, there is a 7 percentage point
increase, which is very large relative to a baseline of 15 percent. For girls, there is a 6 percentage
point increase, from a baseline of 23 percent. The new set of high paying urban jobs clearly
changes the migration vs. home calculus from the perspective of parents.

IV.B. Alternative Explanations for Declines in Schooling
As noted, the key prediction that differentiates our model from more standard models of
human capital investment or migration is that for the identifiable subgroup of children that parents
want to stay at home, increases in urban returns lead to decreases in schooling. We argue that this
is due to parents responding to the increased likelihood their children will want to migrate by trying
to make migration a less attractive option for them. However, a few alternative mechanisms could
also generate a decline in schooling for some children, even alongside gains for others, in the face
of increased urban employment opportunities or returns to schooling.
First, even though the BPO sector was specifically chosen for the experiment because it
targeted the employment opportunities of younger adults (or future opportunities for current
26

We might expect bigger effects for last remaining children. If parents want an earlier birth order child to
remain home but they migrate anyway, there are other children left to try to keep home. If the parent wants
the last child to remain home but they leave, there are no more options. Therefore, parents should employ
even greater strategic reductions in schooling for later born or last remaining children.
25

children) while leaving opportunities for current parents largely unchanged (since few have
enough education, speak English or have computer experience), it is still possible that a few parents
did get jobs. If so, the education of children 6−18 in our regression samples could have been
affected through other channels. For example, schooling declines could be the result of children
taking over the household production activities of parents who migrate for a BPO job, or the lost
parental time input into the child's human capital (as suggested by McKenzie and Rapoport
2010).27 Similar effects could be arise through BPO employment of older siblings or other adults
in the household.28
We cannot completely rule out that such effects take place in our treatment villages.
Instead, we can test our model in a setting where these effects are unlikely to apply. Building on
Jensen (2012), we focus on the subset of households where no member could get a BPO job
because they all have too little education. As noted above, BPO jobs typically require a minimum
of 10 years of schooling. The labor market opportunities for individuals with less education were
unchanged by our experiment (unless the migration of some individuals for BPO jobs opened up
more jobs locally or increased local wages, which we explore below). It is important to keep in
mind for this analysis that we have information on all household members, whether living home
or away from home, as well as all children of household members, whether they have temporarily
or permanently left home. Therefore, we can also exclude households where older siblings of the
children in our sample may have gotten a BPO job and are no longer at home. We note that this
restriction does not change our sample dramatically, since education levels are quite low in this
rural sample (over 75 percent of households with children aged 6 to 18 in our sample do not have
any members with 10 or more years of schooling).29
Table VI shows that the same results continue to hold for this subsample. The treatment
was again associated with declines for boys expected to stay home; the results are similar in
magnitude to those in Table III, and remain significant at the 5 percent level in the first two
specifications and at the 10 percent level in the third. For boys expected to migrate, the results are
27

Employment of adults could lead to other changes affecting child's schooling, such as greater income. It
is likely that any such effects would increase schooling, not decrease it, but regardless, excluding educationqualified households as we do next would rule out such effects.
28
In fact, we can already to an extent largely rule out effects coming through parental employment, since
no adult with a child aged 6-18 in our sample had a BPO job in Round 2.
29
Though we did not stratify our intervention by whether households had qualified members, we find that
treatment-control balance still holds for almost all variables at baseline (results available upon request).
26

still positive, but slightly smaller in magnitude than in Table III, and now only 1 of the three is
significant at the 10 percent level. For girls, the results are very similar to the full sample, and
remain significant at the 5 percent level or better. Again, these results do not rule out that some
children's schooling in treatment villages was affected by a parent, older sibling or other household
adult getting a BPO job; but such effects are unlikely to explain the results for this subsample of
households.
A second mechanism that could lead to schooling reductions for some children is that of
many young adults get BPO jobs, the reduced supply of labor might increase the local wage rate
and thus the opportunity cost of schooling, as suggested by de Brauw and Giles (forthcoming).
Though there is no test to completely rule this out, we believe it is unlikely to explain our results.
The number of people in any given village that was induced to leave due to the treatment is small
relative to the size of the village (about 3 people per year on average, compared to an average
village size of over 1,200), so any wage effects are likely to be very small. As a more direct test,
if we regress the average wage of workers on an indicator for being in a treatment village, the
coefficient is small, negative and not statistically significant (results available upon request).30

V. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
We find that rural children that parents do not want to migrate receive less education in
response to an increase in the urban returns to schooling. By contrast, there is an increase in
education for children who parents want to migrate, and parents want more children to migrate.
Because of the offsetting educational effects, there are no net gains for boys. We believe that the
general conditions under which our model predicts these outcomes (i.e., a large rural population
with few options for old age support, along with increasing urban employment opportunities) are
common in the developing world.
One implication of these results is that overall or aggregate education may adjust more
slowly to increases in the returns to schooling, and could even decline (if the population is
sufficiently rural and most children are expected to stay home). And the net gain for girls alongside

30

It is possible that for children expected to remain in the village, the future migration of other children
will decrease the future expected local returns to schooling, providing less reason to stay in school.
However, this too seems unlikely. Since it is mostly higher skilled or educated workers who will migrate
for BPO opportunities, the local returns to education might actually increase.
27

the net zero for boys may help explain why girls' education in many countries (though not India)
is now outpacing boys', as urban opportunities have increased.
However, by showing that education for some children does increase in response to
increases in returns, the results also show that there is some demand side limitation to schooling.
For these children, the limiting factor in education may not be poverty, access, cost, distance or
quality of schools. Though these other factors are certainly important, at least part of low
educational attainment may be that parents feel the returns are low and see little value to giving
their children much schooling. Our experiment shows that clear and salient evidence of greater
returns can lead to gains even without changes in any of these other factors.
Another key aspect of our findings is in highlighting a potentially important secondary
consequence of increasing returns to education, namely that the incentive cost of education may
reduce the welfare of children who do not take advantage of urban opportunities. Such welfare
declines are by no means certain, since the reduction in education is accompanied by a greater
claim on household assets. However, our findings suggest that special attention should be paid to
these children and that policies may need to be designed or adjusted to protect their interests.
Along these lines, the results suggest a rationale for compulsory schooling laws, since
parents may not achieve the solution that is in the child's best interest. If compulsory schooling
laws prevent parents from reducing education in response to increasing returns to education in the
urban sector, then the greater claim on household assets of children who remain at home will result
in unambiguous gains for the children (although the parents will do correspondingly worse). They
also suggest that policies and programs outside of the education sector may have effects on
schooling. This could include factors that act on parents' desire to have children stay with them in
rural areas, such as improving the functioning of rural land markets (more secure and transparent
tenure and titling, so parents can sell their land to finance old age consumption, rather than needing
a son to stay and generate income from the land) or labor markets (so they can hire in workers,
rather than using their own children). Similarly, public or private pension systems, greater access
to financial services and savings instruments, improved health care access or the market for home
care or nursing homes, may have effects on schooling.
REFERENCES
Abramitzky, Ran and Victor Lavy (2014). "How Responsive is Investment in Schooling to Changes in Redistribution
Policies and in Returns?" Econometrica, 82(4), p. 1241-1272.

28

Antman, Francisca M. (2011). "The Intergenerational Effects of Paternal Migration on Schooling and Work: What
Can We Learn from Children's Time Allocations?" Journal of Development Economics, 96(2), p. 200-208.
Baland, Jean-Marie and James Robinson (2000). "Is Child Labor Inefficient?" Journal of Political Economy, 108, p.
663-79.
Bernheim, B. Douglas, Andrei Shleifer and Lawrence H. Summers (1985). “The Strategic Bequest Motive,” Journal
of Political Economy 93(6), p. 1045-1076.
Bian, Fuqin, John R. Logan and Yanjie Bian (1998). "Intergenerational Relations in Urban China: Proximity, Contact
and Help to Parents," Demography, 35, p. 115-24.
Bommier, Antoine and Pierre Dubois (2004). "Is Child Labor Inefficient?" Journal of Political Economy, 112(1), p.
240-8.
Chakrabarti, Subir, William Lord and Peter Rangazas (1993). “Uncertain Altruism and Investment in Children,”
American Economic Review, 83(4), p. 994-1002.
Costa, Dora (1998). The Evolution of Retirement: An American Economic History 1880-1990. University of Chicago
Press: Chicago.
-- (1999). "A House of Her Own: Old Age Assistance and the Living Arrangements of Older Nonmarried Women,"
Journal of Public Economics, 72(1), p. 39-59.
Delavande, Adeline, Xavier Giné and David McKenzie (2011). “Measuring Subjective Expectations in Developing
Countries: A Critical Review and New Evidence,” Journal of Development Economics, 94(2), p. 151-163.
de Brauw, Alan and John Giles (forthcoming). "Migrant Opportunity and the Educational Attainment of Youth in
Rural China," Journal of Human Resources.
Finkelstein, Amy and Kathleen McGarry (2006). "Multiple Dimensions of Private Information: Evidence from the
Long-Term Care Insurance Market," American Economic Review, 96(4), p. 795-813.
Foster, Andrew D. and Mark R. Rosenzweig (1996). "Technical Change and Human Capital Returns and Investments:
Evidence from the Green Revolution," American Economic Review, 86(4), p. 931-53.
-- and -- (2011). "Are Indian Farms Too Small? Mechanization, Agency Costs, and Farm Efficiency," mimeo Yale
University.
Heath, Rachel and A. Mushfiq Mobarak (2015). "Manufacturing Growth and the Lives of Bangladeshi Women,"
Journal of Development Economics, 115, p. 1-15.
Hoddinott, John (1992). "Rotten Kids or Manipulative Parents: Are Children Old Age Security in Western Kenya?"
Economic Development and Cultural Change, 40(3), p. 545-565.
Hurd, Michael (2009). "Subjective Probabilities in Household Surveys," Annual Review of Economics, 1, p. 435-62.
Jayachandran, Seema and Ilyana Kuziemko (2010). "Why do Mothers Breastfeed Girls Less than Boys? Evidence and
Implications for Child Health in India," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(3), p. 1485-1538.
Jensen, Robert T. (2010). "The (Perceived) Returns to Education and the Demand for Schooling," Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 125(2), p. 515-548.
-- (2012). "Do Labor Market Opportunities Affect Young Women's Work and Family Decisions? Experimental
Evidence from India," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(2), p. 753-792.
Knodel, John E., Jiraporn Kespichayawattana, Suvinee Wiwatwanich, and Chanpen Saengtienchai (2007). Migration
and Intergenerational Solidarity: Evidence from Rural Thailand. Bangkok: UNFPA.
- -, - -, Chanpen Saengtienchai and Suvinee Wiwatwanich (2010). "How left behind are rural parents of migrant
children? Evidence from Thailand," Ageing & Society, 30, p. 811-841.
Kochar, Anjini (2004). "Urban Influences on Rural Schooling in India," Journal of Development Economics, 74, p.
113-136.
Manacorda, Marco and Enrico Moretti (2005). "Why Do Most Italian Young Men Live With Their Parents?
Intergenerational Transfers and Household Structure," Journal of the European Economic Association, 4(4), p.
800-829.
Manski, Charles F. (2004). "Measuring Expectations," Econometrica, 72(5), p. 1329-1376.
McKenzie, David and Hillel Rapoport (2010). "Can Migration Reduce Educational Attainment? Evidence From
Mexico," Journal of Population Economics, 24(4), p.1331-1358.
Munshi, Kaivan and Mark Rosenzweig (2006). “Traditional Institutions Meet the Modern World: Caste, Gender, and
Schooling in a Globalizing Economy,” American Economic Review, 96(4), 1225-1252.
Oster, Emily and M. Bryce Millett (2013). "Do IT Service Centers Promote School Enrollment? Evidence from India,"
Journal of Development Economics, 104, p. 123-135.
Rosenzweig, Mark R. and Kenneth I. Wolpin (1985). “Specific Experience, Household Structure and Intergenerational
Transfers: Farm Family Land and Labor Arrangements in Developing Countries,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 100(5), Supplement, p. 961-987.
29

Ruggles, Steven (2007). “The Decline of Intergenerational Coresidence in the United States, 1850 to 2000,” American
Sociological Review, 72, p. 962-989.
Shastry, Gauri Kartini (2012). "Human Capital Response to Globalization: Education and Information Technology in
India," Journal of Human Resources, 47(2), p. 287–330.
United Nations (2005). Living Arrangements of Older Persons Around the World. New York: United Nations.
Yang, Dean (2008). "International Migration, Remittances and Household Investment: Evidence from Philippine
Migrants' Exchange Rate Shocks," Economic Journal, 118(528), p. 591-630.

30

TABLE I. MEANS, STANDARD DEVIATIONS
AND TESTS OF TREATMENT-CONTROL COVARIATE BALANCE AT BASELINE
A. FULL SAMPLE

In school: boys 6-18
In school: girls 6-18
Log (expenditure per capita)
Head's years of schooling
Spouse's years of schooling
Family Size

(1)

(2)

(3)

All

Control

Treatment

(4)
Difference
(3) − (2)

0.79
[0.41]
0.70
[0.46]
6.35
[0.64]
3.75
[3.72]
1.83
[2.66]
5.52
[2.38]

0.78
[0.41]
0.69
[0.46]
6.36
[0.65]
3.67
[3.71]
1.80
[2.62]
5.53
[2.48]

0.79
[0.40]
0.71
[0.45]
6.35
[0.63]
3.83
[3.73]
1.85
[2.69]
5.52
[2.29]

0.008
(0.016)
0.014
(0.019)
-0.012
(0.032)
0.16
(0.16)
0.062
(0.12)
-0.002
(0.10)

All

Control

Treatment

Difference
(3) − (2)

0.74
[0.41]
6.40
[0.59]
3.92
[3.73]
1.85
[2.61]
6.60
[2.35]

0.74
[0.42]
6.40
[0.61]
3.95
[3.78]
1.76
[2.57]
6.65
[2.51]

0.75
[0.41]
6.40
[0.59]
3.89
[3.70]
1.94
[2.65]
6.56
[2.18]

0.012
(0.018)
0.004
(0.041)
-0.063
(0.23)
0.18
(0.15)
-0.09
(0.15)

All

Control

Treatment

Difference
(3) − (2)

0.84
[0.41]
6.35
[0.59]
3.96
[3.73]
2.04
[2.61]
6.71
[2.35]

0.84
[0.42]
6.36
[0.61]
3.81
[3.78]
2.19
[2.57]
6.71
[2.51]

0.85
[0.41]
6.35
[0.59]
4.09
[3.70]
1.87
[2.65]
6.71
[2.18]

0.012
(0.018)
-0.003
(0.064)
0.27
(0.37)
-0.32
(0.25)
-0.001
(0.24)

B. BOYS EXPECTED TO STAY HOME
In school: boys 6-18
Log (expenditure per capita)
Head's years of schooling
Spouse's years of schooling
Family Size

C. BOYS EXPECTED TO MIGRATE
In school: boys 6-18
Log (expenditure per capita)
Head's years of schooling
Spouse's years of schooling
Family Size

Notes: Baseline values for key variables. Standard deviations in brackets in columns 1-3; heteroskedasticityconsistent standard errors accounting for clustering in parentheses in column 4. The last column contains t-tests
of the difference in means between the control and the treatment samples.

31

TABLE II. BASELINE PREFERENCES FOR CHILD'S FUTURE MIGRATION

BOYS (6-18 at baseline)
Same dwelling
Same village
Nearby rural area
More distant rural area
City in India
Outside India
Don't know/Whatever Child wants/Up to God

GIRLS (6-18 at baseline)
Same dwelling
Same village
Nearby rural area
More distant rural area
City in India
Outside India
Don't know/Whatever Child wants/Up to God

(1)

(2)

(3)

All

Control

Treatment

(4)
Difference
(3) − (2)

0.44
[0.49]
0.24
[0.43]
0.05
[0.21]
0.04
[0.19]
0.15
[0.36]
0.03
[0.17]
0.05
[0.22]

0.44
[0.50]
0.24
[0.43]
0.05
[0.22]
0.04
[0.20]
0.15
[0.36]
0.02
[0.15]
0.06
[0.23]

0.44
[0.50]
0.24
[0.43]
0.05
[0.21]
0.04
[0.19]
0.15
[0.36]
0.03
[0.18]
0.05
[0.21]

0.01
(0.02)
-0.00
(0.02)
-0.00
(0.01)
-0.00
(0.02)
0.00
(0.01)
0.01
(0.01)
-0.01
(0.01)

0.04
[0.20]
0.06
[0.24]
0.14
[0.34]
0.34
[0.48]
0.23
[0.42]
0.03
[0.18]
0.16
[0.37]

0.03
[0.17]
0.06
[0.24]
0.13
[0.33]
0.33
[0.49]
0.24
[0.43]
0.04
[0.19]
0.16
[0.37]

0.05
[0.22]
0.06
[0.24]
0.14
[0.34]
0.34
[0.48]
0.22
[0.41]
0.03
[0.17]
0.16
[0.37]

0.02*
(0.01)
0.00
(0.01)
0.01
(0.02)
0.00
(0.01)
-0.02
(0.02)
-0.00
(0.00)
-0.01
(0.01)

Notes: Data from baseline survey (September−October, 2003). Standard deviations in brackets in columns 1-3;
heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors accounting for clustering in parentheses in column 4. The last column
contains t-tests of the difference in means between the control and the treatment samples. *Significant at 10%;
**Significant at 5%; ***Significant at 1%.

32

TABLE III. EFFECT OF THE INTERVENTION ON ENROLLMENT, BY BASELINE MIGRATION PREFERENCES

GIRLS
FULL SAMPLE

Treatment
log (expend per cap)
Head's Education
Spouse's Education

BOYS
EXPECTED TO
STAY HOME

BOYS
FULL SAMPLE

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

0.057***
(0.017)

0.055***
(0.016)
0.035**
(0.015)
0.003
(0.002)
0.007*
(0.004)

0.054***
(0.019)

-0.018
(0.016)

-0.017
(0.015)
0.047**
(0.023)
0.002
(0.002)
0.006*
(0.003)

BOYS
EXPECTED TO
MIGRATE

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

-0.021

-0.040**
(0.019)

-0.045***

-0.048**
(0.020)

0.062*
(0.033)

0.065*
(0.035)
-0.012
(0.030)
0.001
(0.001)
0.006
(0.009)

0.067*
(0.039)

(0.018)

(0.017)
0.062***
(0.016)
0.000
(0.000)
0.008*
(0.004)

R2
0.005
0.068
0.004
0.001
0.10
0.003
0.002
0.17
0.003
0.008
0.065
0.02
Observations
2,227
2,224
1,719
2,603
2,593
2,007
1,911
1,905
1,463
380
379
289
Notes: Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors accounting for clustering at the village level in parentheses. The first column in each set of three simply
regresses enrolment for children aged 6-18 on a treatment indicator. The second column in each set adds the specified additional covariates. The third column in
each set uses the change in enrollment as the dependent variable. All control variables are measured in Round 1. All regressions also include family size, a full set
of dummy variables for child's age and indicators for whether expenditure or mother's or father's education data was unavailable (these household are assigned
median values for these variables). *Significant at 10 percent level. **Significant at 5 percent level. ***Significant at 1 percent level.

TABLE IV. EFFECT OF THE INTERVENTION ON ENROLLMENT, BY BASELINE MIGRATION PREFERENCES: LAST REMAINING
CHILD

GIRLS
FULL SAMPLE

Treatment
log (expend per cap)
Head's Education
Spouse's Education

BOYS
EXPECTED TO
STAY HOME

BOYS
FULL SAMPLE

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

0.019
(0.042)

0.027
(0.038)
0.015
(0.033)
0.004
(0.005)
0.011
(0.008)

0.058
(0.045)

-0.032
(0.034)

-0.027
(0.032)
0.085
(0.031)
-0.000
(0.006)
0.000
(0.006)
***

BOYS
EXPECTED TO
MIGRATE

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

-0.039

-0.065*
(0.037)

-0.069**
(0.035)
0.087**
(0.037)
-0.001
(0.001)
-0.0001
(0.003)

-0.087**
(0.043)

0.035
(0.066)

0.050
(0.065)
0.053
(0.064)
-0.005
(0.012)
0.008
(0.013)

0.071
(0.104)

(0.038)

R2
0.001
0.148
0.004
0.001
0.18
0.002
0.006
0.241
0.003
0.100
0.006
Observations
497
497
382
598
596
462
413
411
343
119
119
72
Notes: Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors accounting for clustering at the village level in parentheses. The first column in each set of three regresses
enrolment for children aged 6-18 on just a treatment indicator. The second column in each set adds the specified additional covariates. The third column in each
set uses the change in enrollment as the dependent variable. All control variables are measured in Round 1. All regressions also include family size, a full set of
dummy variables for child's age and indicators for whether expenditure or mother's or father's education data was unavailable (these household are assigned median
values for these variables). *Significant at 10 percent level. **Significant at 5 percent level. ***Significant at 1 percent level.

34

TABLE V. EFFECT OF THE INTERVENTION ON MIGRATION PREFERENCES
GIRLS

Treatment
log (expend per cap)
Head's Education
Spouse's Education

BOYS

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.061***
(0.020)

0.059***
(0.020)
0.020
(0.017)
-0.001
(0.003)
-0.006
(0.004)

0.062***
(0.010)

0.071***
(0.014)

0.076***
(0.014)
-0.021
(0.014)
-0.000
(0.002)
0.007*
(0.003)

0.067***
(0.010)

R2
0.005
0.010
0.021
0.016
0.021
0.029
Observations
2,366
2,363
1,829
2,765
2,758
2,132
Notes: Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors accounting for clustering at the village level in
parentheses. The first column in each set of three regresses whether the parent wants or hopes the child
will migrate when they are older on just a treatment indicator. The second column in each set adds the
specified additional covariates. The third column in each set uses the change in migration intentions as the
dependent variable. All control variables are measured in Round 1. All regressions also include family
size, a full set of dummy variables for child's age and indicators for whether expenditure or mother's or
father's education data was unavailable (these household are assigned median values for these variables).
*Significant at 10 percent level. **Significant at 5 percent level. ***Significant at 1 percent level.

TABLE VI. EFFECT OF THE INTERVENTION ON ENROLLMENT, HOUSEHOLDS WITH NO QUALIFIED MEMBERS

GIRLS
FULL SAMPLE

Treatment
log (expend per cap)
Head's Education
Spouse's Education

BOYS
EXPECTED TO
STAY HOME

BOYS
FULL SAMPLE

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

0.059***
(0.018)

0.055***
(0.018)
0.040**
(0.017)
0.004
(0.005)
0.006
(0.004)

0.051**
(0.021)

-0.024
(0.019)

-0.023
(0.018)
0.053**
(0.014)
0.004
(0.003)
0.006
(0.004)

BOYS
EXPECTED TO
MIGRATE

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

-0.017

-0.045**
(0.022)

-0.046**

-0.043*
(0.023)

0.044
(0.036)

0.052*
(0.038)
0.036
(0.030)
0.001
(0.006)
0.005
(0.008)

0.063
(0.042)

(0.021)

(0.019)
0.059***
(0.016)
0.002
(0.003)
0.008*
(0.004)

R2
0.005
0.092
0.004
0.001
0.12
0.004
0.003
0.17
0.002
0.008
0.061
0.008
Observations
1,914
1,912
1,485
2,224
2217
1,708
1,641
1,635
1,245
323
322
254
Notes: Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors accounting for clustering at the village level in parentheses. The first column in each set of three regresses
enrolment for children aged 6-18 on just a treatment indicator. The second column in each set adds the specified additional covariates. The third column in each
set uses the change in enrollment as the dependent variable. All control variables are measured in Round 1. All regressions also include family size, a full set of
dummy variables for child's age and indicators for whether expenditure or mother's or father's education data was unavailable (these household are assigned median
values for these variables). *Significant at 10 percent level. **Significant at 5 percent level. ***Significant at 1 percent level.

ONLINE APPENDIX:
NOT TO BE PUBLISHED

APPENDIX A: STRATEGIC INVESTMENT IN SCHOOLING UNDER BILATERAL ALTRUISM

In this Appendix, we show that the paper’s main comparative static of interest – that parents may
respond to increases in the returns to education in the city by reducing their children’s education – continues
to hold in models in which both the parent and child exhibit altruistic preferences. In addition, once we
allow parents and children to have different preferences over the division of household resources should be
split between the parent and child, we also endogenize the child’s remittances in the sense that the child
chooses how to split household wealth between parent and child in the event that the child chooses to
migrate.
We present two different versions of the result. In the first, the parent and child have Leontief
preferences over own- and other-consumption. In the context of the Leontief model we are able to derive a
closed-form solution to the game between the parent and child. While the intuition carries over to more
general utility functions, it becomes more difficult to compute the solution in closed form. In the second
version of the problem, both the parent and child exhibit Cobb-Douglas preferences over own- and otherconsumption. Under the slightly stronger assumption that the relative return to education in the city is
convex in the level of education, we are able to implicitly characterize the solution and show that some
parents will respond to an increase in the returns to education in the city by reducing education.

A.I: Bilateral Altruism Model with Leontief Utility
The parent chooses the child’s education level, e, and the child chooses whether to migrate to the
city or stay at home. If the child migrates, he controls the division of household net income. If the child
stays at home, then the parent decides how to split income.
If the child stays home, household net income is h(e) = f(e) – c(e), where f (e) is output on the
family farm and c(e) is the cost of education. If the child migrates, household net income is m(e) = θ w(e)
– c(e) – t, where t once again represents the cost of migration.
Assume that f(e) is strictly concave, c(e) is strictly convex, and m(e) is strictly concave. Further,
assume that the income advantage to living in the city increases with education. For simplicity, we
operationalize this by assuming that h(e)/g(e) is strictly decreasing in e and h(0) > g(0). Other specifications,
e.g., h(e) – g(e) is strictly decreasing in e, and g(e) > h (e) for e sufficiently large, would yield similar
results.
Both the parent and child are altruistic with preferences given by the Leontief utility function. Let

 x x 
the parent’s utility be u xk , x p  min  k , p  . Given this utility function, if the parent maximizes the
1  s s 





1

distribution of household income w, he will choose to consume share s himself and give share (1−s) to the
1 s
s

child. In this case, the parent’s utility is min 
h  e  , h  e    h  e  if the child stays home.

s
1  s






 xk x p 
,  . Given these preferences, if the child
1  r r 

The child’s utility is given by v xk , x p  min 

maximizes the distribution of household income w, he will choose to consume share (1−r) himself and give
share r to the parent.
We assume that 1 > s > ½ > r > 0. Thus, both parent and child are altruistic. But, each party prefers
to keep more than half of household income for himself.
To examine education choices, consider the case where if the child stays home, the parent keeps
income share s for himself, but if the child migrates the child decides how to split household assets, and the
parent receives income share r.

Consumption (home)
Utility (home)

Child

s h(e)

(1-s) h(e)

 sh  e  1  s  h  e  
,
  h ( e)
1  s  
 s

min 

Consumption (migrate)
Utility (migrate)

Parent

 sh  e  1  s  h  e   1  s 
,
h e

1  r   1  r 
 r

min 

r m(e)

 rm  e  1  r  m  e   r
,
  m e
1  s   s
 s

min 

(1-r) m(e)

 rm  e  1  r  m  e  
,
  m e
1  r  
 r

min 

The parent prefers that the child remain home whenever h(e) > (r/s) m(e), or h(e)/m(e) > r/s. The
child prefers to remain home whenever ((1−s)/(1−r)) h(e) > m(e), or h(e)/m(e) > (1−r)/(1−s). Due to the
assumption that 1 > s > r > 0, (1−r)/(1−s)>r/s. Hence, we have for sufficiently low levels of education,
both the parent and child prefer that the child stay home. However, there is a cut off level of education e1
such that h(e1)/m(e1) = (1−r)/(1−s), where for higher levels of education the child would prefer to migrate
if he were only given share (1−s) of household resources if he chose not to migrate.
Figure A.1 illustrates the situation where e < e1. For low levels of education, the income advantage
from staying home is large relative to migrating (i.e., h(e)/m(e) is large). If the child does not migrate,
household income is given by h(e), to be divided between parent and child. The “budget line” this implies
is the downward sloping line h(e). If the parent chooses his preferred point along this line, he chooses point
X, where he keeps fraction s of income for himself. Since, absent other constraints, the parent always prefers
to keep fraction s, the expansion path of the parent’s choice has slope s/(1−s). Indifference curves for the
parent (green) and child (red) through point X are depicted by solid lines.
2

If the child chooses to migrate, then household income is m(e) and the child can choose to split
income as he wishes. Given the child’s preferences, absent other constraints he prefers to give fraction r to
the parent. The expansion path for the child’s choice is a ray with slope r/(1−r). Given income m(e), the
child’s preferred point is labeled Y. Indifference curves for the parent (green) and child (red) through point
Y are depicted by dashed lines.
In the case where h(e) is much larger than m(e), both the parent and child prefer that the child
remain at home. In particular, although the child could gain a larger share of income by migrating, income
from migrating is small enough relative to income at home that even the child does not find it worthwhile
to gain a larger share of a smaller income.
As education increases, relative income in the city increases and the (proportional) gap between
the h(e) budget line and the m(e) budget line shrinks. Eventually, at education level e1, the child is indifferent
about migrating, though the parent still prefers that the child stay home. See Figure A.2.
Since point Z is located directly above Y, we know that the child consumes the same amount at Y
and Z. Thus, xk = (1−r) m(e). This leaves income h(e) – (1−r)m(e) = xP for the parent to consume.

Consumption
(home)
Utility
(home)

min



Parent

Child

h(e) – (1−r) m(e)

r m(e)

h  e   (1  r ) m(e)
s

Consumption

rm ( e )
,

1  s 





h  e   (1  r ) m ( e )
s

min





(1  r ) m(e) h  e   1  r  m  e 
,
 m e
1 r
r

r m(e)

(1−r) m(e)

(migrate)
Utility
(migrate)

 rm  e  1  r  m  e   r
,
  m e
1  s   s
 s

min 

 rm  e  1  r  m  e  
,
  m e
1  r  
 r

min 

The child is indifferent between migrating and not by construction. The parent prefers to divert
extra resources to the child rather than have the child migrate whenever h(e) – (1−r)m(e) > rm(e), or h(e)
> m(e). Let e2 satisfy h(e2)/m(e2) = 1. For education levels between e1 and e2, the parent prefers the
‘distorted’ solution of offering Z rather than allowing the child to migrate.
Finally, consider education levels above e2. At this level of education, income from migrating is
greater than income from staying at home. Because when the child migrates income is higher and the child
gets his most preferred split of income, there is no way that the parent can divide income h(e) to induce the
child to remain at home. Thus, for education levels above e2, the child always migrates.

3

The preceding analysis shows that there are three relevant ranges of education the parent must
consider. We summarize the parent’s utility as a function of education, conditional on the child’s migration
decision as:
Relative Income

Education Level

Parent’s Utility

h(e)/m(e) ≥ (1−r)/(1−s)

0 ≤ e ≤ e1

h(e)

(1−r)/(1−s) ≤ h(e)/m(e)

e1 ≤ e ≤ e 2

h(e)  1  r  m  e 
s

Home

e > e2

r
m e
s

Migrate

≤1
h(e)/m(e) < 1

Child’s Migration
Decision
Home

Next, we turn to the parent’s choice of education. Depending on which segment of the parent’s
utility function is relevant, the optimal choice of education will be to set h'(e * ) = 0, h'(e *) – (1−r)m'(e *) =
0, or m'(e *) = 0. It is straightforward to verify that the parent’s utility as described above is continuous, and
therefore that a solution the parent’s problem of choosing an optimal education level exists (provided
education is bounded above). Assuming concavity of h'(e) – (1−r)m'(e) over the middle range is sufficient
to prevent a boundary solution where education is equal to e1 or e2.
The comparative static we are interested in is the response of e * to an increase in θ. For e * < e1, it
is clear that e’(θ) = 0 since θ does not affect h(e). At the other end of the education scale, it is clear that for
e * > e2, e’(θ) > 0, since an increase in θ induces an upward shift in m'(e), leading to an increase in e *. The
remaining case, where e1 < e * < e2 is more complicated. The first-order condition is:





h '  e*   1  r  m '  e*   f '  e*   c '  e*   1  r   w '  e*   c '  e*   0

Consider e* as a function of θ, and consider the impact of an increase in returns to education in the city.
 f ''  e*   c '  e*   e '    1  r   w ''  e*   c ''  e*   e '    1  r  w '  e*   0




e '   

1  r  w '  e* 
0
 f ''  e*   c '  e*    1  r   w ''  e*   c ''  e*  





Where the last expression can be signed by the second-order condition and the fact that w'(e) >0.
Hence we have for education levels in the range where the parent must divert additional resources
to the child in order to keep him from choosing to migrate, and increase in the returns to education in the
city induces the parent to reduce the child’s education. The intuition is straightforward. When the parent
chooses education levels over this range, he weighs the marginal benefit from increasing income against
the marginal cost of education and the fact that at higher education levels migration becomes more
attractive, and the parent must give the child additional resources because of this. Thus, this additional
transfer behaves as an additional marginal cost of education – the marginal incentive cost of education. An
increase in θ increases the rate at which the attractiveness of migration increases for the child, and thus
4

increases the parent’s marginal incentive cost of increasing the child’s education. The result is that the
parent chooses to lower the education given to the child in order to reduce their temptation to migrate.
Note that an increase in θ will decrease the cut-off values e1 and e2.
For given functions h(e) and m(e), the optimal education choice will be in one of the regions
described above. Which region the solution lies in will depend on h(e) and m(e). Thus, one needs to check
for possible solutions in each of the regions and compare the parent’s utility in each case. Note, however,
that if there is a level of education e such that h'(e) = 0 and e ≤ e1, then there cannot be an e with e1 ≤ e ≤ e2
and h'(e) – (1−r)m'(e). Similarly, existence of a solution to h'(e) – (1−r) m'(e) = 0 with e1 ≤ e ≤ e2 precludes
a solution to h'(e) = 0 with e ≤ e1. Hence, there can be a candidate solution with e ≤ e1 or e1 ≤ e ≤ e2, but not
both. If there exists an education level with m'(e) = 0 and e ≥ e2, then the optimal educational choice is
given by comparing the parent’s utility under the (at most) two candidate optimal solutions.
For simplicity, assume that h'(e1) > 0, so that solutions with e ≤ e1 are not relevant. Suppose there
exists education level e* such that h'(e*) – (1−r)m'(e*) = 0 and e1 ≤ e ≤ e2 and education level e** such that
m'(e**) = 0. The parent’s utility in the two cases are proportional to h(e*) – (1−r)m(e*) and r m(e**),
respectively. It is better to choose e* than e** whenever h(e*) – (1−r) m(e*) > r m(e**), or h(e* ) > r m(e**) +
(1−r) m(e*).
The above condition holds for any particular household. To get a sense of which households will
choose to have children migrate, we introduce heterogeneity into the households. In particular, recall that
m(e) = θ w(e) – c(e) – t , where t captures the (optimized) cost of migration. The term t can be heterogeneous
across households and capture idiosyncratic differences the cost of replacing the child’s household inputs
and contributions to home produced goods as well as any transition costs the child may have from moving
to the city. When t is high, it corresponds to situations where the idiosyncratic cost of losing the child to the
city is low, while when t is low, this corresponds to situations where the idiosyncratic cost of losing the
child to the city is high.
Since t does not affect the marginal returns to education, e* and e** are unaffected by changed in t.
On the other hand, an increase in f0 decreases e2 and increases m(e). Both of these factors make it more
likely that households with high f0 will find it optimal to allow their children to migrate. In particular, there
exists a cut-off level of t, t*, such that if t < t*, it is optimal for the household to choose e = e* and keep the
child at home, while if t > t*, it is optimal for the household to choose e = e** and have the child choose to
migrate.
Now, consider a household with t = t*. Such a household has h(e*) − (1−r) m(e*) = r m(e**). By the
envelope theorem, an increase in θ decreases the left-hand side of the equation and increases the right-hand
side. Thus, a household that is indifferent between migrating and not before the increase in θ strictly prefers

5

migration after. This is because the increase in θ both increases income in the city and increases the
incentive cost of keeping the child home.
Overall, the above establishes the basic predictions of the simple model in the paper: in response
to an increase in the city returns to education:
1. Parents who prefer their children to migrate will give their children more education,
2. Parents who prefer their children to stay home will either leave education unchanged or decrease it,
3. More parents will prefer their children to migrate.

A.II: Cobb-Douglas Preferences
As in the previous versions, the parent chooses the child’s education level, e, and the child chooses
whether to migrate to the city or stay at home. If the child migrates, he controls the division of household
net income. If the stays at home, then the parent decides how to split income.
If the child stays home, household net income is h(e) = f(e) – c(e), where f(e) is output on the family
farm and c(e) is the cost of education. If the child migrates, household net income is m(e) = θ w(e) – c(e) –
t.
Assume that f(e) is strictly concave, c(e) is strictly convex, that m(e) is strictly concave. Further,
assume that the income advantage to living in the city increases with education. For simplicity, we
operationalize this assumption by assuming that h(e)/g(e) is strictly decreasing in e and h(0) > g(0). Other
specifications, e.g., h(e) – g(e) is strictly decreasing in e, and g(e) > h(e) for e sufficiently large, would yield
similar results.
Child’s Utility: v(xk,xp) = xk1-r xpr where xk and xp are the child’s consumption expenditure and the parent’s,
respectively.
Parent’s Utility: u(xp,xk) = xk1-sxps , where xk and xp are the child’s consumption expenditure and the
parent’s, respectively.
We assume that r < s, so that the child places more value on the child’s consumption than the parent
does. A stronger assumption, r < ½ < s, would imply that each party is altruistic but places greater weight
on own consumption than the other party’s. However, the less restrictive assumption is sufficient for the
results.
Child’s Problem. Suppose the child chooses xk and xp to solve:

max xk , x p v( xk , x p )
s.t.

xk  x p  w
6

The solution to this problem is:
xk  w  1  r  w and

x p  w  rw ,

and the corresponding indirect utility function is v(w) = A w, where A = rr(1−r)1−r.
Parent’s Problem. Suppose the parent chooses xk and xp to solve:

max xk , x p u ( xk , x p )
s.t.

xk  x p  w

The solution to this problem is:
xk  w  1  s  w and

x p  w  sw ,

and the corresponding indirect utility function is u(w) = b w, where b = ss(1−s)1−s.
Finally, it will be useful to define two quantities. Suppose that the parent chooses to split income
giving share s to himself and share (1−s) to the child. The child’s utility from this is given by:
v  1  s  w, sw  1  s 

1 r

s r w  aw .

Since the child’s preferred split of income earns higher utility when income is w, we have that A
> a. Similarly, when the child chooses to split income keeping share (1−r) for himself and giving share r
to the parent, the parent’s utility is
u  1  r  w, rw  1  r 

1 s

r s w  bw,

where by the same argument B > b.
To examine education choices, consider the case where, if the child stays home, the parent keeps
income share s for himself, but if the child migrates, the child decides how to split household assets and the
parent receives income share r.
Parent

Child

Consumption (home)

s h(e)

(1−s) h(e)

Utility (home)

B h(e)

a h(e)

Consumption (migrate)

r m(e)

(1−r) m(e)

Utility (migrate)

b m(e)

A m(e)

The parent prefers that the child stay home whenever B h(e) > b m(e), or h(e)/m(e) > b/B. The child
prefers to remain home whenever ah(e) > A m(e), or h(e)/m(e) > A/a. Since A > a and b < B, we have that
there is a range of education levels, b/B < h(e)/m(e) < A/a where the parent prefers that the child stay home
but the child prefers to migrate.
Education can therefore be divided into three regions. For e < e1, where h(e1)/m(e1) = A/a, both the
parent and child prefer that the child remain home. For e1 ≤ e ≤ e2, where h(e2)/m(e2) = b/B, the parent

7

prefers the child to remain home but the child prefers to migrate. For e > e2, both the parent and child prefer
that the child migrate.
Let us focus for the moment on the case where e1 ≤ e ≤ e2. In this case, if the parent chooses to give
the child share (1−s) of income, the child will choose to migrate to the city. However, the parent can induce
the child to remain at home by giving him a greater share of household resources. Although the parent is
worse off relative to the case where the parent can keep share s of household wealth for himself, the parent
may find this preferable to allowing the child to migrate and receiving share r.
Holding fixed the choice of e, the parent’s problem can be written as:

max xk , x p x1k s x sp
s.t. xk  x p  h  e 
x1k r x rp  Bm  e 
The solution to this problem satisfies the two constraints.
We can simplify the problem as follows. First, let xk = (1−t) h(e) and xp = t h(e). In this case, the
first constraint can be eliminated, and we rewrite the problem as:
max  1  t  h  e  
s.t.

This in turn becomes:

th  e  
1  t  h  e   th  e  
1 r

r

1 s

s

max h  e 1  t 

1 r

 Bm  e 

tr

s.t. h  e 1  t  t s  Bm  e 
1 s

And one more small step gives:

max h  e 1  t 

1 r

s.t.

tr

h e
1 s
1  t  t s  B
m e

Next, let h(e)/m(e) = g(e,θ). We will assume that g(e,θ) is decreasing and concave in e. It is easy to
show that g(e,θ) is decreasing and convex in θ, and that the cross-partial derivative ∂2g/∂e∂θ < 0 for the
relevant range of e (i.e., where θm'(e) – c’(e) > 0 ). Take logs of the objective function and the constraint.

max ln  h  e    1  r  ln 1  t   r ln  t 
s.t. ln  g  e,     1  s  ln 1  t   s ln  t   ln B
Next, let: H(e) = ln(h(e)), G(e,θ) = ln(g(e,θ)), C(t) = (1−r)ln(1−t)+rln(t), and F(t) = (1−s)ln(1−t)+sln(t). We
know A is increasing and concave in e; B is decreasing and concave; C is concave and F is concave.
8

The Lagrangian for the above problem is:
L  H (e)  C (t )   (G  e,   F  t   ln  B ) .

The first order conditions for this problem are:

H '  e*    *G '  e* ,    0
C ' t*   *F ' t*   0
G  e* ,    F  t *   ln  B   0
Implicitly differentiating the above with respect to θ and solving the resulting system of equations
yields the following expression (arguments on the functions suppressed to improve legibility) for e’(θ):
(C    F  )G Ge    F   Ge
2

e    


(C    F  )  Ge    F   ( H   Gee )
2

2

The denominator is clearly negative since C, F and H are concave and G is concave in its first
argument. The numerator is negative as well.31 Hence e'(θ) < 0.
Note: the full solution to the comparative statics equations is:


e ( )  

G
G

( 0 ,1)

(1, 0 )

( e ( ),  )G
2

F (t ( ))(  ( )( G
G

(1, 0 )









( 0 ,1)

( e ( ),  ) G

( 2,0 )

( e ( ),  )  G



2

(1, 0 )

( e ( ),  ) G





(1,1)

( 2,0 )

(1,1)



( e ( ),  ) F (t ( ))

2



( C ( t ( ))   ( ) F ( t ( )))(  ( )( G
G

(1, 0 )



( 0 ,1)

( e ( ),  ) G

( 2,0 )



( e ( ),  ))  G



2

( e ( ),  )  G


(1, 0 )

( 2,0 )



( e ( ),  ) H ( e ( )))


( e ( ),  ) G
2

( 0 ,1)

( e ( ),  )  H ( e ( )))

( e ( ),  ) (C (t ( ))   ( ) F ( t ( )))  F ( t ( )) (  ( ) G
2

2

( e ( ),  )  H ( e ( )))

( e ( ),  ) (C (t ( ))   ( ) F ( t ( )))  F ( t ( )) (  ( ) G





 ( ) 



( e ( ),  )(C (t ( ))   ( ) F (t ( )))   ( ) G

( e ( ),  ) (C (t ( ))   ( ) F ( t ( )))  F ( t ( )) (  ( ) G





t ( )  

(1, 0 )

(1,1)

( 2,0 )

( e ( ),  ))  G

( 0 ,1)



( e ( ),  ) H ( e ( )))



( e ( ),  )  H ( e ( )))

31

The first term in the numerator is negative since all three factors are negative. The second term in the numerator is
negative as well, since the cross-partial derivative of B is negative.
9

APPENDIX A: FIGURES

FIGURE A.1. CHILD'S AND PARENT'S CONSUMPTION

Parent’s preferred expansion path:
slope s/(1-s)

Parent’s
Cons.

h(e)
Parent’s indifference curve (green)

X
Child’s preferred expansion path:
slope r/(1-r).

m(e)

Child’s indifference curve (red)

Y
Child’s consumption

FIGURE A.2. CHILD'S AND PARENT'S CONSUMPTION

Parent’s
Cons.

Parent’s preferred expansion path:
slope s/(1-s)

h(e1)
Parent’s indifference curve (green)

X
Child’s preferred expansion path:
slope r/(1-r).

m(e1)

Child’s indifference curve (red)

Y

Child’s consumption

10

FIGURE A.3. CHILD'S AND PARENT'S CONSUMPTION

Parent’s
Cons.

Parent’s preferred expansion path:
slope s/(1-s)

h(e)
Parent’s indifference curve (green)

X

m(e)
Z

Child’s preferred expansion path:
slope r/(1-r).
Child’s indifference curve (red)

Y

Child’s consumption

11

APPENDIX B: THE CASE OF MULTIPLE CHILDREN
Suppose the parent has N children, numbered 1, …, N with generic element n. The parent chooses
education level ei for each child. The cost of education is c(e), where c' > 0 and c'' ≥ 0. Let H be the set of
children the parent wishes to stay home and M be the set of children that the parent wishes to migrate. With
slight abuse of notation, we will use H and M to denote the number of children in each set when it can be
done without confusion.
Let FH(e1,…,eH) denote the household production function when set H of children remain at home.
Children who migrate to the city earn wage w(e) and remit fraction r home to the parent, where 0 ≤ r ≤ 1.
The cost of migrating to the city is t > 0. We assume it is the same for all children, but that can be relaxed.
We can also include a child-specific value ui that the parent assigns to keeping the child at home.
For a child the parent wishes to keep at home, the parent must offer that child as much net income
as the child would receive if the child were to migrate. If the child remits fraction r of income home to the
parent, his net income is vi = (1−r) w(ei) – t.
The parent chooses household income subject to the constraint that children who remain at home
are willing to do so:

max H , M ,ei FH  e1 ,..., eH    mM rw  em    n 1 c  en    hH xh
N

s.t.
xh  1  r  w  eh   t for all h  H
Substituting the constraints into the objective function yields:

max H ,M ,ei FH  e1 ,..., eH    mM rw  em    n1 c  en    hH 1  r  w  eh   t 
N

An optimal (interior) solution to this problem satisfies:

rw '  em*   c '  em* 

for m  M *

F *
e1 ,..., eH*   c '  eh*   1  r  w '  eh* 

eh

for h  H *

The comparative static we are interested in is how the optimal choice of education changes when there is a
change in the marginal returns to education in the city. To illustrate this, rewrite the wage function as z
w(e). We will analyze the impact of an increase in z on the solution to the parent’s problem, now
characterized by:

rzw '  em*   c '  em* 

for m  M *

F *
 e1 ,..., eH*   c '  eh*   1  r  zw '  eh* 
eh

for h  H *
12

Clearly, for

m  M * , an increase in the marginal returns to education increase education whenever r w(e)

– c(e) is concave.
Before stating the result for children who remain at home, recall how an increase in the returns to
education in the city impact’s the parent’s decision in the single-child case. In order for the parent to keep
the child from migrating, he must give the child a share of household resources equal to his net wage in the
city. This becomes an “incentive cost” for keeping the child at home. When the marginal returns to
education in the city increase, the marginal incentive cost of keeping the child from migrating increases.
The parent responds to this increase in the marginal cost of education by decreasing education.
While the above intuition is correct for the case of a single child at home, when there are multiple
children at home there are interaction effects that are potentially important. In particular, changing the
education for one child who remains at home affects the marginal productivity of all children who remain
at home. So, if increasing the marginal incentive cost to child 1 leads the parent to reduce education to child
1, this impacts the marginal product of the other children. Without further restrictions, it is possible that
reducing the education to one child increases the marginal product of education for the other children. In
this case, it is possible that, although the direct effect of increasing the incentive cost of keeping the child
at home would induce the parent to reduce education, the indirect effect of the parent’s adjustment in the
other children’s education choices leads the parent to prefer to increase, rather than decrease, education.
The additional assumption needed to rule out this case is that the production function is
supermodular in its arguments, which in this case is equivalent to assuming that it exhibits positive crosspartial derivatives.32 In this case, decreasing education to one child decreases the incentive to educate other
children, ruling out the type of effect discussed in the previous paragraph.
Proposition: If FH(e1,…,eH) is supermodular in (e1,…,eH), then

eh
 0 for all h  H .
z

Proof: The objective function for the parent’s problem is:

OBJ  FH  e1 ,..., eH    mM rw  em    n1 c  en    hH 1  r  zw  eh   t 
N

2
The cross partial derivative of OBJ,  OBJ   w '  eh   0 . Hence OBJ exhibits strictly decreasing
eh z

differences. By Theorem 2.3 in Vives (1999), ei are strictly decreasing functions of z.■

Many natural production functions, including the Cobb-Douglas and CES, are supermodular.
Although somewhat less intuitive, the supermodularity condition can be further relaxed to requiring quasi-

32

See Milgrom and Shannon (1994), Edlin and Shannon (1998), and Vives (1999).
13

supermodularity (see Vives 1999). A function is F quasisupermodular if there is a strictly increasing
function G such that G(F( )) is supermodular. The family of quasisupermodular functions is quite broad and
includes, for example, the case of perfect substitutes with decreasing returns.33
Finally, we argue that increasing returns to education in the city make migration more attractive.
Since the argument is straightforward, we do so informally. Suppose the parent chooses to keep set H of
children at home and allow set M of children to migrate. Consider a particular child, h, who stays home.
When the returns to education go up, this increases the value to the parent of letting that child migrate, since
for any education level the child now earns a higher wage if he migrates and consequently remits more to
the parent. At the same time, since increasing the returns to education in the city makes it more costly for
the parent to keep the child at home, since the parent must now match the higher incentive cost, this makes
the parent less willing to spend money to keep the child at home. Both factors make it more attractive for
the parent to allow the child to migrate, and therefore an increase in the returns to education in the city is
expected to lead to more migration.

REFERENCES
Edlin, Aaron S. and Chris Channon (1998). “Strict Monotonicity in Comparative Statics.” Journal of
Economic Theory, 81(1), 201 – 219.
Milgrom Paul and Chris Shannon (1994). “Monotone Comparative Statics.” Econometrica, 62(1), 157 –
180.
Vives, Xavier (1999). Oligopoly Pricing: Old Ideas and New Tools. MIT Press. Cambridge, Massachusetts.

33

Although F(x,y) = (x+y)1/2 exhibits negative cross-partial derivatives, G(F) =F3 exhibits positive crosspartial derivatives, and hence F(x,y) is quasisupermodular.
14

APPENDIX C:
RESPONSE TO AN INCREASE IN URBAN RETURNS UNDER CREDIT CONSTRAINTS
Let f(e) be the return to a child who has education e and works at home, and w(e) be the return to a
child with education e who migrates and works in the city. As before, assume f(0) > w(0), f’(e) > w’(e),
w’’(e) < 0, f’’(e) < 0, and w(e) > f (e) for e sufficiently large.
Assume that the family has two children, 1 and 2, and that the total value to the family is additive.
Thus, if both children work at home or migrate, the total return is f (e1) + f (e2) or w(e1) + w(e2), respectively.
If child 1 migrates and child 2 stays home, the total return is w(e1) + f (e2). Parents have a fixed total budget
to spend on education, 2y, and the cost of a year of education is normalized to 1. Thus, parents face the
budget constraint e1 + e2 ≤ 2 y, and we assume that y is small enough that this constraint always binds.
Figure C.1 illustrates a typical home production function (f) and wage function (w). Let e* denote
the point where wages and farm revenue are equal, w(e*) = f(e*).
w(e)

$

f(e)

e*

e

FIGURE C.1 HOME AND MARKET OUTPUT AS A FUNCTION OF EDUCATION
When the budget is extremely tight, 2 y ≤ e*, the optimal solution for the parents, since we have assumed
the absence of incentive issues, is to choose e1 = e2 = y, and both children remain at home. On the other
hand, when the family is sufficiently wealthy, y ≥ e*, the optimal solution is to once again choose e1 = e2 =
y, but now both children choose to migrate.
For an intermediate range of y, it is possible that the parents choose to have one child migrate and
one child stay at home. In this case, it will be optimal to give the child who migrates more education than
the child who stays home. Since the total education constraint binds, the parents’ problem can be written
as:
maxΔ f (y – Δ) + w(y + Δ).
Taking the derivative with respect to Δ and setting it equal to zero, we have:
f '(y − Δ*) = w'(y + Δ*).

The optimal solution is illustrated in Figure C.2.

15

f'(y- Δ)

w'(y+ Δ)
Δ*

Δ

FIGURE C.2. OPTIMAL EDUCATION DIFFERENCE BETWEEN SIBLINGS
Suppose the return to return to education in the city increases, shifting up from w'(e) to W’(e). For a small
shift, the result will be an increase in Δ*, as illustrated in Figure C.3.
f'(y- Δ)

W'(y+ Δ)
w'(y+ Δ)
Δ*

Δ**

Δ

FIGURE C.3. CHANGES IN RETURNS AND OPTIMAL EDUCATION DIFFERENCE
Empirically, an increase in Δ* corresponds to an increase in education for children who migrate and
a decrease in education for children who do not migrate. Thus, it is possible that credit constraints would
generate similar behavior to our model, with gains for some children alongside reductions for others.
Though we note that it is not guaranteed; it will depend in general on the shape of the cost and production
functions.34

34

As drawn, the change in the city returns does not result in more children migrating, and in general there
is no clean empirical prediction corresponding to Prediction 2 of our model. It is possible that an increase
in the returns in the city could lead more children to migrate (if it moves households from wanting to keep
both children at home to letting one migrate or from wanting to keep one at home to letting both migrate).
16

