NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LAND MISALLOCATION AND PRODUCTIVITY
Diego Restuccia
Raul Santaeulalia-Llopis
Working Paper 23128
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23128

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2017

For helpful comments we thank Aslihan Arslan, Nadege Azebaze, Fancesco Caselli, Leandro M.
de Magalhaes, Matthias Doepke, Pascaline Dupas, Chang-Tai Hsieh, Chad Jones, Joe Kaboski,
Pete Klenow, Evelyn Korn, Per Krusell, Rody Manuelli, Virgiliu Midrigan, Andrew Newman,
Chris Pissarides, Nancy Qian, Richard Rogerson, Jose-Victor Rios-Rull, Paul Romer, Nancy
Stokey, Kjetil Storesletten, Kei-Mu Yi, and seminar participants at Edinburgh, ENSAI, SITE,
SED, NBER Summer Institute, Toronto, IMF Workshop on Inequality, CIDE Mexico, Queen's,
Marburg, Universitat d'Alacant, CEMFI, RIDGE, Wilfried Laurier University, HEC Montreal,
Oxford CSAE, World Bank Land & Poverty Conference, ECAMA-IPFRI-IPA, Notre Dame
conference on misallocation and development, UAB, FAO-Roma, Universitat de Barcelona, and
LSE. All remaining errors are our own. Restuccia gratefully acknowledges the financial support
from the Canadian Research Chairs program and the Social Sciences and Humanities Research
Council of Canada. Santaeulalia-Llopis gratefully thanks the Weidenbaum Center on the
Economy, Government, and Public Policy for financial support. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Diego Restuccia and Raul Santaeulalia-Llopis. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Land Misallocation and Productivity
Diego Restuccia and Raul Santaeulalia-Llopis
NBER Working Paper No. 23128
February 2017
JEL No. O1,O4,O55
ABSTRACT
Using detailed household-level data from Malawi on physical quantities of outputs and inputs in
agricultural production, we measure total factor productivity (TFP) for farms controlling for land
quality, rain, and other transitory shocks. We find that operated land size and capital are
essentially unrelated to farm TFP implying substantial factor misallocation. The aggregate
agricultural output gain from a reallocation of factors to their efficient use among existing
farmers is a factor of 3.6-fold. We directly link factor misallocation to severely restricted land
markets as the vast majority of land is allocated by village chiefs and not marketed. In particular,
the output gain from reallocation are 2.6 times larger for farms with no marketed land than for
farms that only operate marketed land.

Diego Restuccia
Department of Economics
University of Toronto
150 St. George Street
Toronto, ON M5S 3G7
CANADA
and NBER
diego.restuccia@utoronto.ca
Raul Santaeulalia-Llopis
MOVE, UAB, and Barcelona GSE
Plaza Civica s/n
Bellaterra, Barcelona
08193
Spain
rauls@movebarcelona.eu

A online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w23128

1

Introduction

A fundamental question in the field of economic growth and development is why some countries are
rich and others poor. The literature has offered many useful perspectives but we build on two. First,
agriculture is relevant because poor countries are substantially less productive in agriculture relative
to non-agriculture compared to rich countries and allocate most of their labor to this sector.1 Second,
the misallocation of factors of production across heterogeneous production units is important in
accounting for differences in measured productivity across countries.2 We exploit a unique microlevel data from Malawi to measure total factor productivity (TFP) in farms controlling for land
quality and transitory shocks. We find that operated land size and capital are essentially unrelated
to farm TFP, providing strong evidence of misallocation. Quantitatively, factor misallocation has
a substantial negative effect on agricultural productivity, implying a 3.6-fold gain from efficient
reallocation. This gain is much larger than those reported for the manufacturing sector of China
and India (e.g. Hsieh and Klenow, 2009). Importantly, we provide direct evidence linking the bulk
of agricultural productivity losses from misallocation to restricted land markets.
Malawi represents an interesting case to study for several reasons. First, Malawi is an extremely
poor country in Africa, featuring very low agricultural productivity, a large share of employment in
agriculture, and extremely low farm operational scales. Second, the land market in Malawi is largely
underdeveloped. Most of land in Malawi is customary and user rights are allocated locally by village
chiefs. In our representative sample, more than 83 percent of household farms do not operate any
marketed land (either purchased or rented-in).3 Third, the detailed micro data for Malawi allow
1

See, for instance, Gollin et al. (2002) and Restuccia et al. (2008).
For instance Restuccia and Rogerson (2008) and Hsieh and Klenow (2009). See also Gancia and Zilibotti (2009)
for an analysis connecting misallocation and technology.
3
In Malawi, the vast majority of land is either directly or indirectly distributed by the village head (or superior
chiefs that exercise power over a collection of villages). The Customary Land Act grants these local leaders the power
of allowing/banning land transactions (e.g., inheritance) and resolve disputes across villagers related to land limits
(Kishindo, 2011; Morris, 2016). This status quo has remained stable since colonial times (Pachai, 1973). While not
yet in place, the Malawi Land Bill passed in 2016 aims at reducing these powers.
2

2

us to precisely connect land constraints at the household-farm level and factor misallocation in
agriculture, providing an important departure from the existing macro development literature.
Our contribution is based on two elements that are essential for the assessment of the quantitative
importance of factor misallocation and its sources. The first element is a measure of farm-level TFP
which requires detailed information on outputs, inputs, and other factors such as land quality and
transitory shocks that are relevant in our context. The second element is the direct identification
from the data of which production units are operating land acquired from the market or not, which
provides the basis to directly connecting misallocation and land markets. It is important to note that
none of these two key elements, measurements of farm-level TFP and information on how operated
land is acquired, is present in recent studies of misallocation in agriculture, such as Adamopoulos
and Restuccia (2014). The data is the 2010/11 Integrated Survey of Agriculture (ISA) for Malawi
collected by the World Bank. This is a large nationally-representative sample of more than 12
thousand households.4 Whereas the dispersion in our measure of farm-level TFP is quantitatively
similar to previous studies in other sectors and countries, our finding is that factors of production
are roughly evenly spread among farmers. That is, operated land size and capital are essentially
unrelated to farm productivity, generating substantially larger amounts of misallocation than found
in other contexts. To assess the aggregate impact of misallocation on agricultural productivity in
Malawi, we consider as a benchmark the efficient allocation of factors across existing householdfarms in the data, taking as given the total amounts of land and capital; and calculate the output
(productivity) gain as the ratio of efficient to actual output. Our main finding is that the output
gain is 3.6-fold in the full sample, that is, if capital and land were reallocated across farms in Malawi
to their efficient uses, agricultural productivity would increase by 260 percent.
A limitation of the empirical literature on misallocation is the weak link with policies and institutions that cause it (e.g. Hsieh and Klenow, 2009), a caveat that also applies to previous studies of
4

The ISA data are considered a gold standard for the study of poor countries; see a detailed analysis in de Magalhaes and Santaeulàlia-Llopis (2015). We provide further discussion in Section 2.

3

land allocations in the agricultural sector (e.g. Adamopoulos and Restuccia, 2014). This limitation
has inspired a promising quantitative literature studying specific policies and institutions, but the
findings are yet elusive in accounting for the bulk of TFP differences across countries (Restuccia
and Rogerson, 2016). In this context, an important contribution of our analysis is to provide a
strong empirical connection between factor misallocation and the limited market for land, showing large productivity losses associated with restricted land markets. The evidence comes from
contrasting the output gains among farmers that have no marketed land to those that operate
marketed land. We find that reallocating factors among farms with no marketed land to reduce the
dispersion in marginal products to the same extent to those farms with all marketed land increases
agricultural output and productivity by a factor of 2.6-fold. This result provides an important first
step in directly identifying (lack of) land markets as a relevant institution generating misallocation
and productivity losses. Our results have important implications for the design of policies and
institutions to promote better factor allocation.5
Our evidence of factor misallocation based on producer-level TFP measures is closely linked to
the seminal work of Hsieh and Klenow (2009) for the manufacturing sector in China, India, and
the United States. Our analysis contributes to this work by providing evidence of misallocation in
the agricultural sector of a very poor country that is less subject to concerns of measurement and
specification errors that cast doubt on the extent of misallocation in poor countries. The evidence
of misallocation we provide is strong because of several reasons. First, it is easier to measure
producer-level TFP in agriculture than in other sectors since output and most inputs are directly
measured in physical quantities (Beegle et al., 2012; Carletto et al., 2013). Moreover, there is less
product heterogeneity in the agricultural sector than in other sectors, and such heterogeneity can be
controlled for in our data by focusing on individual crops. Indeed, the prevalence of maize production
5

We recognize that even with detailed and excellent micro data from ISA Malawi, measuring precisely farm-level
TFP is an enormous difficult task. However, we find it reassuring that the gains from factor reallocation are large
even when comparing groups of farmers in the same country operating with and without marketed land, as the
potential biases of mis-measurement, unobserved heterogeneity, and randomness are mitigated in the comparison.

4

in Malawi allows us to corroborate the extent of misallocation for farms that produce the same crop.
There is also a high response rate in the dataset with very few missing observations, making the
analysis less subject to measurement and specification errors. Second, the micro data provide precise
measures of the quality of inputs (e.g., eleven dimensions of land quality) as well as transitory shocks
such as rain and health shocks that we explicitly control for to measure farm-level TFP. Third, the
large sample size allows us to assess the robustness of our results to within narrow geographic areas
and other relevant characteristics. Fourth, the micro data provide information on land and capital
rental payments that we use to compute land and capital income shares for the agricultural sector
in Malawi that generate virtually identical results to our baseline calibration to U.S. shares. Fifth,
while Hsieh and Klenow (2009) assess the reallocation gains in China and India relative to the
gains in the United States, we are able assess the reallocation gains relative to a set of farmers in
Malawi whose operated land is all marketed, providing a more direct benchmark comparison. Sixth,
the link between the degree of misallocation in manufacturing China and India and its causes is
weak in Hsieh and Klenow (2009). More recently, for the case of China, Song et al. (2011) show
that credit market imperfections are important in explaining resource misallocation between private
and state-owned enterprises. Analogously, we provide a direct link between misallocation and land
markets in agriculture exploiting information on how each plot was acquired. For all these reasons,
we argue that our analysis constitutes the most direct and comprehensive evidence of misallocation
in a poor country.
We also explore the broader consequences of misallocation on structural transformation and inequality. The productivity increase from efficient reallocation in Malawi would unravel a substantial
process of structural change, for instance, in the context of a standard two-sector model, a reduction
in the share of employment in agriculture from 65 percent to 4 percent and an increase in average
farm size by a factor of 16.2-fold, making these statistics closer to industrialized-country levels.
These effects would be even larger in more elaborate models that include endogenous investments

5

in productivity, ability selection across sectors, among other well-studied channels in the literature.6
A potential argument that justifies the actual land allocation is the reduction of income inequality.
That is, the distribution of land can operate as an ex-ante redistribution mechanism. Interestingly,
even though the actual allocation of factors is evenly spread across farmers, we find that factor
equalization is ineffective at equalizing incomes in Malawi. Taking the actual allocation of factors
as endowments and decentralizing the efficient allocation via perfectly competitive rental markets,
we show that the income distribution associated with the efficient allocation features much lower
income inequality and poverty. The introduction of rental markets, where operational scales can
deviate from land-use rights, substantially improves aggregate productivity reducing poverty and
alleviating income inequality.
Our paper relates to a growing literature in macroeconomics using micro data to study macro development such as Gollin et al. (2014), Buera et al. (2014), Adamopoulos and Restuccia (2015),
Bick et al. (2016), and Santaeulàlia-Llopis and Zheng (2016). More closely related to our work is
the macroeconomic study of misallocation in the agricultural sector based on the size distribution
of farms across countries (Adamopoulos and Restuccia, 2014).7 Our first advantage over previous
macroeconomic studies on agriculture is that we are able to recover TFP measures at the farm level
and, hence, assess the quantitative impact of factor misallocation in the agricultural sector in a
specific country, as in Hsieh and Klenow (2009) for manufacturing China and India. Importantly,
our results imply larger productivity losses from factor misallocation in agriculture than in manufacturing in poor countries. Our second advantage is that our analysis is able to directly connect
misallocation to restrictions in land markets, providing an important direct link to policy analysis
that is missing in Hsieh and Klenow (2009) and Adamopoulos and Restuccia (2014). Within the
micro development literature, Foster and Rosenzweig (2011) provide evidence of inefficient farm
6

See for instance Goldstein and Udry (2008), Lagakos and Waugh (2013), and Adamopoulos et al. (2017).
Recent work in this area include: Adamopoulos and Restuccia (2015) who study the impact of a specific policy—
land reform—on productivity exploiting panel micro data from the Philippines, Chen (2016) who studies the impact
of land titles on agricultural productivity across countries, and Gottlieb et al. (2015) who study the implications of
communal land on misallocation and productivity in agriculture.
7

6

sizes in India that may be connected to the low incidence of tenancy and land sales limiting land
reallocation to efficient farmers. Udry (1996) focuses on the intra household-farm reallocation of
factors across wives and husbands for a relatively small sample of farms, obtaining a small role of
misallocation in Burkina Faso. Our results indicate a large role for misallocation. There is a crucial
difference between our work and that of Udry’s. We focus on reallocations across farms instead
of within farms. By exploiting large representative data to study nationwide factor reallocation
across farms, our analysis delivers, arguably, a more accurate picture of the macroeconomic gains
from reallocation.8 Finally, Midrigan and Xu (2014) find that firms’ internal capital accumulation substantially mitigates credit market imperfections after entry. It is important to emphasize
that this channel, while potentially important for other factors, is limited for land which is not
reproducible and accumulates only through transactions. This is consistent with recent empirical
evidence showing that household land holdings barely grow over the lifecycle in Sub-Saharan Africa
(de Magalhaes and Santaeulàlia-Llopis, 2015).
The paper proceeds as follows. In the next section and section 3, we describe important elements
of the micro data and construct our measure of farm TFP in Malawi. Section 4 assesses the
aggregate productivity impact of misallocation, linking it with the extent of access to marketed
land. Sections 5 and 6 discuss the broader implications of misallocation on structural change and
inequality. We conclude in Section 7. An on-line Appendix is available at: https://www.dropbox.
com/s/je5wv90trv2nmq3/RS_Online_Appendix.pdf?dl=0.
8
There is an important literature in micro development analyzing the role of tenancy and property rights for
agricultural productivity such as Shaban (1987), Besley (1995), Banerjee et al. (2002), among others. Whereas
this literature has focused on the impact of endogenous investments and effort incentives on farm productivity, our
analysis focuses on the impact of resource allocation on aggregate agricultural productivity, taking as given farmlevel TFP. Integrating the role of land-market institutions on both factor misallocation and endogenous farm-level
productivity, is an important and promising area of study that we leave for future research.

7

2

Data

We use a new and unique household-level data set collected by the World Bank, the Malawi Integrated Survey of Agriculture (ISA) 2010/11, see de Magalhaes and Santaeulàlia-Llopis (2015).
The survey is comprehensive in the collection of the entire agricultural production (i.e., physical
amounts by crop and plot) and the full set of inputs used in all agricultural activities at the plot
level, all collected by a new and enlarged agricultural module that distinguish ISA from previous
Living Standards Measurement Study (LSMS) surveys. The data are nationally-representative with
a sampling frame based on the Census and an original sample that includes 12,271 households (and
56,397 individuals) of which 81% live in rural areas.9
The survey provides information on household-farm characteristics over the entire year and we focus
our attention to agricultural activities related to the rainy season. The detail on household-farm
agricultural production is excruciating. Information on agricultural production is provided by each
and all crops produced by the household. This is an economy largely based on maize production that
uses 80% of the total land. The total quantity of each crop harvested by each household is available
per plot. We value agricultural production using median at-the-gate prices. In crop production, each
household potentially uses different quantities of intermediate inputs such as fertilizers, herbicides,
pesticides and seeds. This information is also provided by plot. We also apply common median
prices to value these intermediate inputs. As a result, our benchmark measure of household-farm
output is a common-price measure of real value added constructed as the value of agricultural
production (of all crops) minus the costs of the full set of intermediate inputs.10
9

The Malawi ISA is part of a new initiative funded by the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation (BMGF) and led
by the Living Standards Measurement Study (LSMS) Team in the Development Research Group (DECRG) of the
World Bank. For further details on the Malawi ISA data and the construction of agricultural output and inputs see
Appendix A.
10
We use common prices of outputs and intermediate inputs to construct real value added in farms in the same
spirit as the real measures of output across countries from the International Comparison Project and the Penn World
Table.

8

We measure household land as the sum of the size of each cultivated household plot. This includes
rented-in land, which consists of 12.5% of all cultivated land. On average, household farms cultivate
1.8 plots.11 Plot size is recorded in acres using GPS (with precision of 1% of an acre) for 98% of plots
(for the remaining 2% of plots, size is estimated). The operational scale of farms is extremely small.
For each household, we compute the amount of land used for agricultural production regardless of
the land status (whether land is owned, rented, etc.). Hence, we focus on the operational scale
of the household-farm. We find that 78.3% of households operate less than 1 hectare (henceforth,
Ha.), 96.1% of households operate less than 2 Ha., and only 0.3% of households operate more than
5 Ha., see the first column in Table 1. The average farm size is 0.83 Ha.12 The data contains
very detailed information on the quality of land for each plot used in every household. There are
11 dimensions of land quality reported: elevation, slope, erosion, soil quality, nutrient availability,
nutrient retention capacity, rooting conditions, oxygen availability to roots, excess salts, topicality,
and workability. This allows us to control for land quality to measure household-farm productivity.
Regarding land, we emphasize that the land market is largely underdeveloped in Malawi. The proportion of household-farms that do not operate any marketed land is 83.4%. These are households
whose land was granted by a village chief, was inherited or was given as bride price. The remaining
16.6% of farm households operate some land obtained from the market, either rented or purchased,
and the proportion of household-farms whose entire operated land was obtained in the market is
10.4%. Disaggregating the main types of marketed land, we find that 3.0% of household-farms rentin land informally (e.g., land borrowed for free or moved in without permission), 9.5% rent-in land
11
In rural Malawi, land is the largest household asset representing 44% of household total wealth. House structure
is 30%, livestock is 13%, and agricultural equipment and structures (e.g. tools and barns) is 3%, see de Magalhaes
and Santaeulàlia-Llopis (2015).
12
To make a comparison of operational scales in Malawi with other countries, we report the distribution of farm
sizes from the World Census of Agriculture in Adamopoulos and Restuccia (2014). These data include all land used
for agricultural production and corresponds to the year 1990. Note that despite the 20 years difference between ISA
2010/11 and the Census 1990 the distribution of land across the two sources is very similar. Comparatively with
other countries, the operational scale of farms in Malawi is extremely small, ∼0.70-0.83 Ha., whereas average farm
size is 187 Ha. in the United States and 16.1 Ha. in Belgium. Belgium is a good developed-country reference since
the land endowment (measured as land per capita) is similar to that of Malawi (land per capita is 0.56 Ha. in Malawi
and 0.5 Ha. in Belgium, whereas land per capita is 1.51 Ha. in the United States).

9

Table 1: Size Distribution of Farms (% of Farms by Size)

ISA 2010/11
Malawi
Hectares (Ha):
≤ 1 Ha
1 − 2 Ha
2 − 5 Ha
5 − 10 Ha
10+ Ha
Average Farm Size (Ha)

78.3
17.8
3.7
0.2
0.0
0.83

World Census of Agriculture 1990
Malawi
Belgium
USA
77.7
17.3
5.0
0.0
0.0
0.7

14.6
8.5
15.5
14.8
46.6
16.1

–
–
10.6
7.5
81.9
187.0

Notes: The first column reports the land size distribution (in hectares) for household farms from the Malawi 2010/11
Integrated Survey of Agriculture (ISA). The other columns report statistics from the World Census of Agriculture
1990 for Malawi, Belgium, and United States documented in Adamopoulos and Restuccia (2014).

formally (e.g., leaseholds, short-term rentals or farming as a tenant), 1.8% purchase land without a
title and 1.3% purchase land with a title.
In terms of agricultural capital, we have information on both equipment and structures. Capital
equipment includes implements (such as hand hoe, slasher, axe, sprayer, panga knife, sickle, treadle
pump, and watering can) and machinery (such as ox cart, ox plough, tractor, tractor plough, ridger,
cultivator, generator, motorized pump, and grain mill), while capital structures includes chicken
houses, livestock kraals, poultry kraals, storage houses, granaries, barns, pig sties, among others.
To proxy for capital services after conditioning for its use in agricultural activities, we aggregate
across the capital items evaluated at the estimated current selling price.13
In Malawi, a large proportion of the households members, beside the household head, contribute
to agricultural work. Household size is 4.6 with extended families in which several generations live
together in a single household. We use the survey definition of household members as individuals
that have lived in the household at least 9 months in the last 12 months. In terms hours, data are
13

This selling price for agricultural capital items, rarely available in previous LSMS data, helps capture potential
differences in the quality and depreciation of capital across farms. We provide robustness of our results to alternative
physical measures of agricultural capital such as asset indexes for agricultural equipment and structures in Appendix
B. Our results are robust to using these alternative indexes to proxy for agricultural capital.

10

collected at the plot level for each individual that participates in agriculture and by agricultural
activity (i.e., land preparation/planting, weeding/fertilizing, and harvesting). The data provides
information of weeks, days per week, and hours per day employed per plot, activity and individual.
To compute household-farm hours we aggregate the hours of all plots, activities and individuals.
Further, the same information is provided for hired labor and labor received in exchange (for free),
but most household-farm hours consist of family hours. We add hours by hired labor and free
exchange of labor to our measure of total household hours.
Since our data comprises a single cross section of households for 2010-11, it is important to control
for temporary output shocks that may explain variation in output and hence productivity across
households in the data. The single most important temporary shock for farmers is weather. We
use the annual precipitation which is total rainfall in millimetres (mm) in the last 12 months. In
further robustness exercises, we net household-productivity from additional transitory shocks in the
form of health, deaths or food security risks suffered by the household in the last 12 months, and
we also exploit the more recent 2013 round data where about 1/4 of the original households are
interviewed to calculate a more permanent component of farm TFP as an estimated fixed effect in
the panel.
Geographic and institutional characteristics are also recorded for each household-farm. We use
several partitions of these characteristics to conduct robustness exercises. In particular, we use geographical information on the region, districts, and enumeration area to which household-farms belong and institutional characteristics such as the traditional authority (TA) governing the householdfarm or ethno-linguistic characteristics. TAs are relevant for our exercise as chiefs appointed by
TAs perform a variety of functions that include resolving issues related to land and property.14
Finally, we note that the survey response is very high with very few missing observations. Condi14

Traditional Authorities are part of the administrative structure of Malawi. Any one district is only in one region,
any one TA is only in one district. Traditional authorities (and their sub-ordinate chiefs) are ’town chiefs’ formally
recognized under the Chiefs Act of 1967 and receive a monetary honorarium by the government.

11

tioning on households that produce agricultural output and for which all factor inputs, including the
11 dimensions on land quality, are available and further trimming about 1% of the household-farm
productivity distribution, our sample consists of 7,157 households.15
The data allows us to construct fairly precise measures of real household-farm productivity. The
ISA data represents a substantial improvement with respect to previous LSMS questionnaires. The
detailed information on quantity inputs and outputs reduces substantially the possibility of measurement error and composition bias, making the dataset ideal for our purpose of measuring productivity
at the farm level, assessing the extent of factor misallocation in the Malawian economy, and assessing the extent to which productivity losses due to misallocation are related to imperfections or
frictions in the land and other input markets.

3

Measuring Farm Productivity

We use the micro data from ISA 2010/11 described in the previous section to measure productivity at the farm level. Constructing a measure of farm total factor productivity (TFP) is essential
in assessing the extent to which factors are misallocated in the agricultural sector. The detailed
micro data for Malawi presents a unique opportunity to assess factor misallocation in agriculture
and its aggregate productivity implications. Fewer assumptions are required to measure micro-level
productivity in our context compared to many studies of misallocation focusing on the manufacturing sector since our data for agriculture comprises physical quantities of outputs and most inputs
whereas additional assumptions are required to separate price and quantity from sales or revenue
data of manufacturing plants.
We measure farm productivity by exploiting the detailed micro data where not only we obtain real
15

See further details on the trimming strategy in Appendix B.

12

measures of output and value added in each farm but also control for land quality and a wide array
of transitory shocks. We measure farm-level total factor productivity (TFP) si as the residual from
the following farm-level production function,

yi = si ζi kiθk (qi li )θl ,

θk + θl < 1,

(1)

where yi is real value added, ki is capital, li is the amount of land in operation, ζi is a rain shock,
qi is land quality, and θk,l are the input elasticities. In our analysis, we focus on the allocation
of capital and land across farms, abstracting from differences in labor inputs. For this reason, we
measure value added, capital, and land in the data in per total labor hour terms. This implies that
our residual measure of TFP is not affected by actual differences in the labor input across farmers
in the data.16 In constructing our measure of farm TFP, we choose θk = 0.36 and θl = 0.18 from the
capital and land income shares in U.S. agriculture reported in Valentinyi and Herrendorf (2008).
We later discuss the sensitivity of our results to these factor shares using our micro data for Malawi.
Our measure of output is real value added which takes into account the real amount of intermediate
inputs used in production. This is relevant in Malawi because intermediate inputs are subsidized via
the “Malawi Input Subsidy Program” and the subsidy allocation is based on farmer’s income, with
poorer farmers receiving higher subsidies. According to our preferred measure of productivity, less
productive farmers, which are also poorer farmers, receive a subsidy that is more than 60 percent
their output, whereas more productive farmers (richer farmers) receive a subsidy that is less than 10
percent their output. This implies that a measure of productivity that uses actual expenditures in
intermediate inputs instead of actual quantities of intermediate inputs substantially underestimates
productivity dispersion across farms. In our data, not accounting for distortions in intermediate
input prices underestimates the dispersion in farm TFP by 23 percent.17
16

We note, however, that labor hours are misallocated across farms since farm hours are uncorrelated with farm
TFP. As a result, our characterization of misallocation is conservative in terms of the potential gains from efficient
reallocation.
17
Misallocation of intermediate inputs via the input subsidy program is distinct from the misallocation due to

13

We are interested in permanent measures of productivity at the farm level, associated with the
productivity of the farm operator. As a result, two key elements for this measure are to distinguish
between the productivity of the farmer and the productivity of the land under operation and to
abstract from temporary variations in output due to whether shocks. We deal with each of these
components in turn.
There are important differences in the land characteristics operated by farms in our sample. For
the full sample, more than 34 percent of land is high-altitude plains while around 20 percent are
low plateaus and 19 percent mid-altitude plateaus. These characteristics also differ by region where
the Center region is mostly high-altitude plains whereas the South region is mostly low plateaus.
We control for land quality in our measure of productivity by constructing an index as follows. Our
benchmark land quality index qi0 is constructed by regressing log output in each farm on the full set of
land quality dimensions described in Section 2. To the extent that farm inputs are positively related
to land quality, our benchmark index attributes too much variation to land quality. We nevertheless
use this index as our benchmark because it is conservative with respect to the productivity effects
of misallocation.18 There is substantial variation in land quality q across households and across
regions, see for instance Figure 1, panel (a); but this variation is not quantitatively substantial
relative to for example variation in TFP across farms. In Table 2 we report the dispersion (variance
of the log) of land quality indexes versus the dispersion in the quantity of land across households
in our data. We find that the dispersion in land quality is large and slightly above that of land
size nationwide, respectively .859 and .749 in terms of the variance of the log. Not surprisingly, the
dispersion in land quality decreases with the size of geographic area: the average dispersion is .833
within regions, .568 within districts, and .147 within enumeration areas.
imperfect land markets we emphasize and as a result we focus on value added measures of output and abstract from
intermediate-input distortions. Nevertheless, it is important to emphasize that intermediate input distortions are
another source of productivity losses in the agricultural sector in Malawi.
18
We have considered many alternative land quality indexes with similar results including imposing exogenous
functional forms, different subsets of land quality dimensions, and different forms of land size and capital controls,
see Appendix A.

14

Figure 1: Histograms of Land Quality Index and Rain, Malawi ISA 2010/11
(a) Land Quality Index, qi (in logs)

(b) Rain, ζi (in logs)

Notes: The land quality index is constructed by regressing log output in each farm on the full set of land quality
dimmensions. Median values by region are depicted with vertical lines: Orange (North), green (Center) and light
blue (South).

15

Table 2: Dispersion of Output, Land Size, Land Quality, and Rain, Malawi ISA 2010/11

Full
Sample
Output (yi )
Land size (li )
Land quality:
Index (qi )
Index subitems:
Elevation
Slope (%)
Erosion
Soil quality
Nutrient availability
Nutrient retention capability
Rooting conditions
Oxygen available to roots
Excess salts
Toxicity
Workability
Quality-adjusted land size (qi li )
Rain (ζi )
Annual precipitation (mm)
Precipitation of wettest quarter (mm)

Within Geographic Areas:
Regions Districts Enumeration
Areas

1.896
.749

1.867
.746

1.778
.719

1.649
.671

.852

.833

.568

.147

.439
.657
.480
.608
.387
.329
.342
.097
.037
.027
.475
1.571

.349
.635
.496
.605
.402
.365
.372
.094
.045
.038
.474
1.531

.075
.453
.472
.514
.248
.180
.302
.105
.048
.033
.335
1.243

.001
.093
.427
.458
.023
.016
.029
.010
.004
.003
.033
.808

.039
.026

.025
.013

.014
.005

.001
.000

Notes: Output yi , land size (in acres) li , land quality index qi , quality-adjusted land size qi li , and rain ζi , are
continuous variables for which we use the variance of logs as a measure of dispersion. Subitems of land quality, slope
(in %) and elevation (in meters), are also continuous variables and we also report the variance of logs as dispersion
measure. The other subitems of land quality are categorical variables such as soil quality (with categories 1 good, 2
fair, 3 poor), erosion (with categories 1 none, 2 low, 3 moderate, 4 high) and nutrient availability, nutrient retention,
rooting conditions, oxygen to roots, excess of salts, toxicity and workability that take values from four categories (1
low constraint, 2 moderate constraint, 3 severe constraint and 4 very severe constraint). For all categorial variables
we use the proportion of non-mode values in the sample as measure of dispersion. The construction of the land
quality index qi is discussed in Section 3. For the last three columns referring to within geographic areas, we report
the averages across geographic area under consideration (e.g., the variance of output in the ’Regions’ column is the
average across regions of the variance of output by region).

16

In Malawi, weather shocks, in particular rain, is the single most important source of transitory
shocks to agricultural production—we find that most cropland is rain-fed and 84% of householdfarms do not have any alternative irrigation system. Figure 1, panel (b), reports the density of
rain for the entire population of farmers and, separately, for farmers within regions. We note what
appear substantial differences across household-farms and regions with median values for the Center
and South region that fall below the range of of the distribution of rain in the North region. To
quantify the actual dispersion in rain we report the variance of logs of rain in the bottom of Table 2
for our entire sample and regions. We find that the dispersion of rain is very small compared to
the dispersion in land size and even smaller relative to output. In particular, the dispersion in
annual precipitation is 5.2% that of land size and 2.1% that of agricultural output. The small role
of rain variation further appears within regions, districts, and enumeration areas, as well as using
alternative definitions of precipitation measures, with mean cross-sectional variances that decline
with the size of the geographical area. In short, rain is not a substantial contributor to output
variation across farm households in Malawi.
Having constructed our measure of farm TFP, Figure 2 documents its distribution across all households in our sample. There are large differences in farm productivity across households that remain
even within regions. The dispersion in farm productivity compares in magnitude to that of the
variation in physical productivity (TFPQ) across plants in the manufacturing sector in the United
States, China, and India reported in Hsieh and Klenow (2009), see Table 3. Whereas the ratio of
physical productivity between the 90 to 10 percentile is a factor of around 15-fold in China and
India and around 9-fold in U.S. manufacturing, the 90-10 ratio across farms in our sample is 10.8fold. Similarly, the 75-25 ratio is 3.2-fold in our sample of farms whereas it is around 4.5-fold across
manufacturing plants in China and India.
Table 4 reports the variance decomposition of farm output per hour using our assumed production
function. We note that farm productivity si and to a lesser extent the inputs of capital and land

17

Figure 2: Density of Farm Productivity si (in logs), Malawi ISA 2010/11

Notes: Household-farm productivity si is measured using our benchmark production function, adjusting for rain ζi
and land quality qi , yi = si ζi f (ki , qi li ) with f (ki , qi li ) = ki.36 (qi li ).18 , where yi is farm output, ki is capital, and li is
land. All variables have been logged.

are the key determinants of output variation across farm households in Malawi, with rain and land
quality playing a quantitatively minor role. For instance, the variance of farm TFP accounts for 76
percent of the total variance of output and the variance of capital and quality adjusted land inputs
for about 20 percent, whereas when rain and land quality are assumed constant across farms, the
variances of these two factors and their contribution to the total variance are fairly similar. The
small quantitative role of land quality for output differences across household farms is robust to
variations in the index which we discuss in Appendix A.

18

Table 3: Dispersion of Productivity across Farms and Manufacturing Plants

Statistic
SD
75-25
90-10
N

Farms
Malawi
USA
ISA 2010/11 1990
1.19
1.15
2.38
7,157

0.80
1.97
2.50
–

Manufacturing Plants
USA
China India
1977
1998
1987
0.85
1.22
2.22
164,971

1.06
1.41
2.72
95,980

1.16
1.55
2.77
31,602

Notes: The first column reports statistics for the household-farm productivity distribution from the micro data
in Malawi. The second column reports statistics for farm productivity in the United Sates from the calibrated
distribution in Adamopoulos and Restuccia (2014) to U.S. farm-size data. The other columns report statistics for
manufacturing plants in Hsieh and Klenow (2009). SD is the standard deviation of log productivity; 75-25 is the
log difference between the 75 and 25 percentile and 90-10 the 90 to 10 percentile difference in productivity. N is the
number of observations in each dataset.

Table 4: Variance Decomposition of Agricultural Output, Malawi ISA 2010/11

var(y)
var(s)
var(ζ)
var(f (k, ql))
2cov(s, ζ)
2cov(s, f (k, ql))
2cov(ζ, f (k, ql))

Benchmark
Level
%

(ζi = 1, qi = 1)
Level
%

1.896 100.0
1.435 75.7
.039
2.1
.383 20.2
-.044
-2.3
.034
1.8
.048
2.5

1.896
1.457
–
.343
–
.096
–

100.0
76.8
–
18.1
–
5.1
–

Notes: The variance decomposition uses our benchmark production function that adjusts for rain ζi and land quality
qi across household farms, yi = si ζi f (ki , qi li ) with f (ki , qi li ) = ki.36 (qi li ).18 . All variables have been logged. The
variables are output yi , household-farm productivity si , rain ζi , structures and equipment capital ki , and qualityadjusted land size, qi li . The first two columns report results from our benchmark specification where rain and land
quality are controlled for. The last two columns report the results abstracting from rain and land quality, i.e. we
set ζi = 1 and qi = 1 ∀i. In each case, the column “Level” reports the variance and the column “%” reports the
variance contribution to the total in percentage.

19

4

Quantitative Analysis

We assess the extent of factor misallocation across farms in Malawi and its quantitative impact
on agricultural productivity. We do so without imposing any additional structure other than the
farm-level production function assumed in the construction of our measure of household-farm productivity. We then study the connection between factor misallocation and land markets.

4.1

Efficient and Actual Allocations

As a benchmark reference, we characterize the efficient allocation of capital and land across a fixed
set of heterogeneous farmers that differ in productivity si . A planner chooses the allocation of
capital and land across a given set of farmers with productivity si to maximize agricultural output
given fixed total amounts of capital K and land L. The planner solves the following problem:

Y e = max

X

{ki ,li }

si (kiα li1−α )γ ,

i

subject to
K=

X

ki ,

L=

i

X

li .

i

The efficient allocation equates marginal products of capital and land across farms and has a simple
1/(1−γ)

form. Letting zi ≡ si
, the efficient allocations are given by simple shares of a measure of
P
productivity (zi / zi ) of capital and land:
zi
lie = P L.
zi

zi
kie = P K,
zi

We note for further reference that substituting the efficient allocation of capital an land into the
definition of aggregate agricultural output renders a simple constant returns to scale aggregate

20

production function for agriculture on capital, land, and agricultural farmers given by

Y e = ZNa1−γ [K α L1−α ]γ ,

(2)

P
where Z = ( zi g(zi ))1−γ is total factor productivity as the average productivity of farmers and
Na is the number of farms. For our benchmark, we choose α and γ consistent with the production
function used in our measure of farm-level productivity so that αγ = 0.36 and (1 − α)γ = 0.18 are
the capital and land income shares in the U.S. economy (Valentinyi and Herrendorf, 2008) — and we
do sensitivity with factor shares directly computed from our Malawi micro data (see section 4.4.2).
This implies γ = 0.54. The total amount of capital K and land L are the total amounts of capital
and land across the farmers in the data. Farm level productivity si ’s are given by our measure of
farm TFP from data as described previously.
We illustrate the extent of factor misallocation in Figure 3, where we contrast the actual allocation of
land and capital and the associated factor productivities by farm TFP with the efficient allocation
of factors and factor productivities across farms. In the figure, each dot represents a household
farm in the data whereas the line represents the variable in the efficient allocation. In the efficient
allocation, operational scales of land and capital are increasing in farm productivity so that factor
productivities are constant across farms. The patterns that emerge in comparing the efficient
allocation with actual allocations are striking as the efficient allocation contrasts sharply with the
actual allocation of capital and land in Malawi. The data show that operational scales of land and
capital in farms are unrelated to farm productivity. Figure 3, panel (a), shows the amount of land
operated by each farm against farm productivity using our baseline measure of productivity that
adjusts for rain and quality as described previously. Contrary to the efficient allocation where there
is a tight mapping between land size and TFP, actual land in farms is essentially uncorrelated to
farm TFP, the correlation between land size and productivity is .05. This pattern implies that
the average (or marginal) product of land is not equalized across farms as it would be the case in

21

the efficient allocation. Figure 3, panel (b) documents the marginal product of land (which in our
framework is proportional to the output per unit of land or yield) across farms, which is strongly
positively related to farm TFP with a correlation (in logs) of .77.
Figure 3, panel (c), documents the relationship between the amount of capital in farms by farm
productivity. As with land, capital and productivity across farms are essentially unrelated, the
correlation between the two variables is -.01. And this pattern implies an increasing marginal
product of capital with farm TFP which we document in panel (d) with a correlation between
these variables (in logs) of .76. Although not documented in the figure, the data indicates that the
capital to land ratio is essentially unrelated to farm productivity, with a correlation between these
variables of -.03. This finding suggests that larger farms use more capital but since larger farms are
not more productive on average, the capital to land ratio remains roughly constant with respect to
farm TFP.
That the actual allocation of land across farmers in Malawi is unrelated to farm productivity is
consistent with our characterization of the land market where the amount of land in farms is more
closely related to inheritance norms and redistribution, and access to land is severely restricted in
rental and sale markets so more productive farmers cannot grow their size. Capital is also unrelated
to farm productivity with the capital to land ratio being roughly constant across farm productivity.
Our interpretation of this fact is that restrictions to land markets are also affecting capital allocations echoing de Soto (2000) findings that land market restrictions and insecure property rights
of farmers limit the ability to raise capital for agricultural production.19 Our findings constitute
strong evidence of land and capital misallocation across farmers in Malawi.
19

See the related discussion in Besley and Ghatak (2010). We find further direct evidence of the relationship
between land markets and access to credit in our micro data for Malawi, see Appendix C for a discussion.

22

Figure 3: Land Size, Capital, MPL and MPK: Actual and Efficient Allocations
(a) Land Size vs. Farm Productivity

(b) MPL vs. Farm Productivity

(c) Capital vs. Farm Productivity

(d) MPK vs. Farm Productivity

Notes: Panel (a) reports actual and efficient land size in farms li with respect to farm productivity si . Panel (b)
reports actual and efficient marginal product of land (MPL) with respect to farm productivity si . Panel (c) reports
actual and efficient capital in farms ki with respect to farm productivity si . Panel (d) reports actual and efficient
marginal product of capital (MPK) with respect to farm productivity si . All variables have been logged.

23

4.2

Aggregate Output Gain

To assess the impact of misallocation on aggregate productivity, in what follows we report the
aggregate output gain defined as the ratio of efficient to actual aggregate output,
Ye
Ye
P
,
=
Ya
yia
where Y e is efficient aggregate agricultural output as defined previously and Y a is actual agricultural
output aggregated from farm-level output yi using the production function in equation (1) with our
measure of farm productivity and the actual amounts of capital and land operated by each farm.20
Because the efficient output takes as given the total amounts of capital, land, and the number of
farmers observed in the data, the output gain is also a TFP gain.
Table 5, panel (a), reports the main results. For the full sample in the entire Malawi, the output gain
is 3.6-fold, that is, if capital and land were reallocated efficiently in Malawi to maximize agricultural
output, output and hence productivity would increase by 260 percent. This is a very large increase
in productivity as a result of a reduction in misallocation compared to the results when evaluating
specific policies which have found increases on the order of 5 to 30 percent or even when eliminating
all wedges in manufacturing in China and India in Hsieh and Klenow (2009) with increases ranging
between 100 to 160 percent. Given that the productivity dispersion across farms in Malawi is similar
to that of manufacturing plants reported in Hsieh and Klenow (2009), a larger reallocation gain
suggests that resources in Malawi are more misallocated than in those other countries. Indeed, the
standard deviation of log revenue productivity in Malawi is 1.05 compared to 0.67-0.74 in the case
of India and China in Hsieh and Klenow (2009). Because we have a large sample, our mean output
gain is tightly estimated. In Table 5, panel (a), we also report the 5 and 95 percentiles of Bootstrap
20

The computation of actual output at the farm level abstracts from rain and land quality and hence is comparable
to the efficient output described in the previous subsection. Our measure of farm productivity si though is purged
of rain and land quality effects.

24

estimates, which provide a narrow interval, between 3.1 and 4.2-fold output gain.
Table 5: Agricultural Output Gain (Y e /Y a )
(a) Main Results
Full Sample
Nationwide
3.59

Bootstrap Simulations
Median 5th pct. 95th pct.
3.55
4.07
3.11

(b) Within Productivity-si Variation
Output Gain

Benchmark
3.59

95%
3.40

90%
3.25

80%
3.00

0%
2.48

(c) By Geographical Areas and Institutions
Average

Median

Max

Min

Geographic Areas:
Regions
Districts
Enum. Areas

3.40
2.93
1.65

3.42
2.80
1.60

3.63 2.87
7.10 2.07
11.00 1.04

Institutions:
Traditional Authority
Language

3.11
3.36

3.48
3.88

5.58
5.95

1.39
1.16

Notes: In panel (a), bootstrap median and confidence intervals are computed from 5,000 simulations obtained from
random draws with 100 percent replacement, i.e., each simulation consists of a sample of the same size as the original
sample. See further discussion in Appendix B. Panel (b), see text in Section 4 for details. Panel (c) reports the
ratio of efficient to actual output when reallocation occurs within three narrower definitions of geographical areas
(3 regions, 31 districts and 713 enumeration areas) and two measures of institutional settings/cultural identity (53
traditional authorities and 13 languages). We drop enumeration areas with less than 5 household-farm observations.

Factor inputs are severely misallocated in Malawi, implying the large aggregate productivity gains
just discussed. There are two features of factor misallocation in Figure 3, panels (a) and (c): factor
inputs are dispersed among farmers with similar productivity (misallocation in factor inputs within
si productivity types) and factor inputs are misallocated across farmers with different productivity
(which lowers the correlation of factor inputs with farm productivity). We argue that factor input
variation within a farm-productivity type is not due to measurement error as factor inputs such as
land are measured with tight precision. Nevertheless, we can assess the magnitude of the aggregate
25

output gain associated with lower dispersion in factor inputs within a productivity type. We remove
within-s variation in factor inputs by regressing separately log land and capital on a constant and
log farm productivity s and use the estimated relationship to construct measures of factor inputs
that partially or fully remove residual variation. The results are in Table 5, panel (b). At the
extreme, with no within-s variation of factor inputs, there is only gain from reallocation across
productivity types. Even in this case, the output gain is still substantial a 2.5-fold (versus 3.6-fold
in the baseline). This implies that 70 percent of the output gain is due to misallocation of factor
inputs across farmers with different productivity.
We also report the output gain for narrower definitions of geographical areas and institutions such
as language classifications. Table 5, panel (c), reports these results. In the first column, we report
the output gain for the average of regions (i.e., output gain of reallocating factors within a region
for each region and then averaged across regions), for the average across districts (a narrower
geographical definition than region), and for the average across enumeration areas. Enumeration
areas are a survey-specific geographical description and is the narrowest geographical definition
available. Each enumeration area amounts to about 16 households in the data, which given the
average land holdings amounts to about 30 acres of geographically connected land. The table also
reports results by Traditional Authority (TA) and language. Columns 2 to 4 report the Median,
Min, and Max in each case.
What is striking about the numbers in Table 5, panel (c), is that the gains from reallocation
are large in all cases, even within narrowly defined geographical areas, traditional authority and
language. In particular, reallocating capital and land within a region generates output gains of the
same magnitude as in the aggregate (mean output gain of 3.4-fold).21 Similarly, within districts,
the average output gain is 2.9-fold, but the output gain can be as large as 7.10-fold and as low
as 2.1-fold. Even for the narrowest geographical definition, enumeration areas, just reallocating
21

The idea is that narrower geographic definitions provide additional land quality controls, see Larson et al. (2014)
for a similar strategy.

26

factors within 16 households, average output gains are 1.7-fold and can be as large as 11-fold in
some areas. The output gain within traditional authorities is 3.1-fold in average, with the largest
5.6-fold and median 3.5-fold. Within languages, the average output gain is 3.4-fold, the largest
6-fold and median 3.9-fold.

4.3

The Role of Land Markets

We have found strong evidence that capital and land are severely misallocated in the agricultural
sector in Malawi. We connect factor misallocation directly to the limited market for land in Malawi.
To do so, we use plot-level information about how each plot was acquired and group householdfarms by the share of marketed land that they operate. We find that 83.4 percent of all household
farms operate only non-marketed land and the remaining 16.6 percent operate some marketed land,
with 10.4 percent operating exclusively marketed land. Using this classification of household farms,
we explicitly assess the output gain across farms that differ in the extent of marketed land in their
operation.
Table 6 reports the aggregate output gain for farms that operate with no marketed land, with some
marketed land as either rented in or purchased, and with only marketed land. The output gain is
much higher for those farms with no marketed land than with some marketed land. For instance,
the output gain for those farms with no marketed land, which comprises 83.4 percent of the sample
of farms, is 4.2-fold, slightly larger than the 3.6-fold output gain for the entire sample. But for
farms with some marketed land, which comprises the remaining 16.6 percent of the sample farms,
the output gain is 2-fold. The output gain of factor misallocation is reduced by more than half when
farms have access to some marketed land. The output gain is even smaller among the set of farmers
whose entire operated land is either rented in or purchased. These farmers comprise 10.4 percent
of the sample and have an output gain of 1.6-fold versus 4.2-fold for farms with no marketed land.

27

These results provide direct and solid evidence of the connection of misallocation to land markets.22
Table 6 also decomposes the output gains among farmers by the type of operated marketed land:
(a) rented-in informally, for example land borrowed for free or moved-in without permission; (b)
rented-in formally such as leaseholds, short-term rentals or farming as tenant; (c) purchased as
untitled; and (d) purchased as titled. The vast majority of farmers with some marketed land are
formally renting-in, 9.5 percent of the sample out of the 16.6 percent with some marketed land. The
output gain is fairly similar for farmers operating land rented-in formally or informally, an output
gain of 1.72-1.73-fold. The lowest output gain is recorded for farms with operated land that was
purchased with a title, 1.39-fold versus 4.15-fold for farms with no marketed land. Interestingly,
farmers with purchased land without a title record a fairly large output gain, 5.13-fold, somewhat
larger than the output gain for farmers without marketed land. We note however that the sample
of farms with purchased land is fairly limited, only 3.1 percent of the sample with 1.8 percent of
farms with purchased untitled land and 1.3 percent of farms with purchased titled land.
Even though we have showed a strong connection between land markets and the degree of output
loss generated by misallocation, farms with marketed land are still far from operating at their
efficient scale which suggests that land markets are still limited even for farms with access to
marketed land. For instance, the correlation between land size and farm TFP is .14 for farms
with no marketed land, .25 for farms with some marketed land, and .30 for farms that operate all
marketed land. Having access to marketed land implies that farmers can command more inputs
and produce more output. Also, operating marketed land is associated with greater access to other
markets (e.g., credit) and with other indicators of economic development. Farmers with marketed
land are substantially more educated than farmers with no marketed land, women in these farms
are more empowered in terms of labor force participation and market wages, more of these farmers
22

The distribution of farm TFP, which we report in Figure C-1 in Appendix C, is slightly shifted to the right for
farms with marketed land compared to farms with no marketed land, however, the output gain difference between
the two groups remains large even when controlling for farm productivity.

28

Table 6: Land Markets—Output Gain for Farms with Marketed vs. Non-marketed Land

By Marketed Land Share
No
Yes
All
(0%)
(> 0%)
(100%)

By Marketed Land Type
Rented
Purchased
Informal Formal Untit. Titled

Output Gain

4.15

1.97

1.57

1.72

1.73

5.13

1.39

Observations
Sample (%)

5,962
83.4

1,189
16.6

746
10.4

215
3.0

682
9.5

126
1.8

97
1.3

Notes: The output gain is calculated as the ratio of efficient to actual output separately for subsamples of farm
households defined by the share of different types of marketed land used. The share of marketed land is defined from
the household-farm level information on how land was obtained, see Section 2. Each column refers to a particular
subsample. The first column reports the output gain for the subsample of household farms that do not operate any
marketed land. The second column refers to the subsample of household farms operating a strictly positive amount
of marketed land, either purchased or rented-in. The third column refers to the subsample of household farms for
which all their operated land is marketed land. The last four columns disaggregate the results by the main types
of marketed land: (1) rented informally, i.e. land borrowed for free or moved in without permission; (2) rented
formally, i.e. leaseholds, short-term rentals or farming as a tenant; (3) purchased without a title; and (4) purchased
with a title. There is only 1% of households with marketed land whose type is missing in the Malawi ISA data.

are migrants, a fewer proportion live in rural areas, and a larger proportion of these farmers invest
in intermediate inputs and technology adoption. We report these dimensions of farm differences by
the type of operated land in Appendix C. One potential concern with our characterization is the
possibility that access to marketed land is driven by farm productivity. We find however very small
differences in productivity between farms with and without marketed land. These differences are
too small compared to what it would be if access to marketed land was purely driven by frictionless
selection in farm TFP. Even though on average farms with some marketed land are 25 percent more
productive than farms with no marketed land, the distribution of household-farm productivity is
very similar between the group of household-farms with marketed land compared to the group of
farms without marketed land, with respective variances of 1.19 and 1.17. Nevertheless, we can assess
the gains from reallocation holding constant farm-level TFP. To do so, we regress household-farm
output gains from reallocation on household-farm productivity and a dummy variable that controls
for whether the farm operates marketed land. Specifically, we estimate using OLS the following
ye

relationship: ln yia = cons + ψ1 ln si + ψ2 1market , where ψ2 is captures the effect of marketed land on
i

29

the farm output gain controlling for farm productivity si . We use actual output as weights so as to
reproduce the output gains of reallocation in our nationwide benchmark. We find that ψ2 = −.39,
that is, operating marketed land decreases the output gain by 39 percent holding productivity
constant.
Finally, to gain further perspective of the productivity gains from reallocation, we note that Hsieh
and Klenow (2009) report the gains from reallocation for the manufacturing sectors in China and
India relative to those in the United States. The idea is that the U.S. data is not necessarily absent
of frictions or measurement and specification errors, but that more misallocation in China and India
than in the United States is indicative of more distortions in those countries. Our decomposition
of the degree of misallocation across groups of households farms with or without marketed land
provides a more direct reference for the gains of reallocation, that is, reallocation gains attained
by household farms without marketed land relative to farms operating marketed land. Taking
advantage of the fact that we can identify which household farms have marketed land, we restrict
the gains of reallocation of household-farms that do not operate marketed land to be at most the
gains attained by households farms that operate marketed land. The output gain of farms with no
marketed land relative to the output gain of farms with only marketed land is 2.6-fold (4.2/1.6).
This implies a reallocation gain that is three times the one obtained in Hsieh and Klenow (2009)
for the manufacturing sector of China and India relative to the United States. Further, this gain
may be a lower bound, as it is unlikely that there is no misallocation among farms operating only
marketed land given the extent of land reallocation frictions in Malawi. Nevertheless, the fact that
we use a group of household farms within Malawi as benchmark reference mitigates the effects of
differential institutional features and frictions (beyond land markets access) that are more prevalent
when using the United States or another country as reference in comparison with Malawi.

30

4.4
4.4.1

Discussion
Farm Size vs. Farm Productivity

A common theme in the development literature is the view that small farms are more efficient
than large farms. This view stems from a well-documented inverse relationship between yields
(output per unit of land) and farm size (e.g. Berry and Cline, 1979). A key concern is whether the
yield by farm size is a good proxy for farm TFP. Our data for Malawi provide an opportunity to
directly assess the relationship between the yield and farm TFP. Consistent with the literature, in
the Malawi data, the yield is negatively related with farm size.23 As documented earlier, yield and
farm TFP are strongly positively correlated across farms but this is because the allocation of land
is not related to productivity (misallocation) so many productive farmers are constrained by size.
But in an efficient allocation in our framework, there would be no relationship between yields and
farm TFP as the marginal product of land would be equalized across farmers.24 To appreciate the
distinction between farm TFP and farm size, note that land productivity of the largest 10 percent of
farms relative to the smallest 10 percent of farms is 0.34 (a 3-fold yield gap). This characterization
contrasts sharply with our earlier documentation that land productivity is strongly increasing with
farm TFP, see Figure 3 panel (b): land productivity of the 10 percent most productive farms relative
to the 10 percent least productive farms is a factor of 58-fold.
Whereas the pattern of land productivity by size suggests reallocation of land across farm sizes—
from large to small farms— the pattern of land productivity by farm TFP suggests reallocation
across farmers with different productivity—from less productive to more productive farmers. We
23

See Appendix D, Figure D-1 which documents the relationship between land productivity (yield) and farm size
in our data. Land productivity declines with farm size, which conforms with the finding in the inverse yield-to-size
literature.
24
The yield is a measure of farm productivity commonly used in studies of agricultural development, e.g., Binswanger et al. (1995). If the yield and farm TFP are uncorrelated in an efficient allocation, changes in policies and
institutions that allow a better allocation of land would tend to, other things equal, reduce land productivity of
the expanding farms and increase land productivity of the contracting farms, potentially masking the productivity
benefits of the reforms.

31

find that the aggregate output and productivity gains of these two forms of reallocation are dramatically different. As discussed earlier, reallocating factors across farms with different productivity
can increase agricultural output and TFP by a factor of 3.6-fold. In contrast, reallocating factors
across farms by size, taking the yield-by-size as a measure of productivity, accrues a gain in output
of only 26 percent. And this gain may be an upper bound as the implementation of reallocation
by size may lead to further amounts of misallocation. For instance, land reforms are often pursued
to implement reallocation of land from large to small holders that are also accompanied by further
restrictions in land markets in order to bias redistribution to smallholders and landless individuals. This redistribution can lead to productivity losses instead of gains as it was the case in the
comprehensive land reform in the Philippines (see, Adamopoulos and Restuccia, 2015).

4.4.2

Further Robustness

We conduct robustness checks to alternative factor shares and technology parameters, specific croptype production, human capital and specific skills, and transitory health and other shocks.

Technology parameters We note that by restricting agricultural factor shares to those in the
United States in our baseline measure of farm productivity we aim at limiting the impact of factor
market distortions in Malawi on the calibrated shares. However, the U.S. agricultural sector is not
necessarily absent of frictions which, in turn, might differ from those in Malawi. To address this
issue, we use household-farm rented-in land and capital payments reported in our micro data to
compute, respectively, the land and capital share of income for the agricultural sector in Malawi.
We use these factor shares to redo our measurement of productivity and reallocation gains in
Malawi. The results are reported in Table 7. Our benchmark results that use the U.S. values of
the agricultural sector, are reproduced in the first column. The second and third columns provide
two alternatives. In the second column, Full Sample, we measure factor shares of output using
32

the average rental rates of land and capital. We compute these rates as the ratio of factor rental
payments to the factor stocks from the sample of farms that rent-in all of their capital and land.
Then we use these rental rates to impute the land and capital rental income for all farms in the
entire sample. This implies an average capital share of income of 0.19 and an average land share
of income of 0.39. With these factor shares, the output gain in the full sample is 3.57-fold, nearly
identical to the 3.59-fold in our baseline calibration. In the third column, Renting Sample, we
assume that the land and capital shares of output are the averages from the renting sample only,
that we then apply to all farms in the sample. In this case, factor shares are lower which imply
a smaller but still substantial output gain of 3-fold. We conclude that our results do not depend
crucially on factor shares using Malawi data, even if we use factor income shares from households
that have access to rental markets in Malawi.
Table 7: Reallocation Results with Factor Shares From Malawi Micro Data

(θk , θl )=
Output gain

Baseline
Calibration
(0.36,0.18)

Micro Malawi ISA Data
Full Sample Renting Sample
(0.19,0.39)
(0.09,0.33)

3.59

3.57

3.04

Notes: The baseline calibration selects factor shares based on U.S. data from Valentinyi and Herrendorf (2008). “Full
Sample” measures land and capital shares using the average rental rates of land and capital computed as the ratio
of factor rental payments to factor stocks from the sample of farms that rent in all of their capital and land. We
use these rental rates to impute the land and capital rental income per farm in the entire sample by multiplying the
rates by the respective farm-level stocks. “Renting Sample” measures factor shares using the average ratios of factor
rental payments to value added using the renting sample only and then applying these averages to the entire sample.
The sample of farm-households used is the same in all specifications.

Rather than factor shares of capital and land, the results are more sensitive to the implied income
share of labor. This is because in our framework, the share of labor is determined by the extent of
decreasing returns in the farm production function γ. In the misallocation literature, there is not
a lot of guidance as to the exact value of this parameter. A large quantitative literature considers
values between 0.8-0.85 (e.g. Restuccia and Rogerson, 2008), whereas monopolistic competition

33

frameworks such as that in Hsieh and Klenow (2009) consider a preference curvature parameter
that maps into decreasing returns of 0.67 (for an exposition of this mapping see Hopenhayn, 2014).
The value for γ ranges from 0.54 in our baseline calibration to U.S. shares to 0.58 and 0.42 using
Malawi data. Hence, our calibration and estimates are lower than the values typically considered
in the literature. For each value of γ, we recompute farm productivity and the output gains from
reallocation. While the output gains become small for small values of γ, in the range of plausible
values, from 0.4 to 0.8, the output gains range from 3-fold to more than 10-fold. That is, using
values of γ closer to those considered in the manufacturing (and other) sectors would increase our
output gains from reallocation. We have also explored a constant elasticity of substitution (CES)
production technology and find that our results remain fairly robust to more extreme elasticity of
substitution between capital and land.

Crop type production In our data, most of the agricultural land is devoted to maize production
(around 80 percent), see also FAO (2013).25 Since optimal farm operational scale may differ across
crop types, we investigate whether the output gains are different across farms producing different
crops. Since most farms produce both maize and non-maize crops, we consider reallocation among
farms that produce mostly maize and those farms that produce mostly non-maize. We report the
results in Table 8 where the first column reports the output gain in the nationwide benchmark,
the next two columns report output gains for farms that produce mostly maize (whether the maize
share is positive or above the median of all farms), and the last two columns report output gains
for those farms that produce mostly non-maize (wether the non-maize share is positive or above
the median). The output gain among farms that produce maize is somewhat smaller (2.7-fold for
farms with maize production above the median versus 3.6-fold in the benchmark), which implies
that the farms with non-maize production have output gains that are larger (4.1-fold for farms that
25

Maize, cassava, and potatoes are the main crops produced in Malawi in terms of volume with roughly equal
amount in tonnes, but it is maize that accumulates the vast majority of cropland. The importance of maize further
appears in terms of the household diet in Malawi where about 50% the average daily calorie intake is obtained from
maize, 8.4% from potatoes, and 5.8% from cassava, see FAO (2013).

34

produce non-maize above the median). We conclude that crop composition and the dependence of
maize production in Malawi are not critical in determining the large negative productivity impact
of factor misallocation.
Table 8: Reallocation Results by Crop Type

Benchmark
Output gain

3.59

Maize Share
>0%
> Median

Non-Maize Share
>0%
> Median

2.83

3.82

2.71

4.13

Notes: The table reports output gains within households producing maize and non-maize. Because most household
farms produce both maize and non-maize crops (around 74 percent), the table also reports output gains within
household-farms whose production of maize is above median production. The median share of maize production
within the group of household-farms that produce a strictly positive amount of maize is 83.1% and the median share
of non-maize production within the group of household-farms that produce a strictly positive amount of non-maize
crops is 66.2%.

Other robustness results In Appendix D we report further robustness results related to differences in human capital across farm operators and other specific skills, as well as adjusting our
measure of farm TFP to other transitory shocks (other than rain) such as health and death shocks,
food security risk, marital status, distance to markets and the availability of other income sources.
Overall, we find that the output gain of factor reallocation to be large in all cases. More importantly, ISA conducted a second wave of interviews for roughly one-fourth of the original sample in
2013. That is, there is a panel for almost 3,000 household farms in Malawi for 2010 and 2013. This
provides us with the opportunity to recover for each household an alternative measure of productivity defined as the estimated fixed effect of individual farm TFP across waves. We find that the
fixed effects from the panel roughly capture 87 percent of the original cross-sectional TFP variation.
Importantly, this new measure of TFP based on fixed effects is, again, essentially unrelated to land
and capital. The output gain from efficient reallocation in 2010/11 using this alternative measure
of farm TFP is 3.1-fold, fairly close to the 3.6-fold output gain with our benchmark measure of farm
TFP. Hence, our results are fairly robust to alternative measures of productivity that isolate more
35

permanent components of farm TFP.

5

Implications for Structural Change

Increased productivity from an efficient allocation of resources would trigger broader implications
in the economy. We assess the implications of increased productivity in agriculture on structural
transformation associated with the reallocation of labor across sectors. A TFP increase of a 3.6fold factor in the agricultural sector would produce a process of substantial structural change in
the Malawian economy. This reallocation would produce broad impacts in the economy through
well-known features such as the potential selection effects associated with the movement of labor
from agriculture to non-agriculture and dynamic investment effects such as additional investments
farmers would make to exploit increased farm size, capital and human capital accumulation, among
many others.
To provide a simple characterization of these broader implications of reallocation, we consider an
extension of the previous analysis to allow for a non-agricultural sector.26 Recall that the aggregate
production function for agriculture in the efficient allocation is given by equation (2). To simplify
the analysis, without much loss of generality, we abstract from capital by assuming that α = 0.
Hence, the aggregate production function in agriculture is given by:

Ya = ZLγ Na1−γ ,

where Na is the fraction of employment in agriculture and γ = 0.54. The non agricultural production
function is given by Yn = A(1 − Na ). We assume that preferences are such that consumers not only
have a minimum consumption of agricultural goods ā, but also this level is a satiation point so per
26

For a more elaborate analysis of misallocation in agriculture in the context of a two-sector economy see
Adamopoulos and Restuccia (2014).

36

capita consumption of agricultural goods is given by ā and any income above the one required for this
amount of agricultural consumption is spent on non-agricultural goods.27 We continue to consider a
benevolent social planner that chooses the allocation of labor across sectors to maximize consumer’s
welfare. Given our assumptions about preferences, the solution to this allocation problem has a
simple form and is given by:
1
 ā  1−γ
.
Na =
ZLγ

Note that the solution is such that an increase in productivity in the agricultural sector Z reduces
the share of employment in agriculture. In particular, the change in employment in agriculture can
be easily calculated using the above equation from the change in TFP in agriculture raised to the
power 1/(1 − γ). We report the results in Table 9. With γ = 0.54, an increase in productivity
of 3.6 implies a decrease in the employment share in agriculture of 16.2-fold. In other words, the
share of employment in agriculture in Malawi would decrease from the actual 65 percent to only
4 percent which is close to the average for rich countries, see for instance Restuccia et al. (2008).
This tremendous reallocation of labor from agriculture to non-agriculture implies that average
farm size would increase by a factor of 16.2-fold (recall that in our previous one-sector analysis
of misallocation, by construction the gains in agricultural productivity of moving to the efficient
allocation involved no change in average farm size). It is also easy to see that the increase in labor
productivity in agriculture Ya /Na is given by a factor of 16.2-fold.28 Hence, for our quantitative
experiment, the entire increase in agricultural labor productivity is reflected in an increase in average
farm size and none in an increase in the yield.
We emphasize that the effects just described abstract from other potential sources of amplification.
For instance, the potential role of selection into the ability of farmers that stay in agriculture.
This feature that has been found quantitatively important in amplifying the productivity increases
27

See for instance Gollin et al. (2002) for a model with such preferences.
Note that agricultural output per unit of land or yield Ya /L remains the same because for the preferences we
consider, the increase in productivity is exactly offset by the decrease in agricultural labor so total agricultural output
remains the same.
28

37

Table 9: Misallocation, Productivity, and Structural Transformation

Benchmark

Increased
Productivity

1.00
0.65
1.00
1.00

3.60
0.04
16.2
16.2

Productivity in Agriculture (Z)
Share of Employment in Ag. (Na )
Average Farm Size (L/Na )
Labor Productivity in Ag. (Ya /Na )

Notes: The “Benchmark” refers to the actual allocation in Malawi. The “Increased Productivity” refers to the
efficient reallocation which in the full sample increases total factor productivity in agriculture by a factor of 3.6-fold.
The table reports the effects of increased TFP in agriculture on output per unit of land in agriculture (yield), the
share of employment in agriculture, average farm size, and aggregate labor productivity in agriculture when factors
are allowed to be reallocated across agriculture and non-agriculture.

in the agricultural sector (e.g., Lagakos and Waugh 2013 and Adamopoulos et al. 2017). Also,
complementary investments such as mechanization, improvements in land quality, or the adoption
of modern technologies could further increase productivity in the agricultural sector. Overall, we
find that the increase in agricultural productivity due to the more efficient allocation of factors can
unravel a substantial process of structural change and productivity growth in agriculture that can
dramatically change the face of the Malawian economy.

6

Implications for Economic Inequality

Unlike the actual distribution of factors in the Malawian economy which is fairly flat across farmers
with different productivity, the efficient allocation implies a substantial increase in the dispersion
of operational scales, in terms of the distribution of operated capital and land across farmers. This
massive redistribution of factors across farmers may lead to concerns over distributional implications, specially if the actual allocation of factors reflect policy and institutional choices in place to
alleviate poverty and distributional concerns, see de Magalhaes and Santaeulàlia-Llopis (2015).29
29

For example, de Magalhaes and Santaeulàlia-Llopis (2015) show that the bottom 20% and top 20% of the land
distribution hold a similar share of aggregate consumption in rural Malawi, respectively 20% and 25%.

38

We study the distributional implications of the efficient operational scales. Table 10 reports the
actual and efficient distribution of factors, output, and income across farmers by productivity.
Whereas the actual distribution of land across farm TFP is fairly flat, with most farms operating
less than 2 acres of land, the efficient distribution implies that the top quintile of farm TFP operates
on average almost 6 acres, representing 97 percent of the total land. This implies a substantial
redistribution of factors to achieve higher levels of aggregate productivity. We note that despite
relative equalization of factor inputs across farmers, the actual distribution of income is widely
dispersed in Malawi, in fact as dispersed as the distribution of productivity. For instance, taking
agricultural output as a measure of farm income, the ratio of top to bottom quintile of income is a
factor of 34-fold even though the ratio of capital and land factors is within a factor of 1 to 2-fold.
To put it differently, equalizing access to land across households does not necessarily translate into
income equalization as these farmers differ substantially in their productivity.
To gauge the distributional income effects of factor redistribution we pursue the following counterfactual. We consider the actual distribution of factors as endowments and allow the efficient
allocation to be achieved via perfectly competitive rental markets. Given the competitive rental
rates of capital and land in this decentralized solution, we compute the income associated with the
efficient allocation as:

endowment income = rk (k a − k e ) + rl (la − le ) + y e ,

where (k a , la ) are the actual allocation of capital and land which we take as endowment and (k e , le )
are the efficient allocations, rk and rl are the prices that support the efficient allocation as a
competitive equilibrium, and y e is efficient output. Table 10 reports the results for this measure
of endowment income and compare the income inequality to that of the actual income, which we
assume is approximated by actual agricultural output y a .

39

Table 10: Actual and Efficient Distribution of Land, Capital, MPL and MPK

Productivity Partition
Quintiles
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
Farm productivity (si )
Land (li )
Actual
Efficient
Capital (ki )
Actual
Efficient
MPL (∝ Yield)
Actual
Efficient
MPK
Actual
Efficient
Output (yi )
Level:
Actual
Efficient
Percentage of total:
Actual
Efficient
Agricultural income
Level:
Actual
Efficient
Income gain
Percentage of total:
Actual
Efficient

5th

var(ln x)

.75

2.10

3.72

6.39

21.50

1.435

1.19
.00

.87
.01

1.01
.04

1.03
.14

1.99
5.91

.749
6.782

55.93
.04

25.35
.32

21.84
1.10

24.70
3.60

26.71
149.52

1.820
6.782

4.21
76.30

11.00
76.30

17.82
76.30

29.10
76.30

82.04
76.30

1.485
.000

.73
6.03

2.19
6.03

3.94
6.03

7.25
6.03

24.54
6.03

2.154
.000

.14
.00

.39
.05

.69
.18

1.20
.60

4.78
25.06

1.824
6.782

2.01
.02

5.46
.20

9.57
.71

16.67
2.33

66.26
96.71

–
–

.14
4.28
23.70

.39
2.22
3.88

.69
2.17
2.27

1.20
2.56
1.58

4.78
14.65
1.97

1.824
1.228
–

2.01
16.55

5.46
8.58

9.57
8.41

16.67
9.88

66.26
56.56

–
–

Notes: Households are ranked by farm productivity si . Land, capital, and output are in per hours terms. MPL
P is
y
the marginal product of land and MPK the marginal product of capital computed for each bin as, MPL = .18 Pi lii
P

i

y

and MPK = .36 Pi kii , and the variance is computed with respect to household-farm specific ratios MPLi = .18 ylii
i
and MPKi = .36 kyii . Actual income is agricultural output whereas efficient income is computed assuming actual
allocations are the endowments and the efficient allocation is achieved via perfectly competitive rental markets.
Income gain is the efficient to actual income ratio.

40

Not only farmers in the lower end of the productivity (and income) distribution benefit the most
from the increase in the return to factors, but also overall inequality declines. For instance, the
overall variance of the log income decreases from 1.8 with actual income to 1.2 to efficient income.
More dramatic are the changes in income across the richest and poorest households. Whereas
the ratio of income between farmers in the top and bottom quintiles is a factor of 34-fold in the
actual allocation, this ratio is 3.4 in the efficient allocation, that is income inequality among these
farmers falls by a factor of 10-fold. Moreover, the ratio of efficient to actual income increases for
all household farms but this increase is larger for the poorest households: 23.7-fold increase for the
first quintile, 3.9-fold for the second quintile and only 2-fold for the top quintile.
Well-functioning rental markets for capital and land to achieve the efficient allocation of operational
scales can lead to substantial increases in agricultural productivity as well as dramatic reductions
in inequality levels and poverty.

7

Conclusions

Misallocation of land and other complementary factors in the agricultural sector is enormous in
Africa. Using detailed nationally representative household-farm level data for Malawi, we show
that a reallocation of land (and capital) to their efficient uses increases agricultural output and
productivity by a factor of 3.6-fold. We show these large gains in the agricultural sector in Malawi
are not due to differentials in TFP dispersion compared with other sectors or more developed
countries, but to severe factor misallocation. We find that land size (and capital) are essentially
unrelated to household-farm level TFP, which is perhaps not surprising given the egalitarian nature
of land-use distributions and weak property rights over land. These restrictions imply that 83% of
the total operated land in Malawi is not marketed. Indeed, our analysis provides a strong empirical
connection between factor misallocation and restricted land markets. The productivity gains from
41

reallocation are 2.6 times larger for farms with no marketed land than for farms with marketed land,
which is roughly three times the reallocation gains found in the manufacturing sector of China and
India in Hsieh and Klenow (2009).
We show that the increase in aggregate productivity from the efficient reallocation of factors could
trigger of a profound process of structural change by which the agricultural sector in Malawi could
approach levels of farm size and sectoral employment shares of the industrialized world. This result
implies that factor misallocation in the agricultural sector is of first-order importance to understand
productivity differences and economic development across countries. Further, in a counterfactual
exercise we show that the introduction of rental markets where operational scales can deviate from
land ownership not only increases aggregate productivity to its efficient level but also decreases
income inequality; large but unproductive farmers are better off by renting-out land to small but
productive farmers. These findings point to a pressing need to facilitate the reallocation of land to
the more productive farmers without necessarily altering the ownership structure. This requires the
development of well-functioning rental markets and well-defined property rights over land. What
policies and institutions are best in promoting a better allocation of resources across farmers is of
crucial importance for future research.
Looking ahead, while our analysis takes the distribution of land and productivity across farmers
as given and asked about the efficiency gains of reallocation, it may also be of interest to study
the dynamic implications of misallocation for productivity whereby a reduction in misallocation
encourages the more productive farmers to grow, utilize modern inputs (mechanization, chemical
seeds, intermediate inputs), and invest in farm productivity. See Restuccia and Rogerson (2016) for
a discussion of the importance of the dynamic implications of misallocation. Further, while the gains
from the reallocation of agricultural inputs across wives and husbands within farm households are
small compared to the gains from reallocation across households, the quantitative role of women—
who are potentially more restricted in land (and capital) inputs than men in many parts of the

42

world—in understanding productivity differences across farms remains a very open but important
question. We leave these interesting and important extensions of our analysis for future research.

References
Adamopoulos, T., Brandt, L., Leight, J., and Restuccia, D. (2017). Misallocation, Selection and
Productivity: A Quantitative Analysis with Panel Data from China. Working Papers tecipa-574,
University of Toronto, Department of Economics.
Adamopoulos, T. and Restuccia, D. (2014). The Size Distribution of Farms and International
Productivity Differences. American Economic Review, 104(6):1667–97.
Adamopoulos, T. and Restuccia, D. (2015). Land Reform and Productivity: A Quantitative Analysis with Micro Data. manuscript, University of Toronto.
Banerjee, A. V., Gertler, P. J., and Ghatak, M. (2002). Empowerment and efficiency: Tenancy
reform in west bengal. Journal of political economy, 110(2):239–280.
Beegle, K., Carletto, C., and Himelein, K. (2012). Reliability of Recall in Agricultural Data. Journal
of Development Economics, 98(1):34–41.
Berry, A. and Cline, W. (1979). Agrarian Structure and Productivity in Developing Countries.
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University.
Besley, T. (1995). Property Rights and Investment Incentives: Theory and Evidence from Ghana.
Journal of Political Economy, pages 903–937.
Besley, T. and Ghatak, M. (2010). Property Rights and Economic Development, volume 5 of Handbook of Development Economics, chapter 0, pages 4525–4595. Elsevier.
Bick, A., Fuchs-Schundeln, N., and Lagakos, D. (2016). How do Average Hours Worked Vary with
Development? Cross-Country Evidence and Implications. Working Paper 21874, National Bureau
of Economic Research.
Binswanger, H. P., Deininger, K., and Feder, G. (1995). Power, Distortions, Revolt and Reform in
Agricultural Land Relations. In Chenery, H. and Srinivasan, T., editors, Handbook of Development
Economics, volume 3 of Handbook of Development Economics, chapter 42, pages 2659–2772.
Elsevier.
Buera, F. J., Kaboski, J. P., and Shin, Y. (2014). Macro-Perspective on Asset Grants Programs:
Occupational and Wealth Mobility. American Economic Review, 104(5):159–64.

43

Carletto, C., Savastano, S., and Zezza, A. (2013). Fact or Artifact: The Impact of Measurement Errors on the Farm SizeProductivity Relationship. Journal of Development Economics,
103(C):254–261.
Chen, C. (2016). Untitled Land, Occupational Choice and Agricultural Productivity,. American
Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, forthcoming.
de Magalhaes, L. and Santaeulàlia-Llopis, R. (2015). The Consumption, Income, and Wealth of
the Poorest: Cross-Sectional Facts of Rural and Urban Sub-Saharan Africa for Macroeconomists.
World Bank Policy Research Working Paper, WPS7337.
de Soto, H. (2000). The Mystery of Capital: Why Capitalism Triumphs in the West and Fails
Everywhere Else. Basic Books. New York.
FAO (2013). Malawi BEFS Country Brief. Technical report, Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations.
Foster, A. D. and Rosenzweig, M. R. (2011). Are Indian Farms Too Small? Mechanization, Agency
Costs, and Farm Efficiency. Unpublished Manuscript, Brown University and Yale University.
Gancia, G. A. and Zilibotti, F. (2009). Technological change and the wealth of nations. Annual
Review of Economics, 1:93–120.
Goldstein, M. and Udry, C. (2008). The Profits of Power: Land Rights and Agricultural Investment
in Ghana. Journal of Political Economy, 116(6):981–1022.
Gollin, D., Lagakos, D., and Waugh, M. E. (2014). Agricultural Productivity Differences across
Countries. American Economic Review, 104(5):165–70.
Gollin, D., Parente, S., and Rogerson, R. (2002). The Role of Agriculture in Development. American
Economic Review, 92(2):160–164.
Gottlieb, C., Grobovsek, J., et al. (2015). Communal land and agricultural productivity. Technical
report.
Hopenhayn, H. A. (2014). Firms, misallocation, and aggregate productivity: A review. Annual
Review of Economics, (0).
Hsieh, C.-T. and Klenow, P. J. (2009). Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China and India.
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(4):1403–1448.
Kishindo, P. (2011). The Village Head and the Problem of Role Relevance in the Context of
Declining Rural Land Availability in Malawi. Working Papers 2, Centre for Social Research,
Chancellor College, Zomba, Malawi.
Lagakos, D. and Waugh, M. E. (2013). Selection, Agriculture, and Cross-country Productivity
Differences. The American Economic Review, 103(2):948–980.

44

Larson, D. F., Otsuka, K., Matsumoto, T., and Kilic, T. (2014). Should African Rural Development Strategies Depend on Smallholder Farms? An Exploration of the Inverse-Productivity
Hypothesis. Agricultural Economics, 45(3):355–367.
Midrigan, V. and Xu, D. Y. (2014). Finance and Misallocation: Evidence from Plant-Level Data.
American Economic Review, 104(2):422–458.
Morris, B. (2016). An Environmental History of Southern Malawi: Land and People of the Shire
Highlands.
Pachai, B. (1973). Land Policies in Malawi: An Examination of the Colonial Legacy. The Journal
of African History, 14(4):681–698.
Restuccia, D. and Rogerson, R. (2008). Policy Distortions and Aggregate Productivity with Heterogeneous Plants. Review of Economic Dynamics, 11(4):707–720.
Restuccia, D. and Rogerson, R. (2016). The Causes and Costs of Misallocation. manuscript,
University of Toronto.
Restuccia, D., Yang, D. T., and Zhu, X. (2008). Agriculture and Aggregate Productivity: A
Quantitative Cross-Country Analysis. Journal of Monetary Economics, 55(2):234–250.
Santaeulàlia-Llopis, R. and Zheng, Y. (2016). The Price of Growth: Consumption Insurance in
China 1989-2009. Working papers, Barcelona GSE.
Shaban, R. A. (1987). Testing Between Competing Models of Sharecropping. The Journal of
Political Economy, pages 893–920.
Song, Z., Storesletten, K., and Zilibotti, F. (2011). Growing Like China. American Economic
Review, 101(1):196–233.
Udry, C. (1996). Gender, Agricultural Production, and the Theory of the Household. Journal of
Political Economy, 104(5):1010–46.
Valentinyi, A. and Herrendorf, B. (2008). Measuring Factor Income Shares at the Sector Level.
Review of Economic Dynamics, 11(4):820–835.

45

