                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  SOCIAL TIES AND FAVORITISM IN CHINESE SCIENCE

                                        Raymond Fisman
                                           Jing Shi
                                        Yongxiang Wang
                                           Rong Xu

                                       Working Paper 23130
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w23130


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2017




We are grateful for comments and suggestions from Jesse Shapiro and six anonymous
referees.We would also like to thank Harry DeAngelo, Murray Frank, David Hirshleifer, Jerry
Hoberg, Christian Julliard, Danielle Li, John Matsusaka, and Jun Pan, as well as seminar
participants at a number of institutions for useful comments. Wang thank the China National
Natural Science Foundation (Grant Number: 71432008) and Xu thank the China National Natural
Science Foundation (Grant Number: 71472180) for financial support, and Wang and Shi thank
the Australian Research Council (DP150102339) for financial support. Teng Zhong, Roy Ruoyu
Ji, Jin Wang, Wenwei Yang, Hongyu Zhang, Tao Lu, and Eric Hardy provide very able RA work.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Raymond Fisman, Jing Shi, Yongxiang Wang, and Rong Xu. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Social Ties and Favoritism in Chinese Science
Raymond Fisman, Jing Shi, Yongxiang Wang, and Rong Xu
NBER Working Paper No. 23130
February 2017
JEL No. J71,O3,P16

                                        ABSTRACT

We study favoritism via hometown ties, a common source of favor exchange in China, in fellow
selection of the Chinese Academies of Sciences and Engineering. Hometown ties to fellow
selection committee members increase candidates' election probability by 39 percent, coming
entirely from the selection stage involving an in-person meeting. Elected hometown-connected
candidates are half as likely to have a high-impact publication as elected fellows without
connections. CAS/CAE membership increases the probability of university leadership
appointments and is associated with a US$9.5 million increase in annual funding for fellows'
institutions, indicating that hometown favoritism has potentially large effects on resource
allocation.

Raymond Fisman                                Yongxiang Wang
Department of Economics                       Marshall School of Business
Boston University                             University of Southern California
270 Bay State Road, 304A                      Los Angeles, CA 90089
Boston, MA 02215                              Yongxiang.Wang@marshall.usc.edu
and NBER
rfisman@bu.edu                                Rong Xu
                                              Renmin University of China
Jing Shi                                      59 Zhongguancun St.
RMIT University                               Haidian, Beijing
445 Swanston Street                           China
Melbourne VIC 3000                            xurongfsi@126.com
Australia
jing.shi@rmit.edu.au




A online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w23130
      Economists have long considered the consequences of rent-seeking and the resultant al-
locative inefficiency for economic growth. Earlier work has focused on the misallocation of
capital (human or physical) in production (e.g., Murphy et al. (1991), Acemoglu (1995)).
However, endogenous growth models, starting with Romer’s (1986) landmark paper, empha-
size knowledge production as the source of increasing returns required to generate growth in
the long run. Consequently, rent-seeking and distortions in knowledge production – a topic
that has seen relatively little discussion or empirical analysis – is of particular relevance to
models of economic growth and development.
      In this paper, we provide an empirical analysis of distortions in knowledge production.
Our focus is on favoritism and the allocation of scientific talent in China. The setting is of
particular relevance because of the increasingly prominent role that China plays in the global
economy, and because of concerns over the long-term viability of Chinese economic growth
(Zhu (2012)). The importance of scientific innovation for sustained growth is well-recognized
by the Chinese government. As part of its strategy for economic development, the country
has channeled over a trillion dollars into promoting scientific education and research over
the past two decades (China Statistical Yearbooks of Science and Technology, 1996-2014).
R&D expenditure has grown at an annual rate of more than 20 percent in recent years, and
China is currently second only to the U.S. in R&D spending (Ni (2015)).
      Press accounts have argued that some of this expenditure has been misdirected as a result
of favoritism and corruption. These stories implicate scholars and officials at the very highest
levels. For example, in a widely-reported embezzlement case in 2014, Ning Li, a fellow of
the Chinese Academy of Engineering (CAE) was among those convicted of misappropriating
funds of 20 million RMB (3.17 million dollars)1 . Corruption is thought to extend to the
fellow selection process of the CAE and its more prestigious sister organization, the Chinese
Academy of Sciences (CAS). Membership in the CAS confers considerable prestige (the title
of CAS fellow is the highest official honor for Chinese scientists), as well as privileged access
  1
      “Scientists caught in Chinese anti-corruption sweep,” Nature, October 16, 2014



                                                      3
to research resources. It also translates into direct material rewards, as CAS members are
sought-after (and well-compensated) by employers as a result.
       There have been well-publicized examples of scientists attempting to gain CAS member-
ship through bribery. In one notorious case, Shuguang Zhang was convicted of accepting
bribes totaling 47 million RMB (about US$7.5 million) in his capacity as vice chief engineer
of China’s railway ministry, and using nearly half the proceeds to try to buy CAS mem-
bership. He came up one vote short in his second attempt in 2009, despite never having
published a peer reviewed journal article.2
       Leading scientists have suggested that the problem runs much deeper than a few high-
profile cases of outright corruption, arguing that the CAS/CAE selection process is opaque
and dictated more by personal connections and lobbying than scientific achievement. The
distorting effects of connections in Chinese science were described most forcefully by two
prominent Chinese scientists, Yigong Shi and Yi Rao, in Science in 2010 (see Shi and Rao
(2010)), where they suggest that “[a] significant proportion of researchers in China spend
too much time on building connections and not enough time attending seminars, discussing
science, doing research, or training students.”3 Furthermore, Shi and Rao argue that once
scientists attain positions of power and influence, “[s]ome become part of the problem: They
use connections to judge grant applicants and undervalue scientific merit.” Shi and Rao
(2010) thus raise concerns about possible misallocation of effort by scientists (lobbying versus
research) and also about misallocation of resources across scientists (from good researchers to
effective lobbyists). Moreover, their narrative suggests that Chinese science may have settled
into a “rent-seeking equilibrium” as described by Acemoglu (1995), in which the rent-seeking
choices of today’s scientists affect the rent-seeking incentives of future scientists.
       In the empirical analysis that is the focus of our paper, we provide evidence of favoritism
in the selection of candidates for membership of the CAS and CAE during the 2001-2013
   2
     Zhang received a death sentence after his record of bribe-taking was uncovered. The sentence was
suspended for two years, and he remains in prison as of this writing. His case is detailed in “The True Cost
of Becoming an Academician in China?” ScienceInsider, September 17, 2013.
   3
     Both failed to get elected to the CAS in 2011.


                                                     4
period, using a form of connections that plays a central role in Chinese society: hometown
ties. We focus on hometown ties, or laoxiang guanxi in Chinese, because of their importance
in the culture of favor-exchange (guanxi ) in China, and because they are observable to us as
researchers.4 We measure connectedness in the fellow selection process based on whether the
nominee’s hometown is shared by a member of the standing committee in the department
where the candidate is nominated for membership (the CAS and CAE, as we detail below,
are organized by department along disciplinary lines, such as chemistry, mathematics, and
so forth).
       We show that, during 2001-2013, the probability of a nominee to the CAS or CAE being
elected as a fellow was 39 percent higher if he was connected according to our measure. This
result is highly robust. It survives the inclusion of department-year fixed effects, city fixed
effects, undergraduate college fixed effects, and employer fixed effects. Further, we find no
effect of hometown ties to fellows who are not members of the nominee’s department standing
committee, nor any effect from hometown ties to members of standing committees from other
departments. These ‘placebo’ results indicate that the higher success rate is quite specific
to hometown ties to influential members from the candidate’s own department. Finally,
we do not find a robust effect of connections to fellows via a candidate’s undergraduate
institution or current employer, which suggests that our results are unlikely to result from
“soft” information on candidate quality, which would likely be captured by shared education
or employment.
       We disaggregate the role of hometown ties into the effect on each round in the two-
stage fellow selection process. In the first stage, where evaluations are done by mail by a
broader set of CAS/CAE members within each department (and where the main purpose
is to filter out obviously unqualified candidates), we find no effect of hometown ties to the
standing committee. First-stage selection is correlated instead with candidates’ publication
   4
    This approach has some precedence in social science research. Siegel (2007), in particular, exploits
regional ties in his analysis of favoritism by Korean government officials. A handful of studies in finance
and economics use school ties as a measure of personal connections between companies and their investors
(Cohen et al. (2008, 2010)), and among politicians in the U.S. Congress (Cohen and Malloy (2014)).


                                                    5
records as proxied by their H-Indexes at the time of nomination. The hometown effect comes
exclusively from the second stage, where final selection is conducted in an in-person meeting,
a setting where personal lobbying can more easily influence voting behavior. In this second
stage, publication records are not predictive of success.
   The higher probability of election enjoyed by hometown-connected nominees virtually
disappears in 2007. That year, owing to outside pressure to increase transparency and
fairness in fellow selection, the CAS and CAE changed the election rules to increase the
fraction of ‘yes’ votes required for a nominee to be appointed fellow, from one half to two
thirds, and began publishing online lists of nominees and those ultimately selected. We
speculate that the change in election rules may have made it more difficult for influential
fellows to secure enough votes to gain approval for their favored nominees.
   If hometown-connected fellows face a lower threshold for election, two further predictions
follow (a) the average quality of a connected nominee may be lower; and (b) conditional on
the pool of nominees, the quality of elected fellows will be lower among connected candidates.
Based on analyses of candidates’ H-Indexes and other measures of research success, we
find no support for the former, i.e., nominee quality is unrelated to connections. However,
we find strong support for the latter prediction. For example, among candidates who are
ultimately elected to the CAS/CAE, those with hometown ties are about half as likely to have
had at least one “homerun” (100+ published citations) relative to candidates without such
connections. We show that this difference comes primarily from positive selection among
unconnected nominees in the election process. Our calculations indicate that a prohibition
on fellows evaluating candidates from their hometown would increase the fraction of elected
fellows with a homerun by 2.7 percentage points; moving from a hypothetical scenario where
all candidates have hometown ties to one where none do would increase the fraction of elected
fellows with a homerun by nearly 20 percentage points.
   In our final set of analyses, we show that election to the CAS/CAE more than doubles a
scientist’s probability of being appointed dean or president of a university, and that employ-


                                              6
ment of CAS/CAE fellows is associated with an estimated US$ 9.5 million in incremental
government funding for a fellow’s institution. These findings on the greater power and re-
sources that come with CAS/CAE election indicates that the favoritism that we document
may have significant implications for the allocation of research resources.
    There are two main limitations to the interpretation of our results. First, we only observe
a single channel of favoritism, which makes it difficult to generate a decisive counterfactual
estimate of what the quality of CAS/CAE membership would be in the absence of favoritism
and rent-seeking (though in Section 3.2 we provide some discussion of this issue). Second,
we cannot directly measure the impact of favoritism on ultimate scientific outcomes. We
show that favoritism leads to lower-quality scientists, but it goes beyond the scope of our
paper to quantify the full effect of favoritism on the allocation of scientific resources.
    Our work relates most directly to a growing literature on the role of personal bias on
resource allocation in scientific research. Li (2015), for example, studies the role of reviewer
“relatedness” in the awarding of National Institutes of Health funding in the U.S., and
finds that applicants connected to a reviewer via citation history are more likely to receive
funding. Zinovyeva and Bagues (2015) find that professional ties to evaluators predicts
academic promotions in Spain. Durante et al. (2014) find evidence that family ties play a
role in academic hiring in Italy.5
    Empirical work on resource misallocation in China (and elsewhere) has focused on misal-
location across firms, a concern first given prominence in the economics literature by Young
(2003). Hsieh and Klenow (2009), in particular, document large gaps in the marginal prod-
uct of labor and capital in China versus the United States, and argue that reallocation of
resources across Chinese firms could increase manufacturing total factor productivity (TFP)
by 30 - 50 percent (see also Khandelwal et al. (2013) and Brandt et al. (2012)). Our study
provides more direct evidence on the allocation mechanism that produces distortions (fa-
   5
     Parsons et al. (2011) discuss how favoritism along ethnic lines can distort decisions in a very different
setting, showing that Major League Baseball umpires make favorable calls toward players of their own
ethnicity.



                                                      7
voritism via hometown ties), and focuses on the distinct domain of scientific enterprise.
    Finally, we contribute to the literature on the distortionary effects of in-group favoritism.
Most directly related to our paper, there is growing concern within China about the abuses
of guanxi where, as we discuss in detail below, hometown ties play an important role (see
Li (2011) for a general treatment). The distortions from in-group favoritism are a global
concern, however: Burgess et al. (2015), for example, show that in Kenya districts that share
the president’s ethnicity receive twice the road building funds and quadruple the length of
paved roads as do unconnected districts.
    In the next section we provide background information on the Chinese Academies and
describe the process for electing new fellows, as well as a discussion of the role of hometown
ties in Chinese society. In Section 2 we discuss the datasets that we employ in our analyses.
Section 3 provides our empirical analysis on the role of hometown ties in CAS/CAE selection,
as well as the consequences of hometown favoritism. Section 4 concludes.



1     Background

1.1    The Chinese Academies of Sciences and Engineering

The Chinese Academy of Sciences describes itself as “the linchpin of China’s drive to explore
and harness high technology and the natural sciences for the benefit of China and the world,”
and lays claim to “over 85 percent of China’s large-scale science facilities” spread across over
1000 CAS-affiliated sites throughout China. In addition to promoting science through its
affiliated institutions, the CAS serves as an academic society, with CAS membership seen as
the country’s highest scientific accolade. As of 2014, the CAS had 711 members (including
274 emeritus members over the age of 80, who play no role in the selection of new members)
spread across six divisions: Mathematics and Physics; Chemistry; Biological and Medical
Sciences; Earth Sciences; Technological Sciences; and Information Technology Sciences (the
last of these was carved out of Technological Sciences partway through our sample, in 2005).


                                                8
The Chinese Academy of Engineering (CAE), the CAS’s sister organization, consists of nine
departments (with 791 members in 2014): Engineering Management; Chemical, Metallur-
gical and Material Engineering; Mechanical and Vehicle Engineering; Energy and Mining
Engineering; Civil and Hydraulic Engineering; Light Industry and Environmental Engineer-
ing; Information and Electronic Engineering; Medicine and Health Engineering; Agriculture;
and Light Industry and Environmental Engineering. The last two were created from a split
of a single department in 2006.
       Beyond the honor of membership, fellows enjoy a number of material benefits. These
range from chauffeur services to priority access at China’s best hospitals (fellows have med-
ical benefits comparable to vice-minister level government officials). Local provinces often
augment the perquisites of CAS and CAE members in their efforts to lure fellows from the
country’s urban centers. For example, the CAE’s website details the benefits of fellows re-
siding in Hunan province, where a fellow’s employer is required to provide a salary of at least
200,000 RMB (a little over US$30,000), a starting research budget of at least one million
RMB, and a car and driver. By comparison, a standard full professor’s salary is less than
half that amount.6 Specific employers can choose to further augment fellows’ benefits. For
example, Jinan University in Shangdong province explicitly states that the school will pro-
vide fellows with an annual salary of two million RMB, a moving allowance of one million
RMB, and also a free home.7
       This eagerness to attract fellows is in part due to the funding and connections that come
with CAS/CAE membership. The academies - and by extension their members - direct the
allocation of significant research resources. The CAS itself was given control of over US$400
million in research funds in the 2014 national budget for “strategic priority projects in areas
ranging from neuroscience to studies of the Tibetan Plateau.” Additionally, “megaproject”
   6
     A regular full professor receives no such perks, and could expect to receive a salary of less than US$15,000.
See Altbach (2012) for estimates of faculty salaries in China.
   7
     This information was taken from a job listing at Jinan University, posted on the school’s official website.
Unlike U.S. schools, many Chinese universities provide detailed compensation information when advertising
job openings.



                                                        9
grants from the Ministry of Science and Technology, or MOST (which has a budget that
in 2014 approached US$10 billion) often require CAS or CAE fellow recommendations.8
Furthermore, MOST often draws on the CAS and CAE to fill its leadership ranks. For
example, CAE fellow Ning Li ran the country’s “National High-tech R&D Program,” known
as Project 863.
    Beyond these narrative examples of the resources controlled by the CAS and CAE as
organizations, in Section 3.3 we provide more direct empirical evidence on the influence and
power of fellows at the individual-level.


Standing committees within the CAS and CAE

Each department within the CAS and CAE has a standing committee, which plays a critical
role in the fellow selection process. The committees are each comprised of 15-23 fellows,
depending on the department’s size. Standing committee members are nominated by fellows
within each department, and one standing committee member is further elected as director
of the department, along with 3 - 5 vice-directors (also from the standing committee’s ranks).
In its election rules, the CAS explicitly states that standing committees should maintain a
balance of membership based on subfields, sectors, and also regions.9 Prior to 2008, standing
committee members in CAS departments served two-year terms for up to three terms; terms
were then lengthened to four years, renewable only once. There is mandatory turnover: until
2008, at least a third of standing committee members had to be replaced every two years;
starting in 2008 at least half of committee members needed to be replaced every four years.
    Finally, there are academy-level committees (Xubu Zhuxi Tuan in Chinese) within both
the CAS and CAE. For each academy, the committee is comprised of the directors of each
department, the dean and vice-deans of the academy, and a few other fellows that are elected
    8
      The following link provided one such call for funding that requires three recommendations from CAS
fellows (or researchers that hold other prestigious titles, such as Yangtze River scholar, the highest honor
bestowed upon Chinese researchers): http://www.most.gov.cn/tztg/201008/t20100824 79062.htm. Down-
loaded on October 19, 2015.
    9
      The CAS website provides details of the standing committee election process:
http://history.casad.cas.cn/document.action?docid=11998 (downloaded October 11, 2016)


                                                    10
by a general vote at the biennial academy meeting. Elected committee members have four-
year terms, which are nonrenewable in the CAS (renewable only once in the CAE). This
committee is in charge of the daily administration of the academy. The number of academy-
level committee members in the CAS ranged from 27 to 38 during our sample period; for
the CAE, the academy-level committee had between 31 and 37 members.


Selection of new CAS and CAE fellows

In the CAS, election of up to 60 new fellows across the six divisions takes place biennially
in odd years, with the CAS-level standing committee deciding on the allocation of openings
across departments. The CAE similarly elects up to 90 fellows across its nine departments,
with the distribution at the discretion of the CAE standing committee.10 Candidates may
be nominated either by any existing fellow or via the candidate’s employer. In the latter
case, the nomination is then vetted by the ministry-level unit that oversees the employer,
with the ministry deciding which nominations will be put forward amongst those under its
administration. For example, Peking University is administered by the Ministry of Educa-
tion. So Peking University may put forward nominations to the Ministry of Education which
will assess these candidates and those from other universities, then decide which university-
affiliated candidates will receive formal nominations.11
    Within each department, selection among these nominees is overseen by the standing
committee. Selection proceeds in two main stages. First, each standing committee orga-
nizes several subgroups within its department based on academic expertise (e.g., organic
and inorganic chemistry), with each subgroup including at least 15 fellows, to provide indi-
vidual written evaluations of applications along with a yes-no vote. Every member of the
  10
     See the CAS bylaws for details on the current selection process http://english.casad.cas.cn/Ab/Re/
(downloaded October 11, 2016)
  11
     According to CAS/CAE bylaws, the ministry-level units that may nominate candidates include a number
of central government ministries in Beijing (i.e., Ministry of Education, Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of
Finance, and so forth), all provincial governments (including Beijing, Tianjin, Shanghai, and Chongqing),
the China Science Association (a ministry-level unit), and the four departments of The People’s Liberation
Army (General Staff Department, PLA General Political Department, PLA General Logistics Department,
and PLA General Armaments Department).


                                                     11
department receives these subgroup assessments (along with the final votes of each subgroup
member), and is then required to provide a yes-no vote on every candidate in the entire
department. This department-wide vote is used to eliminate about 40 percent of the initial
pool of candidates. We refer to this winnowing as the first selection stage.
       The second stage begins with an evaluation of the remaining candidates by a group
of three fellows selected by the department standing committee (and potentially including
standing committee members themselves), who then present their evaluations to the entire
department. Voting then proceeds in two steps. First, all participating fellows vote on the
set of candidates that made it through the first stage, and based on these votes a short list of
“formal candidates” for fellows is generated. The number of formal candidates is equal to 1.2
times the number of available slots in each department (the multiple was 1.4 prior to 2008).
Finally, in the second step of this stage, there is a new round of voting by all participating
fellows. Candidates are ranked based on the number of yes votes received, with the highest
ranked candidates selected as fellows as long as they receive yeses from at least two-thirds
of votes cast (prior to 2006, candidates needed to receive a yes from half of voting fellows to
be elected).
       This process gives standing committee members considerable sway in the selection of
fellows. In the first stage, they assign candidates’ applications to fellows within their de-
partments for initial review. In the second stage, standing committee members organize
the three-person group which evaluates each remaining candidate (likely including at least
some committee members themselves), and have a chance to exercise social pressure in the
final in-person vote. Finally, while non-standing committee members can skip the biennial
meeting at which selection takes place, standing committee members are required to attend:
as department leaders their presence at the meetings is mandatory.12 The election rules at
the CAE are very similar to those of the CAS, except for minor differences. Most notably,
  12
    Once each department has selected its fellows, final academy-wide approval is required, but this step is
largely a formality. Each department sends its fellow list to the CAS-level standing committee for procedural
approval. After 2014 (our data end in 2013), the election rules shifted somewhat, and approval of all
candidates required a CAS-level vote, though this too was seen as largely pro forma.


                                                     12
candidates who make it past the first stage are required to give a presentation (and answer
questions from current fellows) prior to the second stage vote.


1.2       The importance of hometown ties in China

Hometown ties, or laoxiang guanxi in Chinese, play a central role in guanxi, the culture of
favor exchange in Chinese society. As expressed by anthropologist Leo Douw in his introduc-
tion to a book-length treatment of the topic,”[t]he cultivation of hometown ties is part and
parcel of the Chinese culture of establishing guanxi, or relationships of mutual obligation
between individuals, and is therefore also an inherent part of the social structure in which
doing business in China is embedded at present. Moreover, ethnic Chinese communities
abroad have usually preserved a distinctly Chinese cultural identity which is centered on the
sharing of roots in the hometown.” As Chen and Chen (2004) observe, hometown ties are
among the most common and distinctive bases for guanxi to build upon.
       There is a literature too vast to survey here that examines the origins of laoxiang guanxi,
and also documents its many roles in contemporary Chinese society. Social organizations
based on place of origin are very common amongst immigrant groups, and are used to
facilitate communication, strengthen within-group networks, enlarge the group’s political
power in the new location, and also to form coalitions to better compete in commercial
enterprises. There are often formal organizations built around laoxiang guanxi, typically
called Tong xiang hui or Lao xiang hui (hometown associations) or Huiguan (guildhouses).
These formal associations are common among migrant communities within China and also
among the global Chinese diaspora.13
       These connections have led to favor exchange that has been explicitly censured by Chinese
government officials. In early 2015, a director at the Central Commission for Discipline In-
spection, China’s highest anti-corruption authority, expressed his concerns about the culture
  13
    See, for example, Ho (1966) for a classic account of the social and political role of Huiguan in China;
Dou (1946) for details on Tongxianghui within China; and Moll-Murata (2008) for a discussion of Chinese
guilds going back to the seventeenth century. For discussions of hometown-based associations amongst the
Chinese diaspora see, for example, Freedman (1960); Crissman (1967), and Kerri (1976).

                                                    13
of favor-exchange that had emerged around hometown networks, worrying that government
officials maintained their hometown ties solely for the purpose of building profitable con-
nections to businesses or securing promotion.14 In October 2015, the Communist Party of
China acted on these concerns by banning hometown associations altogether, under the ra-
tionale that they served to facilitate corruption amongst government officials, and between
businesses and government officials.
      Hometown ties have been implicated in corruption of the CAS/CAE selection process
that is our focus. In October 2013, Sciencenet, a publication cosponsored by the CAS and
CAE, reported on the case of Mingxian Chen, who in 2011 was the vice-chief officer of Hunan
province’s Transportation Department.15 Chen was nominated that year for the civil engi-
neering department of the CAE by a standing committee member from his home province
of Hunan after trying (and failing) to secure a nomination from a fellow from his hometown
of Changde City. His nomination failed in the second stage after it came to light that some
of his research contributions were fabricated or written by others, leading to his arrest for
corruption in 2012.




2       Data

Candidate information for both the CAS and the CAE were obtained from the organiza-
tions’ official websites (www.cas.cn and www.cae.cn) and the CAS’s official publication CAS
Bulletin, where these data have been published since 2001. The CAS and CAE sites provide
information on a candidate’s passage through both the first and second stages of selection.
(There is no information on whether a candidate was included in the short list that was
considered in the final in-person vote, consisting of 1.2 times (pre-2008) or 1.4 times (post-
2008) the number of available positions.) There are two exceptions: The CAS has not posted
 14
      See http://www.hebgcdy.com/2015/0123/104692.html accessed on October 11, 2016.
 15
      See http://news.sciencenet.cn/htmlnews/2013/10/283957.shtm accessed October 11, 2016.


                                                   14
the list of candidates who passed through the first stage for 2001 and 2013, while the CAE
has not posted this information for 2001. We filed requests for this information via China’s
freedom of information laws (“Regulation of the People’s Republic of China on the Disclo-
sure of Government Information,” in effect since May 1, 2008). The CAS has not complied
with our request, responding that the information “is not a required disclosure under the
government’s information law.”16 The CAE sent us the data from 2001.
      The nominee lists that we obtained from these sources are used to construct our two
main outcome variables. Electedyi is an indicator variable that denotes whether candidate i
in year y was elected a fellow. We also generate the indicator variable F irstStageyi which
denotes whether candidate i passed through the first stage of the selection process in year y.
Nominees who fail in their first bid for membership of the CAS and CAE may be nominated
again in subsequent years, so a single candidate i may appear in multiple years. We match
candidates over time based on name, birthplace, and birth year. Of our final sample of
candidates, 1663 (49.7 percent) are nominated only once, 915 (27.4 percent) are nominated
twice, and 768 receive nominations three or more times. (11 candidates were nominated
to departments in the CAS and CAE in a single year, but otherwise all candidate-year
observations are distinct.)
      Conditional on receiving a nomination after an initial failure, a candidate’s success rate
is much higher. For example, the success rate is 7.1 percent for all candidates in their first
attempt, versus 13.6 percent for candidates who are re-nominated on their second attempt.
      Nominees to the CAS and CAE - even the unsuccessful ones - are generally well-known
individuals, often members of the scientific and social elite. We were thus able to obtain
personal and professional information on most nominees through a combination of employer
websites and listings on Baike (China’s Wikipedia, which is a subsidiary of Baidu, China’s
Google). These sources were generally sufficient to obtain a candidate’s birth year, gender,
municipality of birth (including the rural area within the jurisdiction), and educational
 16
      Translations of this correspondence are available from the authors.



                                                      15
background. These sources were supplemented by, as needed, name searches via Baidu and
also author listings in ckni.net, the Chinese version of JSTOR, as some Chinese journals
require that authors provide their age and city of birth. For elected fellows, the process
was facilitated by the short biographies posted on the CAS and CAE official websites. We
were unable to find the city of birth for 766 candidates out of a total of 3349. Of these, 259
candidates (20.7 percent of the total of 1251) were CAS candidates, while 507 (21.7 percent
of the total of 2332) were CAE candidates. These candidates are necessarily excluded from
our analysis.17 Finally, the CAS official website provides a listing of all standing committee
members for each department for the period of 2001-2013. While the CAE official website
does not provide this information, standing committee lists are provided in hard copies of
CAE yearbooks from 2001-2013.
       By combining city of birth information on both fellows and nominees with department
standing committee listings, we generate the candidate-year level variable CommitteeT ieyi ,
denoting that candidate i in year y was born in the same city as at least one standing
committee member in his department. (In 79 percent of cases, a connected candidate has
only a single hometown tie to the standing committee, in 17 percent of cases there are two
ties, and in 4 percent of cases a connected candidate has 3 or more ties.) We similarly
generate N onCommitteeT ieyi , which denotes that a candidate was born in the same city
as at least one fellow in his department but not on the standing committee. This variable
captures, for example, the extent to which a particular city tends to produce high-quality
chemists or mathematicians. We generate a further “placebo” measure of hometown ties that
captures whether a nominee is connected to department committee members in departments
other than his own, CommitteeT ie P laceboyi .
       Based on candidates’ educational backgrounds, we generate variables that indicate that
  17
     There are no significant differences in age or H-Index between CAS/CAE candidates where we were able
to find birthplace information versus candidates where we could not. The average age is near-identical for
the two groups: 58.4 for those with hometown information, 58.4 for those without. There is similarly no
difference in average H-index (8.8 versus 8.4 for those with and without hometown information, p-value of
the log difference between the two of 0.70).



                                                   16
a candidate attended the same undergraduate institution as a standing committee member
(Committee CollegeT ieyi ) or that a candidate attended the same undergraduate institu-
tion as a fellow not on the standing committee (N onCommittee CollegeT ieyi ). In a similar
vein, we generate Committee EmployerT ieyi to denote whether a candidate is employed
at the same institution as a standing committee member at the time of nomination, and
N onCommittee EmployerT ieyi to denote that a candidate is employed at the same institu-
tion as a fellow not on the standing committee.18 We show in Appendix Table A1 that our
results are robust to including controls for these educational and professional ties.
       Throughout our analysis, we wish to control for academic output. Our main measure is
a candidate’s H-index at the end of the relevant election year, obtained from Web of Science
(Core Collection). Our H-Index is calculated for 2014, but only includes work published by
the end of the year of nomination. This allows us to incorporate a forward-looking view of
publications of relatively recent vintage. In this, we follow the innovations literature, which
typically allows for several years’ lag in measuring citations; see, for example, Aghion et al.
(2013). One potential concern is that our forward-looking measure of publication impact at
the time of election incorporates any positive treatment effect that CAS/CAE membership
has on citations. In Appendix Tables A2 and A3, we show that our results are robust to
using publications as a measure of research quality, which is not subject to this concern.
       In many cases, there were multiple search results due to common names and/or candi-
dates’ use of initials rather than full names. In these cases, we also matched based on the
author’s affiliated institution and field of research.19
       To account for the long right tail in the H-Index distribution, as well as the fact that 36
percent of CAE nominees (as well as 6 percent of CAS nominees) have an H-Index of zero,
  18
      The CAS itself operates 84 largely autonomous institutes spread throughout China with each one typi-
cally specializing in a particular scientific subfield. We treat CAS-affiliated nominees in different municipal-
ities as having separate employers for the purposes of this variable’s construction.
   19
      While shared names are common enough in Chinese, it would be rare to have such overlap for two
individuals within the same institution and the same field of research. In practice, after filtering by name and
affiliated institution we do not find any cases of a name/institution combination where there are publications
across unrelated fields.



                                                      17
we use log(1 + HIndexyi ) as our main measure of the research productivity of candidate
i. (See Online Appendix Figure OA1 for a histogram of H-Indexes for the sample overall,
and for the CAS and CAE separately.) While there is no sufficient statistic for observable
candidate quality, the H-Index is an accepted measure that captures both quantity of output
and citation impact (Hirsch (2005)).
    To assess the robustness of our results to alternative measures, we also collected data on
candidates’ total publications and total citations, and on “homerun” publications – those
with over 100 published citations on Web of Science. We employ an indicator variable,
HasHomerun, that captures whether a candidate had a homerun (100+ citation) paper at
the time of nomination.20
    As a final measure of academic credentials, we also include Doctorateyi , an indicator
variable denoting that a candidate holds a Ph.D. or equivalent degree such as an M.D.
(We caution that the lack of a doctoral degree is not in itself an indication of inadequate
qualifications. For example, the 2015 Nobel laureate in medicine, Youyou Tu, did not hold a
doctoral degree. Doctoral degrees are, as we discuss below, far more common among younger
nominees.)
    We include several further controls to account for other forms of status and connections.
Deanyi indicates that a nominee holds an administrative rank of dean or higher (in practice
dean or president) at his academic institution, while P oliticalT ieyi captures whether the
nominee is (or was) a vice-Tingju level (or above) government official, where a vice-Tingju
level official holds the same rank as a city vice-mayor. In our context, politically influential
candidates are typically former government officials (including some of very high rank; for
example, the former Minister of Railways, Fu Zhihuan, was a candidate in 2001 and was
elected as a fellow in that year) or high-ranking members of the military.
  20
     We also collected data via the China Academic Literature Network Publishing General Database at
CNKI on candidates’ research records in Chinese scientific journals, including citations, publications, and
H-Indexes. We found that none of these productivity measures led to greater success in election to the
CAS/CAE: the Chinese H-Index is negatively correlated with election, significantly so for the CAS. This
confirmed our prior belief that, for the most part, Chinese journals are not well-regarded by the scientific
establishment. See Appendix Tables A2 and A3 for these results.


                                                    18
       Table 1A provides summary statistics for the full sample, while Tables 1B and 1C dis-
aggregate the data by CommitteeT ie and N onCommitteeT ie respectively. Note that the
latter two groups are not mutually exclusive - a candidate may have both committee and
non-committee ties, and this is in fact not uncommon in our data.
       In Table 1A we see that hometown ties are relatively rare: CommitteeT ie = 1 for 10.0
percent of candidates.21 Additionally, we observe that the average candidate is 58.4 years old
- a reminder that election to the academies is a late-career reward for past accomplishments.
       There are a few patterns worth highlighting in the comparison of candidates with and
without committee hometown ties. First, in the raw data there is a gap of 5.9 percentage
points in the fraction of nominees that are elected fellows between CommitteeT ie = 1 candi-
dates and CommitteeT ie = 0 candidates (19.6 percent versus 13.7 percent, difference signif-
icant at the 1 percent level). However, we observe no difference in the fraction of candidates
who make it past the first stage of selection. In fact, CommitteeT ie = 0 candidates enjoy a
slightly higher success rate in the first stage of screening (40.6 percent, versus 38.8 percent
for CommitteeT ie = 1 candidates), though this difference is not statistically distinguishable
from zero. It thus follows that there is a very large difference in Elected|F irstStage = 1,
the fraction of candidates elected conditional on making it past the first stage. Its value
is 17.2 percentage points higher for CommitteeT ie = 1 candidates (49.4, versus 32.2 for
CommitteT ie = 0 candidates). The difference in success rates based on non-committee ties
is much more modest and, as we will see in our regression results in the following section,
does not survive the inclusion of basic controls.
       The second point to note in Tables 1B and 1C is that there are a number of other sharp
differences between hometown connected and unconnected candidates. These all stem from
two main differences: First, there are cities that tend to produce large numbers of scientists,
who also tend to go to elite academic institutions. Hence, in particular, in both tables we
observe a large difference in means for school ties, as evident in the last two rows of each
  21
    By department, the rate of hometown ties ranges from 3.6 percent in Engineering Management to 16.1
in Mathematics and Physics. The rate is 11.2 percent for the CAS overall versus 9.4 for the CAE.


                                                 19
table. This will make it particularly important to ensure that our results are robust to city-
of-origin fixed effects and also to consider the effects of “placebo” measures of connections
that capture the scientific strength or prevalence of scientists from particular locales.
   Additionally, there is a significant age difference in both tables between connected and
unconnected candidates. The difference between candidates with hometown committee ties
and those without is 1.5 years; the age gap is even wider for non-committee hometown
ties, where the mean difference is 2.3 years and highly significant. The difference in the
fraction of candidates with doctoral degrees is a direct result of this age gap, as doctoral
degrees were uncommon among Chinese researchers until relatively recently. For example,
over 70 percent of candidates under the age of 60 hold doctoral degrees (almost 85 percent
of candidates under 50), while the rate is below 20 percent for candidates aged 60 and over.
Once we control for age, the difference in the fraction of candidates with doctoral degrees in
Tables 1B and 1C disappears (see Online Appendix Table OA1).
   This still leaves the question of why there is an age difference based on connections in the
first place. We can offer one speculative answer. Recall that candidates may be nominated
by employers or current fellows. While we do not observe the source of a candidate’s nomina-
tion, an employer would plausibly be less inclined to nominate a candidate as he approaches
retirement, leaving only current fellows as potential nominees. The higher age of nominees
might thus be a manifestation of favor-seeking among related fellows in the nomination pro-
cess, which is necessarily more prevalent among older cohorts. This is roughly consistent
with the age profile of connected nominees, as illustrated in Appendix Figure A1, which
shows the fraction of each 5-year cohort of nominees who are connected to current fellows.
The fraction dips briefly, then rises steadily to level out at the 65-69 cohort. The mandatory
retirement age is 60. We will control for log(Age) in our main specifications below, and also
show results with a full set of age cohort fixed effects, which generates virtually identical
point estimates and standard errors.




                                              20
3     Empirical Results

3.1    Hometown ties and election to the CAS/CAE

We begin in Figure 1 by showing how the gap in election rates by hometown connec-
tion status varies over time. We divide the sample into three non-overlapping groups:
CommitteeT ie = 1 candidates; candidates lacking hometown ties to their department stand-
ing committee but with ties to non-committee department fellows (N onCommitteeT ie = 1
and CommitteeT ie = 0); and candidates with no hometown ties to department mem-
bers at all (i.e., both hometown tie variables are zero). Two noteworthy patterns emerge.
First, we observe virtually no difference in election rates between the two groups where
CommitteeT ie = 0, suggesting that there is no benefit from connections to non-committee
members, and that this lack of benefit is consistent over time. Second, CommitteeT ie = 1
candidates have substantially higher election probabilities than both ‘control’ groups only
prior to the 2007 election: In the earlier part of the sample, the success rate of candidates
with standing committee hometown ties is about two-thirds higher than that of candidates
without such ties. In 2007 the election rates of all groups falls, but the drop is far greater for
CommitteeT ie = 1 candidates. By 2009, the groups have fully converged. This is driven by
a decline in the success rates of candidates with hometown ties to the standing committee,
rather than an improvement in the success rates of candidates without such connections.
    There are several possible explanations for the sudden drop in the success rates of candi-
dates with committee hometown ties (and the decline in the average success rate of candidates
overall). We speculate that an important factor may have been the increase in 2007 in the
fraction of yes votes required for election in the second stage of the selection process, from
one half to two thirds. This could account both for the general decline in election rates, and
also the disproportionate impact on hometown-connected nominees, as it plausibly made it
more difficult for influential fellows to secure enough votes to gain approval for their favored
candidates. There were other concurrent changes that might also have affected candidate


                                               21
selection. Since 2007, the candidate lists for both the CAS and CAE have been published
in two national newspapers, the People’s Daily (the highest-circulation paper in China) and
the Guangming Daily. Prior to 2007, candidate lists were available for the CAS via its in-
ternal newsletter, the CAS Bulletin, and on the CAE’s own website. It is likely that both
the increased publicity and the changes in electoral rules were responses to public criticism
of the CAS/CAE fellow selection process.
       We now turn to a regression analysis of candidate selection in Table 2, showing succes-
sively more demanding specifications. Our main specification takes the form:




 Electedyi = αdy + β1 ∗ CommitteeT ieyi + β2 ∗ N onCommitteeT ieyi + Controlsyi + yi (1)


where αdy is a set of department-year fixed effects (7 years by 15 departments for both CAS
and CAE, or a total of 105 fixed effects) and yi is an error term. We compute standard
errors that allow for clustering by candidate, since a single individual may apply multiple
times.22
       In column 1, we show the results of specification (1) including only CommitteeT ie and
N onCommitteeT ie as covariates, along with department-year fixed effects. The coefficient
on CommitteeT ie is 0.050, significant at the 1 percent level. In column 2 we add a num-
ber of covariates: log(1 + Hindex) and Doctorate to proxy for candidate quality; controls
for academic and political stature via Dean and PoliticalTie; Committee CollegeT ie and
N onCommittee CollegeT ie to capture whether a candidate went to the same undergradu-
ate institution as fellows in his department; and log(Age). The coefficient on CommitteeT ie
increases slightly to 0.053 (significant at the 1 percent level). Recall that the mean success
rate of CommitteeT ie = 0 candidates is 0.137, so these estimates imply that a hometown
tie increases the probability of becoming a fellow by about 39 percent. In column 3 we
  22
    We may also cluster at the level of the election (i.e., department-year), given the non-independence of
votes received within a department in a given year. This generates slightly larger standard errors, though all
our full sample results remain significant at least at the 10 percent level. See Online Appendix Table OA2.


                                                     22
use HasHomerun, an indicator variable denoting whether a nominee has at least one 100+
citation paper, as a readily interpretable measure of research quality. As with our H-Index
measure on column 2, HasHomerun is very significant (p-value < 0.001). The magnitude
of its coefficient, 0.060, is about 15 percent greater than that of CommitteeT ie, indicating
that a hometown connection has an impact on selection that is roughly comparable to that
of having a high impact journal publication.
    In column 4 we provide our most rigorous specification which includes hometown fixed
effects for each of the 424 municipalities (including county cities) with at least one candidate
during our sample, as well as department-year fixed effects. (62 of these municipalities
have within-city variation in CommitteeT ie, though they tend to be larger municipalities
and contain 54 percent of candidate observations in our sample.) This captures any time-
invariant differences in city of origin that might influence both the chances of serving on a
department standing committee, and also success as a CAS/CAE candidate. The coefficient
on CommitteeT ie remains largely unchanged, though in this saturated specification the
standard error also increases so the coefficient is significant only at the 5 percent level (p-value
of 0.047). In column 5 we include fixed effects for candidates’ undergraduate institutions.
This leads to a modest increase in the coefficient on CommitteeT ie, to 0.070, with a standard
error that is slightly higher than our main specification in column 2. Finally, in columns 6
and 7 we separate the sample into CAS and CAE applicants; we find no difference between
the two groups in the effect of committee hometown ties.
    Overall, the results in Table 2 indicate that the effect of hometown ties to committee
members is quite robust, and distinct from other measures of connectedness. Across columns
1 - 5, we may reject equality of coefficients for CommitteeT ie and N onCommitteeT ie at
least at the 10 percent level (at least at the 5 percent level if we allow for any individual-level
controls). Furthermore, we do not find a consistent impact of connectedness via undergradu-
ate institution, a tie that would more plausibly be a conduit for soft information on scientific
ability.


                                                23
       In Appendix Table A1, we provide a series of further robustness checks that highlight
both the robustness and distinctiveness of the impact of hometown ties on CAS/CAE election
outcomes. In column 1 we present a ‘falsification test’ by including CommitteeT ie P lacebo,
which captures hometown ties to standing committee members not in the candidate’s de-
partment. These non-department standing committee ties have no effect on a candidate’s
election prospects, as one would expect given that election is conducted at the department
level. In column 2 we show that our findings are robust to the inclusion of a full set of
age cohort fixed effects. The point estimate on β1 is near-identical to those in Table 2,
with a comparable standard error. In column 3 we include Committee EmployerT ie and
N onCommittee EmployerT ie, which capture nominees’ ties to fellows through their em-
ployer at the time of nomination, as well as employer fixed effects. As with undergraduate
ties, we argue that these professional connections would more plausibly serve as a channel for
soft information than hometown ties. In this specification, the coefficient on CommitteeT ie
increases to 0.061 (and the coefficient on N onCommitteeT ie is slightly negative though
insignificant). If soft information were the primary reason for CommitteeT ie’s effect on
selection, it is very surprising that neither school nor employer ties have any positive effect.
In column 4 we verify that the differences across time observed in Figure 1 are statistically
significant. When we add the interaction of CommitteeT ie and an indicator variable denot-
ing election years later than 2007, we find that the direct effect of CommitteeT ie increases
to 0.094, while the interaction is of near-equal magnitude and opposite sign. Finally, to
emphasize the robustness of our results to alternative measures of research impact, in Ap-
pendix Table A2 we present specifications comparable to those in Table 2, column 2, with
log(1 + P ublications), log(1 + Citations),log(1 + ChineseHIndex), P ublications, and H-
Index deciles as controls. The coefficient on CommitteeT ie is stable across all specifications
and, apart from log(1 + ChineseHIndex), all measures of research output are significant
predictors of election.23 Finally, it is possible to show how election probabilities shift when
  23
    Because an individual may be nominated more than once, we may also run our analysis with candidate
fixed effects. We present these results in Online Appendix Table OA3. The coefficients on CommitteeTie


                                                 24
a city has a fellow elected to the standing committee, or when a city’s fellow steps down.
There are 60 such transitions where we have at least one candidate that is nominated both
pre and post-transition. Using these data, we obtain selection probabilities that are very
much in line with our regression results: in a year when a city gets a new standing commit-
tee member, its nominees’ election probability increases from 14.7 to 21.3 percent. When a
standing committee tie is lost, the selection probability decreases from 18.3 to 12.8 percent.
Owing to the shortness of our panel, we cannot provide ‘event studies’ for these transitions
with more years before and after the transition.
   We next separate the overall impact of hometown connections on selection into the first
and second stages of the process. Our sample is smaller for these analyses relative to those
presented in Table 2, because we were unable to obtain results from the first stage of selection
for CAS candidates in 2001 and 2013.24 We present the results in Tables 3, where we include
individual-level controls and department-year fixed effects in all specifications (we suppress
the coefficients on control variables to conserve space; these coefficients, along with more
extensive first and second stage results, may be found in Online Appendix Tables OA4 and
OA5). In columns 1 and 2 we present the results for the first selection stage. There are two
interesting patterns that emerge. First, the link between observable candidate quality and
progressing past the first stage is quite strong. The coefficient on log(1 + HIndex) in column
1 is 0.074 (p-value < 0.001), more than twice as large as the comparable coefficient reported
for overall selection in Table 2. The coefficient of 0.131 on the variable HasHomerun in
column 2 indicates that a homerun publication increases the probability of progressing past
the first stage by nearly 13 percentage points, or 36 percent relative to the probability for
HasHomerun = 0 candidates of 0.36. There is, however, no correlation between hometown
ties and candidate success at the first stage. The point estimate on CommitteeT ie is close
to zero in both specifications, and never significant. Based on CommitteeT ie’s coefficient
remain similar in magnitude but are no longer statistically significant.
   24
      In the final column of Appendix Table A1, we show that our main result on hometown committee ties
is near-identical for this smaller sample where first stage data are available.



                                                  25
(-0.014) and its standard error (0.028) in column 1, we can rule out at the 95 percent level
the existence of a positive effect of CommitteeT ie of greater than 4.1 percentage points
(-0.014 + 0.028*1.96).
   In columns 3 and 4, the dependent variable is Elected; we limit the sample to candidates
who make it past the first selection stage. There is a very large effect of CommitteeT ie
on second stage success across all specifications: a committee hometown tie is associated
with a 15.8 percentage point increase in the probability of becoming a CAS/CAE fellow,
conditional on making it through the first stage screening. Interestingly, the correlations
between second stage success and our measures of research quality, log(1 + HIndex) and
HasHomerun, are much weaker - the coefficient on log(1 + HIndex) in column 3 is close to
zero, while the coefficient on HasHomerun in column 4 is about 60 percent lower than its
counterpart in column 2 (and significant only at the 10 percent level).
   Overall, our results in Table 3 are consistent with a more prominent role for individual
lobbying in the second stage which, as we observed in Section 1, takes place in a closed-door
meeting. This stands in contrast to our finding that committee hometown ties are irrelevant
in the first stage, where individual written evaluations dictate the outcome (though standing
committee members choose the set of first stage evaluators, so this non-result is not obvious
ex ante).


3.2    Hometown ties and the quality of selected fellows

If hometown-connected fellows face a lower threshold for election, two further predictions
follow: (a) the average quality of connected nominees will be lower; and (b) the quality
of elected candidates (conditional on the pool of nominees) will be lower for connected
candidates.
   We explore these predictions in Table 4, where we report the results of the following
specification:




                                             26
 Qualityyi = αdy + β1 ∗ CommitteeT ieyi + β2 ∗ N onCommitteeT ieyi + Controlsyi + yi (2)


       We do so for quality measures log(1 + HIndex) and HasHomerun, examining their
correlation with quality for the pool of candidates as they progress through the selection
process. In columns 1 - 3 we employ log(1 + HIndex) as our outcome variable; the sample is
comprised of all nominees in column 1, candidates progressing past the first stage in column
2, and elected candidates in column 3. We repeat these analyses in columns 4 - 6 using
HasHomerun as the outcome.
       We find a small, statistically insignificant coefficient on CommitteeT ie in column 1,
which includes the full sample of nominees. Thus, there is at best limited evidence of lower
measurable quality for hometown-connected candidates in the nominee pool overall. The
coefficient on CommitteeT ie increases as we move across the columns. In column 3, the
pool of elected candidates, the coefficient on CommitteeT ie, -0.392, is more than five times
greater than in column 1, and significant at the 1 percent level. Comparing columns 2 and 3,
it is clear that the negative selection of connected nominees (relative to unconnected ones)
occurs primarily in the second (in-person) stage of selection.25 Intriguingly, the coefficient on
N onCommitteeT ie is positive and significant in the second stage. One natural interpretation
is that this is a result of the directive for geographic diversity within the CAS/CAE, which
we noted in Section 1 - if a hometown is already represented in a department, the quality
bar may be higher for additional members.26 In Appendix Table A3 we report results
paralleling those in column 3, using alternative measures of research quality. In each case,
CommitteeT ie is a negative predictor of elected fellow quality except when measured by
Chinese H-Index.
  25
      In Online Appendix Table OA6, we present results from a fixed effects Poisson (Quasi-ML) regression,
with election-level clustering and also fixed effects. This analysis generates results that are very similar to
those reported in Table 4, with comparable interpretation.
   26
      However, note that in the second set of columns with HasHomerun as our quality measure, the coeffi-
cient on N onCommitteeT ie is insignificant.


                                                      27
       The size of this negative selection effect is large, and easy to see in the bar graph in
Figure 2, which shows the median H-Index of candidates at each stage of selection. While
the nominee pools for connected and unconnected candidates start out with comparable
quality (median H-Index of 4 versus 4.5 respectively), among elected candidates the median
H-Index of connected candidates is less than half that of unconnected ones (4.5 versus 10).
Figure 2 also reveals a pattern that cannot be discerned from regression coefficients - while
we observe positive selection on quality in the first stage for both groups, in the second stage
there is negative selection overall (not just relative to unconnected candidates) for connected
nominees who make it past the first selection stage. One might speculate that this reflects
senior scholars’ concerns about being displaced in the hometown guanxi network by more
able - and ultimately more influential - fellows, in line with the idea that leaders face a
tradeoff between loyalty and quality in choosing colleagues or advisors (see, for example,
Egorov and Sonin (2011)).27
       In the next three columns of Table 4, along with Figure 3, we repeat the preceding exercise
with HasHomerun as our quality measure. We obtain qualitatively very similar results, with
a more intuitive interpretation. In particular, the coefficient on CommitteeT ie in the final
column is -0.198. Given that the fraction of elected candidates with CommitteeT ie = 0 who
have a homerun publication is 0.398, it follows that a hometown tie cuts the probability that
an elected fellow has a 100+ citation paper by half. Comparing the results of columns 1 and
3, it is clear that this effect comes almost entirely from the fellow election process rather
than differences in the candidate pools.
       In using these results to provide policy-relevant extrapolations, it is important to keep in
mind that, while the impact of connections on individual quality is very large, in aggregate
the effect of hometown ties needs to be scaled by their prevalence in the population. Recall
that only 10 percent of all nominees - and 13.7 percent of elected fellows - are connected to
  27
    This result also suggests no complementarity between connections and ability, and may imply – in the
context of the model developed by Jia et al. (2015) on promotion within the Chinese bureaucracy – that
connections are more likely to be associated with loyalty than learning about a candidate’s ability.



                                                  28
standing committee members via hometown ties. Thus, getting rid of hometown ties in the
evaluation process would increase the homerun rate by only 2.7 percentage points for the
membership overall (0.137*0.198). Of course, hometown ties represent only a single form of
favoritism, so that the aggregate effect of all forms of favoritism may be much larger than
the effect of hometown ties alone.


3.3    The consequences of CAS/CAE election for resource alloca-

       tion

In our final set of analyses, we document the increase in influence and resources associated
with CAS/CAE election, which complements our brief qualitative discussion in Section 2.
We present here two pieces of empirical analysis. First, we document how membership
affects an individual’s chances of being appointed to a senior administrative post. Second,
we show the relationship at the university-level between the number of fellows employed and
government funding.
   In our first set of analyses, we provide “event study” plots for the probability of receiving
a university appointment of dean or president in the years around CAS/CAE election.
   We divide the sample into candidates who are elected, and those who are nominated
but never elected. For never-elected candidates who were nominated more than once, we
focus on the first year in our sample when they receive a nomination as the event date. In
practice, the patterns we observe are near-identical if we use their last year of nomination,
or an average of all nomination dates.
   In Figure 4, for each group we provide event plots showing the fraction of nominees
that are appointed as dean or president of their institution in the [−3, +3] year window
around their nomination or election date. Since the most recent data for administrative
appointments is from 2015, we use CAS/CAE nomination data for 2001 - 2011. The fraction
of newly-elected CAS/CAE candidates obtaining appointments as dean or president, as
shown by the solid line, increases markedly in the year of election and remains high for the

                                              29
subsequent three years. By contrast, unsuccessful nominees exhibit no increase (perhaps
even a small decrease) in the fraction receiving such appointments.28
    A second channel of influence may come through funding. As we have observed previously,
CAS/CAE fellowship tends to come late in a scholar’s career. We are thus less interested in
the funding that they access directly than in the funding they obtain for their collaborators
or institutions.29 While mapping out the personal and professional networks of candidates is
beyond the scope of our study, we may examine how the presence of fellows affects university-
level funding using publicly available data from China’s Ministry of Education (MOE). These
data, available in MOE yearbooks by institution, include total government grants and total
scientists and researchers (including research staff) employed, for 2001-2013, excepting 2003-
2004 when only municipal aggregates were available. The funding data include competitive
grants (such as projects financed by China’s National Science Foundation and Ministry
of Science and Technology) as well as governmental budget allocations to each university.
The latter part represents the vast majority of university-level funding, which is subject to
considerable discretion on the part of MOE officials.30
    Figure 5 provides a binned scatterplot showing the relationship between the number of
fellows employed at each university and its total government funding. These scatterplots
  28
     In Appendix Table A4 we show the effect of CAS/CAE election on senior administrative appointments
in a regression framework. We focus on elected candidates, and include candidate and year fixed effects in all
specifications (we also include third-order polynomial controls for age in most specifications given the strong
(and non-monotonic) relationship between age and administrative appointments). Our results are roughly
in line with those illustrated in Figure 4, with an estimated effect of CAS/CAE election on administrative
appointments of 1.2 to 1.8 percentage points (significant at least at the 5 percent level in all cases). When
we allow the effect of CAS/CAE fellowship to differ for connected versus unconnected candidates, the point
estimate on CommitteeTie*ElectedPost is negative, but with a very large standard error.
  29
     We also collected data on Chinese National Science Foundation funding for all the fellows in our sample,
and conducted event study analyses paralleling those in Figure 4. We observe a modest increase in the
probability of an individual receiving NSF funding in the year following CAS/CAE election, while we observe
no such increase for unsuccessful nominees. Our regression estimates suggest that CAS/CAE election leads to
a 2 percentage point increase in the probability of NSF funding (significant at the 5 percent level). However,
the sums of money involved are relatively modest and award frequency quite rare, compared to the aggregate
funding effects we document in the material that follows: NSF funding probability increases from about 10
percent to 12 percent, and the median award amount is 2.1 million RMB.
  30
     Xu (2013) tells the story of CAE fellow and professor at Beijing Forestry University, Shen Guofang.
According to the story, Shen wished to retire but his request was rejected because of the consequences - in
terms of funding and prestige - for the university.



                                                      30
are residualized, removing university and year fixed effects, and present the data for all
universities that employed at least one CAS/CAE fellow during 2001-2013. In addition, we
control for total researchers, allowing its effect to differ across years owing to changes in the
way that research staff are classified by the MOE across years. The scatterplot indicates
a clear positive correlation between the number of fellows employed and total government
funding. When we look at this relationship in a regression framework, again including
university and year fixed effects, as well as controlling for the number of full-time researchers
in each year, we estimate that a fellow is associated with an additional 63 million RMB in
annual funding, or around US $9.5 million, significant at the 1 percent level.



4     Conclusion

In this paper, we study the fellow selection process for China’s Academies of Sciences and
Engineering. Nominees with hometown ties to department standing committee members
were 39 percent more likely to be selected as CAS/CAE fellows, due entirely to higher suc-
cess rates in the second (in-person) stage of the selection process. The hometown-connected
candidates who gain election do so with considerably weaker scientific accomplishments than
non-connected candidates - for example, elected candidates with hometown ties are about
half as likely as unconnected candidates to have had a 100+ citation paper. Favoritism
in selection into the CAS/CAE has potentially major effects on the allocation of research
resources since, as we document, election increases the probability that scientists will re-
ceive high-level administrative appointments, and is associated with greater funding for the
universities that employ them.
    The fact that the “hometown advantage” in fellow selection largely disappears in 2007
suggests that greater scrutiny and amended election rules may have been effective in curbing
at least this form of favoritism, although it is possible that other channels of favoritism not
observable to us are still present.



                                               31
References

Acemoglu, D. (1995). Reward structures and the allocation of talent. European Economic
  Review Vol. 39.1, 17–33.

Altbach, P. G. (2012). Paying the professoriate: A global comparison of compensation and
  contracts. Routledge: Taylor & Francis Group.

Brandt, L., J. V. Biesebroeck, and Y. Zhang (2012). Creative accounting or creative destruc-
  tion? firm-level productivity growth in chinese manufacturing. Journal of Development
  Economics Vol. 97.2, 339–351.

Burgess, R., R. Jedwab, E. Miguel, A. Morjaria, and G. Padro i Miquel (2015). The value
  of democracy: evidence from road building in kenya. American Economic Review Vol.
  105(6), 1817–1851.

Chen, X.-P. and C. C. Chen (2004). On the intricacies of the chinese guanxi: A process
  model of guanxi development. Asia Pacific Journal of Management Vol. 21, 305–324.

Cohen, L., A. Frazzini, and C. Malloy (2008). The small world of investing: Board connec-
  tions and mutual fund returns. Journal of Political Economy Vol. 116(5), 951–979.

Cohen, L., A. Frazzini, and C. Malloy (2010). Sell-side school ties. Journal of Finance Vol.
  65(4), 1409–1437.

Cohen, L. and C. J. Malloy (2014). Friends in high places. American Economic Journal:
  Economic Policy Vol. 6(3), 63–91.

Crissman, L. W. (1967). The segmentary structure of urban overseas chiense communities.
  Man, New Series Vol. 2, No. 2, 185–204.

Dou, J. (1946). Tongxiang Zuzhi Zhi Yanjiu: [Study on the hometown associations]. Taipei:
  Taiwan Zhengzhong Publishing House.


                                            32
Durante, R., G. Labartino, and R. Perotti (2014). Academic dynasties: Decentralization
  and familism in the italian academia. Unpublished manuscript.

Egorov, G. and K. Sonin (2011). Dictators and their viziers: Endogenizing the loyalty-
  competence trade-off. Journal of the European Economic Association Vol. 9.5, 903–930.

Freedman, M. (1960). Immigrants and associations: Chinese in nineteenth-century singapore.
  Comparative Studies in Society and History Vol. 3(1), 25–48.

Hirsch, J. E. (2005). An index to quantify an individual’s scientific research output. Pro-
  ceedings of the National academy of Sciences of the United States of America Vol. 102.46,
  16569–16572.

Ho, P.-t. (1966). Zhongguo Huiguan Shi Lun [Study on the history of Chinese guildhouses].
  Taipei: Taiwan Xuesheng Publishing House.

Hsieh, C.-T. and P. J. Klenow (2009). Misallocation and manufacturing tfp in china and
  india. The Quarterly Journal of Economics Vol. 124.4, 1403–1448.

Jia, R., M. Kudamatsu, and D. Seim (2015). Political selection in china: The complementary
  roles of connections and performance. Journal of the European Economic Association Vol.
  13(4), 631–688.

Kerri, J. N. (1976). Studying voluntary associations as adaptive mechanisms: A review of
  anthropological perspectives. Current Anthropology Vol. 17(1), 23–47.

Khandelwal, A. K., P. K. Schott, and S.-J. Wei (2013). Trade liberalization and embedded
  institutional reform: Evidence from chinese exporters. American Economic Review Vol.
  103.6, 2169–2195.

Li, D. (2015). Information, bias, and efficiency in expert evaluation: Evidence from the nih.
  Unpublished manuscript.



                                             33
Li, L. (2011). Performing bribery in china: guanxi-practice, corruption with a human face.
  Journal of Contemporary China Vol. 20.68, 1–20.

Moll-Murata, C. (2008). Chinese guilds from the seventeenth to the twentieth centuries: An
  overview. International Review of Social History Vol. 53, 213–247.

Murphy, K. M., A. Shleifer, and R. W. Vishny (1991). The allocation of talent: Implications
  for growth. The Quarterly Journal of Economics Vol. 106.2, 503–30.

Ni, X. (2015). China’s research and development spend. Nature 30 April, VOL 520.

Parsons, C. A., J. Sulaeman, and M. C. Yates (2011). Strike three: discrimination, incentives,
  and evaluation. The American Economic Review Vol. 101, No. 4, 1410–1435.

Romer, P. M. (1986). Increasing returns and long-run growth. The Journal of Political
  Economy Vol. 94, No. 5, 1002–1037.

Shi, Y. and Y. Rao (2010). China’s research culture. Science Vol. 329, No. 5996, 1128.

Siegel, J. (2007). Contingent political capital and international alliances: Evidence from
  south korea. Administrative Science Quarterly Vol. 52, No. 4, 621–666.

Xu, Y. (2013). Hard for a fellow to retire? the issue of resource misallocation [yuanshi tuixiu
  nan beihou shi ziyuan de cuopei]. Guangming Daily December 24.

Young, A. (2003). Gold into base metals: Productivity growth in the people’s republic of
  china during the reform period. Journal of Political Economy Vol. 111.6, 1220–1261.

Zhu, X. (2012). China’s growth: Past, present and future. Journal of Economic Perspec-
  tives Vol. 26(4), 103–124.

Zinovyeva, N. and M. Bagues (2015). The role of connections in academic promotions.
  American Economic Journal: Applied Economics Vol. 7(2), 264–92.



                                              34
                    Table 1a: Summary Statistics, Full Sample

               Varible Name                Mean     StdDev   Observations
               CommitteeT ie                0.100    0.299      4921
               N onCommitteeT ie            0.332    0.471      4921
               Elected                      0.143    0.350      4921
               F irstStage                  0.404    0.491      4357
               Elected|F irstStage = 1      0.338    0.473      1760
               log(1 + HIndex)              1.677    1.271      4921
               Homeruns                     1.545    4.708      4921
               HasHomerun                   0.271    0.445      4921
               Doctorate                    0.457    0.498      4921
               Age                         58.393    8.846      4825
               P oliticallyConnected        0.048    0.213      4921
               Dean                         0.403    0.491      4921
               Committee CollegeT ie        0.246    0.431      4921
               N onCommittee CollegeT ie    0.446    0.497      4921



                Table 1b: Summary Statistics, by Committee Ties

                            CommitteeT ie = 1   CommitteeT ie = 0          Difference
Varible Name                Mean     StDev      Mean     StDev      Difference t-statistic
Elected                      0.196   0.397       0.137   0.344        0.059         3.557
F irstStage                  0.388   0.488       0.406   0.491       -0.018        -0.718
Elected|F irstStage = 1      0.494   0.502       0.322   0.467        0.172         4.420
log(1 + HIndex)              1.617   1.238       1.683   1.274       -0.067        -1.104
Homeruns                     1.418   3.945       1.559   4.785       -0.141        -0.629
HasHomerun                   0.257   0.438       0.273   0.445       -0.016        -0.742
Doctorate                    0.398   0.490       0.463   0.499       -0.065        -2.758
Age                         59.713   8.474      58.247   8.875        1.465         3.448
P oliticallyConnected        0.035   0.183       0.049   0.216       -0.015        -1.429
Dean                         0.373   0.484       0.406   0.491       -0.033        -1.403
Committee CollegeT ie        0.402   0.491       0.229   0.420        0.173         8.506
N onCommittee CollegeT ie    0.543   0.499       0.435   0.496        0.108         4.562




                                           35
                  Table 1c: Summary Statistics, by Non-Committee Ties

                             N onCommitteeT ie = 1   N onCommitteeT ie = 0          Difference
 Varible Name                Mean      StDev         Mean      StDev         Difference t-statistic
 Elected                     0.151      0.358        0.139      0.346          0.012         1.117
 F irstStage                 0.393      0.489        0.409      0.492         -0.016        -1.044
 Elected|F irstStage = 1      0.368     0.483         0.324     0.468          0.045         1.860
 log(1 + HIndex)              1.618     1.221         1.706     1.294         -0.088        -2.293
 Homeruns                     1.376     4.952         1.630     4.581         -0.254        -1.783
 HasHomerun                   0.245     0.430         0.284     0.451         -0.040        -2.949
 Doctorate                    0.390     0.488         0.490     0.500         -0.099        -6.617
 Age                         59.955     8.587        57.622     8.872          2.332         8.680
 P oliticallyConnected        0.050     0.217         0.047     0.211          0.003         0.421
 Dean                         0.386     0.487         0.412     0.492         -0.026        -1.756
 Committee CollegeT ie       0.326      0.469        0.207      0.405          0.119         9.204
 N onCommittee CollegeT ie   0.533      0.499        0.402      0.490          0.131         8.743

Notes: CommitteeT ie is an indicator variable denoting that the candidate shared his home-
town with a standing committee member in the year of nomination. N onCommitteeT ie
denotes a hometown connection to a department fellow not on the standing committee.
Elected denotes that a candidate was elected to the CAS or CAE in year y. F irstStage
denotes that a candidate was successful in passing through the first stage of selection to the
CAS or CAE in year y. Homeruns is the number of homerun (100+ citations in English
journals) publications by the year of nomination. HasHomerun is an indicator variable de-
noting whether a candidate has at least one homerun publication by the year of nomination.
Age is the candidate’s age in the year of nomination. P oliticallyConnected denotes candi-
dates with a government rank of vice-Tingju (i.e., vice-mayor) or higher, and Dean denotes
a candidate holding an academic position of dean or higher. Committee CollegeT ie denotes
that the candidate shared his undergraduate institution with a standing committee member
in the year of nomination. N onCommittee CollegeT ie denotes that the candidate shared
his undergraduate institution with a department fellow not on the standing committee. See
text for further details on variable construction. Table 1A provides summary statistics on
the overall sample. Tables 1B and 1C compare the mean characteristics of candidates by
committee ties and non-committee ties respectively.




                                              36
       Table 2: Standing Committee Hometown Ties and Candidate Election Rates

                              (1)        (2)            (3)       (4)       (5)        (6)        (7)
Dependent Variable                                             Elected
CommitteeT ie               0.050∗∗∗   0.053∗∗∗    0.052∗∗∗    0.048∗∗    0.070∗∗∗    0.055∗    0.052∗∗
                             (0.019)    (0.020)     (0.020)     (0.024)    (0.025)    (0.032)    (0.026)
N onCommitteeT ie             0.007      -0.000      0.001     -0.030∗      -0.009     -0.011     0.006
                             (0.011)    (0.011)     (0.011)     (0.017)    (0.014)    (0.021)    (0.013)
log(1 + HIndex)                        0.030∗∗∗                0.029∗∗∗   0.037∗∗∗   0.037∗∗∗   0.027∗∗∗
                                        (0.005)                 (0.007)    (0.007)    (0.010)    (0.006)
Doctorate                                0.020     0.030∗∗       0.016       0.017     0.029      0.017
                                        (0.013)     (0.012)     (0.016)    (0.017)    (0.025)    (0.015)
Dean                                     0.008       0.012       0.007       0.000      0.021     0.004
                                        (0.011)     (0.011)     (0.013)    (0.014)    (0.021)    (0.012)
P oliticallyConnected                    0.033       0.032     0.062∗∗       0.040     0.139      0.027
                                        (0.024)     (0.024)     (0.029)    (0.032)    (0.137)    (0.024)
log(Age)                               0.121∗∗∗    0.141∗∗∗    0.192∗∗∗   0.231∗∗∗   0.138∗∗    0.119∗∗∗
                                        (0.037)     (0.037)     (0.048)    (0.051)    (0.067)    (0.046)
Committee CollegeT ie                    0.019       0.019      0.028∗      -0.009      0.036     0.008
                                        (0.014)     (0.014)     (0.016)    (0.019)    (0.024)    (0.017)
N onCommittee CollegeT ie                0.009       0.008       0.016      -0.018      0.007     0.010
                                        (0.011)     (0.011)     (0.014)    (0.018)    (0.020)    (0.014)
HasHomerun                                         0.060∗∗∗
                                                    (0.014)
Department-year FEs           Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
Hometown FEs                                                     Yes
College FE                                                                 Yes
Sample                        Full       Full           Full    Full       Full       CAS        CAE
Observations                 4921       4825           4825     4824       4641        1800      3025
R-Squared                    .0235      .0335          .0316    .176       .152       .0334      .0222

       Notes: Standard errors clustered by candidate in all regressions. The sample
       in columns 1 - 5 includes all candidates to the CAS and CAE during 2001-
       2013; columns 6 and 7 provide results on the CAS and CAE separately. The
       dependent variable in all columns is an indicator variable denoting whether
       candidate i was elected to the CAS/CAE in year y. CommitteeT ie is an indi-
       cator variable denoting that the candidate shared a hometown with a standing
       committee member in the year of nomination. N onCommitteeT ie denotes a
       hometown connection to a department fellow not on the standing committee.
       Dean denotes a candidate holding an academic position of dean or higher,
       and P oliticallyConnected denotes candidates with a government rank of vice-
       Tingju (i.e., vice-mayor) or higher. Committee CollegeT ie denotes a candi-
       date that attended the same undergraduate institution as a standing commit-
       tee member. N onCommittee CollegeT ie denotes a candidate with a college
       connection to a fellow not on the standing committee. HasHomerun is an
       indicator variable denoting whether a candidate has at least one publication
       with 100+ citations by the year of nomination. log(1 + Hindex), Doctorate,
       and log(Age) are self-explanatory. See the text for further details on variable
       construction.
       Significance: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.

                                                  37
Table 3: Standing Committee Hometown Ties and Candidate Success in Each
Selection Stage

                                (1)          (2)        (3)                  (4)
      Dependent Variable          F irstStage                    Elected
      CommitteeT ie           -0.009       -0.014     0.158∗∗∗             0.160∗∗∗
                             (0.028)      (0.028)      (0.043)              (0.043)
      N onCommitteeT ie       -0.019       -0.017       0.022                0.022
                             (0.019)      (0.020)      (0.026)              (0.026)
      log(1 + HIndex)       0.074∗∗∗                    0.009
                             (0.009)                   (0.012)
      HasHomerun                         0.131∗∗∗                       0.049∗
                                          (0.025)                       (0.028)
      Department-Year FEs       Yes          Yes         Yes              Yes
      Sample                    Full         Full   FirstStage=1     FirstStage=1
      Observations             4265         4265        1738             1738
      R-Squared                .0696        .0602       .0517            .0529

Notes: Standard errors clustered by candidate in all regressions. The sample
in columns 1 and 2 includes all candidates to the CAS during 2003-2011 and
to the CAE during 2001-2013; the sample in columns 3 and 4 includes all
candidates to the CAS during 2003-2011 and to the CAE during 2001-2013,
who passed through the first stage of selection. The dependent variable in
columns 1 and 2 is an indicator variable denoting whether candidate i made
it through the first stage of candidate selection to the CAS/CAE in year y.
The dependent variable in columns 3 and 4 is an indicator variable denoting
whether candidate i was elected to the CAS/CAE in year y. CommitteeT ie
is an indicator variable denoting that the candidate shared a hometown with
a standing committee member in the year of nomination. N onCommitteeT ie
denotes a hometown connection to a department fellow not on the standing
committee. HasHomerun is an indicator variable denoting whether a candi-
date has at least one publication with 100+ citations by the year of nomination.
log(1 + Hindex) is self-explanatory. Control variables include those in Table 2,
with output suppressed to conserve space. See Online Appendix Tables OA4
and OA5 for full results, and see the text for further details on variable con-
struction.
Significance: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                         38
        Table 4: Research Quality of Hometown-Connected versus Unconnected Can-
        didates, at Different Stages of the Election Process

                              (1)             (2)           (3)      (4)             (5)        (6)
Dependent Variable                     log(1 + HIndex)                        HasHomerun
CommitteeT ie                 -0.072        -0.110     -0.392∗∗∗     -0.017       -0.054   -0.198∗∗∗
                             (0.056)       (0.091)      (0.117)     (0.024)      (0.039)     (0.050)
N onCommitteeT ie             0.032         0.061       0.219∗∗      -0.001       -0.001      0.059
                             (0.040)       (0.065)      (0.086)     (0.016)      (0.026)     (0.038)
Dean                        0.154∗∗∗      0.213∗∗∗     0.240∗∗∗       0.010        0.015      0.003
                             (0.038)       (0.059)      (0.083)     (0.015)      (0.024)     (0.036)
P oliticallyConnected         -0.049        -0.099       -0.087      -0.012        0.004      -0.075
                             (0.091)       (0.144)      (0.175)     (0.032)      (0.057)     (0.078)
log(Age)                    0.390∗∗∗       0.432∗        -0.025    -0.150∗∗       -0.158    -0.293∗∗
                             (0.145)       (0.235)      (0.291)     (0.060)      (0.101)     (0.142)
Doctorate                   0.545∗∗∗      0.520∗∗∗     0.485∗∗∗    0.108∗∗∗     0.109∗∗∗      0.068
                             (0.052)       (0.081)      (0.100)     (0.020)      (0.035)     (0.046)
Committee CollegeT ie         0.018         0.019         0.008       0.004       -0.007      -0.022
                             (0.044)       (0.068)      (0.092)     (0.016)      (0.027)     (0.041)
N onCommittee CollegeT ie      0.008        0.018        -0.012       0.019        0.026      0.007
                             (0.040)       (0.059)      (0.087)     (0.015)      (0.025)     (0.038)
Sample                          Full    FirstStage=1 Elected=1         Full   FirstStage=1 Elected=1
Observations                   4825          1738          700        4825         1738         700
R-Squared                       .512         .537          .608        .353         .379       .418

        Notes: Standard errors clustered by candidate in all regressions. All spec-
        ifications include department-year fixed effects. The dependent variable
        in columns 1 - 3 is log(1 + Hindex) while in columns 4 - 6 the depen-
        dent variable is HasHomeRun, an indicator variable denoting whether the
        candidate had at least one publication (100+ citations in English jour-
        nals) at the time of nomination. Columns 3 and 6 include only candi-
        dates elected to the CAS/CAE. N onCommitteeT ie denotes a hometown
        connection to a department fellow not on the standing committee. Dean
        denotes a candidate holding an academic position of dean or higher, and
        P oliticallyConnected denotes candidates with a government rank of vice-
        Tingju (i.e., vice-mayor) or higher. Committee CollegeT ie denotes a candi-
        date that attended the same undergraduate institution as a standing commit-
        tee member. N onCommittee CollegeT ie denotes a candidate with a college
        connection to a fellow not on the standing committee. HasHomerun is an
        indicator variable denoting whether a candidate has at least one publication
        with 100+ citations by the year of nomination. log(1 + Hindex), Doctorate,
        and log(Age) are self-explanatory. See the text for further details on variable
        construction.
        Significance: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                  39
             Figure 1: Hometown Ties and Candidate Election Rates over Time
          .3     .25
   Election Rate
.15       .2
          .1
                       01




                             03




                                   05




                                              07




                                                          09




                                                                     11




                                                                             13
            20




                            20




                                  20




                                             20




                                                        20




                                                                   20




                                                                           20
                                               Year

                                  CommitteeTie = 1
                                  NonCommitteeTie = 1 & CommitteeTie = 0
                                  NonCommitteeTie = 0 & CommitteeTie = 0




             Notes: Each line provides the fraction of nominees elected to the
             CAS/CAE, disaggregated based on whether they have ties to fel-
             lows in the department of their nomination. The connections that
             characterize each group are provided in the figure legend.




                                             40
                                Figure 2: Hometown Ties and Nominees’ H-Indexes
                           10
Median H−Index of Candidates
  2      4     6
               0     8




                                                0




                                                                               1
                                              =




                                                                             =
                                           ie




                                                                          ie
                                         eT




                                                                        eT
                                          e




                                                                         e
                                      itt




                                                                     itt
                                    m




                                                                    m
                                 om




                                                                om
                                C




                                                                C




                                                    All              FirstStage=1
                                                    Elected=1




                   Notes: Each bar provides the median H-Index for a group of
                   CAS/CAE candidates. The bars on the right are for the sample
                   of candidates with hometown ties to standing committee members.
                   The bars on the left are for candidates without such ties. The bars
                   in each grouping are for progressively more selective samples of can-
                   didates. The white bars are for the full set of nominees. The gray
                   bars are for nominees who progress past the first selection stage. The
                   black bars are for candidates who are elected as fellows.




                                                           41
                                             Figure 3: Hometown Ties and Nominees’ Homerun Publications
                                        .4
Fraction of Candidates with Homerun Paper
        .1         .2 0       .3




                                                      CommitteeTie = 0              CommitteeTie = 1

                                                                  All               FirstStage=1
                                                                  Elected=1




                           Notes: Each bar provides the fraction of nominees to the CAS/CAE
                           that had at least one publication with 100+ citations at the time of
                           nomination. The bars on the right are for the sample of candidates
                           with hometown ties to standing committee members. The bars on
                           the left are for candidates without such ties. The bars in each group-
                           ing are for progressively more selective samples of candidates. The
                           white bars are for the full set of nominees. The gray bars are for
                           nominees who progress past the first selection stage. The black bars
                           are for candidates who are elected as fellows.




                                                                         42
Figure 4: Election to the CAS/CAE and Appointment to Senior Administrative Posts
                   .04
     Appointed Dean or President
       .01      .020      .03




                                   −3   −2      −1          0            1            2     3
                                                  Years since nomination

                                             Years since elected
                                             Years since first (unsuccessful) nomination



                      Notes: Each line provides the fraction of individuals in each group
                      appointed as university dean or president around the years of nomi-
                      nation or appointment to the CAS/CAE. For both groups, t = 0 at
                      the relevant year of nomination.




                                                         43
                                 Figure 5: CAS/CAE Appointments and University Funding
                600
Total Grants (millions of RMB)
 300        400 200     500




                                  2                  4                       6             8
                                                         Number of Fellows



                   Notes: This graph provides a binned scatterplot relating the number
                   of CAS/CAE fellows at a university in a given year to its total grant
                   funding. The specification used to generate the scatterplot includes
                   fixed effects for university and year, and controls for the number of
                   researchers in each year. The sample includes all universities with
                   at least one fellow during the years 2001 - 2013, excluding 2003 and
                   2004 when no university-level data were available.




                                                             44
                          Table A1: Further Robustness Tests for Favoritism Results

                                                      (1)        (2)          (3)      (4)        (5)
              Dependent Variable                                          Elected
              CommitteeT ie                         0.052∗∗∗   0.052∗∗∗   0.061∗∗    0.094∗∗∗   0.057∗∗∗
                                                     (0.020)    (0.020)    (0.025)    (0.027)    (0.022)
              N onCommitteeT ie                       -0.001     0.001      -0.011     -0.003     0.001
                                                     (0.012)    (0.011)    (0.015)    (0.016)    (0.012)
              log(1 + HIndex)                       0.030∗∗∗   0.030∗∗∗   0.033∗∗∗   0.035∗∗∗   0.028∗∗∗
                                                     (0.005)    (0.005)    (0.009)    (0.009)    (0.006)
              Doctorate                                0.020     0.015      0.010      0.001      0.020
                                                     (0.013)    (0.013)    (0.019)    (0.011)    (0.013)
              Dean                                     0.008     0.006      0.023      0.005      0.008
                                                     (0.011)    (0.011)    (0.015)    (0.010)    (0.011)
              P oliticallyConnected                    0.033     0.033      0.051      0.033      0.033
                                                     (0.024)    (0.024)    (0.039)    (0.023)    (0.024)
              Committee CollegeT ie                    0.019     0.020      0.013      0.020      0.016
                                                     (0.014)    (0.014)    (0.018)    (0.014)    (0.015)
              N onCommittee CollegeT ie                0.009     0.010      0.013      0.011      0.003
                                                     (0.011)    (0.011)    (0.016)    (0.011)    (0.012)
              CommitteeT ie P lacebo                   0.004
                                                     (0.012)
              Committee EmployerT ie                                        0.028
                                                                           (0.022)
              N onCommittee EmployerT ie                                  -0.041∗∗
                                                                           (0.019)
              CommitteeT ie ∗ I(Y ear ≥ 2007)                                        -0.096∗∗
                                                                                      (0.039)
              N onCommitteeT ie ∗ I(Y ear ≥ 2007)                                      0.015
                                                                                      (0.022)
              log(1 + HIndex) ∗ I(Y ear ≥ 2007)                                        -0.005
                                                                                      (0.011)
              Cohort FEs                                         Yes
              Employer FEs                                                 Yes
              Sample                                  Full       Full      Full        Full
              Observations                           4825       4825       4825       4921       4265
              R-Squared                              .0335      .0357      .191       .0335      .0328

Notes: Standard errors clustered by candidate in all regressions. All specifications include department-year
fixed effects. The dependent variable in all columns is an indicator variable denoting whether candidate
i was elected to the CAS/CAE in year y. Column 2 includes fixed effects for 5 year age cohorts, while
column 3 includes fixed effects for a candidate’s employer. The sample in column 5 excludes CAS nominees
from 2013, to show robustness of our main results for the sample where data on first stage selection were
unavailable. CommitteeT ie is an indicator variable denoting that the candidate shared a hometown with a
standing committee member in the year of nomination. N onCommitteeT ie denotes a hometown connection
to a department fellow not on the standing committee. Dean denotes a candidate holding an academic posi-
tion of dean or higher, and P oliticallyConnected denotes candidates with a government rank of vice-Tingju
(i.e., vice-mayor) or higher. Committee CollegeT ie denotes a candidate that attended the same undergrad-
uate institution as a standing committee member. N onCommittee CollegeT ie denotes a candidate with a
college connection to a fellow not on the standing committee. CommitteeT ie P lacebo denotes a hometown
connection to a standing committee member not in the candidate’s department. Committee EmployerT ie
denotes a candidate who shares an employer with a standing committee member in his department of nom-
ination. N onCommittee EmployerT ie denotes a candidate who shares an employer with a department
fellow not on the standing committee. I(Y ear ≥ 2007) denotes observations from nomination years 2007
and later. log(1 + Hindex), Doctorate, and log(Age) are self-explanatory. See the text for further details
on variable construction.
Significance: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.
Appendix Table A2: Robustness to Differing Controls for Research
Quality

                           (1)           (2)     (3)       (4)        (5)
Dependent Variable                             Elected
CommitteeT ie            0.053∗∗∗   0.053∗∗∗   0.051∗∗   0.052∗∗∗   0.052∗∗∗
                          (0.020)    (0.020)   (0.020)    (0.020)    (0.020)
N onCommitteeT ie          -0.001     -0.000    0.001      0.000      0.001
                          (0.011)    (0.011)   (0.011)    (0.011)    (0.011)
log(1 + Citations)       0.012∗∗∗
                          (0.002)
log(1 + P ublications)              0.017∗∗∗
                                     (0.004)
log(1 + ChineseHIndex)                          -0.007
                                               (0.005)
P ublications/1000                                       0.428∗∗∗
                                                          (0.091)
H-Index Decile FEs                                                    Yes
Observations              4825       4825       4825       4825      4825
R-Squared                 .0331      .032       .0283     .0331      .0357

Notes: Standard errors clustered by candidate in all regressions. The
sample includes all candidates to the CAS and CAE during 2001-
2013, and all specifications include department-year fixed effects,
as well as all controls in column 2 of Table 2. Column 5 addi-
tionally includes H-Index decile fixed effects (though with a larger
fraction of the data for the bottom (H-Index=0) grouping). The
dependent variable in all columns is an indicator variable denot-
ing whether candidate i was elected to the CAS/CAE in year y.
CommitteeT ie is an indicator variable denoting that the candidate
shared a hometown with a standing committee member in the year of
nomination. N onCommitteeT ie denotes a hometown connection to
a department fellow not on the standing committee. P ublications,
ChineseHindex and Citations are self-explanatory. P ublications
are a candidate’s total year-end publications in the year of nomina-
tion; ChineseHindex and Citations use all citations to these articles
up to 2014. See the text for further details on variable construction.
Significance: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** signifi-
cant at 1%.




                                    46
           Appendix Table A3: Research Quality of Hometown-Connected versus Unconnected Can-
           didates, Different Measures of Quality

                                        (1)                  (2)                        (3)                    (4)
Dependent Variable           log(1 + Citations)   log(1 + P ublications)   log(1 + ChineseH Index)   P ublications/1000
CommitteeT ie                     -0.928∗∗∗             -0.508∗∗∗                    -0.127                -0.018∗
                                    (0.280)               (0.181)                   (0.136)                 (0.010)
N onCommitteeT ie                  0.544∗∗               0.327∗∗                      0.074                 0.016∗
                                    (0.212)               (0.131)                   (0.094)                 (0.009)
Dean                               0.579∗∗∗              0.517∗∗∗                   0.212∗∗                  0.011
                                    (0.203)               (0.127)                   (0.096)                 (0.008)
P oliticallyConnected                -0.117                -0.028                     0.059                  -0.008
                                    (0.406)               (0.261)                   (0.202)                 (0.016)
log(Age)                              0.096               0.827∗                   1.031∗∗∗                  0.043
                                    (0.708)               (0.429)                   (0.369)                 (0.027)
Doctorate                          1.014∗∗∗              0.668∗∗∗                  0.303∗∗∗                0.029∗∗∗
                                    (0.242)               (0.158)                   (0.105)                 (0.011)
Committee CollegeT ie                 0.059                 0.003                     0.086                  0.001
                                    (0.219)               (0.141)                   (0.097)                 (0.007)
N onCommittee CollegeT ie            -0.065                 0.001                     0.026                   0.003
                                    (0.213)               (0.130)                   (0.092)                 (0.008)
Observations                           700                   700                       700                     700
R-Squared                              .601                  .57                       .319                   .431

           Notes: Standard errors clustered by candidate in all regressions. All specifications in-
           clude department-year fixed effects. All specifications include only candidates elected
           to the CAS/CAE. CommitteeT ie is an indicator variable denoting that the candi-
           date shared a hometown with a standing committee member in the year of nomina-
           tion. N onCommitteeT ie denotes a hometown connection to a department fellow not
           on the standing committee. Dean denotes a candidate holding an academic position of
           dean or higher, and P oliticallyConnected denotes candidates with a government rank
           of vice-Tingju (i.e., vice-mayor) or higher. Committee CollegeT ie denotes a candidate
           that attended the same undergraduate institution as a standing committee member.
           N onCommittee CollegeT ie denotes a candidate with a college connection to a fellow not
           on the standing committee. ChineseHindex, Citations, P ublications, Doctorate, and
           Age are self-explanatory. P ublications are a candidate’s total year-end publications in the
           year of nomination; ChineseHindex and Citations use all citations to these articles up to
           2014. See the text for further details on variable construction.
           Significance: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                          47
Appendix Table A4: Hometown Ties and the Impact of CAS/CAE Membership on Senior
Administrative Appointments

                                          (1)          (2)         (3)     (4)       (5)
        Dependent Variable                               LeaderAppointment
        P ostElection                   0.012∗∗∗    0.015∗∗∗   0.017∗∗∗ 0.014∗∗∗   0.018∗∗
                                         (0.005)     (0.005)    (0.005)  (0.005)   (0.009)
        P ostElection ∗ CommitteeT ie                            -0.007
                                                                (0.008)
        Age                                         0.205∗∗∗   0.202∗∗∗ 0.185∗∗     -0.197
                                                     (0.071)    (0.071)  (0.072)   (0.497)
        AgeSquared                                  -0.034∗∗∗ -0.034∗∗∗ -0.030∗∗     0.042
                                                     (0.012)    (0.012)  (0.012)   (0.087)
        AgeCubed                                    0.002∗∗∗   0.002∗∗∗ 0.002∗∗     -0.003
                                                     (0.001)    (0.001)  (0.001)   (0.005)
        Candidate FEs                     Yes          Yes        Yes      Yes        Yes
        Year FEs                          Yes          Yes        Yes      Yes        Yes
        Observations                     11466        11376      11376    10831      4424
        R-Squared                        .0607        .0619       .062    .0663       .137

Notes: Standard errors clustered by candidate in all regressions. The dependent variable
in all specifications is LeaderAppointment, an indicator variable denoting whether an in-
dividual was appointed president or dean in a given year. The sample in columns 1 - 3
includes all elected fellows from our main analysis in Table 2, and includes administrative
appointments made during 1998 - 2015. Column 4 excludes election year observations to
address concerns that election year administrative appointments may cause election to the
CAS/CAE (i.e., reverse causation). Column 5 employs the sample used in Figure 4, lim-
iting observations to the [-3,+3] window around election. CommitteeT ie is an indicator
variable denoting that the candidate shared a hometown with a standing committee mem-
ber in the year of nomination. P ostElection is an indicator variable denoting membership
in the CAS/CAE (year of election is coded as P ostElection = 1). Age is divided by ten
to facilitate readability of coefficients.
Significance: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                   48
  Appendix Figure A1: Nominees’ Connections to Fellows by Age Cohort
          .4
Fraction of nominees
     .2   .1    .3




                       40   45    50        55       60        65           70      75
                                             Age Cohort

                                  CommitteeTie = 1
                                  NonCommitteeTie = 1
                                  CommitteeTie = 1 or NonCommitteeTie = 1




             Notes: Each line provides the fraction of nominees, by age cohort,
             with connections to CAS/CAE fellows in the department of their
             nomination. The type of connection (on standing committee; off
             standing committee; either) is provided in the figure legend We use
             5 year cohorts starting at the age of 40, and ending at 79, since
             very few candidates’ ages lie outside of this range (particularly at
             the upper end).




                                             49
