                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               THE ANATOMY OF SENTIMENT-DRIVEN FLUCTUATIONS

                                       Sushant Acharya
                                        Jess Benhabib
                                          Zhen Huo

                                      Working Paper 23136
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23136


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                         February 2017, Revised October 2018




The views expressed in this paper are entirely those of the authors. They do not necessarily
represent the views of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the Federal Reserve System, or
the National Bureau of Economic Research. The authors would like to thank our discussants
Ryan Chahrour and Tatsuro Senga for insightful comments. The authors are also grateful to
George Marios Angeletos, Keshav Dogra, Pierro Gottardi, Mildred Hager, Johannes Hörner,
Guillermo Ordoñez, Shu Lin Wee and Pierre-Olivier Weill for useful comments and discussions.
The authors would also like to thank seminar and conference participants at Yale Cowles
Summer Workshop 2017, New Advances on Informational Frictions in Business Cycles,
University of Lausanne, University of International Business and Economics, the 2018 ASSA
meetings in Philadelphia and the Minnesota-Chicago Accounting Theory Conference 2018.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Sushant Acharya, Jess Benhabib, and Zhen Huo. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Anatomy of Sentiment-Driven Fluctuations
Sushant Acharya, Jess Benhabib, and Zhen Huo
NBER Working Paper No. 23136
February 2017, Revised October 2018
JEL No. E20,E32,F44

                                         ABSTRACT

We show that sentiments - self-fulfilling changes in beliefs that are orthogonal to fundamentals -
can drive persistent aggregate fluctuations under rational expectations. Such fluctuations can
occur even in the absence of any exogenous aggregate fundamental shocks. In addition,
sentiments also alter the volatility and persistence of aggregate outcomes in response to
fundamental changes. We characterize conditions under which sentiments drive persistent
fluctuations and when they only affect aggregate outcomes contemporaneously. We also discuss
how these sentiments are related to noise shocks- driven fluctuations studied in the literature on
information frictions.

Sushant Acharya                                           Zhen Huo
Macroeconomic and Monetary Studies Function               Department of Economics
Federal Reserve Bank of New York                          Yale University
33 Liberty Street                                         New Haven, CT 06520
New York, NY 10045                                        zhen.huo@yale.edu
sushant.acharya@ny.frb.org

Jess Benhabib
Department of Economics
New York University
19 West 4th Street, 6th Floor
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
jess.benhabib@nyu.edu
1       Introduction
Can a change in sentiments induce persistent macroeconomic fluctuations? Even though this
is a very attractive proposition and has captured the minds of economists at least since Keynes
and Pigou, this idea has been very hard to formalize under rational expectations. We revisit
this question in this paper.
    We explore this question in the context of a beauty contest model that has a unique Ratio-
nal Expectations Equilibrium (REE) under full information. A key feature of the information
structure is that agents receive noisy endogenous signals about the aggregate action in the
economy which are potentially confounded by noise. Agents must parse this information in
order to determine their own appropriate action. This reliance of each agents’ action on the ag-
gregate action can induce complementarities even if the primitives of the model do not feature
any coordination motive. This induced strategic complementarity allows for persistent fluctu-
ations driven by self-fulfilling changes in beliefs. We refer to these self-confirming changes in
beliefs as sentiments, and aggregate fluctuations driven by these changes as sentiment-driven
fluctuations. These sentiment-driven fluctuations are independent of changes in fundamen-
tals such as technology, preferences, or government policies. In fact, they can even exist in
an economy without any change in these aggregate fundamentals and this fact is common
knowledge.
    Importantly, our definition of sentiments is fundamentally different than the way the term
“sentiments” is used in the fast growing theoretical and empirical literature which studies
expectations-driven fluctuations.1 This literature has largely modeled sentiments as an ex-
ogenous stochastic process which alter the agents’ first-order beliefs or higher-order beliefs
about fundamentals. As a result, these exogenous changes in sentiments can affect aggregate
outcomes. In contrast, in the context of our model, changing sentiments are self-fulfilling
changes in beliefs which arise endogenously - their evolution is disciplined by rational expec-
tations. While our notion of sentiments is similar to Benhabib et al. (2015), it is important
to point out that while Benhabib et al. (2015) provide an illustration of how sentiments can
generate stochastic self-fulfilling rational expectations equilibria, they only consider a static
environment and do not study whether sentiments can generate persistent fluctuations. In
this paper, we instead show that sentiments can generate persistent aggregate fluctuations - a
common finding in the empirical literature (see Benhabib and Spiegel (2017), Lagerborg et al.
(2018) among others).
    Our first contribution is to provide general conditions under which a change in sentiments
    1
    See for example Angeletos and La’O (2010, 2013), Lorenzoni (2009), Barsky and Sims (2012), Acharya
(2013), Nimark (2014), Rondina and Walker (2014), Angeletos et al. (2014), Huo and Takayama (2015) among
many others.



                                                   1
can have prolonged effects on aggregate outcomes, and when it can only have short-lived
effects. Our analysis shows that if agents observe both (i) the history of realizations of past
aggregate actions with a one period lag and (ii) the history of realizations of past aggregate
fundamentals with a one-period lag, then sentiments cannot drive persistent fluctuations. In
this case, sentiments can at most affect contemporaneous aggregate outcomes. More generally,
our analysis shows that if agents observe both (i) the history of realizations of past aggregate
actions with a k-period lag and (ii) the history of realizations of past aggregate fundamentals
with a k-period lag, then sentiment-driven fluctuations can be described by a MA(k − 1)
process. This characterization does not depend on the private information agents might
possess. This result uncovers a key property of standard models with information frictions. A
commonly made assumption in this literature to ensure tractability is to assume that agents
observe past aggregate variables without any noise, either immediately or with a finite lag.2
While this literature has not focused on endogenous sentiments as a driver of business cycle
fluctuations, our results highlight that this assumption eliminates the possibility of persistent
sentiment-driven fluctuations to begin with.
    Thus, our analysis isolates a necessary condition for sentiments to have long-lasting fluc-
tuations - one or both of the two conditions mentioned above must not hold. Next, we show
that our model is capable of generating sentiment-driven fluctuations which strongly resemble
the response which has been isolated in the empirical literature. In doing so, we also provide
an analytically tractable and convenient way to relax the two conditions mentioned above,
allowing our model to generate persistent sentiment-driven fluctuations.
    Importantly, we show that sentiments can drive fluctuations in the economy even absent
any fluctuations in aggregate fundamentals, i.e. sentiment-driven fluctuations can manifest
even if aggregate fundamentals are common knowledge. This is an important distinction
relative to the large literature mentioned above which models sentiments as an exogenous
stochastic process. In these models, agents are unable to perfectly separate the noise or
changes in sentiments from the change in aggregate fundamentals. Thus, agents mis-attribute
changes in sentiments to be changes in fundamentals and thus behave as if fundamentals had
changed. In our model, this is not the case and sentiments can drive persistent fluctuations
even if agents perfectly know the realization of the aggregate fundamental.
    While the presence of stochastic aggregate fundamentals is not necessary for sentiments
to drive persistent fluctuations, the presence of sentiments can alter how the economy re-
acts to changes in aggregate fundamentals. As we show in Section 5, in an equilibrium in
   2
     The standard practice in this literature has been to either assume that (1) agents observe past realizations
after a k-period lag (see for example Hellwig (2002)), or (2) the model solution algorithm involves truncation
the history of realizations that agents pay attention to a finite number of periods (see for example Lorenzoni
(2009)).



                                                       2
which sentiments drive persistent fluctuations, sentiments can imbue additional persistence
to fluctuations driven by changes in aggregate fundamentals. In particular, we show that
in the presence of sentiments, the same change in aggregate fundamentals can generate a
hump-shaped persistent response in aggregate outcomes which would have generated a more
transitory and monotonic response is sentiments were absent. Sentiments alter the economy’s
response to aggregate fundamentals because they play the role of endogenous noise shocks
and can hamper the ability of agents to infer fundamentals by observing endogenous signals.
Thus, sentiments can also serve as amplification and propagation mechanisms with regard to
fundamental shocks.

Related Literature As previously mentioned, our notion of sentiments is closely related to
Benhabib et al. (2015). However, while they focus on a static environment, our paper focuses
on the dynamic response of the economy to changes in sentiments. Another closely related
paper is Chahrour and Gaballo (2016), where the sentiment is interpreted as the limit of a
fundamental equilibrium where the variance of the fundamental shock goes to zero. Their
work is also in the context of a static setting. Unlike them, we argue that sentiments can
drive persistent fluctuations even when aggregate fundamentals are known to be fixed. In
particular, we show that the existence of sentiment driven fluctuations does not hinge on the
existence of aggregate fundamental shock in the first place.
    In the literature of dispersed information, sentiments, confidence, or animal spirits are
often modeled as exogenous shocks to agents’ expectations. For example, common noise in
signals observed by agents serve as exogenous shocks to agents’ first-order beliefs about the
fundamental, such as in Angeletos and La’O (2010) and Barsky and Sims (2012) among many
others. The sentiment shock in Angeletos and La’O (2013) instead alters agents’ higher-order
beliefs about the fundamental. Different from previous studies, our sentiments are not imposed
on to the model by adding noise to the information set in an ad-hoc way. Rather, they are
generated endogenously, i.e., they are disciplined by the rational expectations equilibrium.
However, as previously mentioned, our endogenous sentiments can play a role similar to an
exogenous common noise.
    The sentiment equilibria that we obtain are also closely related to correlated equilibria of
Aumann (1974), as further developed by Maskin and Tirole (1987).3,4 In Maskin and Tirole
(1987), there exists a unique fundamental equilibrium and correlated equilibria exist only if
there are Giffen goods. In our model, all goods can be normal and demand functions downward
   3
     See also Peck and Shell (1991), example 5.7.
   4
     Aumann et al. (1988) provide an excellent overview of the relation between correlated and sunspot
equilibria under asymmetric information with a set of examples in market games that in the limit converge
to a competitive equilibrium, and also illustrate that under asymmetric information there can be correlated
equilibria even though the fundamental equilibrium is unique.


                                                    3
sloping, as in Benhabib et al. (2013, 2015). In a linear Gaussian economy, Bergemann and
Morris (2013) and Chahrour and Ulbricht (2017) characterize the set of correlated equilibria
and construct the corresponding information process (without sentiment shocks) that supports
a particular allocation in the set. Our exercise instead starts from a particular information
structure, and explore the set of equilibria that can be supported by the given primitives.
    Since sentiment-driven fluctuations, in our paper, take the form of self-confirming beliefs
about aggregate outcomes, one could interpret these as sunspots. However, it is important
to realize that the continuum of sentiment equilibria that we characterized are not simple
sunspot randomizations over multiple fundamental equilibria as in many macroeconomic mod-
els. There exists a significant literature showing that sunspot equilibria can occur in models
where the fundamental equilibrium is unique. The seminal paper of Cass and Shell (1983)
demonstrates this in a two period model with a unique fundamental equilibrium by intro-
ducing securities traded in the first period, with returns that are sunspot contingent and can
induce wealth effects. Peck and Shell (1991) obtain a similar result by postulating imper-
fect competition and non-Walrasian trades in the post-sunspot market that also gives rise to
wealth effects.5 By contrast Mas-Colell (1992) and Gottardi and Kajii (1999) explicitly rule
out securities with payoffs contingent on sunspot realizations, but trading is possible due to
heterogeneous endowments and preferences in the first period. Thus according to Gottardi
and Kajii (1999) what accounts for the existence of sunspot equilibria is “potential multiplic-
ity” in future spot markets that results from trades that take place in the first period.6 It
is clear that these are not the forces generating multiplicity of equilibria in our economy, as
agents do not trade assets and do not make any inter-temporal decisions. Instead, the multiple
equilibria in our model arise due to signal extraction problems in a setting with endogenous
information sources.


2       Environment and Equilibrium Concept
We consider a standard beauty-contest game such as in Morris and Shin (2002). Our economy
consists of a continuum of agents indexed by i ∈ [0, 1]. Agent i wants to choose an action
ai,t every period which depends on their idiosyncratic fundamental shock zi,t , an aggregate
fundamental shock θt and the economy wide aggregate action at . Assume that the optimal
    5
      See also Spear (1989) for an overlapping generations model with two islands where prices in one island
act as sunspots for the other.
    6
      Mas-Colell (1992) and Gottardi and Kajii (1999) give examples of such economies characterized by en-
dowments, preferences and security payoffs. Gottardi and Kajii (1999) also provide a systematic method to
generically construct such economies with sunspot equilibria.




                                                     4
action by agent i is given by:

                           ai,t = αE[zi,t | Ii,t ] + ϕE[θt | Ii,t ] + γE[at | Ii,t ],                    (1)

where                                                   Z
                                                 at =       ai,t

is defined as the aggregate action and Ii,t denotes the information set of agent i at date t. α
and ϕ can take any value on the real line but we impose that the γ < 1. This assumption
ensures that there is a unique full-information fundamental equilibrium.7 The processes for
idiosyncratic and aggregate fundamental are given by:
                                                             ∞
                                                             X
                                      zi,t = h(L)ui,t =             hk ui,t−k                            (2)
                                                             k=0
                                                            ∞
                                                            X
                                       θt = g(L)vt =               gk vt−k ,                             (3)
                                                            k=0


where ui,t and vt are sequences of Gaussian white noise innovations to the idiosyncratic
and aggregate fundamental respectively.8 ui,t is a vector of idiosyncratic shocks to agents’
                                                      R
fundamental and satisfies an adding-up constraint i ui,t = 0 at each date t. In contrast, vt
is common across all agents. Furthermore, we assume that h(L) and g(L) are potentially
infinite-order one-sided polynomials in positive powers of the lag operator L.9 We do not
impose any restrictions on h(L) and g(L) except square-summability which implies that zi,t
and θt are linear stationary processes. Also, note that for the rest of the paper, bold-face
letters indicate vectors and matrices while non bold variables indicate scalars.
    While we do not provide explicit micro-foundations for the best response (1), it is easy to
do so. In fact, many commonly studied economic settings admit best responses of this form.
For example, Angeletos and La’O (2010) derive (1) as the optimal best response of firms in
their islands economy. In the context of their economy, ai,t corresponds to the quantity that
firm i chooses to produce while at denotes the aggregate quantity produced in the economy.
The same best-response can also be found in the New Keynesian literature which studies
optimal pricing decisions. For example, in the context of Woodford (2003) ai,t refers to the
price set by firm i and at refers to the aggregate price. Moreover, Morris and Shin (2002) and
   7
      γ is a measure of the strength of strategic complementarities. If γ ≥ 1, this complementarity is strong
enough to generate multiple equilibria. See for example Cooper and John (1988). Since we restrict γ < 1, our
results do not depend on the strength of the strategic complementarity.
    8
      Even though the idiosyncratic and aggregate fundamentals are univariate stochastic processes, we allow
them to be driven by a vector of innovations.
    9
      As is convention we define the lag operator L as Lxt := xt−1 , L−1 xt := xt+1 and Ln xt = xt−n .



                                                        5
Angeletos and Pavan (2007) also study environments where the best response of individual
agents takes the same form as (1).

Information Set of Agents We impose very little structure on the information sets that
each agent possesses. We conceptualize this as agents observing signals which provide them
with (potentially noisy) information about fundamentals. Agents in the model have access
to both exogenous and endogenous sources of information. Exogenous sources of information
are those that are not affected by interactions among agents. These are modeled as a set of
exogenous signals yi,t which take the form:

                                       yi,t = P(L)νt + Q(L)ζi,t                                        (4)
            h        i0           h         i0
where νt = vt ηt and ζi,t = ui,t ςi,t . ηt represents the vector of noise which is common
across agents. In the literature, ηt is often interpreted as noise shocks, animal spirits or
confidence shocks.10 Thus, the vector νt contains both innovations to fundamentals vt and
also the noise shocks ηt . In a similar fashion ςi,t denotes the vector of idiosyncratic noise which
may confound an agent’s ability to observe fundamentals. The distinction between ηt and ςi,t
is that while ηt is common across all agents, ςi,t varies by agent. We collect both idiosyncratic
fundamentals ui,t and idiosyncratic noise ςi,t into the vector ζi,t . P(L) and Q(L) can be
any square summable, one sided polynomials in the lag operator L.11 This structure is very
general and encompasses commonly used assumptions in models with information frictions.
For example, consider a situation in which each agent observes a public and a private signal
about the aggregate fundamental,

                                                1
                                               yi,t = vt + ηt ,
                                                2
                                               yi,t = vt + ςi,t ,

which is the similar to the specification in Morris and Shin (2002). In terms of equation (4),
this information structure can be represented as:
                                              "    #" # " #
                                               1 1 vt     0
                                     yi,t   =          +      ςi,t
                                               1 0 ηt     1
                                              | {z }     |{z}
                                                  P(L)              Q(L)


   In contrast to exogenous sources of information, endogenous sources are affected by inter-
  10
    See for example Lorenzoni (2009), Angeletos and La’O (2013), among many others.
  11
    In other words, the signals can only depend on past and current changes (not future) in the fundamental
shocks.


                                                         6
actions among agents. In other words, the informativeness of such signals is determined in
equilibrium. We model such sources of information as the set of signals xi,t :

                                  xi,t = A(L)at + B(L)νt + C(L)ζi,t ,                                      (5)

The key distinction between xi,t and yi,t is that while yi,t provides information about objects
which aren’t determined as part of equilibrium, xi,t provides an agent with information about
objects which are shaped by equilibrium. The availability of such information to agents in an
economy is not hard to motivate. For example, firms, in finalizing their production decisions
use information about expected aggregate demand, which is readily available from surveys of
consumer expectations. Alternatively, one could think of such signals as market research by
each firm regarding the demand for its own product.
    The set of signals xi,t are linear combinations of current and past innovations and aggregate
action. As before, the only restriction we impose is that A(L), B(L) and C(L) be square-
summable and one sided polynomials in the lag operator L. If A(L) 6= 0, then agents ob-
serve signals which provide information directly about equilibrium actions and not just about
changes in exogenous fundamentals. The amount of information xi,t provides to the agent
depends on the equilibrium. To see this clearly, consider the case in which B(L) = C(L) = 0
and A(L) = 1, i.e. xi,t = at . Suppose that in equilibrium, at responds one-for-one to changes
in the aggregate fundamental θt . Then, observing xi,t provides agent i enough information
to infer the realization of θt perfectly. In contrast, if in equilibrium at does not respond
to changes in the aggregate fundamental θt , then observing xi,t does not provide the agent
with any information about the realization of θt . Thus, the informativeness of signals xi,t is
determined as part of equilibrium rather than being exogenously specified.12
    This specification of endogenous information is general enough to encompass assumptions
that are made commonly in the information frictions literature. For example, suppose agents
observe a public and a private signal about current and past aggregate action at and at−1 :

                                                x1i,t = at + ηt ,
                                                x2i,t = at−1 + ui,t .

These signals can be written compactly in terms of equation (5) as:
                                              " #       " #       " #
                                               1         1         0
                                     xi,t   =      at +      ηt +      ui,t
                                               L         0         1
                                              |{z}      |{z}      |{z}
                                              A(L)        B(L)          C(L)

  12
       Notice that setting A(L) = 0 shuts off this property of endogenous informativeness of the signal.


                                                         7
It is important to notice that if A(L) = 0, (5) encompasses the noisy public signal in (4). In
principle, the vector of signals xi,t can contain both endogenous and exogenous signals. Thus,
even though it is not necessary, we define (4) separately from (5) because of the notational
convenience. In summary, we can express the information set of any agent i at date t as:13

                                     Ii,t = V yit ∨ V xti ∨ M
                                                        
                                                                                                           (6)

V (yit ) denotes the smallest sub-space spanned by (at date t) by the past and current realiza-
tions of exogenous information yit . V (xti ) is defined analogously but for endogenous sources of
information xti . Finally, since we are going to concentrate only on rational expectations equi-
libria (REE), all agents have knowledge of the cross-equation restrictions imposed by REE.
This is denoted by M and implies that the agent knows that the dynamics of the economy are
determined by equations (1) - (3).14

Equilibria In this paper, we focus on linear rational expectations equilibrium which we
classify into two broad classes: fundamental equilibrium and sentiment equilibrium. Funda-
mental equilibrium refer to those equilibria in which the aggregate action at is driven solely
by exogenous aggregate shocks and is formalized in the definition below.

Definition 1 (Fundamental Equilibrium). In any fundamental equilibrium, the aggregate ac-
tion is driven purely by changes in the aggregate fundamental innovations vt and common
noise ηt in the exogenous information:

                                                at = ψ(L)νt                                                (7)

where ψ(L) is a vector of square-summable rational polynomial in positive powers of the lag
operator L. Furthermore, at is consistent with the agents’ optimal choice given the information
set Ii,t in (6)
                               Z n                                                  o
                 at = ψ(L)νt =    αE[zi,t | Ii,t ] + ϕE[θt | Ii,t ] + γE[at | Ii,t ] di                    (8)

   In a fundamental equilibrium, aggregate fluctuations are driven solely by changes in exoge-
nous fundamentals of the economy.15 For example, these exogenous shocks can be aggregate
  13
      X ∨ Y denotes the smallest closed subspace which contains the subspaces X and Y.
  14
      In the paper we assume that agents cannot observe the current fundamentals perfectly when making their
decisions. Although this is not key, we will generally assume that the information available to agents will not
be sufficient to infer the aggregate and idiosyncratic fundamentals perfectly.
   15
      All fundamental equilibria lie in the Hilbert space H(v, η) (the space spanned by square-summable linear
combinations of vt and η t ).



                                                      8
TFP or preference shocks. Furthermore, we allow fundamental equilibria to include those in
which agents may not directly observe the fundamentals θt . In such a setting, aggregate noise
in signals can also result in aggregate fluctuations. Thus, this class of equilibria encompasses
the standard full-information equilibrium as well as those in economies with information fric-
tions. In the latter, the definition is general enough to include both equilibria with exogenous
information and endogenous information.
Definition 2 (Sentiment Equilibria). Consider any payoff irrelevant white noise process {t }
where {t } ⊥ {νt , ζi,t }. A sentiments equilibrium is one in which the aggregate action is driven
by changes in fundamental innovations vt , exogenous noise ηt and also by changes in payoff
irrelevant sentiments t :
                                       at = ψ(L)νt + φ(L)t                                     (9)

where t ∼ N (0, 1). ψ(L) and φ(L) are square-summable rational polynomials in positive
powers of the lag operator L and additionally, φ(L) has no roots inside the unit circle.16
Moreover, at is consistent with the agents’ optimal choice
                                   Z n                                                  o
            at = ψ(L)νt + φ(L)t =    αE[zi,t | Ii,t ] + ϕE[θt | Ii,t ] + γE[at | Ii,t ] di                  (10)

    The key difference between the two classes is that in addition to fluctuations driven by
forces in a fundamental equilibrium, the sentiments equilibria allows for aggregate fluctuations
to also arise due to changes in a payoff irrelevant factor t .17 Notice that t is completely
unrelated to changes in fundamentals νt and exogenous noise ηt . Strictly speaking, sentiment
equilibria are correlated equilibria.
    In order to explain what sentiments are, it is useful to explain what they are not. As
explained above, it may be the case that agents only observe aggregate fundamentals vt with
measurement error or noise ηt and this noise itself may drive aggregate fluctuations. According
to our definition, this is not an example of sentiments-driven fluctuations. Sentiments t , as we
have defined them, must be orthogonal to the vector νt , which includes ηt - they are not part of
an agent’s exogenous sources of information yi,t . As another example, consider a game which
features multiple equilibria in which all agents observe a public randomization device, like a
sunspot. Such an environment might permit an equilibrium in which agents use this device
to coordinate their actions, and thus the aggregate outcome responds to the coordination
   16
      The assumption that φ(L) has no roots inside the unit circle is the same as requiring that φ(L) is invertible
only in positive powers of L. Proposition 4 in Appendix B.4 shows that this is without loss of generality -
if we consider an equilibrium in which at = ψ(L)νt + φ(L)t in which φ(L) is not invertible, then we can
always construct another observationally equivalent equilibrium in which at = ψ(L)νt + φ(L) e    t where φ(L) is
                                                                                                            e
invertible and satisfies φ(L)φ(L−1 ) = φ(L)
                                         e φ(Le −1 ).
   17
      All sentiment equilibria lie in the Hilbert space H(v, η, ) (the space spanned by square-summable linear
combinations of vt , η t and t ).

                                                        9
device. Again according to our definition this is not a sentiments-driven equilibrium since our
environment features a unique full-information equilibrium and in addition our model does
not necessarily feature a coordination motive. Furthermore, unlike the realization of such a
public coordination device, t is not part of the exogenous information set: therefore it is not
observed directly; nor is it an exogenously given feature of the environment.
      Given that exogenous sources of information yi,t provide no information about t , it follows
that agents can only get information about t through the endogenous sources of information
xi,t . Moreover, even within xi,t , the only way t affects an agent’s information set is through
the aggregate action at . This is in contrast to ηt which can appear independently of at in
xi,t . Thus, unlike ηt , t is an endogenous source of aggregate fluctuations. The next section
explains why such sentiment-driven fluctuations are possible even under rational expectations.
In particular, our main focus in this paper is to study whether sentiments can drive persistent
fluctuations.


3     Forces at Play
Now that we have defined the environment, we begin presenting a simple example to uncover
which ingredients are essential in generating sentiment-driven fluctuations and which ingredi-
ents are not. Before exploring how and when sentiments can generate persistent fluctuations,
we first show how sentiment-driven fluctuations can arise in the first place. For this purpose,
we can ignore the time dimension of the environment we just specified. Recall that the best
response of an agent i was given by (1) which is reproduced below for convenience

                          ai = αE[zi | Ii ] + ϕE[θ | Ii ] + γE[a | Ii ]

As mentioned earlier, the assumption that γ < 1 ensures that the strength of strategic com-
plementarity in decisions is not strong enough to generate multiple equilibria as in Cooper and
John (1988). For this example, further assume that the aggregate fundamental θ is constant
at θ = 0 all the time and that this fact is common knowledge. Further, assume that the
idiosyncratic fundamental zi is i.i.d. across agents. In this case, the best response function
simplifies to:
                                   ai = αE[zi | Ii ] + γE[a | Ii ]                         (11)
             R
where a = ai di denotes the aggregate or average action. We assume that each agent i
observes a noisy signal endogenous signal:

                                            xi = a + zi


                                                 10
The signal xi provides agent i with some information about the aggregate action a but is
contaminated by the idiosyncratic fundamental zi . The important thing about the signal xi
is not the exact form it takes,18 but rather the fact that it provides agents with information
about the endogenous variable at . In this setting, it is straightforward to see that the optimal
action of agent i must take the form:

                                           ai = $xi = $a + $zi                                          (12)

where the second equality follows from the definition of xi . Importantly, the constant $ is
determined as part of equilibrium. Aggregating the decisions of all agents:
                                       Z                     Z
                                  a=       ai di = $a + $        zi di = $a                             (13)

Equation (13) implies that in equilibrium, it must be the case that a(1 − $) = 0. Notice
that if $ 6= 1, then the only equilibrium is one in which a = 0 for all t. This is the unique
fundamental equilibrium. But if $ = 1, then the equation above is satisfied for any level of a!
   Of course $ is determined as part of equilibrium and thus, it remains to show whether in
equilibrium whether $ equals 1 or not. In order to understand what influences the equilibrium
magnitude of $, we conjecture that in equilibrium, the aggregate action can be described by:

                                                   a = φ                                               (14)

with the understanding that φ is also determined as part of equilibrium. We refer to  as
the “sentiment”.  ∼ N (0, 1) is independent of idiosyncratic and aggregate fundamentals.
Plugging (14) into the expression for xi yields:

                                                xi = zi + φ                                            (15)

The signal xi provides agent i information about their idiosyncratic fundamental zi but is
potentially contaminated by the sentiment . Importantly, the precision of this signal depends
on φ - with φ = 0, the signal is fully informative about zi ; if φ 6= 0, xi is a noisy signal of zi .

Verifying the Fundamental Equilibrium The fundamental equilibrium is one in which
φ = 0, i.e. the aggregate outcome is a = 0 and is unaffected by sentiments . With φ = 0,
the signal xi in (15) perfectly informs agent i about the actual realization of her idiosyncratic
fundamental, i.e, E[zi | xi ] = zi . Consequently, using (11) agent i’s optimal action is given
  18
       For example, it is straightforward to incorporate additional exogenous noise into this signal.



                                                        11
by:19                                                            Z               Z
                   ai = αE[zi | Ii ] = αxi         ⇒        a=       ai di = α       zi di = 0

Also, from (12) $ = α 6= 1, confirming that φ = 0 is indeed an equilibrium.

Can $ = 1 in equilibrium? We just saw that with φ = 0, $ 6= 1. Thus, if there exist
equilibria with $ = 1, it must be with φ 6= 0. Then, unlike in the fundamental equilibrium,
(15) does not have infinite precision,20 and the signal does not allow an agent to perfectly
infer the realization of zi :

                                       σz2                                        φ2
                  E [zi | xi ] =            xi     and        E [a | xi ] =            xi
                                   σz2 + φ2                                   σz2 + φ2

Plugging these expressions into (11) and comparing with (12), it follows that:

                                            σz2        φ2
                                      $=α 2       +γ 2                                                    (16)
                                         σz + φ 2   σz + φ 2

Then, for $ = 1, it must be the case that:
                                                       r
                                                           α−1
                                            |φ| = σz                                                      (17)
                                                           1−γ

Thus, in addition to the fundamental equilibrium, the endogenous signal also supports an
additional sentiment equilibrium in which sentiments can affect aggregate outcomes a even
though it is common knowledge that the aggregate fundamental θ = 0!21

Sentiment-driven Fluctuations and Correlated Forecast Errors Agents observe cor-
related signals in the sentiment equilibrium (φ 6= 0): agent i and j 6= i observe correlated
signals since both xi and xj depend on a. In equilibrium, cov(xi , xj ) = φ2 for i 6= j. Conse-
quently, agents form correlated forecast errors about the aggregate action and can be written
as:22
                   h                                   i  σ 2 φ 2
                 E (E [a | x̃i ] − a)(E [a | x̃j ] − a) = 2 z 2 > 0 for i 6= j
                                                          σz + φ
  19
      Agents know that a = 0 in this equilibrium and so E[a | Ii ] = 0.
  20
      In fact the signal-to-noise ratio, σz2 /φ2 is decreasing in φ.
   21
      Such an equilibrium exists as long as α > 1. If α ≤ 1, then the sentiment equilibrium does not exist.
In this sense, endogenous information is a necessary but not sufficient condition for sentiment equilibria to
exist. Furthermore, it is worth noting that α > 1 is not a particularly binding condition. It happens to be the
restriction under which sentiment equilibria can exist in this simple example. In the subsequent sections, we
also focus on a case in which we study the interaction of sentiment-driven and fundamental-driven fluctuations.
In that setting, we can set α = 0 an sentiment equilibria still exist.
   22                                                                    φσz2          φ2
      The forecast error made by agent i can be written as Ei a − a = σ2 +φ   2  + σ 2 +φ2 zi
                                                                        z            z




                                                       12
Since agents make correlated forecasts (and forecast errors) of a and zi , their choices of ai are
also correlated in the sentiments equilibrium. Thus, even upon aggregating across all agents,
this correlated component does not vanish. In contrast, in the fundamental equilibrium where
φ = 0, agents receive effectively uncorrelated signals, make uncorrelated forecasts (and forecast
errors) and as a result when averaged across all agents, the forecast errors vanish.
    Importantly the magnitude of γ < 1 (strength of the strategic complementarity) does not
play any role in generating the sentiment equilibrium and can exist even if γ = 0 (no comple-
mentarity) or γ < 0 (strategic substitutability). Endogenous information induces complemen-
tarities even when the primitive economy may not feature any. To see this, notice that the
equilibrium covariance between ai,t and at can be expressed as: E[ai , a] = σz2 (α − 1) / (1 − γ)
which is positive in a sentiments equilibrium even if γ = 0.23 In contrast, in the fundamental
equilibrium, this covariance is 0.

Adding aggregate fundamentals to the mix The example above showed that sentiments
can affect outcomes independently of aggregate fundamentals. More generally, not only can
sentiments affect aggregate outcomes, they can also affect how the economy responds to
changes in aggregate fundamentals as the following example shows. For this demonstration it
is convenient to assume that zi,t = 0 for all i, t. The best response function can be specialized
to:
                                  ai = ϕE[θ | Ii ] + γE[a | Ii ]                             (18)

Further assume that the endogenous signal now takes the form:

                                               xi = a + ζi                                                  (19)

where ζi is private noise.24 Again, in this setting, agent i’s optimal decision must take the
form ai = $xi . In equilibrium, now the aggregate outcome can respond to both aggregate
fundamentals θ and sentiments . As before, we start by conjecturing that in equilibrium, the
aggregate action can be written as:
                                         a = ψθ + φ
   23
     This is true if α > 1 which is also the condition for the sentiment equilibrium to exist.
   24
     Notice that in this example, while agents cannot directly observe any signal about θ, we still refer to
it as fundamental because it shows up explicitly in the best response (18).  on the other hand does not
directly enter the best response or the signal. In Section 4 and 5 with persistent sentiment-driven fluctuations,
we allow more general signal structures where agents can directly observe past realizations of the aggregate
fundamental or noisy signal about the current realization.




                                                       13
where ψ and φ are determined as part of equilibrium. Plugging in the equilibrium a in to the
expression for the signal xi yields:

                                       xi = ψθ + φ + ζi

The expression above makes it clear that the informativeness of xi about θ depends on the
                                                             ψ2 σ2
equilibrium φ and ψ - the signal to noise ratio is given by φ2 +σθ2 which is increasing in ψ and
                                                                  ζ
decreasing in φ. Appendix A shows that there is a continuum of equilibria in which the pair
(ψ, φ) satisfy:
                                                 2
                                                       φ2
                                
                                           ϕ
                                  ψ−                + 2 = r2
                                      2 (1 − γ)        σθ
where r is a constant which depends on the parameters of the model and is defined in Appendix
A. Noticeably, one of the equilibria is the fundamental equilibrium in which φ = 0 and all
the aggregate fluctuations are accounted for by aggregate fundamentals. However, all other
equilibria are sentiment equilibria in which φ 6= 0 and thus sentiments also cause aggregate
fluctuations. Importantly, the expression above makes clear that in an equilibrium where |φ|
is large, the effect of changes in aggregate fluctuations is smaller. In other words, if agents in
the economy believe that sentiments are important drivers of fluctuations, then the economy’s
response to changes in aggregate fundamentals can be diminished!


4    Beyond Static Sentiment Equilibrium
While the simple examples above abstracted from the time dimension, they illustrated that
sentiments could result in aggregate fluctuations contemporaneously even if aggregate funda-
mentals were unchanged. Moreover, the presence of sentiments could even alter the strength
of the contemporaneous effect of changes in aggregate fundamentals on aggregate outcomes.
One way to interpret the examples above is that we have effectively restricted the sentiments
to only affect aggregate outcomes contemporaneously (in terms of the notation from Section
2, we have restricted φ(L) = φ0 ).
     Next, we do not impose this restriction and explore whether the same forces can generate
persistent sentiment-driven aggregate fluctuations, i.e. we study equilibria in which φ(L) =
P∞          τ
   τ =0 φτ L where at least one φτ 6= 0 for τ > 0. In other words, we now explore whether
current changes in sentiments t can affect aggregate outcomes in the future. We begin by
establishing some general properties of sentiment equilibria when moving to this dynamic
setting. To proceed, it is useful to define two assumptions on the information set

Assumption 1. The past aggregate action is observable with a k-period lag, i.e, at−k ∈ Ii,t .


                                               14
Assumption 2. The past exogenous aggregate shock with a k-period lag can be perfectly in-
ferred from exogenous information, i.e, V(yit ) ⊇ V(ν t−k ).

   If Assumption 1 is satisfied, at any date t each agent i observes the aggregate outcomes
up till date t − k, i.e. each agent knows the sequence at−k . Similarly, Assumption 2 ensures
that at any date t, each agent knows the realization of the innovation to the aggregate fun-
damentals (ν) up till date t − k, i.e at date t each agent knows the sequence ν t−k .25 With
these assumptions in place, we are ready to characterize equilibria in which sentiments can
have persistent effects.

Proposition 1. If Assumptions 1 and 2 are satisfied, then in any sentiment equilibria φ(L) =
P∞         τ
  τ =0 φτ L , it must be the case that φτ = 0 for all τ ≥ k. In other words, a change in
sentiments t at date t cannot affect outcomes after date t + k.

Proof. See Appendix B.1 for the proof.26

    Proposition 1 states that if agents observe past aggregate action and fundamental perfectly
with a finite lag k, the effects of a change in sentiments dies out after a finite number of
periods. In particular, dynamics of the aggregate outcome driven by changes in sentiments
can be described by a moving average process where the maximum lag length is k − 1.
    A few remarks are in order at this point. First, the statement of Proposition 1 holds
under very general conditions as we do not impose any restrictions on the number of shocks,
the number of signals or private information that each agent might possess.27 Second, even
though Assumptions 1-2 imply that agents can observe past aggregate actions and fundamen-
tals, there is no supposition that they observe idiosyncratic fundamentals perfectly. In fact,
agents can still have persistent forecast errors about their individual fundamentals. How-
ever, Proposition 1 makes clear that these forecast errors about the idiosyncratic fundamental
cannot translate into persistent aggregate fluctuations.

Corollary 1. If Assumptions 1 and 2 hold for k = 1, then in any sentiment equilibria φ(L)
can only be a constant.

    A direct corollary of Proposition 1 is that if at any date t, each agent observes the realiza-
tion of the aggregate fundamental θt−1 and at−1 , then the only sentiment equilibrium is the
  25
      Notice that for Assumption 2 to be satisfied, it is not necessary for agents to observe νt−k directly. For
example, if the aggregate fundamental follows an AR(1) process, θt = ρθt−1 + vt , observing past fundamentals
{θt−1 } allows agents to infer past shocks {v t−1 } perfectly.
   26
      Note that the proof of this proposition relies on the result from Definition 2 and Appendix B.4 that we
can focus on invertible φ(L).
   27
      We also do not impose restrictions on whether the signal process is invertible or non-invertible.



                                                      15
one in which changes in sentiments at date t can only affect aggregate outcomes contempora-
neously, i.e., ∂at+s /∂t = 0 for all s > 0. This result is independent of any private information
that agents may possess or other signals that they might observe. Corollary 1 also implies that
the static examples in the previous section can equally be interpreted in terms of a dynamic
environment in which each agent observes (or can infer) θt−1 and at−1 at date t. The upshot of
Proposition 1 and in particular Corollary 1 is that in order for sentiment driven fluctuations to
display persistence, Assumption 1 and/or Assumption 2 do not hold for k = 1, i.e. at−1 6∈ Ii,t
and/or V(yit ) 6⊇ V(ν t−1 ). This powerful characterization provides a helpful insight to the large
literature which studies sentiment-driven equilibria such as Benhabib et al. (2013, 2015) and
Chahrour and Gaballo (2016) among others. While this literature has largely concentrated
on studying i.i.d fluctuations driven by sentiments, Proposition 1 and Corollary 1 serve as a
guide by uncovering the minimum ingredients required to construct and study equilibria in
which sentiments can drive persistent fluctuations. The results above also provide additional
insight about the large literature which studies models with information frictions. While this
literature uses models which are very similar to the setting studied in this paper, their focus
has largely been on fundamental equilibrium. In order to avoid the complexity of dealing with
the problem referred to as forecasting the forecasts of others, Townsend (1983), researchers in
this literature have commonly made the assumption that the realizations of aggregate fun-
damentals and aggregate outcomes in the past are common knowledge. Proposition 1 shows
that these assumptions on the information set of agents rules out the possibility of persistent
sentiment-driven fluctuations.
    Finally, it is important to note that Proposition 1 is not about the existence of sentiment
equilibrium; the statement of Proposition 1 is conditional on a sentiment equilibrium existing.
This raises the question whether there exist any equilibria in which sentiments can drive
persistent and predictable aggregate fluctuations even if we relax these assumptions. We show
that this is in fact the case by presenting two examples of such equilibria when Assumptions
1 and 2 only hold for k > 1. These examples show that the set of such sentiment equilibria is
not empty.

Example 1: at−1 is not observed at date t. We start with the dynamic counterparts
to the example studied in Section 3 where the aggregate fundamental was fixed at θt = 0 for
all time and this is common knowledge. The best-response of agent i at any date t can be
written as:
                              ai,t = αE[zi,t | Ii,t ] + γE[at | Ii,t ]

which is identical to equation (11) except that we have appended time-subscripts. It follows
from Proposition 1 that if agents observed at−1 at date t, then the only sentiment equilibrium


                                                16
takes the form:
                                                  at = φt

where φ is defined in equation (17). Now relax this assumption and assume that at date t,
agents cannot observe the realization of at−1 but can observe the aggregate outcome with two
lags. This can be formalized as each agent i receiving two signals at each date:

                              x1i,t = at + zi,t      and        x2i,t = at−2 .

where the first signal is a private signal as in Section 3 except that we have appended time-
subscripts. Applying the statement of Proposition 1, a sentiment equilibria in which φ(L)
is a MA(1) can exist. In fact, Appendix C.1 shows that there exist a sentiment equilibrium
in which the aggregate outcome at any date t is affected by contemporaneous changes in
sentiments t and by yesterday’s changes in sentiments t−1 .

                                           at = φ0 t + φ1 t−1 .

The expressions describing φ0 and φ1 are contained in Appendix C.1. This example shows
that as long as Proposition 1 does not hold for k = 1, there exist sentiment equilibria in which
sentiments can drive persistent aggregate fluctuations albeit in a limited fashion.

Example 2: θt−1 is not observed at date t For this example we consider the other exam-
ple in Section 3 where aggregate fundamentals were stochastic but idiosyncratic fundamentals
were fixed at zi,t = for all i, t. Recall that the best-response function at date t in this case can
be written as:
                                       ai,t = ϕEit [θt ] + γEit [at ]

which is identical to equation (18) except for the additional time-subscripts. It is clear from
Proposition 1 that if agents observed θt−1 and at−1 at date t, sentiments can only affect
contemporaneous aggregate outcomes. We relax this by assuming that agents only observe
the realization of the aggregate fundamental with a lag of two periods. The signal structure
observed by agent i in this case can be written as:

                     x1i,t = at + ζi,t ,    x2i,t = at−1       and         1
                                                                          yi,t = θt−2

where as in Section 3 ζi,t denotes noise in the private signal x1i,t . The signal x2i,t implies that
agents at date t perfectly observe the aggregate outcome at date t − 1. While the first two
signals are endogenous, the third is exogenous and implies that agents only observe the real-
ization of the aggregate fundamental with a lag of two periods. In this setting, Appendix C.2

                                                    17
confirms that there exist a continuum of equilibria in which current and yesterday’s changes
in sentiments can affect aggregate outcomes alongside change in aggregate fundamentals. In
fact, the evolution of the aggregate outcome at can be expressed as:

                                    at = φ0 t + φ1 t−1 + ψ0 vt + ψ1 vt−1 ,

where vt denotes the date t innovation to the aggregate fundamental θ. Appendix C.2 shows
that in equilibrium, the coefficients satisfy: φ20 + ψ02 + φ21 + ψ 2 = α−1+ϕψ
                                                                         1−γ
                                                                             0
                                                                               , φ0 φ1 = −ψ0 ψ1 with
 φ1
 φ0
         < 1.


5         Persistent Sentiment-Driven Fluctuations
While from a theoretical point of view, we have proved the existence of persistent sentiment,
this is less than satisfying for applied macroeconomic work which has found that sentiments
can have long-lasting effects demonstrated by slowly decaying impulse responses. When As-
sumption 1 and 2 are satisfied, the perfect observation of the aggregate variables is only
delayed by a finite number of periods, and this type of truncation forces the forecast errors
to jump discretely to zero after a finite horizon. Consequently, this type of truncation forces
the impulse response of aggregate outcomes to a sentiment shock to die out abruptly after a
finite number of periods.
    A simple strategy to “smooth” out the decay of forecast errors is to assume that agents
observe past realizations of aggregate outcomes and aggregate fundamentals with additional
noise. The presence of such noise would prevent agents from perfectly inferring the exact
realizations of aggregate productivity. However, such a strategy would lead to an environment
in which agents observe fewer signals than shocks. While this in itself is not a problem, this
does severely restrict analytical tractability in characterizing equilibrium since it involves
dynamic signal extraction in a “non-square system” in a setting with endogenous signals.28
Consequently, the lack of analytical tractability makes it very difficult to establish the existence
of sentiment equilibrium and to characterize its properties in these general settings in which
the forecast errors would decay smoothly.
    Next, we adopt a different strategy which allow us to relax Assumptions 1 and 2 so as to
construct equilibria in which the aggregate outcome displays a long lasting impulse response
to sentiment shocks which does not die out abruptly after a finite number of periods. It is
attractive to study such equilibria as they are easier to map to empirical studies. The following
brief digression describes this approach.
    28
         See Nimark (2017) and Huo and Takayama (2017) for more discussion.



                                                      18
A Brief Digression Suppose a variable yt follows an invertible stationary process

                                                yt = φ(L)et ,

and a signal xt is observed every period which takes the form:

                                            xt = (L − λ)yt                                                (20)

for λ ∈ (−1, 1). Notice that for small enough λ (|λ| < 1), the signal xt puts very little weight
on the current realization of yt and thus the agent is unable to infer yt perfectly by observing
the sequence of signals xt .29 In fact, Appendix D shows that for k ≥ 0, the forecast error
about yt−k at date t can be written as:
                                                                      ∞
                                                                      X
                            yt−k − E[yt−k |xt ] = λk φ(λ)(1 − λ2 )          λs et−s
                                                                      s=0


In other words the forecast error decays gradually at a rate which is proportional to λ and
only converges to zero asymptotically, i.e. the agent only learns about the actual realization
of yt−k asymptotically. Thus, a signal of the form (20) is a convenient way to model a smooth
decay of the forecast error and avoids the undesirable discreteness with which forecasts error
vanish as in the previous section. Compared to the strategy of adding additional observation
noise, this alternative signal structure allows us to generate smoothly decaying forecast errors
and also affords analytical tractability.30 Armed with this new modeling device, we revisit the
now familiar examples from Section 4.


5.1     Persistent Sentiment-Driven Fluctuations
In this subsection, we consider the environment where it is common knowledge that aggregate
fundamentals are unchanged. In order to construct a sentiment equilibrium in which a change
in sentiments can result in persistent effects on the aggregate outcome, we return to the
setting of Example 1 from Section 4 but now with the new signal structure. Recall that the
   29
      A higher λ increases implies a larger weight on the current yt and increases the informativeness of the
signal about yt . Actually, when λ is larger than 1, the signal reveals the underlying shock perfectly.
   30
      This strategy shares some similarity to the confounding process in Rondina and Walker (2014). In
Rondina and Walker (2014), the variable yt itself is assumed to follow a non-invertible process. Instead, we
introduce the non-invertible component in the signal which prevents agents from inferring the underlying shock
et perfectly after finite time. To be clear, while the modeling strategy looks superficially similar to Rondina
and Walker (2014), they do not study self-fulfilling sentiment fluctuations or how the presence of sentiments
can affect the dynamic response of the economy to aggregate fundamentals, which we show next.




                                                      19
best response in this case was given by (11) (reproduced here for convenience):

                                          ai,t = αEi,t [zi,t ] + γEi,t [at ]

As in Example 1 in Section 4, agents observe two signals.

                               x1i,t = at + zi,t         and          x2i,t = (L − λ)at

with |λ| < 1. The first signal is the same as before but now instead of observing at−2 , each agent
now observes the signal of the form we discussed above. As before, the unique fundamental
equilibrium of this economy, in the absence of fluctuations in the aggregate fundamental is
simply given by at = 0 for all t. Now we move to the sentiment equilibrium which is defined
formally in the following proposition:

Proposition 2. For α > 1, there exists a unique sentiment equilibrium in which the dynamics
of the aggregate outcome can be described by:
                                                    r
                                                      α−1 1
                                                         2
                                      at = σ(1 − λ )               t                                         (21)
                                                      1 − γ 1 − λL

Proof. See Appendix B.2 for the proof.

    In contrast to Example 1 in Section 4, now the aggregate dynamics can be described by
an AR(1) and thus, do not die out abruptly as in that section. Notice that the persistence
of the sentiment equilibrium, λ is the same parameter as in the second signal. As was the
case in Section 4, observing at−k at date t generated a sentiment equilibrium with MA(k)
dynamics. Similarly, here, the dynamics inherit the properties of the signal that allows us
to violate Assumption 1 for any finite k. This equilibrium construction has the potential to
rationalize the empirical evidence on the persistence effects of sentiments on macroeconomic
outcomes.31
    In the sentiment equilibrium, the volatility of the aggregate outcome is given by
                                                                               
                                                     2            2       α−1
                                        V(at ) = σ (1 − λ )
                                                                          1−γ
   31
      Also, notice that agents’ forecast errors also die out gradually in this case rather than abruptly after
                                                                                                          R a finite
number of periods. Denote the sequence of the impulse responses of the average forecast error at − Eit [at ] to
a sentiment shock as {fk }∞                                     2 k
                             k=0 . Then, we have fk ∝ (1 − λ) λ . If λ is close to zero, agents know little about
current aggregate action, but they can quickly learn the past sentiment shocks as time goes. Therefore, f0 is
relatively large, but fk dies out fast. If λ is close to one, agents know more about the current sentiment shock
t , but they learn little about the current shock t in the future. This makes the forecast error more persistent.
The aggregate action inherits the property of the forecast error, and the persistence of the aggregate action is
tied with λ.


                                                             20
This expression reveals the key property of the sentiment equilibrium - the persistence and
volatility of the aggregate outcomes are tightly linked through equilibrium. The expression
above shows that if the sentiment equilibrium displays a very persistent response to changes
in sentiments (high λ), then the unconditional variance of the aggregate outcome is lower.32
    Finally, it is important to understand that this response of aggregate outcomes to change
in sentiments is fundamentally different from Angeletos and La’O (2013) where the aggregate
fluctuation is driven by exogenous aggregate noise shock to higher-order beliefs. Instead,
sentiments driven fluctuations in our model arise due to self-fulfilling beliefs and hence can be
thought of as arising “endogenously” as part of equilibrium.

Learnability In this environment with one fundamental equilibrium at = 0 and one sen-
timent equilibrium, it is natural to ask which of these equilibria (if any) are stable under
learning. In a similar spirit as in Benhabib et al. (2015), we show next that the sentiment
equilibrium is a stable one under learning. Suppose agents’ perceived law of motion of the ag-
                                                c
gregate action follows an AR(1) process at = 1−λL t , where c = 0 reduces to the fundamental
equilibrium. The actual law of motion will follow
                                                            
                                                      2
                                     c σ 2 α (1 − λ2 ) + γc2      1
                                at =                      2          t .
                                         2      2
                                        c + σ (1 − λ )  2      1 − λL

                                       2
                                            
                         c σ 2 α(1−λ2 ) +γc2
The mapping T (c) ≡                         has two fixed points corresponding to the fundamental
                         (c2 +σ2 (1−λ2 )2 )
and the sentiment equilibrium respectively. It turns out that as long as the sentiment equilib-
rium exists,33 then the fundamental equilibrium is unstable while the sentiment equilibrium is
stable. By the E-stability principle (Evans and Honkapohja, 2012), this implies the sentiment
equilibrium is stable under adaptive learning.


5.2     Sentiments and Fundamental Shocks
Sentiment equilibria can feature very different responses of the economy to changes in aggre-
gate fundamentals relative to the fundamental equilibrium. To highlight how the presence
of sentiment-driven fluctuations can alter both the volatility and persistence of fundamental-
driven fluctuations we return to the environment of Example 2 from Section 4. Recall that
  32
      Notice that if λ = 0, then the second signals is simply x2i,t = at−1 and Proposition 1 dictates that the
only sentiment equilibrium can be one in which the aggregate outcome only responds to contemporaneous
changes in sentiments.. The expression for V(at ) shows that this case observes the lowest persistence but the
the highest unconditional volatility of the aggregate outcome.
   33
      Recall that this requires that α > 1 in this example.




                                                     21
the best-response was given by (18) (reproduced here for convenience):

                                              ai,t = ϕEit [θt ] + γEit [at ],

but we now change the signal structure - agents are assumed to observe three signals:

                      x1i,t = at + ζi,t ,        x2i,t = at−1       and          1
                                                                                yi,t = (L − λ)θt

Notice again that the first two signals are the same as before but we have changed the third
signal. The third signal is an imperfect observation about the aggregate fundamental shock,
which relaxes Assumption 2 in order to generate sentiment equilibrium which displays persis-
tence.
    We start by first characterizing the fundamental equilibrium. In the fundamental equilib-
rium, the aggregate action is by definition only driven by the fundamental shock, at = ψ(L)vt .
Agents observe two public signals about at , which implies that the fundamental shock vt can
be perfectly inferred. As a result, there is no information frictions in this economy, and the
the unique fundamental equilibrium features an aggregate action which tracks the aggregate
fundamental θt perfectly:
                                        at = θt = g(L)vt .

   However, the belief among agents that sentiments also affect aggregate outcomes changes
things dramatically. In the presence of shocks to sentiment, agents are no longer able to use the
public signals to infer the aggregate shocks. Instead, all agents have to solve a dynamic signal
extraction problem. The proposition below presents the properties of sentiment equilibria:

Proposition 3. There exits a continuum of sentiment equilibria at = φ(L)t + ψ(L)vt :

                                                          Φ(κ)L
                                            φ(L) = κ +           ,                                 (22)
                                                          1 − λL
                                                      ϕ          Ψ(κ)
                                        ψ(L) =           g(L) −        ,                           (23)
                                                     1−γ        1 − λL

indexed by κ ∈ R+ where κ satisfies:
                                  2
                     ϕ 1 − λ2 g(λ) κ2 > 4 σ 2 + (1 − γ)κ2 λ2 σ 2 + (1 − γ)κ2 ,
                                                                          
                                                                                                   (24)

and Φ(κ) and Ψ(κ) are constants depend on κ.34

Proof. See Appendix B.3 for the proof.
  34
       The analytic form of Φ(κ) and Ψ(κ) are quite involved and are shown in Appendix.


                                                            22
    Proposition 3 shows that there are a continuum of sentiment equilibria in which fluctua-
tions driven by shocks to sentiments can be described by an ARMA(1,1) process. Thus, much
like in Example 1 above , changes in sentiments can generate persistent fluctuations. However,
unlike in the previous example, the existence of a sentiment equilibrium itself depends on the
properties of the aggregate fundamental θt . To see this, note that if the aggregate fundamen-
tal shock is shut-off, i.e. g(L) = 0, then no κ can be supported, which is also implied by
Proposition 1.
    Moreover, the properties of sentiment-driven fluctuations are both affected by (and also
affect) fluctuations driven by changes in fundamentals. Without shocks to sentiments, we
simply have ψ(L) = g(L), i.e. the aggregate action tracks the aggregate fundamental θt .
However, in the presence of shocks to sentiments, agents are now forced to infer the the
change in sentiments and the change in fundamentals from the observed signals. Since agents
are no longer able to infer the true realization of θt by observing the signals, the presence
of sentiments affects how the economy responds to fundamental shocks. Here sentiments
behave as “endogenously” arising noise which prevents agents from perfectly inferring the
aggregate fundamentals by observing the endogenous signals. This change in response of the
                                                                              Ψ(κ)
economy to fundamental shocks is reflected in the additional AR(1) term 1−λL       . Particularly,
this new component could generate additional persistence of to the dynamics of fluctuations
driven by fundamental shocks, a salient feature of most macroeconomic variables. In an
extreme case, even when the fundamental follows an i.i.d process, i.e. g(L) = 1, the response
to the fundamental shock in the sentiment equilibria can still be persistent even though in
the fundamental equilibrium, a change in aggregate fundamental would only affect aggregate
outcomes contemporaneously.
    To further appreciate how the presence of sentiments can alter the dynamic response of
the economy, we present the following numerical example. We assume that the fundamental
process follows an AR(1) process: θt = ρθt−1 +vt .35 We set ρ = 0.9, λ = 0.7, γ = 0.1, ϕ = 1−γ,
and σ = 0.2. As was mentioned earlier there are a continuum of sentiment equilibria indexed
by κ which are consistent with this parameterization. Denote the set of κ which satisfies (24)
as [κ, κ]. Then, the two panels of Figure 1 show how Φ(κ) and Ψ(κ) (defined in (22) and
(23)) vary with κ ∈ [κ, κ]. As can be seen from the left panel, while Φ(κ) is a function, the
part associated with the response of the economy to fundamental shocks, Ψ(κ) is a set-valued
map. The solid section of the curve corresponds to the case where ψ(L) is invertible, and the
dashed line corresponds to the case where ψ(L) is non-invertible.
    To highlight how the presence of sentiments can affect the response of the economy to
fundamental shocks, we choose two typical equilibria from the set described above. In partic-
  35                                1
       This implies that g(L) =   1−ρL .




                                               23
                      Figure 1: Coefficients of the Equilibrium Process

ular, we pick two values of κ which lie in the interval [κ, κ]. We will refer to the equilibrium
corresponding to the lower of these two κ’s as the low-κ equilibrium and the one associated
with the higher value of κ as the large-κ equilibrium. The corresponding Φ(κ) and Ψ(κ) are
the dots in Figure 1. Next, we describe how the response of the economy in the two equilibria
to fundamental and sentiment shocks can differ dramatically across equilibria.
    The left panel shows the impulse response to the sentiment shock and the fundamental
shock in the small-κ equilibrium are shown in the left panel of Figure 2. The right panel shows
the impulse responses in the high-κ equilibrium. In the small-κ equilibrium, the response of
the economy to changes in sentiments is less volatile than in the high-κ equilibrium (the blue
solid lines in the two panels). Consequently, in the low-κ equilibrium, the aggregate outcome is
mostly driven by changes in fundamentals. Since in this equilibrium, fundamentals account for
the bulk of aggregate fluctuations, agents by observing aggregate outcomes can learn relatively
a lot more about the realizations of the fundamental shock and as a result, the response to
the fundamental shock is monotonic and closer to that in the fundamental equilibrium.
    However, when κ is large, the sentiment part φ(L)t is more volatile and accounts for
a larger fraction of aggregate fluctuations. This makes it more difficult for agents to infer
information about the fundamental shock since most variations in aggregate outcomes are now
driven by changes in sentiments. This results in a slower rate at which agents learn about the
actual realizations of aggregate fundamental shocks. Consequently, when a fundamental shock
actually hits the economy, agents are slow to realize this and this generates a hump-shaped
rather than a monotonic response to the fundamental shock.
    The hump-shaped response is an empirical regularity emphasized in the DSGE literature
(see Christiano et al. (2005) and Smets and Wouters (2007) for example) in the context of many
macroeconomic data series. One potential way to generate such a response is to model the

                                              24
presence of dispersed information. Since higher-order expectations are more anchored by the
prior, they can explain the presence of additional inertia in an economy’s response to shocks
(See for example, Woodford (2002) and Angeletos and Huo (2018)). This paper presents
another logically distinct way which could explain the presence of this additional inertia. In
our model environment, the information is complete in the fundamental equilibrium and so
there is no more dispersed information after agents observe aggregate outcomes. However, the
introduction of the sentiment shock makes the information incomplete, and agents have to
rely on Bayesian learning to infer the shocks and others’ action. Therefore, for a fixed κ, each
individual behaves as if they face an exogenous signal process and their action is a weighted
average of fist-order and higher order beliefs about the fundamental as in Woodford (2002).
However, unlike Woodford (2002), the range of κ and the structure and informativeness of
signals in our model is endogenously determined as part of the equilibrium.

Relation with “noise shocks” The effect of sentiment shocks in our model resembles
that of exogenous noise shocks in the dispersed information model such as Angeletos and
La’O (2010). The presence of such noise in these models prevents agents from inferring the
realizations of aggregate fundamentals and thus, alters the economy’s response to changes
in aggregate fundamentals. For example, in Angeletos and La’O (2010), the response to
the exogenous common noise shock follows an AR(1) process and the response to the TFP
shock follows an ARMA(2,1) process, which is almost identical to our model dynamics. The
small/large κ sentiment equilibrium corresponds to the case in Angeletos and La’O (2010)
where the variance of the common noise is relatively small/large.
    Despite these apparent similarities, the environment studied in models such as Angeletos
and La’O (2010) and our model are very different. Unlike in their setting, the sentient performs
the role of a common noise term but crucially in endogenous in the sense that it is disciplined
by equilibrium. More broadly, the sentiment equilibrium may be viewed as a particular micro-
foundation for these exogenous noise shocks that drive aggregate outcomes in the dispersed
information literature.
    From an applied perspective, this raises an important question as to whether one can dis-
tinguish between sentiment-driven or noise-driven fluctuations. Since our equilibria featuring
sentiment-driven fluctuations are correlated equilibira, it follows directly from the results in
Bergemann and Morris (2013) that one can find an exogenous information structure which
can rationalize the strategies as a Bayesian-Nash equilibrium. In this sense, it is possible to
find some specification of exogenous noise shocks which would have identical aggregate dy-
namics as a sentiment equilibirum. However, the opposite need not be true since equilibrium
disciplines sentiment-driven fluctuations but noise shocks are exogenously specified.
    Finally, providing a technical distinction between our model structure with that of Rond-

                                              25
                  Figure 2: Impulse Response in the Sentiment Equilibrium

    0.8                                            0.8

    0.7                                            0.7

    0.6                                            0.6

    0.5                                            0.5

    0.4                                            0.4

    0.3                                            0.3

    0.2                                            0.2

    0.1                                            0.1

      0                                             0
          0   5    10     15    20     25     30         0   5   10    15    20     25    30




ina and Walker (2014) is useful. The information structure in our model is similar to Rondina
and Walker (2014), in the sense that there is a non-invertible component that prevents infor-
mation from being fully revealed. However, there are notable differences between our model
and theirs. First, unlike in their setup, in our model, the fundamental that drives the economy
is always assumed to be invertible. In contrast we choose to model the the signal observed by
agents as a weighted average of current and past fundamentals in such a way that the signal
is non-invertible rather than the fundamental being non-invertible. Second, in Rondina and
Walker (2014), because of the non-invertible fundamental, the response to the fundamental
shock oscillates around its perfect information benchmark. In our model, due to the addi-
tional sentiment shock, the response to the fundamental shock is monotonic or hump-shaped,
which is closer to the identified impulse response in the literature. Third, in the absence of
shocks to sentiments, the fundamental equilibrium in our model is the same as the perfect in-
formation benchmark. In contrast, Rondina and Walker (2014) feature imperfect information
about the shocks to aggregate fundamentals even in the fundamental equilibrium. Fourth and
most importantly, Rondina and Walker (2014) do not explore the possibility of a sentiment
equilibrium.


6    Conclusion
The objective of this paper was to establish whether endogenously arising sentiments could
drive persistent aggregate fluctuations in the context of rational expectations equilibria. Within
the class of the commonly used beauty contest game, we provided a thorough characterization
of stationary linear rational expectations equilibria and showed that there exist a multiplicity


                                               26
of equilibria in which sentiments can drive aggregate fluctuations. Furthermore, we identified
necessary conditions under which these sentiments equilibria result in persistent aggregate
fluctuations, and these conditions do not depend on the private information agents might
possess. This characterization serves as an guide for a growing literature in the field of
macroeconomics that is trying to theoretically and quantitatively evaluate the importance of
sentiments or correlated equilibria in trying to understand aggregate fluctuations.
    While we focused on static beauty contest games in this paper,36 the same notion of senti-
ment equilibrium can be easily extended to environments in which agents’ decision is dynamic
(it depends on the expectations of fundamentals and aggregate outcomes in the future) as
in Allen et al. (2006), Nimark (2017), Angeletos and Huo (2018). Another interesting direc-
tion for future research is to explore the properties of the sentiment equilibrium when agents
acquire information endogenously (Benhabib et al., 2016). We believe these are potentially
fruitful paths to move forward.


References
Acharya, S. (2013): “Dispersed Beliefs and Aggregate Demand Management,” Tech. rep.,
 University of Maryland mimeo.

Allen, F., S. Morris, and H. S. Shin (2006): “Beauty contests and iterated expectations
 in asset markets,” The Review of Financial Studies, 19, 719–752.

Angeletos, G.-M., F. Collard, and H. Dellas (2014): “Quantifying Confidence,”
 NBER Working Papers 20807, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Angeletos, G.-M. and Z. Huo (2018): “Myopia and Anchoring,” Tech. rep., National
 Bureau of Economic Research.

Angeletos, G.-M. and J. La’O (2010): “Noisy Business Cycles,” in NBER Macroeco-
 nomics Annual 2009, Volume 24, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

——— (2013): “Sentiments,” Econometrica, 81, 739–779.

Angeletos, G.-M. and A. Pavan (2007): “Efficient Use of Information and Social Value
 of Information,” Econometrica, 75, 1103–1142.

Aumann, R. J. (1974): “Subjectivity and Correlation in Randomized Strategies,” Journal
 of Mathemaical Economics, 67–96.
  36
     By static, we mean that the agents best response function at any date t only depends on fundamentals
and aggregate actions in that period. All the dynamics arise due to the information set.

                                                   27
Aumann, R. J., J. Peck, and K. Shell (1988): “Asymmetric Information and Sunspot
 Equilibria: A Family of Simple Examples,” Tech. rep., Center for Analytic Economics,
 Cornell University.

Barsky, R. B. and E. R. Sims (2012): “Information, Animal Spirits, and the Meaning of
 Innovations in Consumer Confidence,” American Economic Review, 102, 1343–77.

Benhabib, J., X. Liu, and P. Wang (2016): “Endogenous information acquisition and
 countercyclical uncertainty,” Journal of Economic Theory, 165, 601–642.

Benhabib, J. and M. M. Spiegel (2017): “Sentiments and economic activity: Evidence
 from US states,” The Economic Journal.

Benhabib, J., P. Wang, and Y. Wen (2013): “Uncertainty and Sentiment-Driven Equi-
 libria,” Working Paper 18878, National Bureau of Economic Research.

——— (2015): “Sentiments and Aggregate Demand Fluctuations,” Econometrica, 83, 549–
 585.

Bergemann, D. and S. Morris (2013): “Robust Predictions in Games With Incomplete
 Information,” Econometrica, 81, 1251–1308.

Cass, D. and K. Shell (1983): “Do Sunspots Matter?” Journal of Political Economy, 91,
 193–227.

Chahrour, R. and G. Gaballo (2016): “Learning from Prices: Amplification and Busi-
 ness Fluctuations,” Tech. rep.

Chahrour, R. and R. Ulbricht (2017): “Information-driven Business Cycles: A Primal
 Approach,” .

Christiano, L., M. Eichenbaum, and C. Evans (2005): “Nominal Rigidities and the
 Dynamic Effects of a Shock to Monetary Policy,” Journal of Political Economy, 113, 1–45.

Cooper, R. and A. John (1988): “Coordinating Coordination Failures in Keynesian Mod-
 els,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 103, 441–463.

Evans, G. W. and S. Honkapohja (2012): Learning and expectations in macroeconomics,
 Princeton University Press.

Gottardi, P. and A. Kajii (1999): “The Structure of Sunspot Equilibria: The Role of
 Multiplicity,” The Review of Economic Studies, 66, 713–732.


                                           28
Hellwig, C. (2002): “Public Announcements, Adjustment Delays, and the Business Cycle
 (November 2002),” UCLA Economics Online Papers 208, UCLA Department of Economics.

Huo, Z. and N. Takayama (2015): “Higher order beliefs, confidence, and business cycles,”
 Tech. rep., University of Minnesota working paper.

——— (2017): “Rational Expectations Models with Higher Order Beliefs,” Manuscript, Yale
 University.

Lagerborg, A., E. Pappa, and M. Ravn (2018): “Sentimental Business Cycles,”
  Manuscript, European University Institute.

Lorenzoni, G. (2009): “A Theory of Demand Shocks,” American Economic Review, 99,
 2050–84.

Mas-Colell, A. (1992): “Three observations on sunspots and asset redundancy,” .

Maskin, E. and J. Tirole (1987): “Correlated equilibria and sunspots,” Journal of Eco-
 nomic Theory, 43, 364–373.

Morris, S. and H. S. Shin (2002): “Social Value of Public Information,” American Eco-
 nomic Review, 92, 1521–1534.

Nimark, K. (2017): “Dynamic Higher Order Expectations,” Working Paper.

Nimark, K. P. (2014): “Man-Bites-Dog Business Cycles,” American Economic Review, 104,
  2320–67.

Peck, J. and K. Shell (1991): “Market Uncertainty: Correlated and Sunspot Equilibria
 in Imperfectly Competitive Economies,” The Review of Economic Studies, 58, 1011–1029.

Rondina, G. and T. B. Walker (2014): “Information Equilibria in Dynamic Economies
 with Dispersed Information,” Working Paper.

Smets, F. and R. Wouters (2007): “Shocks and Frictions in US Business Cycles: a
 Bayesian DSGE Approach,” American Economic Review, 97, 586–606.

Spear, S. E. (1989): “Are Sunspots Necessary?” Journal of Political Economy, 97, 965–973.

Townsend, R. M. (1983): “Forecasting the Forecast of Others,” Journal of Political Econ-
 omy, 91, 546–588.




                                           29
Woodford, M. (2002): “Imperfect Common Knowledge and the Effects of Monetary Policy,”
 in Knowledge, Information, and Expectations in Modern Macroeconomics: In Honour of
 Edmund S. Phelps, ed. by P. Aghion, R. Frydman, J. Stiglitz, and M.Woodford, Princeton
 University Press.

——— (2003): Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy, Princeton
 University Press, Princeton, NJ.




                                          30
Appendix

A         Static case with agg. fundamentals and sentiments
Agent i observes the signal:
                                                                   xi = ψθ + φ + ζi

It follows that:

                                                     ψσθ2                                                          φ
                          E [θ | xi ] =                         xi        and           E [ | xi ] =                        xi
                                             ψ 2 σθ2 + φ2 + σζ2                                         ψ 2 σθ2   + φ2 + σζ2

allora:
                                                                                            ψ 2 σθ2 + φ2
                                          Ei a = ψE [θ | xi ] + φE [ | xi ] =                             xi
                                                                                        ψ 2 σθ2 + φ2 + σζ2
Using this in 18 yields:
                                             γψ 2 σθ2 + γφ2 + ϕψσθ2
                                                          ai =      xi
                                                ψ 2 σθ2 + φ2 + σζ2
                                                           R
Aggregating individual decisions and using the fact that xi di = a, we get:

                                                                        γψ 2 σθ2 + γφ2 + ϕψσθ2
                                                          Z
                                                     a=       ai di =                          a
                                                                           ψ 2 σθ2 + φ2 + σζ2

which requires that:
                                                                               2
                                                                                        φ2
                                                          
                                                                       ϕ
                                                              ψ−                    +       = r2
                                                                   2 (1 − γ)            σθ2
            r
                                       σζ2
                                            
                 1          ϕ2
where r =       1−γ       4(1−γ)   −   σθ2
                                                 . The existence of sentiment equilibria requires that r ≥ 0 which is guaranteed
if the exogenous signal noise variance σζ2 is small enough. Importantly, sentiment equilibrium exist even when
σζ2 = 0.



B         Proof of Propositions
B.1       Proof of Proposition 1
Consider an impulse response of the signals to an t shock, where 0 = 1, and t = 0 for t 6= 0. Note that
                                     P∞
for the sentiment process φ(L) = t=0 φt Lt , φt is the same as the response of at at time t. To show that
         Pk
φ(L) = t=0 Lt φt Lt , it is sufficient to show that the impulse response of at is zero from period k.
     By Proposition 4, we only need to consider the case where φ(L) is invertible. If Assumption 1 and 2 are
satisfied, E[νt−τ | yit ] = νt−τ and agents also observe at−τ = ψ(L)νt−τ + φ(L)t−τ for τ ≥ k. As a result,
agents observe φ(L)t−τ perfectly for τ ≥ k. Because φ(L) is invertible, past sentiment shocks {t−τ }∞
                                                                                                      τ =k can
                                                                        0
be inferred perfectly. Particularly, when t = k, agents can infer {τ }τ =−∞ perfectly, and they know 0 = 1
without uncertainty.




                                                                           31
    Recall that the signal process is given by

                                        yi,t   = P(L)νt + Q(L)ζi,t
                                        xi,t   = A(L)at + B(L)νt + C(L)ζi,t ,

In the impulse response experiment, only 0 = 1, and all other shocks are muted. Effectively, agents observe

                                                     yi,t    = 0,
                                                     xi,t    = A(L)φt 0 ,

where φt = 0 for t < 0.
      With t ≥ k, after subtracting the part A(L)φt 0 which agents observe perfectly, the signals are all zero.
It follows that the optimal forecasts for all other shocks have to be zero, Ei,t [ζi,t−τ ] = 0, Ei,t [νt−τ ] = 0, and
Ei,t [t−τ ] = 0 for t > 0 and τ ≥ 0.
      Therefore, the impulse response with t ≥ k is given by
                                   Z
                      a t = φt =       αEi,t [h(L)ui,t ] + ϕEi,t [g(L)vt ] + γEi,t [φ(L)t ] = γφt 0 .                            (25)

                                                                                                              Pk−1
Given that γ < 1 and 0 = 1, it has to be that φt = 0 for t ≥ k. It follows that φ(L) =                        τ =0   Lτ φτ Lτ .


B.2      Proof of Proposition 2
In a linear rational expectations equilibrium with only sentiment shock, the aggregate outcome can be written
as
                                                  at = φ(L)t

The information process can be summarized as
                        "         # "                        #" #
                            x1i,t        φ(L)               1  εt
                              2
                                   =                                           ⇔          Xi,t = M (L) ei,t
                            xi,t      (L − λ)φ(L)           0 zi,t

Note that the determinant of M(z) is
                                                   det[M(z)] = (z − λ)φ(z)

and there is one root inside the unit circle, 0 and λ. This mapping can also be represented by an observationally
equivalent invertible representation of system
                                                                  0
                                 Xi,t = M (L) ΣWB (L; λ) B L−1 ; λ W0 Σ−1 ei,t
                                        |      {z      }|          {z        }
                                                    M(L)
                                                    f                              e
                                                                                   ei,t


where

                                                            L−1 −λ
                                                        "                  #
                                                            1−λL−1       0
                                       B (L; λ)     =
                                                              0          1
                                                                                    φ(λ)
                                                                                               
                                                             √       σ         √
                                                                 σ 2 +φ(λ)2        σ 2 +φ(λ)2 
                                               W    =               φ(λ)           σφ(λ)
                                                       −√                      √
                                                                  σ 2 +φ(λ)2       σ 2 +φ(λ)2



                                                                  32
Using the Kolomogrov-Weiner projection formulas:

                                                                        
                                                                  1 − λ2 σ 2 φ(λ)
                                  Z
                                       Ei,t [at ]    = φ(L) +
                                                              (1 − λL) (σ 2 + φ(λ)2 )
                                 Z                              Z
                                      Ei,t [zi,t ]   = at −         Ei,t at

Also, recall that equilibrium must satisfy:
                                                        Z                   Z
                                               at = α       Ei,t zi,t + γ       Ei,t at

As a result, it must be the case that:
                                                       
                                                 1 − λ2 σ 2 φ(λ)(α − γ)
                                      φ(L) =
                                             (1 − γ)(1 − λL) (σ 2 + φ(λ)2 )

Evaluating at L = λ leads to

                                                               σ 2 φ(λ)(α − γ)
                                             φ(λ)     =
                                                            (1 − γ) (σ 2 + φ(λ)2 )

Therefore, the sentiment process is given by
                                                            r
                                                              α−1 1
                                                                2
                                            φ(L) = σ(1 − λ )
                                                              1 − γ 1 − λL

B.3      Proof of Proposition 3
The linear rational expectation equilibrium with both sentiment shock and fundamental shock can be written
as
                                            at = φ(L)t + ψ(L)vt

The signal process can be summarized as
                                             
                    x1i,t   1    φ(L)     ψ(L)    ζi,t
                    2  
                    x     = 0 (L − λ)g(L)   0    t                              ⇔       Xi,t = M (L) ei,t
                                                
                    i,t  
                      3
                    xi,t    0    Lφ(L)    Lψ(L)    vt

Note that the determinant of M (z) is

                                             det[M(z)] = σzg(z)(z − λ)φ(z)

and there are two roots inside the unit circle. Note that we restrict φ(L) is invertible by the logic in Proposition
4. This mapping can also be represented by an observationally equivalent invertible representation of system
                                                                0            0
                 Xi,t = M (L) ΣW1 B (L; λ) W2 B (L; 0) B L−1 ; 0 W20 B L−1 ; λ W10 Σ−1 ei,t
                        |            {z              }|                {z                 }
                                         M(L)
                                         f                                                e
                                                                                          ei,t




                                                                33
where
                           L−1 −λ
                                           
                          1−ωL−1         0 0
     B (L; ω)   =          0            1 0
                                           

                            0            0 1
                                                                
                                 0         1           0
                                                 r           
                                                         ψλ2
                  − √ φ2 λ 2              0
                                                             
                                                      φ2λ +ψλ2
         W1     =    φλ +ψλ                                  
                                                   s         
                                                        ψ 2
                                                φλ       λ   
                                                     φ2 +ψ 2 
                    √ ψ2 λ 2               0
                                                       λ
                                                      ψλ
                                                            λ

                            φλ +ψλ
                                         1
         W2     =     p
                        (σ 2 + φ20 ) φ2λ + (λ2 σ 2 + φ20 ) ψλ2
                              p            p                                                                                             
                         −λσ ψλ2              (σ 2 + φ20 ) φ2λ + φ20 ψλ2                        √ q
                                                                                                                 0
                       φ ψ √φ2 +ψ2                         √
                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                               σ  φ2λ (σ 2 +φ20 )φ2λ +(λ2 σ 2 +φ20 )ψλ
                                                                                                                                     2
                                                  λσφ0 ψλ φ2λ +ψλ      2                                                                   
                      − 0 λ√ λ λ            −  q                                                     q                                    
                                ψ 2
                                                   (σ +φ0 )φλ +φ0 ψλ2
                                                           2   2     2
                                                                                                        (σ2q+φ20 )φ2λ +φ20 ψλ
                                                                                                                            2
                                                     2
                                                                                                                                           
                                  λ
                                                             √ 2                               √ 2√ 2 2
                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                                          
                                                   λσ 2 φλ ψλ                            φ0 ψλ φλ φλ +ψλ (σ 2 +φ20 )φ2λ +(λ2 σ 2 +φ20 )ψλ
                                                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                                                           
                             σφλ               q                                                     √ 2 q
                                                  (σ2 +φ20 )φ2λ +φ20 ψλ2                          φλ ψλ     (σ2 +φ20 )φ2λ +φ20 ψλ2

Here, we use φ0 , φλ , and ψλ to denote φ(0), φ(λ), and ψ(λ).
   Using the Kolomogrov-Weiner projection formulas:

                                                   ψλ2 λσ 2 φ0 (λ − L) + φ2λ (1 − λL)σ 2 φ0
                Z                                                                                
                    Ei,t [at ]       =      φ(L) −                                                  t
                                                (1 − λL) (ψλ2 (λ2 σ 2 + φ20 ) + φ2λ (σ 2 + φ20 ))
                                                                                                  !
                                                                1 − λ 2 σ 2 φ0 ψ λ φλ
                                       + ψ(L) −                                                      vt
                                                 (1 − λL) (ψλ2 (λ2 σ 2 + φ20 ) + φ2λ (σ 2 + φ20 ))
                                                                                                 
                                           1 − λ2 g(λ)φλ ψλ λσ 2 L − φ20 t − φλ σ 2 + φ20 vt
                Z
                    Ei,t [θt ]       =                                                                + g(L)vt
                                                (1 − λL) (ψλ2 (λ2 σ 2 + φ20 ) + φ2λ (σ 2 + φ20 ))

Also, recall that equilibrium must satisfy:
                                                                 Z                    Z
                                                    at = ϕ           Ei,t [θt ] + γ       Ei,t [at ]

As a result, it must be the case that:
                                                                                 !
                                    λσ 2 γφ0 (φ2λ + ψλ2 ) + ϕ 1 − λ2 gλ ψλ φλ             1
                      φ(L) = φ0 +            2     2 2      2   2    2     2     L                                                             (26)
                                  (1 − γ) ψλ (λ σ + φ0 ) + φλ (σ + φ0 )              1 − λL
                                               2
                                                         2                  2     2
                                                                                     
                              ϕ          1 − λ φλ γσ φ0 ψλ + ϕgλ φλ σ + φ0                  1
                      ψ(L) =     g(L) −                                                                                                        (27)
                             1−γ          (1 − γ) ψλ2 (λ2 σ 2 + φ20 ) + φ2λ (σ 2 + φ20 ) 1 − λL

with φ(λ) and ψ(λ) satisfying
                                                  
                                         ϕ 1 − λ2 φ0 gλ ψλ φλ − γσ 2 (φ2λ + λ2 ψλ2 )
                                                                                     =(1 − γ)
                                             ψλ2 (λ2 σ 2 + φ20 ) + φ2λ (σ 2 + φ20 )
                                               (1 − γ)gλ (σ 2 λ2 + φ20 )ψλ − σ 2 γφ0 φλ
                                                                                         =(1 − γ)
                                                  ψλ2 (λ2 σ 2 + φ20 ) + φ2λ (σ 2 + φ20 )



                                                                          34
Given φ0 , we can solve for φλ and ψλ as

                          λ2 σ 2 + (1 − γ)φ20
                  φλ =
                         (1 − γ) (1 − λ2 ) φ0
                                           q
                                                          2
                         ϕ 1 − λ2 φ0 ± (ϕ (1 − λ2 ) φ0 gλ ) − 4 (σ 2 + (1 − γ)φ20 ) (λ2 σ 2 + (1 − γ)φ20 )
                  ψλ =
                                                            2φ0 (1 − γ) (1 − λ2 )

Denote φ0 as κ. To make sure that ψλ is well defined, it has to be that
                                           2
                              ϕ 1 − λ2 g(λ) κ2 > 4 σ 2 + (1 − γ)κ2 λ2 σ 2 + (1 − γ)κ2
                                                                                    


Equation (26) and (27) can be easily written in terms of Φ(κ) and Ψ(κ) accordingly.
   Another restriction for κ is that Φ(κ) has to make sure that φ(L) is invertible, but this is a further selection
among the equilibria that satisfying the condition above.


B.4          Restricting attention to equilibria with invertible φ(L) is with-
             out loss of generality
Proposition 4. If at = ψ(L)νt + φ(L)t is a sentiment equilibrium, then at = ψ(L)νt + φ(L)
                                                                                      e    t is also a
sentiment equilibrium if
                                    φ(L)φ(L−1 ) = φ(L)
                                                   e φ(Le −1 )

Furthermore, there exits a sentiment equilibrium φ(L)
                                                 e    which is invertible.

Proof. Assume that the aggregate action at is given by

                                                     at = ψ(L)νt + φ(L)t

Let m, n, r, ` denote the dimensions of exogenous signals, endogenous signals, exogenous aggregate shocks,
and exogenous idiosyncratic shocks, respectively. Agents’ information structure specified in Section 2 can be
represented by the following matrix
                                                                                                                     
         
           1
                                                                                                                t
          yi,t         0            P11 (L)         ...          P1r (L)         Q11 (L) . . . Q1` (L)  1 
         .           .                .                            .               ..                ..     νt 
                                                                                                                      
         ..          ..               ..                           ..               .                 .      .. 
                                                                                                               
                                                                                                               . 
          
         m 
         yi,t       0            P m1    (L)     . . .        P mr    (L)     Qm1     (L) . . . Q m`    (L) 
si,t   ≡      =                                                                                             νr 
        x1   A (L)φ(L) A (L)ψ (L) + B (L) . . . A (L)ψ (L) + B (L) C (L) . . . C (L)                          t 
         i,t   1           1     1           11         1     r           1r    11                1`          1 
                                                                                                                      
         .          .                .                            .               .                 .       ζi,t 
                                                                                                                
         .          ..               ..                           ..              ..                ..
         .                                                                                                   .. 
                                                                                                               
           n                                                                                                     . 
         xi,t     An (L)φ(L) An (L)ψ1 (L) + Bn1 (L) . . . An (L)ψr (L) + Bnr (L) Cn1 (L) . . . Cn` (L)             `
                                                                                                                 ζi,t

 More compactly, we can represent the information structure by
                                                                                
                                                     "          #            t
                                                         yi,t
                                            si,t =                  = M(L)  νt  .
                                                                            
                                                         xi,t
                                                                            ζi,t



                                                                      35
Suppose φ(L)
        e    satisfies that
                                               φ(L)
                                               e φ(Le −1 ) = φ(L)φ(L−1 ).

Denote M(L)
        f     as the matrix where φ(L) is replaced by φ(L).
                                                       e     This replacement implies that agent i believes
that the process for sentiments follow φ(L) instead of φ(L). We will show that the forecast rules based on
                                       e
M(L) is the same as those based on M(L).
                                     f      Note that

                                            M(L)
                                            f   Mf 0 (L−1 ) = M(L)M0 (L−1 ).

This equality implies that the fundamental representation of M(L) and M(L)
                                                                      f    is the same. Denoting the
fundamental representation of M(L) as B(L), we have

                                  M(L)M0 (L−1 ) = M(L)
                                                  f   Mf 0 (L−1 ) = B(L)B0 (L−1 ),

where B(L) is invertible. For any stochastic variable
                                                                       
                                                                    t
                                                    fi,t   = F(L)  νt  ,
                                                                       

                                                                   ui,t

the Wiener-Hopf prediction formula using M(L) is given by

                                   Ei,t [fi,t ] = F(L)M0 (L−1 )B0 (L−1 ) + B(L)−1 si,t ,
                                                                       


and the forecasting rule using M(L)
                               f    is given by
                                                  h                       i
                                                       f 0 (L−1 )B0 (L−1 ) B(L)−1 si,t .
                                   e i,t [fi,t ] = F(L)M
                                   E
                                                                             +

    Supposing an agent wants to forecast a stochastic variable driven by exogenous aggregate or idiosyncratic
shocks, we have                          h                                   i
                                F(L) = 0, F2 (L), F3 (L) . . . , , Fr+`+1 (L) .

It is straightforward to verify that

                                             F(L)M0 (L−1 ) = F(L)M
                                                                 f 0 (L−1 ).

As a result, Ei,t [fi,t ] = E
                            e i,t [fi,t ].
    Suppose an agent wants to forecast the aggregate action, i.e., fi,t = at . If the agent believes that at =
φ(L)t , then                                    h                  i
                                           F(L) = φ(L), 0, . . . , 0 .

Similarly, if the agent believes at = φ(L)
                                      e    t , then

                                                       h                  i
                                                 F(L) = φ(L),
                                                         e    0, . . . , 0 .

Due to that φ(L)
            e φ(Le −1 ) = φ(L)φ(L−1 ), the following identity holds
                              h                     i           h                  i
                                  φ(L), 0, . . . , 0 M0 (L−1 ) = φ(L),
                                                                  e    0, . . . , 0 Mf 0 (L−1 ),


                                                               36
which implies that Ei,t [at ] = E
                                e i,t [at ]. Because the inferences are the same under the two specifications of the
sentiment processes, both of them will be REE.
    Assume that at = ψ(L)νt + φ(L)t is an equilibrium. By the Wold representation theorem, there always
exists φ(L)
       e    and wt ∼ N (0, 1) such that
                                                    φ(L)t = φ(L)w
                                                               e     t,

and φ(L)
    e    is invertible. By construction, it follows that

                                           φ(L)φ(L−1 ) = φ(L)
                                                         e φ(Le −1 ).
                          h           i
Consider the signal e
                    si,t = yi,t   ei,t . The endogenous signal is generated by
                                  x

                             x
                             ei,t = A(L)(ψ(L)νt + φ(L)w
                                                  e    t ) + B(L)νt + C(L)ζi,t .


While in the original equilibrium, the endogenous signal is generated by

                              x
                              ei,t = A(L)(ψ(L)νt + φ(L)t ) + B(L)νt + C(L)ζi,t .

The autocorrelation-generating function of si,t and e
                                                    si,t are the same. The sentiment part φ(L)t and φ(L)w
                                                                                                     e    t
are identical. Therefore, at = ψ(L)νt + φ(L)wt is also an equilibrium.
                                        e




C       Examples in Section 4
C.1      Agents do not observe past aggregate actions
Consider the following environment: the idiosyncratic fundamental zi,t is given by a AR(1):

                                                             1
                                                 zi,t =          ui,t
                                                          1 − ρL

Agents receive two signals every period: (1) two periods before aggregate action at−2 ; (2) noisy signal xi,t
about current aggregate action:

                                                  xi,t = at + ui,t

where
                                                   at = φ(L)t

An educated guess for the equilibrium path of aggregate action is:

                                                 φ(L) = φ0 + φ1 L




                                                          37
Given this guess, the problem can be transformed into a static problem with the relevant information encoded
in the following modified signals:

                                             1
                                            wi,t = φ0 t−1 + ui,t−1
                                             2
                                            wi,t = (φ0 t + φ1 t−1 ) + ui,t

                                  1      2 0
The covariance matrix of wi,t = [wi,t , wi,t ] can be written as:
                                            "                                      #
                                             φ2 + σu2               ψ0 ψ1
                                          Ω= 0
                                              ψ0 ψ1              2
                                                               (φ0 + φ21 ) + σu2

Then using the Kalman filter, any equilibrium satisfies:
                                                s               p
                                                    (α − 1) ±    (α − 1)2 − 4α2 ρ2 )
                                    φ0 = ±σu
                                                                  1−γ
                                                           p
                                              (α − 1) ±     ((α − 1)2 − 4α2 ρ2 )
                                    φ1 = φ0
                                                             2αρ

C.2      Agents do not observe lagged innovations to aggregate funda-
         mentals
Agents receive three signals every period: (1) exogenous signal about the past value of common aggregate
fundamental yt = νt−2 ; (2) an endogenous signal about aggregate action

                                                      xi,t = at + ζi,t ,

(3) and last period aggregate action at−1 . This information structure implies that last period aggregate
fundamental νt−1 is not directly observable, and an educated guess is that

                                                     φ(L) = φ0 + φ1 L
                                                     ψ(L) = ψ0 + ψ1 L

The equivalent signal process is

                                    1
                                   wi,t = φ0 t−1 + ψ0 vt−1
                                    2
                                   wi,t = (φ0 t + φ1 t−1 + ψ0 vt + ψ1 vt−1 ) + ζi,t

Indeed, we can verify that the set of persistent sentiment equilibria is
                                                s
                                                    ϕσv2 ψ0 − σζ2 − (1 − γ) (φ20 + σv2 ψ02 )
                               φ1 =   ±σv2 ψ0
                                                           (1 − γ)σv2 (φ20 + σv2 ψ02 )
                                           s
                                                ϕσv2 ψ0 − σζ2 − (1 − γ) (φ20 + σv2 ψ02 )
                               ψ1 = ∓φ0
                                                        (1 − γ)σv2 (φ20 + σv2 ψ02 )




                                                             38
Note that φ0 and ψ0 have to satisfy
                                              ϕσv2 ψ0 − σζ2
                                                            > φ20 + σv2 ψ02
                                                 1−γ
and
                                                         φ1
                                                            <1
                                                         φ0
      In equilibrium

                                                                        ϕσv2 ψ0 − σζ2
                                      φ20 + ψ02 σv2 + φ21 + ψ12 σv2 =
                                                                           1−γ
                                                             φ0 φ1 = −σv2 ψ0 ψ1



D        Details on Section 5
The signal is xt = (L − λ)φ(L)t . The fundamental Wold representation of this stochastic process is:

                                                        L−λ
                                  xt = φ(L)(1 − λL)           t ≡ φ(L)(1 − λL)wt
                                                       1 − λL

The forecast about Lk φ(L)t is

                 Et [Lk φ(L)t ]
                                                                        
                                                       1                            1
                =Et Lk φ(L)φ(L−1 )(L−1 − λ)                                                 (L − λ)φ(L)t
                                                 φ(L )(1 − λL−1 )
                                                    −1
                                                                           +   φ(L)(1 − λL)
                                   
                            1 − λL        L−λ
                =Et Lk φ(L)                      t
                             L − λ + (1 − λL)
                                               1 − λ2
                                                     
                      k     1 − λL       k              L−λ
                =Et L φ(L)           − λ φ(λ)                 t
                             L−λ               L − λ (1 − λL)
                                     1 − λ2
                =Lk φ(L)t − λk φ(λ)        t
                                     1 − λL

The forecast error is then given by
                                                             1 − λ2
                                                   λk φ(λ)          t
                                                             1 − λL




                                                           39
