                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            EXCHANGE ARRANGEMENTS ENTERING THE 21ST CENTURY:
                        WHICH ANCHOR WILL HOLD?

                                         Ethan Ilzetzki
                                      Carmen M. Reinhart
                                       Kenneth S. Rogoff

                                      Working Paper 23134
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23134


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2017




We wish to thank Duygu Guven and seminar participants at the Bank of International Settlements
and the AEA meetings for helpful comments and suggestions and Lukas Althoff, Patricio
Merlani, Paul Schmelzing, and Jordan Ward, for outstanding research assistance. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Ethan Ilzetzki, Carmen M. Reinhart, and Kenneth S. Rogoff. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Exchange Arrangements Entering the 21st Century: Which Anchor Will Hold?
Ethan Ilzetzki, Carmen M. Reinhart, and Kenneth S. Rogoff
NBER Working Paper No. 23134
February 2017
JEL No. E50,F3,F4,N2

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper provides a comprehensive history of anchor or reference currencies, exchange rate
arrangements, and a new measure of foreign exchange restrictions for 194 countries and
territories over 1946-2016. We find that the often-cited post-Bretton Woods transition from fixed
to flexible arrangements is overstated; regimes with limited flexibility remain in the majority. Our
central finding is that the US dollar scores (by a wide margin) as the world’s dominant anchor
currency and, by some metrics, its use is far wider today than 70 years ago. In contrast, the global
role of the euro appears to have stalled in recent years. While the incidence of capital account
restrictions has been trending lower for decades, an important wave toward capital market
integration dates as recently as the mid-1990s. We suggest that record accumulation of reserves
post 2002 has much to do with many countries’ desire to stabilize exchange rates in an
environment of markedly greater capital mobility. Indeed, the continuing desire to manage
exchange rates despite increased capital mobility post-2003 may be a key factor underpinning the
modern-day Triffin dilemma that some have recently pointed to.

Ethan Ilzetzki                                   Kenneth S. Rogoff
London School of Economics                       Thomas D Cabot Professor of Public Policy
Houghton Street                                  Economics Department
London WC2A 2AE                                  Harvard University
e.ilzetzki@LSE.ac.uk                             Littauer Center 216
                                                 Cambridge, MA 02138-3001
Carmen M. Reinhart                               and NBER
Kennedy School of Government                     krogoff@harvard.edu
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and CEPR
and also NBER
carmen_reinhart@harvard.edu
                                                  Introduction

           The impossible trinity, sometimes referred to as the macroeconomic trilemma, holds that a

country with an open capital account that opts to fix its exchange rate must subjugate its monetary policy

to that of the anchor currency country. If it wishes to maintain capital mobility and an independent

monetary policy, then the country must give up on the idea of stabilizing its exchange rate. If intent on

achieving both independent monetary policy and stabilizing its exchange rate, then it must resort to

foreign exchange controls. Only two of the three options are possible at any point in time. The theory

does not specify clearly what independent monetary policy might entail. For example, over much of the

1980s, targeting monetary or credit aggregates was popular; the Federal Reserve has had a long history of

maintaining targets for its policy interest rate; and inflation targeting was formalized by New Zealand in

1989 and has since been adopted by almost thirty countries.


           Focusing primarily on interest rates, Obstfeld, Shambaugh, and Taylor (2005) conclude that the

evidence supports the implications of the Trilemma for more than a century. For instance, during the gold

standard era (fixed exchange rates), which Eichengreen (1996) and others have characterized as a period

of high capital mobility, the three authors suggest that monetary policy independence appears to have

been quite limited. Frankel (2008), however, emphatically argues that the pairings (whether by design or

circumstance) among the components of the trinity are time-varying within country as well as across

countries. In principle, the optimal or desired combination is not etched in stone. Indeed, Frankel’s

observation about time and cross-country variation is soundly supported by the country chronologies that

are a companion to this paper. 1


           In this paper we compile a new and comprehensive dataset on exchange arrangements and capital

mobility (two sides of the Trinity) for 194 countries and territories over seven decades (1946-2016). The

third side of the trinity (monetary independence) plays a smaller role in our analysis, but we nevertheless

1
    See the companion chronologies to this paper, Ilzetzki, Reinhart and Rogoff (2016).

                                                           2
devote considerable attention in our analysis to the comparatively novel phenomenon of inflation

targeting frameworks. For example, as a building block to classifying the exchange rate regime of

Eurozone (EZ) countries, we examine the interest rate policies of the European Central Bank.


          It has been well documented for some time that de jure descriptions of exchange rate regimes,

monetary policy, and capital account restrictions routinely depart from actual practices and can be

downright misleading. Calvo and Reinhart (2001) pointed out that the behavior of the exchange rate and

foreign exchange reserves for many countries that were self-declared floaters was virtually

indistinguishable from that of countries with limited flexibility arrangements. Reinhart and Rogoff

(2004) emphasized in their classification of exchange rate arrangements that gauging the true extent of

exchange rate flexibility requires incorporating the parallel market exchange rate has in the analysis,

especially for developing countries but also for advanced economies during the Bretton Woods era. 2

Indeed, in periods where parallel premiums are high, the parallel market exchange rate is often a better

gauge of the underlying monetary policy stance than the official (usually pegged) rate. Venezuela’s

ongoing hyperinflation is a recent illustration of that point. A conclusion from that study was that the de

facto exchange rate regimes were not always as “fixed” as advertised and often involved “back-door”

floating. As Levy Yeyati and Sturzennegger (2005) put it, the objective should be to quantify “deeds not

words”.


          There has been a proliferation of de facto exchange arrangement classifications in recent years.

Reinhart and Rogoff (2004) categorize countries based on the degree of exchange rate variability, while

taking into account parallel markets. 3 4 Levy Yeyati and Sturzennegger (2005) incorporate the behavior

of reserves. Shambaugh (2004) also studies exchange rate variability, but allows for regime changes in

2
  The Reinhart and Rogoff (2004) study spanned 1946-2001 and covered 153 countries.
3
  Klein and Shambaugh (2010) contains an excellent overview.
4
  The Reinhart and Rogoff (2004) classification has been extremely widely used in empirical macroeconomics
across a wide variety of topics, for example Aghion et al (2009) and Rajan and Subramanian (2005) on growth,
Aizenman and Lee (2007) and Jeanne and Ranciere (2006) on reserve accumulation, Chinn and Wei (2013) and
Ghosh et al (2013) on current account adjustment, Hau and Rey (2006) on capital flows and equity prices, Mendoza
and Terrones (2008)and Jorda, Schulariak and Taylor (2015), Ball, Lopez and Reyes (2013) on the effect of
remittances on the macroeconomy; Habib et al (2016) on the effect of oil shocks.

                                                       3
higher frequency. The IMF’s annual report on exchange arrangements and exchange restrictions has

moved from a de-jure classification of exchange arrangements to a de facto one as well.


        Exchange arrangements in our new data and the analysis of this paper are based on a new updated

version of the classification scheme advanced by Reinhart and Rogoff (2004). However, we advance

previous analyses in that we tackle the critical question of anchor currencies directly. The algorithm we

propose allows much more fully for the possibility of multiple currency poles. In the process of

classifying anchor currencies, we also update and refine the classification of Reinhart and Rogoff (2004),

The new classification series runs through 2015, whereas the widely-used existing series ends in 2001.


        On capital controls, the work of Chinn and Ito (2006 and updates) covering 1970-2014 and

Fernandez et. al. (2015) covering 1995-2013 has exploited a broad range of the information provided by

IMF’s Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions (AEAER) to construct a

variety of measures of capital mobility. But the policies described in the AEAER are strictly de jure,

which do not necessarily capture de facto capital mobility5 Mathieson and Rojas-Suarez (1992), among

others, emphasize the erosion of the effectiveness of capital controls over the course of the developing

country debt crisis of the 1980s. Indeed, in a broad array of countries, tax and capital control evasion

appears almost at the level of a national sport. Our exercise is a contribution to these efforts in a narrow

but important dimension. We focus on unitary/dual/multiple exchange rate practices that the AEAER

compiles; regular publications by Franz Pick (various issues and Pick and Sedillot, 1971) also contribute

importantly to the chronology on dual markets. This record is supplemented by information on parallel

market exchange rates: apart from de jure chronologies, there is a de facto component to the index.


        Some of our main findings can be summarized as follows:


        Based on our new classification of anchor currencies, the dollar is as dominant today as the

world’s reserve currency as it was at the time of the early Bretton Woods era. Indeed, by other metrics, its

5
 Kose Prasad, Wei and Rogoff (2003) emphasize the important distinction between de facto and de jure
classifications in their analysis of the effects of financial globalization on developing economies.

                                                       4
global role has expanded even further following the collapse of the ruble zone. The euro is a distant

second. From the early 1980s until the introduction of the euro, the German Deutschemark’s (DM)

sphere expanded first in Western Europe and later in the East. The euro consolidated the French franc

and German DM zones but appears to have stalled in the 21st century. By some metrics (given the

shrinking share of Europe in world output) its global importance has declined. No other major established

international currencies compete at present with the dollar and the euro. The much-debated international

role of the renminbi is a live future possibility but, at this stage, is difficult to quantitatively separate its

role given its history of strong linkage to the US dollar.


        There are, of course, many corroborating pieces of evidence on dollar dominance besides the de

facto exchange rate regime, including the importance of dollar funding for global banks and non-financial

firms (e.g. Bruno and Shin, 2015), the outsize influence of US Federal Reserve policy in global capital

markets (e.g., Rey, 2013), and the widespread prevalence of dollar pricing in trade in global markets (e.g.,

Gopinath, 2015). But these corroborating pieces of evidence are all partial and indirect. We argue that the

revealed preference of monetary authorities’ choice of anchor currency provides an important summary

statistic of the overall degree of dollar dominance. That so much of the world chooses the dollar as its

anchor/reference currency underscores the broad importance of the dollar across global markets.


    To some, the dominance of the dollar may seem natural and obvious, but in fact this is hardly the

central view in the literature. Indeed, many researchers continue to argue that since the share of the

United States in the global economy is declining, the US dollar’s role as the de facto world currency is

likely declining as well. Eichengreen (2011), for example, argues that the world is headed towards a

multi-polar system where the euro dominates in Europe, the US dollar is the anchor in the Americas while

Chinese Renmenbi becomes the main currency in Asia.


    In fact, to the extent there has been debate, it has been more about whether fading dollar dominance

can be considered a good thing. Frankel (2008) argues that it is ultimately inefficient to have multiple



                                                         5
world currencies, for much the same reason that barter is inefficient; see also Mundell (1969) and

McKinnon and Schnabl (2004). Rogoff (2001), however, argues that despite the transactions benefits of

having a single world anchor currency, an equilibrium with two or three major currencies might still

preferable because it provides a critical check on the center country’s incentives to misbehave, for

example to inflate away debt. (This theme is echoed in Farhi and Maggiori, 2016.)


    On the basis of classifying exchange rate arrangements for 194 countries over 1946-2016, we also

conclude that the frequently cited global transition from fixed to floating exchange rates considerably

overstates the reality. The fact that since 2007 the IMF has classified all Eurozone member countries as

having independently floating exchange rates contributes to this misperception. As we revisit the

classification criteria, we conclude that an approach that places Malta’s exchange rate arrangements in the

same bucket as Australia’s is questionable on many grounds. By our metric, less flexible exchange rate

arrangements currently account for about 80 percent of all countries or about one-half of world GDP, the

latter being lower because some of the wealthiest economies float freely and some of the largest emerging

markets have recently adopted managed floating regimes.


    An increasing number of countries have adopted (de jure) inflation targeting regimes and the question

arises as to whether this classification makes a country’s exchange rate classification irrelevant. We

argue that this not the case after examining the monetary policy and exchange rate practices of countries

that have adopted de jure an inflation targeting framework. Closer inspection reveals that the inflation

targeting banner encompasses a very broad spectrum of exchange rate arrangements. Almost 40 percent

of these regimes involve limited flexibility arrangements, such as crawling pegs (Guatemala and Serbia,

for example). The majority of the regimes are managed or freely floating exchange rates. While we duly

indicate in the individual country chronologies whether inflation targets are a part of the monetary

framework, we do not treat these cases as a separate category.




                                                     6
    What emerges clearly from our analysis is the markedly lower incidence of bi-polar or corner

solutions, in the words of Stanley Fischer (2001). Instead, we find a marked increase in the adoption of

intermediate regimes. De jure pegs and pre-announced narrow bands are less common today. Also less

common in the 21st century are the chronically collapsing currencies that accompany very high inflation.

We classify these cases as freely falling, but in other classifications these “anchorless” currencies were

usually included in the floating category. While the managed floating category has expanded somewhat,

the same cannot be said of freely floating, which has remained confined to a few countries.

        As to out index of exchange restrictions, which also spans seven decades, there is little that

surprises. The global march to higher capital mobility has a well-defined trend. In 1946 about 70 percent

of the independent countries had either a dual exchange rate, multiple exchange rate practices, or active

parallel markets with substantial premiums. By 2016, the share was hovering around 20 percent, despite a

noticeable pick-up since 2014. The path to greater capital market integration evolved in steps and had

stalled from the late 1960s to the mid-1990 (at around 50 percent). The lower incidence of controls

globally and higher degree of capital mobility is of a fairly modern vintage for emerging and developing

countries.


    The mercantilist and self-insurance motive explanations of the unprecedented surge in official reserve

holdings during 2003-2013 (often referred to as the demand for safe assets) are well known. We suggest

here that the combination of arrangements with limited exchange rate flexibility and markedly greater

(and increasing) capital market integration (as documented here) also helped to fuel the demand for

reserves. To some extent, reserves have replaced capital controls.


        Finally, we integrate our data and findings to the discussion of a modern-day Triffin dilemma in

Farhi, Gourinchas and Rey (2011), Obstfeld (2013) and Farhi and Maggiori (2016). We document some

of the features of the comparatively shrinking advanced economies that are supplying the reserve assets.

But our primary contribution comes from connecting the demand for reserves by the expanding emerging

market group to their exchange rate arrangements and choice of anchor or reserve currency. As already

                                                      7
noted, reserve assets are provided primarily (by a wide margin) by the United States. We conclude and

concur with the aforementioned studies that the stage is set for a Triffin-type dilemma. This time it is not

driven by the demand for reserves by other advanced economies, as was the case in the 1970s, but by the

demand from emerging markets, Although the literature has extensively discussed global demand for safe

advanced-country assets, we argue that countries’ desire to stabilize exchange rates (for example because

of financial dollarization) also plays a key role in this phenomenon. Unlike the 1970s, the numeraire for

reserves is not connected to a sluggishly expanding supply of gold; in the modern context, the numeraire

is connected to the sluggishly expanding supply of US goods and services.

        Section II defines our methodology to determine anchor currencies and exchange rate

arrangements. This section also addresses the criteria applied to the classification of currency union

countries in general, and Eurozone in particular. The treatment of countries that have adopted an inflation

target and its rationale are outlined in our classification strategy. The following section presents a global

profile over 1946-2016 on the major currencies that serve as anchors for the rest of the world and the

evolution of exchange rate arrangements, with an emphasis on their degree of flexibility and their

incidence of inflationary crises. A new measure of capital or foreign exchange restrictions that spans the

post-World War II era is introduced. Section IV uses our findings to revisit some of the recent themes in

the international financial system including the surge in reserve accumulation and the modern-day Triffin

dilemma. Concluding remarks focus on research and policy implications.



        II. Anchor Currencies and Exchange Rate Regimes: Methodology
        This section describes the classification framework that we apply to each of the 195 countries (or

territories) that comprise our sample of 2016. The core exchange rate and inflation data is monthly and

spans January 1946 through October 2016, approximately seven decades. The classification algorithms

perform two intertwined tasks. First, they identify the relevant anchor currency for each country over the

course of the sample, and second, they define the exchange rate arrangement by metrics that primarily

(but not exclusively) measure the degree of flexibility. The approach follows builds on that introduced by


                                                      8
Reinhart and Rogoff (2004). Important extensions to the Reinhart-Rogoff framework address: (i) explicit

classification of anchor or reference currency (ii) the classification of inflation targeting cases; (iii) the

treatment of Eurozone countries. The exercise yields a monthly classification. The criteria for evaluating

the regime, however, almost always involve a multi-year window.


1. Anchor or Reference Currency
        Choosing the anchor currency and determining the exchange rate classification is an interactive

simultaneous process. The selection of candidate anchor currencies is informed by several features of

country practices. A country whose external trade is concentrated in the Eurozone and primarily invoices

its trade in euro is more likely to favor the euro as an anchor currency. If a nation’s external debts are

largely denominated in US dollars, that country may be more inclined to stabilize its currency versus the

dollar, so as to avoid potentially destabilizing fluctuations in its debt servicing burden. The currency

composition of a country’s official reserves is also informative. Reserve holdings that are skewed to the

US dollar may be a sign that the central bank of that country is more prone to intervene to stabilize its

bilateral exchange rate viz the US dollar than other currencies. Historical boundaries also figure

prominently in the choice of anchor currency, especially in the earlier part of our sample. Colonies and

former colonies use (almost without exception) the currency of the colonial power. A country with a high

and unstable inflation rate chooses as an anchor the currency of a country whose inflation performance

they want to mimic. For instance, despite the fact that Brazil has been Argentina’s most important trading

partner by a wide margin for decades, Brazil’s comparatively high and chronic inflation through the

1990s limited the usefulness of its currency as a potential anchor in the fight against inflation—Argentina

preferred the US dollar. Some de jure exchange rate practices, such as Australia’s arrangements with

several nearby islands or South Africa’s with Botswana and Lesotho also inform the possible short-list of

currency anchors.


        Since world trade and finance are dominated by a handful of currencies, the process of

elimination to select the anchor for each country and period is tedious but not intractable. It is also the


                                                        9
case that there is considerable inertia and path dependence in the choice of anchor currency. Switches of

anchor currencies are far more infrequent than changes and revisions to the degree of exchange rate

flexibility. Intuitively, in most cases the anchor currency will display a much tighter link and less

variation to the country under scrutiny than the other potential anchors. The most transparent cases are the

variants of pegs or crawling pegs (de facto or de jure)—also to be defined. As highlighted by Calvo and

Reinhart (2002) and Reinhart and Rogoff (2004), these comparatively rigid arrangements dominated

much of the global landscape through the 1990s.


         Figure 1 sketches the process of anchor currency selection. The distinction between freely and

managed floating will be defined below. If a currency is identified as “freely floating” it is classified as

having no anchor or reference currency. At the other end of the spectrum, countries with arrangements

that are less flexible than managed floating have a low degree of exchange rate variability viz a specific

anchor. In these cases. we use this lack of flexibility as a summary measure and classify the anchor

currency accordingly.


         More recently, managed floating has emerged as a regime of choice among the larger emerging

markets. Managed floating is a relatively more flexible exchange arrangement and the classification of a

currency as managed floating doesn’t assign a clear anchor currency. Therefore, for these exchange rates,

we calculate the monthly, one-year moving average of the absolute value of the change in its bilateral

exchange rate relative to all candidate anchor currencies. If the currency shows smaller movements

relative to any single anchor in more than 50 percent of the observations, we link the currency to this

anchor.6




6
 Candidate anchor currencies are the US dollar, the euro, the Japanese yen, the British pound, the Australian dollar
and, more recently, the Chinese yuan. Some past arrangements focused (at least on a de jure basis) on the IMF’s
Special Drawing Rights (SDR). With these candidate anchors, moving more closely against a single currency 50%
of the time is a relatively high bar. Classifications are not sensitive to altering this to 40% or 60%.

                                                         10
Figure 1: Anchor Currency Selection Process


                                               Yes
           Freely Floating?                                               No Anchor




                                                No
           Managed Float?                                             Anchor Determined by
                                                                          ER Variability



                              Yes


                                         Single candidate anchor
                                         with P(smallest |Δst,n|) >
                                                     50%
                     Yes                                                                 No


                                                                                      Other Criteria
                Anchor Classified




        Even with this refinement, there remain 11 episodes whose anchor remains unclassified based on

exchange rate behavior alone. Table 1 lists these cases and how, using supplementary information we

were able to allocate these to a currency bloc. We use four separate criteria to assign a reference currency

to these countries. First, in which currency is the majority of foreign trade is invoiced? Second, in which

currency is the largest share of external (public and publically guaranteed) debt denominated? Third,

which currency comprises the largest share of central bank foreign reserves? And finally, which was the

most recent anchor currency? Conveniently, all four indicators point to the same reference currency in all

countries in the table. As Table 1 highlights, nearly all these cases are a recent phenomenon, beginning in

the early 2000s and accelerating during the global financial crisis. The last column summarizes the


                                                      11
supplementary information we used to arrive at our reference currency decision. These are admittedly

cases where the notion of an anchor currency is less relevant and we therefore refer to “reference

currency” in these cases.


Table 1: Classifying the Unclassified Anchors with Supplementary Indicators

        Country         Years      Fine ERA                               Indicators
        (anchor)                  Classification
     Brazil (USD)      2001-      12               94% of exports and 84% of imports in USD. 90% of PPG
                                                   debt in USD. Anchored to USD before the 2000s.
     Canada (USD)      2001-      12               70% of exports and 75% of imports in USD. Debt in
                                                   domestic currency. Most recently anchored to USD.
     Chile (USD)       2008-      12               No data available on invoicing, but given the large share
                                                   of copper in exports and the denomination of
                                                   international copper prices in USD, the lion share of
                                                   exports are likely denominated in USD. Algorithm
                                                   anchors the CLP to the USD as recently as 2008.
     Colombia          2008-      12               Close to 100% of invoicing in USD and close to 100% of
     (USD)                                         public debt in USD. Algorithm classifies a dollar anchor
                                                   as recently as 2008.
     Iceland (USD)     2001-      10               Very diversified invoicing between USD, GBP and EUR,
                                                   but with USD the largest share. Central bank FX reserves
                                                   diversified with USD the largest close to 50%.
     India (USD)       2012-      10               86% of exports and 80% of imports in USD. 80% PPG
                                                   debt in USD.
     Israel (USD)      2005-      10               Approximately 70% of exports and imports denominated
                                                   in USD. Over 60% of Bank of Israel reserves in USD.
                                                   Most recently anchored to the USD.
     Korea (USD)       1999-      12               Anchored to the USD in the 1990s. Other data
                                                   unavailable.
     Latvia (EUR)      1998-      10               Diversified invoicing, with EUR the majority at
                       2001                        approximately 50% of imports and exports. The country
                                                   was in transition to joining the Eurozone.
     Turkey (USD)      1998-      10 (until        Diversified invoicing with the majority in USD. Foreign
                                  2000)            currency public debt is 60% in USD and 40% in EUR.
                                  and 12
                                  (from 2003)
     Uruguay (USD)     2009-      10               Anchored to the USD until the late 2000s. Other data
                                                   unavailable.


        For completeness, we assess the robustness of our anchor choice by studying two recent natural

experiments. There have been two large recent swings in the bilateral USD-EUR exchange rate (see

Appendix 1). Both movements can be traced back to monetary policy shocks in Europe and the US. First,

on July 22, 2012, Mario Draghi, the President of the European Central Bank, made his now famous

speech, in which he stated that the ECB stood ready to do “whatever it takes” to preserve the euro.


                                                       12
Following his pronouncements, spreads on sovereign bonds of peripheral EZ governments declined and

the euro appreciated by about10 percent relative to the dollar through the end of the year. Second, the

minutes of FOMC meeting of June 17-18, 2014 increased market perceptions that the Federal Reserve

would initiate its tightening cycle, a perception that gathered momentum throughout the rest of the year.

As a result, the dollar appreciated by a cumulative 30 percent relative to the Euro through March of

2015.7 While Appendix 3 provides the details for the full exercise, we highlight here that all in all, these

two event studies strongly corroborate our anchor classification for the borderline cases.


         Unlike other prominent exchange rate classification strategies (for example, Levi-Yeyati and

Sturtzenegger (2005), and Shambaugh (2004), which focus almost exclusively on the degree of exchange

rate stability, our approach places considerable emphasis on getting the currency anchor right. In that

regard, our aim is closer in spirit to Frankel and Wei (1994), Frankel (2008), and Frankel and Xie (2010).

A common thread in the papers by Frankel and co-authors is the attempt to estimate the weights in

currency baskets.


2. Measuring Exchange Rate Flexibility
         We now outline our approach to classify exchange regimes. Figure 2 (top and bottom panels)

describe the algorithm and statistical tests involved. Starting from the top of Figure 2, the first issue to

resolve is whether, due to exchange rate controls, there exists a dual exchange rate arrangement, multiple

exchange rate practices, or an important parallel market. This issue has been extremely important at

different points on time. For example, in post-war Europe, in Africa, parts of Asia, and in Latin America

during the debt crisis of the 1980s, and immediately following the dissolution of the Soviet Union in the

newly-formed republics parallel markets accounted for an important part of exchange rate developments.

Parallel market practices have become significantly less prevalent in the twenty-first century, but their



7
  This differs from the proverbial “taper tantrum” of the previous year, when the Federal Reserve indicated plans to
slow down and eventually reverse asset purchases as part of its quantitative easing policies. While this
announcement did create some volatility in emerging market currencies, it had a relatively muted effect on the
bilateral Euro-Dollar exchange rate.

                                                         13
resurgence in many lower income countries since 2014 suggest such arrangements still need to be

addressed (see Reinhart, 2016).


           Assuming a unified rate (no parallel market), the algorithm goes on to examine whether the

official announcement (the de jure regime) matches up with actual exchange rate management (the de

facto regime). Importantly, there is a separate category, called freely falling, for regimes with very high

inflation (over 40 percent per annum), which is treated separately, irrespective of whether the exchange

rate is unitary or not. In most classifications, these dysfunctional episodes are lumped together with

ordinary flexible exchange rate regimes.


           Figure 2 (bottom panel) describes our statistical method, which begins by tabulating (the absolute

value of) percentage changes in the currency against the anchor currency. If a country has (virtually) no

change in the exchange rate for four months or longer, it is classified as a de facto peg (unless it is a de

jure arrangement, such as Hong Kong’s). An example of a much looser category is a “narrow band”

which requires that 80 percent of monthly exchange rate changes be less than 2 percent over a two-year or

five-year rolling window.


           Freely and managed floating exchange rate categories are the residual cases that do not fall into

any of the less flexible arrangements. We then form an index whose numerator captures the mean

absolute exchange rate change over a five year rolling window, while the denominator is the probability

of exchange rate changes less than one percent. To qualify as “managed float,” (in lieu of a freely

floating exchange rate), the index must take on an extremely low value relative the volatility of the

world’s major floating exchange rates.8 Supplementary documentation that the country in question

intervenes on a regular basis in the foreign exchange market also places the country in the managed

floating bucket rather than the freely (or independently in the IMF’s lexicon). As we shall discuss in

detail, our algorithm is the same for de jure inflation targeting countries.



8
    See Reinhart and Rogoff (2004) for further details.

                                                          14
         Table 2 provides the full range of regimes and their numeric classification for both the detailed

fine grid as well as the condensed (simplified) version that comprises the coarse grid. In both

classification grids lower numbers indicate less exchange rate flexibility.


3. Classifying Eurozone and Other Currency Unions

    A major development in exchange rate practices in the past two decades has been the introduction of

the Euro. Since the Eurozone (EZ) comprises more than 15 percent of world GDP, any conclusion about

the evolution of global exchange rate arrangements and their degree of flexibility in recent decades

depends importantly on how the exchange rate practices of EZ members are treated.


    As noted, the IMF, in its Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions

(AEAER), currently treats the Eurozone as though it were a single sovereign nation with a freely floating

exchange rate. As a consequence, every member country of the Euro area from Malta to Italy and

Germany is accordingly placed in the independently floating exchange rate category. An approach that

places Malta’s and Italy’s exchange rate arrangements in the same bucket as Australia’s and the United

States is questionable on many grounds.


    To be sure, according to our classification algorithm, the euro floats freely against other major

currencies. But, to state the obvious, Eurozone is far from a cohesive sovereign entity. Individual EZ

members do not have their own currency. Faced with a country-specific shock to inflation, output or

unemployment, there is no exchange rate that can immediately adjust in response.9 Thus, in our

classification, individual member countries of EZ are placed at the bottom end of the flexibility spectrum.

The currency union label is tantamount, in the flexibility scale, to an exchange rate arrangement with no

separate legal tender or a de jure peg (Coarse-grid 1). To reflect (for information purposes only) that the




9
  Of course, as prices adjust over time, real exchange rates will also change in response to country-specific
(idiosyncratic) shocks, much the same way as these would for other “hard pegs.”

                                                          15
Figure 2. Exchange Rate Arrangement Classification Algorithm

Sequence and general scheme


                              No                            Yes
     Use unified                       Parallel                          Use parallel
        rate                           Markets?                             rate




                                            No                    12-month
              Official
                                                                  inflation >
           Announcement?
                                                                     40%
                                                            Yes                  No
                Yes
                                            No
                                                     Freely falling
               Verified?
                                                                                 Statistical
                                       Use pre-                                classification
                Yes                   announced
                                        regime


Statistical tests

             εt,n = |Δst,n| in
                 monthly
                frequency



             εt,n = 0 for 4              Yes
             consecutive                                   Peg
               months?

                          No

            P(εt,n < 2%) > 80%                 Yes
            w/in 5 year rolling                         Narrow band
                 window

                                 No
                                                         Within 99% CI of
                 Freely floating
                                                         bilateral index of
                 index:
                                                        reserve currencies?
                 E{εt,n}/P(εt,n<1%)
                 w/in 5 year                    No                                 Yes
                 rolling window.

                                           Managed Float                      Freely Float


Source: The authors.




                                                          16
Table 2: Fine and Coarse De Facto Exchange Rate Arrangement Classification


       The fine classification codes are:
   1   • No separate legal tender or currency union
   2   • Pre announced peg or currency board arrangement
   3   • Pre announced horizontal band that is narrower than or equal to +/-2%
   4   • De facto peg
   5   • Pre announced crawling peg; de facto moving band narrower than or equal to
          +/-1%
   6   • Pre announced crawling band that is narrower than or equal to +/-2%
          or de facto horizontal band that is narrower than or equal to +/-2%
   7   • De facto crawling peg
   8   • De facto crawling band that is narrower than or equal to +/-2%
   9   • Pre announced crawling band that is wider than or equal to +/-2%
  10   • De facto crawling band that is narrower than or equal to +/-5%
  11   • Moving band that is narrower than or equal to +/-2% (i.e., allows for both appreciation and
          depreciation over time)
  12   • De facto moving band +/-5%/ Managed floating
  13   • Freely floating
  14   • Freely falling
          Dual market in which parallel market data is
  15   •
          missing.

       The coarse classification codes are:
   1   • No separate legal tender
   1   • Pre announced peg or currency board arrangement
   1   • Pre announced horizontal band that is narrower than or equal to +/-2%
   1   • De facto peg
   2   • Pre announced crawling peg
   2   • Pre announced crawling band that is narrower than or equal to +/-2%
   2   • De factor crawling peg
   2   • De facto crawling band that is narrower than or equal to +/-2%
   3   • Pre announced crawling band that is wider than or equal to +/-2%
   3   • De facto crawling band that is narrower than or equal to +/-5%
   3   • Moving band that is narrower than or equal to +/-2% (i.e., allows for both appreciation and
          depreciation over time)
   3   • Managed floating
   4   • Freely floating
   5   • Freely falling
          Dual market in which parallel market data is
   6   •
          missing.

                                                17
currency (euro) for the union as a whole floats freely, the label attached to each member of the EZ is

currency union/freely floating.10


           The main considerations behind our classification of the EZ countries are as follows:


           First, our approach consistently defines exchange rate arrangements at the country level and not

at the currency level; our units of observation are countries rather than currencies. Under its current

approach the IMF lists Portugal (like all EZ members) as having a floating exchange rate while at the

same time Panama (which adopted the US dollar as its sole legal tender in the early 20th century) is placed

in the category of an arrangement with no separate legal tender. If the currency criterion was applied to

Panama, it should be considered a floater, since the US dollar floats. Because from the vantage point of

Portugal or Panama, neither country has its own currency; in our classification both are in the same

bucket as regards exchange rate flexibility. Empirical studies that use our or other de facto exchange rate

classifications often ask questions about the relative economic performance of countries under different

exchange rate regimes. There too, the unit of observation tends to be sovereign countries, rather than

currencies. 11


           Second, even the largest Eurozone members (Germany, France, Italy, Spain, and the Netherlands)

have the equivalent of less than a 4 percent share each of voting rights on the board of the European

Central Bank (ECB). These countries rotate such that four of the five is represented in each ECB board

meeting. In meetings when they are represented, they have one of 21 votes. Other countries are

represented less frequently—in only 11 out of every 19 board meetings. But even the largest members

have only a small de-jure influence on the conduct of ECB monetary policy. This arrangement tends to

limit the likelihood that ECB policy at any given meeting is set in response to a particular country-

specific shock. By contrast, the monetary policies of the central banks of Australia and the United




10
     See the companion chronologies in Ilzetzki (2016) for individual countries over 1946-2016.
11
     See Levi Yeyati and Sturzenneger (2005), for example.

                                                          18
Kingdom (among other floaters) are routinely and importantly determined by the very nature of their

country-specific idiosyncratic shocks.


         Third, our classification is continuous in the time series sense—the IMF’s is not (for the EZ

group at least). As noted, in Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions, the

IMF described the exchange rate policy of future EZ members in the latter part of the 1990s exclusively

by their de jure arrangement, which involved at that time +/- 15 percent floatation bands. In reality, even

the most committed floaters seldom make use of +/-15 percent bands. From 1999 until 2006, Eurozone

countries (then 12 in total) were listed in the IMF’s AEAER under the category of exchange rate

arrangement with no separate legal tender. By the time the 2007 AEAER was published, however, EZ

members (then 13, with the addition of Slovenia) had been transferred from the most rigid exchange rate

regime category to the most flexible (independently floating). This shift The AEAER classification

therefore implies that the introduction of euro brought a marked increase in exchange rate flexibility in

Europe over the past decade.

         By contrast, we characterize most members of the European Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM)

as having a de facto peg to the Deutschmark well prior to the introduction of the Euro.12 Germany, in the

freely floating category, was the exception. In our classification, it follows from these observations that

for most EZ members, the adoption of the Euro did not represent a drastic change, with a slight (yet

important) reduction in the exchange rate exchange rate flexibility of its members.13 14

         Finally, the de facto interest rate policy of the European Central Bank appears to support

classifying individual members of Eurozone as an exchange rate arrangement with no separate legal

tender. At a very basic level, theory suggests that a country with a pegged exchange rate and an open

capital account has little or no scope for adjusting the policy interest rate in response to changes in
12
   Some future EZ members had narrow +/-2 percent bands.
13
   As shown in Table 2, in the fine grid, a de facto peg is a 4 and no separate legal tender or currency union is a 1, so
the introduction of the euro reduces flexibility. In the coarse grid classification, categories 1 through 4 of the fine
grid are subsumed in category 1, the least flexible category.
14
   To reiterate, the observation on limited change refers narrowly to exchange rate flexibility. In countless other
dimensions the introduction of the euro represented major changes for EZ countries, not the least of these was the
creation of Target2.

                                                           19
domestic inflation or fluctuations in the output gap. By contrast, a country with a floating exchange rate

can respond to inflationary pressures and an overheated economy (shrinking output gap) by raising

interest rates, for example. This type of policy response is at the core of a Taylor rule.15 Simply put,

evidence in favor of a Taylor rule is consistent with a flexible exchange rate regime and at odds with a

peg.16


         To be clear, the ECB has not (at least in the public domain) considered itself to be guided by a

Taylor rule when setting the course of its policies. In that context, the estimation of the Taylor rule for an

individual member of the Eurozone should be interpreted primarily as a checkpoint to confirm that,

indeed, the ECB’s de facto monetary policy is not set on the basis of the idiosyncratic economic

conditions of any of its members (consistent with a peg ).


         The only case where a Taylor rule accords with the data reasonably well is pre-2008 Germany. It

is as if the ECB policy rate extended Germany’s policy rule almost exactly until the onset of the global

financial crisis. This evidence is in line with the earlier findings of Smant (2002), who concludes that,

after an initial period of lower than expected interest rates, the ECB since mid-2000 set the interest rate

consistent with the Bundesbank’s old policy rule. Indeed, we find no sign of a structural break in the fit

of the Taylor rule to the actual policy once the euro was adopted in January 1999. The sharp contrast of

the German case with all other EZ members is discussed in Appendix 1, where additional details are

provided.


         Classifying other currency unions (specifically, the East Caribbean Dollar bloc and the Central

African Franc (CFA) zone, which is itself comprised of Communauté Économique et Monétaire de

l'Afrique Centrale, CEMAC and West African Monetary Union, WAEMU) is comparatively

straightforward. The reason is that these are clear-cut cases of pegged or rigid arrangements whether the

focus is on the currency unit or the country unit. As we have argued for the EZ membership, from the
15
  See Taylor (1993).
16
  Unless, of course, the country doing the pegging has virtually no idiosyncratic shocks of its own and its cycle is
perfectly correlated with the anchor country’s cycle. This match made in heaven scenario rarely accords with reality.

                                                         20
vantage point of any member country of these currency unions, they do not have their own currency. At

the same time, the Central African Franc or the East Caribbean Dollar are pegged to the euro and US

dollar, respectively. Recalling that currency unions, a de jure peg, and exchange rate arrangement with no

separate legal tender are all in the same least flexible (see Table 2) category, the classification outcome is

narrowly circumscribed. In their respective chronologies, members of these currency unions appear

under the label currency union/peg. Their flexibility score is the same as for the EZ countries.


4. Inflation Targeting and the Exchange Rate Regime
     To integrate inflation targeting (IT) frameworks into our classification scheme, we begin by taking

stock of the global emergence of IT and the countries that adopted these policies. IT cases are far from

homogenous, spanning across regions, income levels, and exchange rate policies, among other

considerations. As shown in Table 3, which lists the countries that have adopted this policy framework,

the dates of its inception, and the de facto exchange rate regime classification on the basis of exchange

rate behavior, the proliferation of inflation targeting as a de-jure monetary regime has been a development

of that past two-three decades, with a more recent history in emerging markets. Since New Zealand

adopted an inflation target in 1989, close to 30 countries have followed suit. Nevertheless, with respect to

the exchange rate, the impact of inflation targeting has been far less widespread than a simple roll call of

IT countries might suggest.


     As Table 3 highlights, there is considerable variation in de facto exchange rate practices among

countries with a de jure IT policy framework. Among this group (as with non-IT cases), exchange rate

practices range from the freely floating currencies of Australia and the United Kingdom to Romania’s de

facto peg to the euro since 2012. The more flexible arrangements (Categories 3 and 4 in the coarse-grid

classification) include: the freely floating case, managed floating, and moving bands that are narrower

than or equal to +/-2 percent.17 Slightly less than 2/3rds of the IT group (17 of 27) falls into this basket.

De facto pegs, crawling pegs and narrow crawling bands (categories 1 and 2 in the coarse-grid

17
  A moving band refers to the cases where periods of sustained appreciations are also evident; with crawling bands,
changes are always in the direction of depreciation.

                                                        21
classification) make up the remaining ten IT countries. More than half of the Fix-IT group is from of

Emerging Europe.


       Table 3 suggests that the de-jure IT category masks significant differences in monetary practices and

that our classification provides information beyond the headline label of inflation targeting. In effect,

there is a subset of cases where the mantra of inflation targeting has hidden a continued “fear of floating”

by many central banks (Calvo and Reinhart, 2002).


       Beyond the analysis of the exchange rate through our various filters, we adopt two different but

complementary empirical strategies to assess whether the behavior of IT countries and their non-IT

counterparts are similar or distinct. First, we follow an event study approach. Specifically, we focus on

the collapse of Lehman Brothers in September 2008--a major global shock exogenous to the monetary

conduct of smaller economies. We also revisit the minutes of the FOMC meeting of June 17-18, 2014

(about a year following the Taper-Tantrum of May 2013) which produced a marked appreciation in the

US dollar that was particularly acute viz emerging market currencies. The response of IT and non IT

countries during these episodes are compared. Second, to assess if IT countries are less distinctive as a

group than advertised, we estimate an augmented Taylor rule (that includes a role for the exchange rate)

for the sample of IT cases.18


           evident for both de jure IT cases and the control group, which is comprised of countries without

an official inflation target. Faced with major external shocks, the exchange rates of inflation targeters

with a de facto crawling peg react almost identically on average to countries with a de facto peg and no

inflation target.


           The main take-away of the Taylor rule estimates is that countries with a de jure inflation target

are heterogeneous in their exchange rate practices. In countries we classify as having a crawling peg, the

policy interest rate responds less aggressively to inflation and more aggressively to exchange rate


18
     See Taylor (2001).

                                                       22
movements than in countries with flexible exchange arrangements, supporting the conclusions of the

event studies. These insights suggest that inflation targeting by itself is too vague and encompassing to

constitute a separate category as its own exchange rate arrangement. The de facto exchange rate

classification appears to do a far better job in predicting exchange rate variability in IT countries than the

de jure classification of inflation targeting.



                                        III: The “Big Picture”
        This section quantifies to what extent a handful of major currencies serve as anchors for the rest

of the world. Apart from documenting the exit of old anchors, the emergence of new ones, and the

resilience of some, our study attempts to shed light on the factors that determine which currencies prevail

or fail as anchors. We then shift emphasis from the anchor currency question to focus on the evolution of

exchange rate arrangements in the seven decades since World War II ended. Of particular interest is the

emergence of new types of de jure monetary and exchange rate arrangements and their degree of

exchange rate flexibility. We ask whether these arrangements are characterized by trends, say toward

greater exchange rate flexibility, or by long cycles with no clear-cut tendency. A new measure of capital

or foreign exchange restrictions is introduced.


    1. Anchor Currency
        Figure 3 presents two snapshots of the world with the information on anchor currencies displayed

in maps. This spatial view is shown for the years 1950 and 2015. Of course, comparable figures are

possible for all the intervening years, as all the information about currency anchors on a continuous basis

is contained in Ilzetzki, Reinhart and Rogoff (2016). The maps show that the dollar zone has expanded

considerably since 1950.




                                                      23
          Table 3: Countries with Inflation Targets and Their De Facto Exchange Rate Arrangements


Country                                Start date            Exchange rate arrangement

Armenia, Republic of                   January 2006          +/-2% crawling band. US dollar.
Australia                              June 1993             Freely floating
Brazil                                 June 1999             Managed floating
Canada                                 February 1991         Managed floating
Chile                                  September 1999        Managed floating
Colombia                               October 1999          Managed floating
Czech Republic                         December 1997         +/-2% band. Euro
Ghana                                  May 2007              De facto crawling peg and later +/-2% band. Large
                                                             devaluations and nearly freely falling.
                                                             Managed floating since December 2010.
Guatemala                              December 2005         Crawling peg
Hungary                                June 2001             De facto crawling band +/- 2% since 2009. Euro.
                                                             Broader band prior.
Iceland                                March 2003            Managed floating.
Indonesia                              July 2005             De facto crawling band +/-2 to 5% range,
                                                             depending on the sub-period considered. US dollar.
Israel                                 June 1997             Managed floating
Korea, Republic of                     April 1998            De facto moving band +/-2 to 5% range, depending
                                                             on the sub-period considered.
Mexico                                 December 2001         Managed floating
New Zealand                            December 1989         Managed floating
Norway                                 March 2001            De facto moving band +/-2%. Euro.
Peru                                   January 2002          De facto crawling band +/-2%. US dollar.
Philippines                            January 2002          De facto crawling band +/-2%. US dollar.
Poland                                 December 1998         De facto crawling band +/-2 to 5% range,
                                                             depending on the sub-period considered. Euro.
Romania                                August 2005           De facto peg since 2012. Euro. De facto crawling
                                                             band, 2-5%, depending on sub-period.
Serbia                                 January 2009          De facto crawling peg. Euro.
South Africa                           February 2000         Managed floating
Sweden                                 December 1995         De facto moving band +/-2% since 2008. Euro.
Thailand                               May 2000              De facto Moving band +/-2%. US dollar.
Turkey                                 January 2006          Managed floating
United Kingdom                         October 1992          Freely floating since January 2009. Moving band,
                                                             +/-2%. Euro earlier subsample.
Memorandum items:
Number (share) of IT cases with        17 (63%)              Australia, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Colombia,
more flexible arrangements (Coarse                           Iceland, Israel, Korea, Mexico, New Zealand,
grid 3-4)                                                    Norway, South Africa, Sweden, Thailand, Turkey,
                                                             United Kingdom, and Ghana more recently.
Number (share of IT cases with least   10 (37%)              Armenia, Czech Republic, Guatemala, Hungary,
flexible arrangements (Coarse grid                           Indonesia, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Romania, and
1-2)                                                         Serbia




                                                        24
        This growth has been due to two world developments. Chronologically, the first spurt to the

dollar zone in the years since 1950 comes from the dismantling of the sterling zone, as former British

colonies switched from British pounds to American dollars in the decades following the war. This

process was already underway by 1950, but gathered momentum with the UK’s sterling crisis of 1967 and

the country’s mounting economic difficulties. By the 1970s the transition out of pound sterling was

essentially complete, an issue we revisit in the next section.


        Second, the collapse of the former Soviet Union dismantled the sizable ruble block. Russia and

most of the former Soviet republics have since anchored to the dollar. Most of the Eastern European

nations that were either a part of the USSR (the Baltics) or satellites in the Soviet sphere left the ruble to

embrace first the German DM and later the euro. Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, the Slovak Republic and

Slovenia are now a part of the 19-country EZ. As the chronologies document, a number of the others in

the region have fairly tight links to the euro via de facto pegs or crawling pegs or narrow corridors.


        Shifting from a spatial view of selected years to the time-series dimension, Figure 4 presents the

evolution of four major anchor currencies from 1946 through 2015. The top panel shows the (unweighted)

share of countries anchored to each anchor currency. The bottom panel of Figure 4 presents the same

information but weighs the observations by each country’s share in world GDP. Two old anchor

currencies disappeared (the British pound and the French franc); one emerged in the 1970s only to

disappear (the German DM); a new currency emerges (the euro); and one prevails throughout (the US

dollar). In Figure 4, the French franc and German DM, both which transitioned to the euro in January

1999, are combined into a single zone for the 1946-1998 period.


        The Bretton Woods system institutionalized the role of the US dollar as the main anchor

currency, and until the 1970s, about 70 percent of global GDP was anchored to the dollar. The remainder

was split roughly evenly between the UK pound and the Soviet ruble. The end of the Bretton Woods era




                                                      25
in the 1970s witnessed the Deutschmark emerge as the dominant currency of Europe as many European

countries began to shadow the actions of the Bundesbank, explicitly or otherwise.


        Despite the fact that during this period the US dollar was the currency of choice among the

former British colonies that were exiting from the Sterling zone, the loss of comparatively high-income

Europe to the DM led to a shrinking of the dollar zone by 1980. This dent to the US dollar zone is

apparent in both top and bottom panels of Figure 4. At this time, another rising trend was reducing the

share of countries with a tight exchange rate link to the US dollar.


        By the late 1970s and into the 1990s, a significant proportion of countries in Latin America and

Africa (and some, like Vietnam, in Asia or Turkey in Europe) had freely falling currencies. 19 Chronic and

high inflation, and in numerous cases hyperinflation, meant that these countries were “anchorless” with

regards to their exchange rate, which steadily plummeted in value versus nearly all other currencies. As

inflationary crises became much less common in the 21st century (to date), nearly all the countries with

freely falling currencies in the late 1970s-1990s have re-anchored to the dollar. Arguably, one can

plausibly reinterpret the history of the freely falling cases and conclude that these countries maintained a

US dollar anchor even during the years of very high inflation, as their trade, debts, and hard-currency

reserves continued to be dominated by the US currency. In effect, during these long and chronic high

inflation bouts many of these countries became significantly dollarized domestically as well. 20 The one

place that the dollar link was not apparent was in their sinking currencies (which had decoupled from the

US dollar or any other currency).




19
   As noted in Figure 2 and Table 2, freely falling captures all the cases where the 12-month inflation rate exceeds
40 percent. The incidence of freely falling over 1946-2016 will be discussed later in this section.
20
   On de facto dollarization see, for instance, Calvo and Vegh (1999); Reinhart, Rogoff, and Savastano (2014) and
Ize and Levy Yeyati (2003)

                                                        26
Figure 3. The Geography of Anchor Currencies, 1950 and 2015

1950




2015




Sources: Currency Yearbook, various issues, International Monetary Fund, International Financial Statistics, Pick
and Sedillot (1971), Reinhart and Rogoff (2004) and sources cited therein.




                                                        27
Figure 4 Post-World War II Major Anchor Currencies

Share of countries, 1946-2015, excludes freely falling cases
100       Percent
 90

 80

 70

 60                      UK pound

 50

 40

 30

 20
                                                         French franc and German DM
                               US dollar                 (1946-1998) and Euro (1999-2015)
 10

  0
  1946M1            1956M1     1966M1      1976M1      1986M1       1996M1       2006M1



Number of countries weighted by their share in world GDP, 1950-2015, excludes freely falling cases
 100        Percent

  90
                        UK pound

  80

  70

  60

  50

  40                                                            French franc and German DM
                         US dollar                              (1950-1998) and Euro
  30

  20

  10

      0
      1950M1          1960M1     1970M1       1980M1      1990M1        2000M1        2010M1


Sources: The Conference Board Total Economy Database, International Monetary Fund International Financial
Statistics, Reinhart and Rogoff (2004) sources cited therein, and authors’ calculations
Note: The Country Chronologies that supplement this paper show the evolution of the anchor currency on a country-
by-country basis.




                                                        28
           The dollar dip was eventually largely reversed by the collapse of the Soviet Union and the global

disinflation trend from the mid-1990s. The latter translated to a sharp reduction in the share freely falling

currencies, which are recorded in our methodology as having no particular currency anchor. The French

franc zone, which had its largest roots in French Africa and most explicit connection to the CFA currency

arrangement, held a steady share throughout this period until it was replaced by the euro in early 1999.

           The DM zone, which in 1999 was consolidated with the French franc area under the aegis of the

euro, expanded to encompass approximately 20 percent of global GDP by the start of the 21st century.

Since then, the proportion of world GDP that is anchored to the Euro has declined. The UK pound has

delinked from its former euro anchor and importantly the Eurozone’s share of global GDP has declined.

The shrinking euro area (as a share of world GDP) has both external causes, the growth of China and

other emerging market economies (an issue we take up in the next section) and the severe nature of the

crisis of 2008-2009, which affected so many EZ members.21


       2. Drivers of Anchor Currencies
           Although Japan eventually emerged from the devastation of World War II as one of the world’s

most dynamic economies with a share of world GDP that peaks close to 10 percent in the early 1990s, the

Japanese yen has not figured in our discussion of post-war anchor or reserve currencies. Indeed, given

Japan’s wide global trade network, it is somewhat of a puzzle that the yen never takes its place among the

world’s major anchor currencies. In this section, we discuss some of the factors that help determine

whether a particular currency gains ground in the global theater or not.


           We now explore a number of factors that may potentially determine the choice of anchor

currency. Each of these factors has been used elsewhere as an indicator of the dollar’s global reach. So

this exercise can also be seen as a cross-check that our anchor classifications are a useful summary

measure of these factors. Table 4 studies four reserve currencies (dollar, euro, pound, and yen) and reports

the share of countries that are anchored to each as well as a number of factors that may explain their roles


21
     See Reinhart and Rogoff (2014).

                                                      29
as global currencies. These factors include the share of world reserves held in this currency, the share of

developing country debt that is denominated in the anchor currency, and an index that summarizes the

extent to which world trade is denominated in the anchor currency. The trade invoicing index is based on

trade


Table 4: Markers of a Reserve Currency
(figures for 2015, unless otherwise noted)

Anchor measure or criteria: US dollar                                                              Percent
Share of countries with a US dollar anchor in their exchange rate arrangements                     62
Share of world’s reserves (excluding gold) in US dollars                                           65
Share of developing country external debt denominated in US dollars. (This does not include debt   64
owed to China that are denominated in US dollars)
Trade invoicing “index”                                                                            69
Memorandum item:
Share of the US in world GDP                                                                       18

Anchor measure or criteria: Euro                                                                   Percent
Share of countries with a euro anchor in their exchange rate arrangements                          28
Share of world’s reserves (excluding gold) in euro                                                 20
Share of developing country external debt denominated in euro                                      13
Trade invoicing “index”                                                                            55.5
Memorandum item:
Share of the Eurozone in world GDP                                                                 11.8
Share of France and Germany in World GDP                                                           5.6

Anchor measure or criteria: UK pound                                                               Percent
Share of countries with a pound anchor in their exchange rate arrangements                         Nil
Share of world’s reserves (excluding gold) in pounds                                               4
Share of developing country external debt is denominated in pounds                                 Less than 1
Trade invoicing “index”                                                                            8.5
Memorandum item:
Share of UK in World GDP                                                                           2.7

Anchor measure or criteria: Japanese yen                                                           Percent
Share of countries with a yen anchor in their exchange rate arrangements                           nil
Share of world’s reserves (excluding gold) in euro                                                 4
Share of developing country external debt is denominated in euro                                   6
Trade invoicing “index”                                                                            9.6
Memorandum item:
Share of Japan in World GDP                                                                        5

Sources: The Conference Board Total Economy Database, Gopinanth (2015), International Monetary Fund
International Financial Statistics, Reinhart and Rogoff (2004) sources cited therein, World Bank, and authors’
calculations.
Note: The Country Chronologies that supplement this paper show the evolution of the anchor currency on a country-
by-country basis. GDP in millions of 1990 US$ (converted at Geary Khamis PPPs)




                                                        30
invoicing data from Gopinath (2015) and is detailed in Appendix 4. It averages the percent of countries

with any trade invoiced in a given anchor currency with the share of all trade invoiced in that currency.


            The picture emerging from Table 5 is fairly consistent across indicators and confirms our

assessment that the US dollar stands out as the dominant anchor. Based on the classification approach

outlined in Section II, as of 2016 the dollar serves as the anchor or reference currency for 62 percent of

the 195 countries that are a part of our study. About two-thirds of the worlds’ foreign exchange reserves

are held in US dollars and a comparable share of developing and emerging market economies’ external

debt is denominated in greenbacks.22 Both in magnitude and relative importance, these numbers align

with our own estimates on exchange rate arrangements. Finally, the US scores 69 percent on the trade

invoicing index, a score that exceeds that of any other anchor currency.


            The only other major anchor currency, by our classification, is the euro, to which 28% of

countries have an anchor. This figure somewhat overstates the euro’s global reach as the euro’s sphere of

influence appears to be confined to Europe (including emerging Europe). The factors show a similarly

consistent picture on the role of the euro as a far second. While the trade invoicing indicator has a fairly

high reading (intra-Europe trade is significant), the other indicators on reserves and external debt are

considerably lower than their readings for the US dollar. Asia, Latin America, the Middle East and much

of Africa (CFA Zone notwithstanding) is dominated by the use of the dollar as a reserve currency.


            We are not aware of any country that either pegs to or shadows the yen or UK pound at present.

Indeed, apart from its colonies prior to World War II or its occupied territories during that war, Japan’s

currency served as an anchor only for the domestic economy and even then one which had competition

from the dollar. The trade invoicing indicator gives some insight why the UK pound and Japanese yen

have very limited status as world anchor currencies during this period. For each of the factors, the score is

less than 1/7th of the dollar’s combined score. The late Ronald McKinnon, in several of his papers on what



22
     See also Faudot and Ponsot (2016).

                                                       31
he called East Asia’s dollar standard, emphasized this point.23 Only the euro comes close to the use of the

dollar in trade invoicing. In fact, as Gopinanth’s (2015) data highlights, about 50 percent of Japan’s

exports and over 70 percent of its imports are denominated in US dollars. Furthermore, Japan’s link to the

US dollar lasted longer than Europe’s and well past the breakdown of the Bretton Woods arrangements,

as Japan maintained a narrow de facto band until 1977 (see the companion chronologies to this paper.)



       3. Exchange Rate Arrangements
       Having described the trends in anchor currencies, we now turn to the global evolution of exchange

arrangements. Figure 5 provides a spatial view of exchange rate arrangements in 1950, the early Bretton

Woods era and recent experience (2015), comparable to what Figure 3 showed for anchor currencies. In

each map, countries are shaded based on their coarse exchange rate classification, with lighter shades

indicating greater exchange rate flexibility.


       In the early years, the majority of countries participated in the Bretton Woods system, pegging their

currencies to the US dollar, which itself was convertible to gold at a fixed rate. Why then do large tracts

of Europe show up as more flexible managed arrangements in Figure 5? The answer lies directly with the

first question we pose in our classification algorithm, as illustrated by Figure 2: Is the exchange rate

unitary? In nearly all of post-war Europe through the mid-1950s, the answer to that question was a

resounding no. While there was an official parity registered with the IMF and its gold equivalent, in

practice this was an era of comprehensive and widespread foreign exchange and capital account

restrictions of multiple exchange rate practices, as discussed at length in DeVries (1969) and (1987). A

widespread dollar shortage at the time (see a summary in Reinhart, 2016) drove parallel market premia

sky high (often into three digits). The gyration in the parallel market provided what Reinhart and Rogoff

(2004) called back-door floating.




23
     See, for example, McKinnon and Schnabl (2004).

                                                      32
     On the other side of the iron curtain, many of the remaining countries were in the Soviet block and

had pegs to the ruble. If Western Europe’s exchange arrangements at that time were decidedly opaque,

the arrangements of the Eastern bloc were outright inscrutable. Multiple exchange rate practices were the

norm and the Soviet Union and Yugoslavia could, at any point in time, list administered exchange rates

by the dozen. Continued scarcity meant that black currency markets were active despite repression.

Unlike the Western European countries, for which we have the parallel market exchange rate data, we do

not have their counterpart. Hence, we leave these cases under the label Parallel markets-no data.


         The geographical snapshot of Bretton Woods in 1950 and 2015 is supplemented by the time

series profile over 1946-2016 shown in Figure 6 in three panels. The first of these panels traces the

evolution of the least flexible arrangements (Coarse classifications 1 and 2, as defined in Table 2) while

the second presents the more flexible arrangements (Coarse classifications 3 and 4). The third panel

traces out the incidence of the dysfunctional freely falling category as well as those cases where there are

dual or multiple exchange rate practices or an active parallel market and we do not have time series data

on the parallel market exchange rate that allows us to classify the arrangement by its degree of flexibility.

Figure 6 only includes independent (sovereign) states, which means that the total number of entities more

than doubles over the course of the sample, from 79 in 1946 to 188 in 2016.24 To offer a clearer picture

of the incidence of regimes across countries and avoid presenting a global picture that is dominated by a

handful of very large economies, we first report the unweighted tally for each regime.




24
  There are six territories for which we have a full classification, bringing the total to 194. As we also have the pre-
independence de facto exchange rate arrangements, Figure 6 can be also reproduced for all countries and territories,
which would mean 194 entries for each year.

                                                          33
Figure 5. The Geography of Exchange Rate Arrangements, 1950 and 2015

1950




                                                                                                      \


2015




Sources: Currency Yearbook, various issues, International Monetary Fund, International Financial Statistics, Pick
and Sedillot (1971), Reinhart and Rogoff (2004) and sources cited therein.




                                                       34
         The most striking feature of Figure 6 (top panel) is that if the two least flexible arrangements

(Coarse 1 and 2) are combined, the share of countries living with limited exchange rate flexibility is about

the same today as at the outset of the sample under Bretton Woods.25 This aggregate masks the fact that

within these two groups there was a significant migration from the explicit de jure pegs that we tend to

associate with the post-war Bretton Woods era to the still limited flexibility arrangements (Coarse Grid 2)

that have more “escape valves” either because they allow for a drift in the exchange rate over time

(crawling pegs), because they are de facto and not de jure arrangements—so there is no explicit

commitment to “maintain the peg” and therefore adjustments to the pegs are often discretionary--or a

combination of the two. It is evident in Figure 6 that Coarse grid 2 arrangements were virtually

nonexistent until well into the 1950s only to gain in popularity post-1980s.


         The incidence of managed and free floats (second panel) re-enforces the finding that flexible

arrangements are not as commonplace since the breakdown of Bretton Woods as one might have thought

or as the IMF’s classifications suggest. Freely floating exchange rates after all these years are still largely

confined to a few wealthy economies. If instead of focusing on the share of countries in each category, we

were to weigh the aggregation by the country shares in world GDP, as is done in Figure 7 (second panel

for the floaters), then the share of floaters about doubles from less than 20 percent in Figure 6 to

somewhere between 30 and 40 percent, as shown in Figure 7. Since the United States and Japan float

freely, this already accounts for 23 percent of world GDP, as Table 4 makes plain. Thus, to develop a

sense of country practices around the world, Figure 6 is far more suited to the task.




25
  The classification regime studied by Klein and Shambaugh (2010) is broadly similar in spirit to ours and (we
believe) would also show that the rise in reserves coincided with a rise in the weight of less flexible exchange rate
regimes. Another widely used system, Levy-Yeyati and Sturzegger (2005) gives this result to some extent by
construction, since it includes reserve accumulation (where available) in its algorithm for detecting exchange rate
inflexibility.

                                                          35
Figure 6. De Facto Exchange Rate Arrangements, Coarse Classification, 1946-2016:
Share of (independent) countries in each group

Groups 1 and 2: Less flexibility, primarily nominal exchange rate anchors
         100 Percent
                           Group 2: Gradualist adjustment (from crawling
          90               peg to narrow crawling bands)
          80
          70
          60
          50
          40
          30
          20           Group 1: Least flexible (from no separate legal
                       tender to de facto pegs)
          10
           0
            1940    1950     1960    1970    1980    1990    2000    2010



Groups 3 and 4: Flexibility, primarily interest rate, money and most inflation target arrangements

         100 Percent
          90
          80
          70
          60
          50                                        Group 4: Freely floating
          40                                        (few high-income cases)
          30           Group 3: Broad bands and
                       managed floating
          20
          10
           0
            1940    1950     1960    1970    1980    1990    2000    2010




                                                    36
Figure 6 (concluded) De Facto Exchange Rate Arrangements, Coarse Classification, 1946-2016:
Share of (independent) countries in each group

Groups 5 and 6: Flexibly unstable: Anchorless
                Percent

                 100
                  90
                  80
                  70
                  60
                                                                 Group 5: Freeely falling,
                  50      Group 6: Multiple, Dual, or             inflation > 40%
                          parallel markets with limited or       or currency crash
                  40
                          no data on the structure of
                  30       exchange rates
                  20
                  10
                   0
                    1940       1950    1960    1970      1980     1990     2000     2010

Sources: International Monetary Fund International Financial Statistics and Exchange Arrangements and Exchange
Restrictions, Reinhart and Rogoff (2004) sources cited therein, numerous detailed country sources listed in the Data
Appendix, and authors’ calculations.

        The third panel of Figures 6 and 7 highlights that freely falling went into a hiatus early in the 21st

century. The wave of hyperinflations that spread across former Soviet Republics came to an end. Also

the resolution of the debt crisis of the 1980s in the mid-1990s re-opened international capital markets for

many large emerging markets (Brazil, Mexico, Poland, among others), which meant that these countries

that had relied heavily on inflationary finance had other options available to them. The spread of inflation

targeting to emerging markets that began in the late 1990s (Table 3) has also contributed to the lower

global incidence of inflationary crises. Some resurgence of high inflation should not be ruled out; now in

the third year of a sharp decline in oil and commodity prices losses in revenues, depleted foreign

exchange reserves and markedly slowing economic activity may drive some countries back to inflationary

finance. The most extreme case is Venezuela (estimated inflation is well over 800 percent in 2016) but

other countries in Africa are reporting inflation rates that are climbing back into double digits.



                                                        37
        These figures also include the share of cases where we can document that there were de jure

parallel markets or multiple exchange rates but we simply do not have the parallel market data to classify

these cases according to their flexibility. Most of the cases in that group come from either the soviet ruble

bloc or low income countries where data collection on parallel rates is patchy or nonexistent. Our

documentation of the post-2014 re appearance of parallel markets (more of this to follow) relies heavily

on the financial press and web-based sources rather than on a single publication or official sources.


    Finally, Figure 8 shows how our classification contrasts with that of the IMF in 2014: the last year for

which the IMF classification was available. It compares the percentage of world GDP classified in each

(coarse) exchange rate regime according to our and the IMF’s classifications. In addition to classifying all

Eurozone as freely floating, the IMF classified a larger number of inflation targeting countries as having

flexible arrangements. These differences lead to very different conclusions of the international monetary

system. The IMF classifies 70 percent of world GDP as either freely floating, managed floating or

floating (an intermediate category that we do not use). Nearly all other countries are classified as having a

crawling peg, leaving a negligible fraction of the world economy in a fixed exchange arrangement.


        Based on this classification one might conclude (incorrectly in our view) that the world has made

enormous strides towards exchange rate flexibility and that fixed exchange rates are essentially a thing of

the past. In contrast, we find that the world is roughly evenly divided between more flexible exchange

arrangements (freely or managed floats) and crawling or hard pegs. In the latter category, most pegs are

hard (in fact, mostly countries with no separate legal tender). Our conclusions point to far greater

constancy in the international monetary system than the seismic shift suggested by the IMF’s

classification.




                                                     38
Figure 7. De Facto Exchange Rate Arrangements, Coarse Classification, 1946-2016: Arrangement
Categories as Shares of World GDP


        Groups 1 and 2: Less flexibility, primarily nominal exchange rate anchors
           100 Percent
             90
             80
             70                                             Group 2: De facto Crawling
             60                                             Bands in developing
                                                            and emeging markets
             50
             40
                     Group 1: De jure
             30      pegs become rarer
             20      but de facto less so.

             10
              0
               1950          1960        1970        1980         1990          2000          2010



Groups 3 and 4: Flexibility, primarily interest rate, money and most (not all) inflation targeters

 100              Percent

  90
  80
  70
                                                    Group 4: Freely floating, few but
                                                    high income
  60
                  Group 3: Wide bands and managed
  50              floating , in some casesin
  40               parallel markets
  30
  20
  10
   0
    1950           1960        1970          1980        1990            2000          2010




                                                         39
Figure 7 (concluded) De Facto Exchange Rate Arrangements, Coarse Classification, 1946-2016:
Arrangement Categories as Shares of World GDP

Groups 5 and 6: Flexibly unstable: Anchorless
                 Percent
          100
            90
            80
            70
            60
            50
            40                                                      Group 5: Chronic inflation and
                      Group 6: Lack of convertibility               currency crashes
            30
                      is common                                      are a significant share
            20
            10
             0
              1950         1960      1970       1980         1990        2000      2010


Sources: International Monetary Fund International Financial Statistics and Exchange Arrangements and Exchange
Restrictions, Reinhart and Rogoff (2004) sources cited therein, numerous detailed country sources listed in the Data
Appendix, and authors’ calculations.

Figure 8: Share of World GDP by Exchange Arrangement: Ilzetzki, Reinhart and Rogoff (2016) and IMF
(2014)


                           100%

                           90%

                           80%

                           70%
                                                                        Freely
                           60%
                                                                        Floating
                           50%                                          Floating
                           40%
                                                                        Managed
                           30%
                                                                        Float
                           20%                                          Crawling Peg
                           10%

                             0%                                         Fixed
                                       IRR             IMF

                                                        40
     4. Capital Mobility, Multiple Exchange Rates, and Parallel Markets
        In much of the literature on exchange rate arrangement classification, the closely related issue of

capital mobility has often been ignored altogether. This omission is at odds with the discussions in the

closely related literature on the Impossible Trinity (Frankel 1999) and the Policy Trilemma or Dilemma

(Obstfeld and Taylor 2003, Obstfeld et al 2005, Gourinchas and Obstfeld 2012, Rey 2013). These papers

pointedly connect the choice of exchange rate regime not only to the ability to conduct independent

monetary policy (an issue we have discussed in the previous section in connection with the classification

of Eurozone regimes and inflation targeting) but also to the prevalence of capital mobility. We concur that

a profile of the global financial system that includes a discussion of reserve currencies, exchange rate

arrangements, and monetary policy would be incomplete without an assessment of developments in

capital market integration.


        To this end, we compile here a (0,1) index of capital mobility that offers insights into the big

question of the extent of integration of capital markets over the course of 1946-2016. The index we

choose is a narrow measure of capital restrictions and we discuss the limitations of our chosen index in

detail below. As described in Section II, the first step of our classification is to determine whether the

exchange rate is unitary or not. The IMF’s AEAER provides an annual update on whether a country has

an official dual market or multiple exchange rate practices. Indeed, this report offers detailed information

on the extent of many other capital account restrictions.


        The work of Chinn and Ito (2006 and updates) covering 1970-2014 and Fernandez et. al. (2015)

covering 1995-2013 exploited a broad range of the information provided by AEAER to construct a

variety of measures of capital mobility.26 Our exercise is a contribution to these efforts in a narrow but

important dimension. Our interest is confined to the record on unitary/dual/multiple exchange rate

practices that the AEAER compiles; regular publications by Franz Pick (various issues and Pick and

Sedillot, 1971) contribute importantly to the chronology on dual markets. This record is supplemented by

26
  See Quinn, Schindler and Toyoda (2011) for an assessment of this literature and Quinn (2003) for an insightful
long view spanning 1890-1999.

                                                        41
information on parallel market exchange rates. Depending on the era and the region, parallel markets

have accounted for a significant share of the activity in foreign exchange markets. Tighter capital account

restrictions are often accompanied by higher parallel market premia.27 The monthly index we provide for

194 countries or territories from 1946 through 2016 is based on the answers to three questions: (i) is there

a de jure dual market? (ii) is there a de jure system of multiple exchange rates? (iii) is there a parallel

market (official, tolerated or outright illegal) and if there is, is the parallel market premium above 10

percent over the majority of a moving 12-month period? If the answer is yes to any of the three questions

above, the index takes on the value of one. It is zero otherwise.


         As noted, this measure of capital mobility is not as comprehensive as others which incorporate

specific measures that are designed to limit or ban capital outflows or inflows, regulate the repatriation of

profits abroad, cap foreign ownership, require the surrender of foreign exchange receipts, etc. We suggest,

however, that this index is informative as a “minimum measure” of restrictions nonetheless. While a

country can have many of the capital account restrictions listed above (or others) and still have a de facto

as well as a de jure unified exchange rate, the converse is not true. First, if the answer is yes to questions

(i) and (ii), these are de jure controls. Second, if the answer to question (iii) is yes, it is difficult to see

how a significant and sustained gap between the official exchange rate and the parallel market exchange

rate can persist in a country where there is a high degree of capital mobility. De facto (if not de jure)

capital mobility would tend to equalize those rates.28 Therefore there must be other restrictions or market

imperfections that prevent this from happening.


         With the caveats in mind that this measure may be overstating the degree of capital mobility and

that in reality capital controls are seldom a (0,1) process, the top panel of Figure 9 plots the index (as a

share of all independent countries) with and without weights that reflect country shares in world GDP.

While the index is available since 1946, GDP weights are only available for these many countries since
27
   The premium is defined as (spt – st)/st, the percentage difference between the parallel market and the official
exchange rate.
28
   De facto capital mobility refers here to cases where the existing de jure controls are not binding, either because
these are being circumvented or because they have become outmoded or obsolete.

                                                           42
1950. About 70 percent of all countries did not meet the criteria of a unified exchange market in 1950. In

the 1960s that share drops to around 50 percent, as many advanced economies move to eliminate multiple

exchange rate practices (an important goal of the IMF at the time, as discussed by De Vries (1969) and

shown in the bottom panel of Figure 9) and the post-war dollar shortage is less acute. The next round of

capital market integration occurs in the 1990s as the former Soviet bloc joins global capital markets

alongside the emerging markets that regain capital market access after a long debt crisis.


        Since mid-2014, many developing and emerging markets, particularly (but not exclusively) those

that rely on primary commodity exports, have seen foreign exchange reserves dry up and governments

have turned once again to capital controls. Under these conditions, parallel markets have re-emerged,

particularly in Africa, the Middle East and Central Asia. Parallel market premia have risen, in several

cases into the three and even four digit range. Despite this recent revival of foreign exchange controls,

which has been mostly confined to lower income countries, global capital mobility (by this measure) is

higher since the mid-1990s. Perhaps the combination of increasingly mobile capital across borders and

the stubbornly high share of countries that continue with exchange rate arrangements that have limited

flexibility (Figure 6) can help explain the sustained and unprecedented rise in the emerging world’s

demand for reserves. The next section takes up this and related issues.




                                                     43
Figure 9. Share of Independent Countries with Dual, Multiple, or Parallel Exchange Rates,
January 1950-September 2016
All independent countries
  100

   90

   80

   70

   60
                                         Share of countries (solid line)
   50

   40

   30

   20
               Share weighted by GDP (dashed line)
   10

     0
    1950M1      1960M1      1970M1      1980M1        1990M1     2000M1      2010M1

Advanced economies

 90

 80

 70

 60
                     Share of countries(solid line)
 50

 40

 30                                       Share weighted by GDP (dashed line)
 20

 10

   0
  1950M1     1960M1      1970M1      1980M1      1990M1     2000M1     2010M1


Sources: International Monetary Fund International Financial Statistics and Exchange Arrangements and Exchange
Restrictions, Reinhart and Rogoff (2004) sources cited therein, and authors’ calculations.
Note: The Country Chronologies that supplement this paper show the evolution of the anchor currency on a country-
by-country basis and whether a system of dual, multiple, or parallel exchange rates was in place. The number of
countries increases from 72 in 1946 to 184 in 2016.




                                                       44
         IV. Trilemmas and Dilemmas; Triffin and the Impossible Trinity
        Having developed a quantitative assessment of the global evolution of the world’s reserve

currencies, exchange rate arrangements, and international capital mobility over seven decades, we turn

our attention to a broad set of questions regarding the implications of the established trends and some

potential risks in the current global financial system. We begin by revisiting a topic that has attracted the

attention of academics and policy makers alike for more than a decade now: the surge in reserve

accumulation since the early 2000s by emerging markets in general and China in particular. The

possibility of a modern version of the Triffin dilemma has been recently addressed in Farhi, Gourinchas

and Rey (2011), Obstfeld (2013), and Farhi and Maggiori (2016)—we connect that discussion to our data,

including the rise in managed exchange rates despite increasing capital mobility


     1. The Impossible Trinity and the 2003-2013 Reserve Surge
        Since the International Monetary Fund was established at the end of World War II, no period has

witnessed a comparable surge in the stock of reserves held by central banks across the world. As is well

known, this war chest of reserves was built primarily by emerging markets, notably Asia, and most

famously China. A fast-growing literature has examined the causes of that growth. Some papers have

stressed the precautionary, self-insurance motive (see, Gourinchas and Obstfeld, 2012, for instance)

while others have highlighted the mercantilist motive and the desire to avoid or limit exchange rate

appreciation (Aizenman and Lee, 2007, Dooley et al, 2003). Figure 10 plots world reserves—and their

emerging market and developing country component—scaled by US GDP. US GDP was the scale

variable of choice, as the US dollar remains the dominant reserve currency by what appears to be a

widening margin.29




29
  A variant of this Figure could pair reserves held in US dollars to US GDP and another variant could pair world
reserves to world GDP. This latter version would be far less informative since what we want to ultimately focus on
are the North-South trends (more of this to follow).

                                                        45
Figure 10: World Reserves minus Gold (US dollars) as a percent of US GDP (Principal anchor currency
country), 1948-2015
   Percent
140
                                                               Reserves minus gold/
120                                                            US GDP

             The Bretton Woods
100          system


 80                                                                      World

 60


 40


 20

                                                          Emerging and Developing countries
  0
      1948 1952 1956 1960 1964 1968 1972 1976 1980 1984 1988 1992 1996 2000 2004 2008 2012




Sources: International Monetary Fund International Financial Statistics, Bureau of Economic Analysis, and authors’
calculations.

          Apart from the aforementioned self-insurance or mercantilist motivation, we would add that the

Impossible Trinity offers insights why reserve accumulation accelerated so markedly in the past decade.

This motivation for reserve accumulation has been suggested by Korinek (2013), Bussiere et al (2015),

and Heathcoate and Perri (2016) among others. Countries that want to simultaneously limit exchange rate

fluctuations and reduce their reliance on capital controls or other administrative measures will rely more

heavily on the use of foreign exchange reserves and interest rate policy to achieve their goals. Other

things equal, a country that is fully committed to a floating exchange rate will require lower levels of

reserves, even with a fully open capital account.

          In connecting this discussion to the data, we recall that in the previous section it was shown

(Figure 6, top panel) that limited flexibility arrangements still dominate the landscape. At the same time,

we estimated that about 80 percent of all countries had abandoned the kinds of exchange controls that led

to a fragmented foreign exchange market (Figure 9 top panel). These two trends in exchange rate

arrangements and capital market integration are connected in Figure 11. Because we are focusing on the

unweighted measures, the series start in 1946. Figure 12, top and bottom panels connect reserve



                                                       46
accumulation to the rising share of countries with limited exchange rate flexibility (top panel) and the

decline in exchange controls, or rising capital mobility (bottom panel).

Figure 11: Exchange Rate Arrangements and Capital Mobility, 1946-2016

 90
                                                  Share of countries with less flexible
 80                                               exchange rate regimes
 70
 60
 50
 40
 30
 20                       Share of countries with
                          dual/multiple/parallel exchange rates
 10
  0
      1946       1956         1966         1976          1986        1996         2006     2016

Source: The authors, based on Figures 6 and 8.

         As documented by Reinhart, Reinhart and Trebesch (2016), since the early 2000s, emerging

markets faced a “double bonanza” of booming commodity prices and surging capital inflows. Apart from

an acute but brief interruption during the Global Financial Crisis 2008-2009, this process resumed in full

force up to the time of the Taper Tantrum in May 2013, following the Federal Reserve’s announcement to

scale back from their accommodative policy stance. Also at this time, China began to slow and

commodity prices started to slide. As Figure 10 highlights, that also marks the peak in reserves for both

the world and the emerging markets. Leaning against the wind of an appreciation and a “double bonanza”

with mobile capital may have required the significant reserve build up. While on the surface, this sounds

like a mercantilist explanation, it also encompasses the precautionary motive, as bonanzas often end in

large current account deficits and often financial crisis. The arguments advanced in Levy Yeyati,

Sturzenegger and Guzman’s (2013) “Fear of Appreciation” may also help motivate the reserve

accumulation in some countries during the double bonanza decade.




                                                        47
         The trends in reserves, exchange rate flexibility, and capital mobility shown here are not a

substitute for popular explanations that stress self-insurance and mercantilist motives behind the 2003-

2013 historic episode of reserve accumulation. Yet these components of the impossible trinity perhaps

merit a larger role than they were assigned in the large pool of studies on the topic. The role of growth

differentials in the advanced and emerging economies, which we turn to next, is another trend influencing

the demand and supply of international reserves.

Figure 12: Reserves and Two Sides of the Impossible Trinity, 1950-2015

The incidence of limited exchange rate flexibility

 90
                                           Share of countries with less flexible
 80                                        exchange rate regimes
 70

 60

 50

 40

 30

 20
                                      Share of emerging and developing country
 10                                   reserves in total world reserves
  0
      1950       1960         1970         1980         1990        2000           2010




                                                     48
Are reserves a substitute for capital controls?
 80

 70
             Share of countries with dual/multiple
 60          parallel exchange rates
 50

 40

 30

 20           Emerging and developing country
              reserves/ US GDP
 10

  0
      1946        1956      1966      1976      1986        1996      2006       2016


Sources: International Monetary Fund International Financial Statistics, Bureau of Economic Analysis, and authors’
calculations.

      2. The Triffin Dilemma
             With recovery from the war underway in Europe and a sustained expansion in global trade, the

global demand for reserves grew rapidly in the 1950s and 1960s. Reserves, at that time, usually took two

forms: gold and dollar assets (US government debt or greenbacks) which were also linked to gold, in that

the gold content of the major (and numerous minor) currencies had been registered at the IMF. Given

that the world’s gold supplies were not increasing as fast as the demand for reserves, an expanding share

of the world’s reserve assets came to be paper denominated in US dollars. The rest of the world’s appetite

for dollars could be met by the US issuing more dollar debt and selling it to the rest of the world. In the

balance of payments, this would require the US to run sustained current account deficits, but importantly,

a fiscal deficit, as Obstfeld (2013) observes. However, fulfilling the demand for reserves also meant that

over time the ratio of “paper dollar” reserves to gold reserves was steadily rising (as shown in Figure 13).

Until 1969, the “paper-to-gold ratio had been hovering around 0.5, but in a couple of years in the very

early 1970s it quadrupled to almost two.

   Figure 13: Ratio of Total Reserves minus Gold (US dollars) to Gold Reserves (US dollars):
                                       World, 1948-2015


                                                       49
  Ratio of non-gold to gold reserves
12



10



 8



 6



 4
                      The Triffin dilemma

 2



 0
  1948 1952 1956 1960 1964 1968 1972 1976 1980 1984 1988 1992 1996 2000 2004 2008 2012



Sources: International Monetary Fund International Financial Statistics and authors’ calculations.

         To maintain the official dollar/gold parity, the US would have had to restrict its supply of dollars

and cease to borrow from the rest of the world, that is run a current account surplus, which in the context

of the time meant running a fiscal surplus. The incompatibility of the national goals to maintain the parity

and the international role to serve as sole provider of the reserve currency is the essence of the dilemma

that Robert Triffin (1960) foresaw as a risk to the Bretton Woods system.

         As the supply of dollars rose (relative to gold reserves) the gap between the parallel market price

of gold and the official US price of gold (then set at $35 per ounce) widened (Figure 13). Two increases

in the official price of gold (tantamount to a devaluation of the dollar) in December 1971 and February

1973 were not sufficient to correct the “overvaluation” of the dollar. The Bretton Woods system came to

an end in March 1973, when the dollar and other major currencies were allowed to float.




                                                         50
     Figure 14: Official and Parallel Market Price of Gold, United States December 1969-December 1973

                 Price in US $
              145US $

              125
                                                                                                  New York parallel
              105                                                                                 market price of gold

               85

               65
                                                                                                                                          US Official price
                                                                                                                                          of gold
               45

               25
                    Dec-69




                                                        Dec-70




                                                                                                                                 Dec-72




                                                                                                                                                                     Dec-73
                                                                                             Dec-71
                                      Jun-70




                                                                                                               Jun-72




                                                                                                                                                   Jun-73
                                                                          Jun-71
                                               Sep-70




                                                                                   Sep-71




                                                                                                                        Sep-72




                                                                                                                                                            Sep-73
                             Mar-70




                                                                                                                                          Mar-73
                                                                 Mar-71




                                                                                                      Mar-72
Sources: World Currency Reports (various issues) and World Currency Yearbooks (various issues).

      3. Triffin II?
          The underpinings of a modern version of the Triffin dilemma has been recently addressed in

Farhi, Gourinchas and Rey (2011) and Obstfeld (2013), who also revisits the 1970s episode. Farhi and

Maggiori (2016) add to the discussion, by primarily focusing on the supply of the reserve asset, which

includes the possibility of a small group of suppliers, as well as the hegemon case. They note that ﬁscal

capacity, reputation, and pricing currency in the goods market are the key factors that importantly

determine the emergence of a hegemon. The demand for reserves is not their focal point. We connect

some of the issues raised in these studies to our data. In particular, the data on exchange rate

arrangements, currency preferences, and capital mobility help to shape and quantify the potential demand

for reserves. Of particular interest is the connection between exchange rate arrangements and the demand

for reserves, as the surge in the reserves during 2003-2013 came from the official sector (the central

banks) in emerging markets (see, for instance, Alfaro, Kalemli-Ozcan, Volosovych, 2014).30




30
  For instance, it would be quite interesting to consider in a Farhi and Maggiori (2016) setting the demand
implications of a hegemon (People’s Bank) or small but influential group (ASEAN).

                                                                                            51
           Our point of departure is in line with Obstfeld (2013), who observes that the first asymmetry

driving the modern-day Triffin dilemma is that “the emerging and developing world is growing more

quickly than the more creditworthy industrial world. While “the second asymmetry is that the main

advanced countries remain more creditworthy on average than the poorer countries.” We would re-write

the first statement to read that the emerging and developing world is growing more quickly than industrial

world. It is certainly true that advanced economies are more creditworthy than the poor ones. Yet, the

severe and lasting impacts of the global financial crisis, the continued debt build-up in Japan and other

countries have had an effect on the reputational standing, of several advanced economies, as measured by

their credit ratings. With regard to the Triffin dilemma this is not a trivial point, as it distinctly shrinks the

pool of assets that qualify as reserves. Furthermore, because of deflation and the precarious state of the

banking sector, in many cases large scale purchases by the domestic central banks are further impacting

the supply of reserve assets.31

           When examining measures of economic activity that separate the world into advanced economies

and emerging or developing countries it becomes evident that over the past 15 years or so, there are signs

of some degree of convergence. As in the original Triffin episode, the increase in the demand for reserves

that have accompanied this rebalancing has been unprecedented, as already discussed. The cumulative

effect of the persistent growth gap between emerging and advanced economies is evident in Figure 15,

which shows the shares of world GDP for advanced and emerging economies from 1950 through 2015.

Emerging and developing countries now account for about 60 percent of world GDP, far higher that at

any time in the past. Given that advanced economy growth prospects remain subdued, these trends are

likely to continue (even with the evident slowing in China and other emerging markets.)

           To reiterate, the connection of these trends to the Triffin dilemma has to do with the fact that it is

the shrinking advancing economies that are supplying the reserve assets (more on this) while the demand

for safe assets (or reserves) is primarily coming from the emerging (and expanding) group. Complicating



31
     This statement goes beyond the Federal Reserve, Bank of Japan and ECB.

                                                        52
matters is the fact that it is primarily (by a large margin) the United States, among the advanced

economies, that is providing the reserve assets.

Figure 15: The Shifting Distribution of World GDP, 1950-2015

 65        Percent

 60                                           Advanced economies (solid line)

 55

 50

 45

 40
                                  Emerging and developing countries (dashed line)
 35
 1950M1         1960M1      1970M1      1980M1       1990M1      2000M1       2010M1


Source: The Conference Board, Total Economy Database.

          As noted earlier, exchange rate arrangements usually play a key role in driving the demand for

international reserves. The next four figures (Figures 16-19) juxtapose our measures of potential sources

of “world demand” for four major currencies with the potential suppliers’ share of world GDP. For each

figure the top panel plots the share of countries where the US dollar, euro, UK pound and Japanese yen is

the main anchor currency in the context of their prevailing exchange rate arrangements. The dashed line

represents the US, Germany and France, UK, and Japan’s share in world GDP. The bottom panel only

differs in that the share of countries anchored to the reference currency is weighted by their share in world

income.


          The US dollar retains its dominant position as the world’s reserve currency (Figure 16); 60 to 70

percent of all countries have the dollar as the anchor or reference currency (top panel). As Figure 15

highlights, by some metrics it is as dominant as it was at the time of the early Bretton Woods era. By

other metrics, its global role has expanded even beyond that following the collapse of the ruble zone. In

Section III we already discussed the main factors behind the “dip” of the late 1970s and 1980s. What is

                                                     53
most suggestive of Figure 16 is the trends since the start of the 21st century, which show a more rapidly

shrinking US share of that world economy coupled with a rise in the share of the world anchored to the

dollar. Presumably the latter is a representation of the demand for US dollar assets (reserves). These

widening and divergent trends are the essence of the modern-day Triffin dilemma for the United States.

Particularly because, as Figures 16-19 show there is limited competition from other major economies in

the provision of reserve assets.


        The euro (Figure 17) is a distant second to the US dollar. From the early 1980s until the

introduction of the euro, the German Deutschemark’s (DM) sphere expanded first in Western Europe and

later in the East. The euro consolidated the French franc and German DM zones but appears to have

stalled in the 21st century. By some metrics (given the shrinking share of Europe in world output) its

global importance has declined. No other major established international currencies compete at present

with the dollar and the euro.


        For the United Kingdom (Figure 18), the loss of its colonies following World War II eventually

translated to a shift away from the pound into the US dollar. The sterling crisis of 1967 was followed by a

lingering economic crisis. In June 1972 the UK introduced a series of capital control measures that

effectively put an end to the sterling area, although the official dismantling of the Sterling Area was in

1979. The Farhi and Maggiori (2016) criteria all seem to apply to the demise of sterling, as the UK had 11

IMF programs during the 1950s-1970s (with significant consequences to its global image), a precarious

fiscal situation, and a shrinking piece of the trade and invoicing pie. To interpret the bottom panel, we

note that since the Global Financial Crisis, the pound has become the anchor currency for the UK. While

the UK has a history back to the early 1970s (see chronology) of managed floating, during the late 1970s

until 2008, it was included (on the basis of the exchange rate behavior, see Figure 1) in the DM/euro

group, with practically all the rest of Europe.




                                                     54
         In the case of Japan (Figure 19), which has a freely floating exchange rate since the late 1970s,

the two series overlap in the bottom panel because Japan is the only country that has a yen anchor.

Between 1950 and 1978, Japan’s anchor currency had been the US dollar. Farhi and Maggiori (2016)

highlight that ﬁscal capacity, reputation, and pricing currency in the goods market are the key factors that

importantly determine the emergence of a hegemon. Applying their criteria to Japan, it is very clear that

the world does not invoice in yen. As Table 2, which is based on Gopinanth (2016), highlights, only 18

percent of the countries in that sample have any trade invoiced in yen and the shares invoiced in yen are a

trivial share of the total. Furthermore, not even Japan invoices the majority of own trade in yen. But

invoicing notwithstanding, its lack of international resonance remains puzzling. In its heyday, prior the

the banking crisis of the early 1990s, Japan accounted for nearly 10 percent of world GDP; it had low

levels of public debt; according to Institutional Investors, it had higher ratings than the United States and

in the 1980s, it was the it country to emulate. Perhaps regulatory measures or the structure of domestic

banking, postal saving, and pension funds never gave the rest of the world an opportunity to hold yen

assets (specifically yen government bonds). It remains a case for further study.




                                                      55
Figure 16: Measures of the Role of the Dollar and US Economy in a Global Context, 1950-2015
Share of countries measure

  70                                                                                            30
                      US GDP as a share of world GDP
                      (percent, right scale)                                                    28
  60
                                                                                                26
                                                                                                24
  50
                                                                                                22
  40                                                                                            20
                                                                                                18
  30
                                                                                                16
                    Share of countries where the US dollar
                                                                                                14
  20                is the principal anchor currency (percent, left scale)
                                                                                                12
  10                                                                                            10
   1950M1        1960M1       1970M1       1980M1       1990M1        2000M1       2010M1


Share of countries measure weighted by share of world income

 80                                                                                              30

 75                                       Countries where the US dollar                          28
                                          is the principal anchor currency
 70                                       weighted by their share                                26
                                          of world GDP (percent, left scale)
 65                                                                                              24

 60                                                                                              22

 55                                                                                              20

 50                                                                US GDP as a                   18
                                                                   share of world GDP
 45                                                                (percent, right scale)        16

 40                                                                                              14
  1950M1        1960M1       1970M1        1980M1       1990M1        2000M1       2010M1


Sources: The Conference Board Total Economy Database, International Monetary Fund International Financial
Statistics, Reinhart and Rogoff (2004) sources cited therein, and authors’ calculations.
Note: The Country Chronologies that supplement this paper show the evolution of the anchor currency on a country-
by-country basis.




                                                       56
Figure 17: Measures of the Role of the French Franc, Deutschmark (1950-1998), and Euro (1999-2015)
and French and German Economies in a Global Context

Share of countries measure
 30                              France and Germany GDP as a share of world GDP                12
                                 (percent, right scale)
 28
                                                                                               10
 26

 24
                                                                                               8
 22

 20                                                                                            6

 18
                                                                                               4
 16
                                        Share of countries where the euro
 14                                     (and previously the French franc and DM)
                                                                                                2
                                        are the principal anchor currency (percent, left scale)
 12

 10                                                                                            0
  1950M1       1960M1        1970M1        1980M1       1990M1       2000M1        2010M1


Share of countries measure weighted by share of world income
 30                              France and Germany GDP as a share of world GDP                12
                                 (percent, right scale)
                                                                                               11
 25
                                                                                               10
 20
                                                                                               9

 15                                                                                            8

                                                                                               7
 10
                                      Share of countries where the euro
                                                                                               6
                                      (and previously the French franc and DM)
  5                                   are the principal anchor currency
                                                                                               5
                                      weighted by their share of world GDP
  0                                                                                            4
  1950M1       1960M1        1970M1        1980M1       1990M1       2000M1        2010M1


Sources: The Conference Board Total Economy Database, International Monetary Fund International Financial
Statistics, Reinhart and Rogoff (2004) sources cited therein, and authors’ calculations.




                                                       57
Figure 18: Measures of the Role of the UK Pound and the UK Economy in a Global Context, 1950-2015
Share of countries measure

 30                                                                                         7.0

                                                                                            6.5
 25
                                                                                            6.0

                                                                                            5.5
 20
                                     Share of countries where the UK pound
                                                                                            5.0
                                     is the principal anchor currency (percent, left scale)
 15                                                                                         4.5

                                                                                            4.0
 10
                                                                                            3.5
       UK GDP as a share of world
       GDP (percent, right scale)                                                           3.0
  5
                                                                                            2.5

  0                                                                                         2.0
  1950M1        1960M1      1970M1      1980M1       1990M1       2000M1       2010M1


Share of countries measure weighted by share of world income


 12                                                                                         7.0

                                                                                            6.5
 10
                                                                                            6.0

                                                                                            5.5
  8
                                     Share of countries where the UK pound
                                                                                            5.0
                                     is the principal anchor currency
  6                                  weighted by their share of world GDP                   4.5
                                     (percent, left scale)
                                                                                            4.0
  4
                                                                                            3.5

           UK GDP as a share of world                                                       3.0
  2
           GDP (percent, right scale)                                                       2.5

  0                                                                                         2.0
  1950M1        1960M1      1970M1      1980M1       1990M1       2000M1       2010M1




                                                   58
Figure 19: Measures of the Role of the Yen and the Japanese Economy in a Global Context, 1950-2015
Share of countries measure


 10                                                                                       10
                     Japan GDP as a share of world GDP
  9                  (percent, right scale)                                               9

  8                                                                                       8

  7                                                                                       7

  6                                                                                       6

  5                                                                                       5

  4                                                                                       4

  3                                                                                       3
                   Share of countries where the yen
  2                is the principal anchor currency (percent, left scale)                 2

  1                                                                                       1

  0                                                                                       0
  1950M1       1960M1        1970M1       1980M1       1990M1       2000M1       2010M1


Share of countries measure weighted by share of world income

 10                                                                                       10

  9        Japan GDP as a                                                                 9

  8        share of world GDP                                                             8
           (percent, right scale)
  7                                                                                       7

  6                                                                                       6
                                              Country (ie, Japan)where the yen
  5                                           is the principal anchor currency            5
                                              weighted by their share
  4                                           of world (percent, solid line left scale)   4

  3                                                                                       3

  2                                                                                       2

  1                                                                                       1

  0                                                                                       0
  1950M1       1960M1        1970M1       1980M1       1990M1       2000M1       2010M1




                                                      59
                    V. Concluding remarks: Which anchor will hold?

        What topics and areas would enhance our understanding of the international financial system in

general and the anchor currency question in particular? While that list is long, perhaps an obvious key

starting point involves China and its rapidly expanding global role. While a great deal is written on the

subject, it is a much smaller literature that quantifies that role. More is known about China’s connections

through trade of goods and services with the rest of the world than its growing financial linkages.

Chinese lending to a broad range of emerging and developing countries is not captured in the extensive

databases of the World Bank, International Monetary Fund, or Bank of International Settlements. Much

of this lending is done through its development banks, but credit lines and swap arrangements between

the People’s Bank of China and other central banks are also rapidly expanding. Given the opaqueness of

these cross-border financial transactions, it is not clear whether the US dollar or the renminbi is the

dominant currency in this new source of lending. As the Gopinanth (2016) study reflects, information on

China’s trade invoicing by currency is also scant.


        It should be noted that our categorization of anchors is fundamentally retrospective. Over time,

one might expect the Chinese yuan with its far reaching trade and finance network to serve as an anchor

for some countries. Indeed, it is possible that the Chinese yuan has already become (or made significant

inroads as) an anchor currency. In the summer of 2015, the modest devaluation of the renminbi triggered

marked depreciations of several Asian currencies (as well as others outside Asia). By our exchange rate

metric, however, China remains part of the dollar bloc, and it is unclear how many countries might move

along with the yuan if it were ever to separate from the US dollar. This will certainly be a significant

development when it happens. During the latter stage of Bretton Woods, a cursory inspection of

exchange rate practices in Europe would have led one to conclude that the US dollar was the across-the-

board anchor. It was only when Germany’s DM separated from the dollar that it became evident that the

European economies had already transitioned from a dollar to a DM anchor.



                                                     60
        The role of China also figures prominently in questions we raise about the global demand for

reserves and the implications of the modern-day Triffin dilemma. These implications include: the

possibility of sustained dollar depreciation (as in the 1970s), imparting a capital loss on China and other

major holders of US Treasuries; some significant reduction in the global demand for reserves (China

floating); a new supplier of reserve assets that is re-oriented and connected to some degree to the fast-

growth regions of the world. This connection could be more direct (renminbi acquires reserve currency

status) or less direct, as in an expanded role for the SDR (renminbi is now a part of the SDR). The

common thread in this discussion is the pressing need to better quantify the finance networks of the

world’s second largest economy.


        Lastly, we reiterate our main conclusions. Our new algorithm for jointly determining a country’s

anchor currency and its degree of exchange rate flexibility shows a world where relatively inflexible

exchange rate regimes remain extremely important, and where the dollar’s dominance as an

anchor/reference currency appears to be at least as great as it was under Bretton Woods. Moreover, many

countries’ continuing desire to stabilize exchange rates despite generally increasing capital mobility (as

our new measure of capital ability based on exchange rate restrictions underscores) is potentially a key

element of the modern-day Triffin dilemma that needs to be added to the widely-discussed scarcity of safe

advanced-country assets.




                                                     61
References
Aghion, Philippe, Philippe Bacchetta, Romain Ranciere, and Kenneth Rogoff (2009). “Exchange Rate
Volatility and Productivity Growth: The Role of Financial Development.” Journal of Monetary
Economics, 56 (4): 494-513.

Aizenman, Joshua and Jaewoo Lee (2007). “International Reserves: Precautionary Versus Mercantilist
Views, Theory and Evidence” Open Economy Review, 18(2): 191-214.

Alfaro, Laura, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, Vadym Volosovych, forthcoming.“Sovereigns, Upstream Capital
Flows, and Global Imbalances,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 12(5): 1240-1284.

Ball, Christopher P., Claude Lopez, and Javier Reyes (2013). “Remittances, Inflation and Exchange Rate
Regimes in Small Open Economies,” The World Economy, 36(4): 487-507.

Bussière, Matthieu. Gong Cheng, Menzie D. Chinn and Noëmie Lisack (2015). “For a few dollars more:
Reserves and growth in times of crises,” Journal of International Money and Finance, 52(C): 127-145.

Calvo, Guillermo A., and Carmen M. Reinhart, (2002). “Fear of Floating” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 117(2): 379-408.

Calvo, Guillermo A. and Carlos A. Vegh (1999). “Inflation stabilization and BOP crises in developing
countries," in: J. B. Taylor and M. Woodford (ed.), Handbook of Macroeconomics, edition 1, volume 1,
chapter 24, pages 1531-1614. Elsevier.

Chinn, Menzie D. and Hiro Ito (2006). “What Matters for Financial Development? Capital Controls,
Institutions, and Interactions,” Journal of Development Economics, 81(1): 163-192.

Chinn, Menzie and Shang-Jin Wei (2013). “A Faith-Based Initiative Meets the Evidence: Does a Flexible
Exchange Rate Regime Really Facilitate Current Account Adjustment?” Review of Economic Studies
95(1): 168-184.

De Vries, Margaret G. (1969). “Multiple Exchange Rates,” in The International Monetary Fund 1945-
1965, Margaret de Vries and J. Keith Horsefield, eds. (Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund),
pp. 122-151.

De Vries, Ms Margaret G. (1987). Balance of payments adjustment, 1945 to 1986: The IMF experience.
(Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund).

Dooley, Michael, David Folkerts-Landau and Peter Garber (2003). “An Essay on the Revived Bretton
Woods System,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 9971.

Eichengreen, Barry (1996). Globalizing Capital: A History of the International Monetary System.
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.

Eichengreen, Barry (2011). Exorbitant Privilege: The rise and fall of the Dollar and the Future of the
International Monetary System. Oxford University Press.



                                                    62
Eichengreen, Barry and Marc Flandreau (2009). “The rise and fall of the dollar (or when did the dollar
replace sterling as the leading reserve currency?).” European Review of Economic History, 13(3): 377–
411.

Farhi, Emmanuel, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, and Hélène Rey (2011) Reforming the International
Monetary System. London: Centre for Economic Policy Research.

Farhi, Emmanuel and Matteo Maggiori, (2016). “A Model of the International Monetary System”
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 22295, May.

Faudot, Adrien and Jean-François Ponsot (2016). “The Dollar Dominance: Recent Episode of Trade
Invoicing and Debt Issuance,” Journal of Economic Integration, 31(1): 41-64.

Fernández, Andrés , Michael W. Klein, Alessandro Rebucci, Martin Schindler, and Martín Uribe (2015).
“Capital Control Measures:A New Dataset,” IMF Working Paper 15/80, April.

Fischer, Stanley (2001). “Exchange Rate Regimes: Is the Bi-Polar View Correct?”, Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 15(2): 3-24.

Frankel, Jeffrey (2008). “Estimation of De Facto Exchange Rate Regimes: Synthesis of the Techniques
for Inferring Flexibility and Basket Weights, IMF Staff Papers 55/2008.

Frankel, Jeffrey and Shang-Jin Wei (1994). “Yen Bloc or Dollar Bloc? Exchange Rate Policies of the East
Asian Economies,” in Macroeconomic Linkages: Savings, Exchange Rates, and Capital Flows, NBER -
East Asia Seminar on Economics, Volume 3, Takatoshi Ito and Anne Krueger, editors (University of
Chicago Press).

Frankel, Jeffrey and Daniel Xie (2010). “Estimation of De Facto Flexibility Parameter and Basket
Weights in Evolving Exchange Rate Regimes” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 100,
May 2010.

Ghosh , Atish R. ,Mahvash S. Qureshi, and Charalambos G. Tsangarides (2013). “Is the Exchange Rate
Regime Really Irrelevant for External Adjustment?” Economics Letters, 118: (1): 104-109.

Gopinanth, Gita (2015). “The International Price System,” Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson
Hole Symposium , August.

Gourinchas, Pierre Olivier and Maurice Obstfeld (2012). “Stories of the Twentieth Century for the
Twenty-First,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 4(1): 226-265.

Habib, Maurizio Michael, Sascha Bützer and Livio Stracca (2016). “Global Exchange Rate
Configurations: Do Oil Shocks Matter?” IMF Economic Review, 64(3): 443–470.

Hau, Harald and Helene Rey (2006). “Exchange rates, equity prices, and capital flows” Review of
Financial Studies, 19(1): 273-317.

Heathcote, Jonathan and Fabrizio Perri (2016). “On the Desirability of Capital Controls,” IMF Economic
Review, 64(1): 75-102.




                                                   63
Ilzetzki, Ethan, Carmen M. Reinhart, and Kenneth Rogoff (2016). “Country Chronologies and
Background Material to Exchange Rate Arrangements into the 21st Century: Will the Anchor Currency
Hold?” Mimeo.

Ize, A., and Yeyati, E. L. (2003). “Financial Dollarization”. Journal of International Economics, 59(2):
323-347.

Jeanne, Olivier and Roman Rancière (2006). “The optimal level of international reserves for emerging
market countries: formulas and applications,” IMF Working paper 06/2006.

Jorda, Oscar, Moritz Schularick, Alan M. Taylor (2015). “Betting the House,” Journal of International
Economics 96, Supplement 1, S2-18.

Klein, Michael and Jay Shambaugh (2010). Exchange Rate Regimes in the Modern Era, MIT Press.

Korinek, Anton (2013). “Currency Wars or Efficient Spillovers?” Mimeo.

Kose, Ayhan, Eswar Prasad, Kenneth Rogoff, and Shang-Jin Wei (2003). “The Effects of Financial
Globalization on Developing Countries: Some Empirical Evidence.” IMF Occasional Paper 220.

Levy-Yeyati, E., and Sturzenegger, F. (2003). “To Float or to Fix: Evidence on the Impact of Exchange
Rate Regimes on Growth,” The American Economic Review, 93(4): 1173-1193.

Levy-Yeyati, Eduardo, and Federico Sturzenegger (2005). “Classifying Exchange Rate Regimes: Deeds
vs. Words.” European Economic Review, 49(6): 1603-1635.

Levy-Yeyati, Eduardo and Federico Sturzenegger (2016). “Classifying Exchange Rate Regimes: Fifteen
Years Later” Center for International Development Working Paper 319.

Levy-Yeyati, Eduardo, Federico Sturzenegger, and Pablo Alfredo Gluzmann (2013). “Fear of
Appreciation”, Journal of Development Economics, 101(C): 233-247.

Mathieson, Donald J. and Liliana Rojas-Suarez. (1992) “Liberalization of the Capital Account:
Experiences and Issues.” IMF Occasional Paper 1-60.

McKinnon, Ronald, and Gunther Schnabl. (2004) “The East Asian Dollar Standard, Fear of Floating, and
Original Sin.” Review of Development Economics Vol. 8. No. 3, 331-360.

Mendoza, Enrique G. and Marco E. Terrones (2008). “An Anatomy of Credit Booms: Evidence From
Macro Aggregates and Micro Data,” NBER Working Paper.


Mundell Robert (1969). “The Redundancy problem and the World price level,” in Robert Mundell and
Alexender. K, Swoboda, ed. Monetary problems of International Economy. Chicago university: 379–
382.

Obstfeld, Maurice (2013). “The International Monetary System: Living with Asymmetry.” In
Globalization in an Age of Crisis: Multilateral Economic Cooperation in the Twenty First Century, edited
by Robert C. Feenstra and Alan M. Taylor. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.


                                                    64
Obstfeld, Maurice, Jay C. Shambaugh and Alan M. Taylor (2005). “The Trilemma in History: Tradeoffs
Among Exchange Rates, Monetary Policies, and Capital Mobility,” The Review of Economics and
Statistics, 87(3): 423-438.

Obstfeld, Maurice and Alan M. Taylor (2003). “Globalization and Capital Markets,” in Globalization in
Historical Perspective, ed. Bordo, Taylor, and Williamson.

Pick, Franz, various issues, (1955-1982). Pick’s Currency Yearbook (Pick Publishing Corporation, New
York).

Pick, Franz, various issues, (1945-1955). World Currency Reports (Pick Publishing Corporation, New
York).

Pick, Franz, and René Sédillot (1971). All the Monies of the World: A Chronicle of Currency Values,
(Pick Publishing Corporation, New York).

Quinn, Dennis P. (2003). “Capital account liberalization and financial globalization, 1890–1999: a
synoptic view.” International Journal of Finance & Economics, 8(3), 189-204.

Quinn, Dennis P., Schindler, M., and Toyoda, A. M. (2011). Assessing Measures of Financial Openness
and Integration. IMF Economic Review, 59(3), 488-522.

Rajan, Raghuram G. and Arvind Subramanian (2005). “What Undermines Aid’s Impact on Growth?”
NBER Working Paper 11657.

Reinhart, Carmen M. (2016). “The Return of Dollar Shortages”, Project Syndicate, October 2016.

Reinhart, Carmen M.,Vincent Reinhart, and Christoph Trebesch (2016). “Global Cycles: Capital Flows,
Commodities, and Sovereign Defaults, 1815-2015,” American Economic Review, 106(5): 574-580.

Reinhart, Carmen M., Kenneth S. Rogoff (2004). “The Modern History of Exchange Rate Arrangements:
A Reinterpretation” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(1): 1-48.

Reinhart, Carmen M., Kenneth S. Rogoff (2014). “Recovery from Financial Crises: Evidence from 100
Episodes,” American Economic Review, 104(5): 50-55.

Reinhart, Carmen M., Kenneth S. Rogoff and Miguel A. Savastano (2014). “Addicted to Dollars,”
Annals of Economics and Finance, 15(1): 1-52.

Rey, Hélène (2013). “Dilemma not Trilemma: The Global Financial Cycle and Monetary Policy
Independence” Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole Symposium, August.

Rogoff, Kenneth (2001). "Why Not a Global Currency?," American Economic Review, 91(2): 243-247.

Schenk, Catherine R. (2013). “The Sterling Area and Economic Disintegration,” Geschichte und
Gesellschaft (Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht) 39(2):177-196.

Schenk,Catherine R. (2010). The Decline of Sterling, Cambridge Books, Cambridge University Press,
November.



                                                   65
Shambaugh, Jay C. (2004). “The Effect of Fixed Exchange Rates on Monetary Policy”, Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 119(1): 301-352.

Bruno, Valentina and Hyun Song Shin (2015): “Global Dollar Credit and Carry Trades: a Firm-Level
analysis", BIS Working Papers, no 510, August.

Sims, Christopher A. (1992). “Interpreting the Macroeconomic Time Series Facts: The Effects of
Monetary Policy,” European Economic Review 36: 975 –1000.

Smant, David JC. (2002). “Has the European Central Bank followed a Bundesbank policy? Evidence
from the early years.” Kredit und Kapital, 3(3): 327-343.

Singelton, John and Catherine R. Schenk. (2015). “The Shift from Sterling to the Dollar, 1965–
76:Evidence from Australia and New Zealand” Economic History Review, 68(4): 1154–1176.

Subramanian, Arvind (2011). “Renminbi Rules: The Conditional Imminence of the Reserve Currency
Transition”, Peterson Institute for International Economics Working Paper 11-14.

Taylor, John B. (1993). “Discretion Versus Policy Rules in Practice.” Carnegie-Rochester conference
series on public policy. Vol. 39. North-Holland.

Taylor, John B. (2001). “The Role of the Exchange rate in Monetary-Policy Rules.” The American
Economic Review 91(2): 263-267.

Triffin, Robert. (1960). Gold and the Dollar Crisis: The Future of Convertibility. New Haven, Conn.:
Yale University Press.




                                                   66
Appendix 1. Stress Testing Anchors


         We assess the robustness of our anchor choice (see Table 1) by studying two recent natural

experiments. There have been two large recent swings in the bilateral USD-EUR exchange rate. Both

movements can be traced back to monetary policy shocks in Europe and the US. First, on July 22, 2012,

Mario Draghi, the President of the European Central Bank, made his now famous speech, in which he

stated that the ECB stood ready to do “whatever it takes” to preserve the euro. Second, the minutes of

FOMC meeting of June 17-18, 2014 increased market perceptions that the Federal Reserve would initiate

its tightening cycle, a perception that gathered momentum throughout the rest of the year. As a result, the

dollar appreciated by a cumulative 30 percent relative to the Euro through March of 2015.32 Figure A1.1

highlights these events.


         Figure A1.1 US dollar-Euro Exchange Rate, 2010-2016

          1.5

                                                                     FRB Tightening
                                                                         signal
                                              "Taper Tantrum"
          1.4




          1.3




          1.2



                                      "Whatever it takes"
          1.1




          1.0
             2010       2011        2012             2013            2014             2015   2016




         Source: Bloomberg.


         The large movements of the USD-EUR bilateral exchange rate allow “stress-testing” of our

anchor currency classification, at least between the critical choice of the dollar or the euro. Specifically,

32
  This differs from the proverbial “taper tantrum” of the previous year, when the Federal Reserve indicated plans to
slow down and eventually reverse asset purchases as part of its quantitative easing policies. While this
announcement did create some volatility in emerging market currencies, it had a relatively muted effect on the
bilateral Euro-Dollar exchange rate.

                                                                67
we would expect currencies anchored to the dollar to move more closely with the dollar during these

episodes, while currencies with other anchors (most commonly the euro) might move more freely relative

to the dollar. These two episodes have the advantage that they are primarily due to the monetary policies

of the ECB and the Federal Reserve, not idiosyncratic shocks facing other economies. In one case the

dollar depreciated while it appreciated in the other.


        Figure A1.2 shows the median percent depreciation of countries with +/-5 percent exchange rate

bands and countries classified as managed floats; the results would naturally be far sharper if we included

all countries. We divide these economies into three groups, based on the algorithm we used to classify

these countries’ anchors. The first two groups include currencies that could be classified at the first stage

based on the magnitudes of exchange rate movements relative to anchor currencies. The red (dashed) line

shows countries classified as anchored to the US dollar and the blue (dotted) line shows countries

classified with other anchors (three countries anchored to the Euro and one to the Australian dollar).


        In both episodes, currencies not anchored to the US dollar moved in tandem with the Euro. These

currencies appreciated 5 percent on average relative to the dollar in 2012 and depreciated 20 percent in

2014-5. In contrast, currencies classified as having a dollar anchor moved far less relative to the dollar.

Following Draghi’s speech, their bilateral US dollar exchange rate appreciated by less than 2%. These

currencies depreciated only 10 percent following 2014-15 as the Fed began signaling a tightening cycle.

The difference in cumulative exchange rate movement relative to the US dollar between these two groups

of countries is statistically significant at the 90 percent confidence level in the first episode and at the 99

percent confidence level in the second.




                                                        68
             Figure A1.2, Two Monetary Policy Events, 2014 and 2014
             Draghi’s Whatever it Takes


              0%



                                                                                                                         $ Anchor
              -2%


                                                                                                                         Borderline
              -4%




              -6%
                                                                                                                         Non-$ Anchor


              -8%
                          Depreciation vs. $:
                        Smaller when classified
                             as anchored
             -10%                                                                                                            €/$
                Jul-2012        Aug-2012        Sep-2012         Oct-2012        Nov-2012        Dec-2012         Jan-2013




             Fed Tightening, 2014


27%
                                                                                                            €/$

                                                                                                        Non-$ Anchor
22%                          Appreciation vs. $:
                           Smaller when classified
                                as anchored
17%                                                                                                     Borderline

                                                                                                            $ Anchor
12%




 7%




 2%


  Jun-2014   Jul-2014   Aug-2014   Sep-2014   Oct-2014     Nov-2014   Dec-2014   Jan-2015   Feb-2015

 -3%




Source: Bloomberg and authors’ calculations.

       Finally, the purple (dash-dotted) line shows the average exchange rate change of countries with

unclassified anchors in 2015, listed in Table 1. All were classified as having the US dollar as their

reference currency, based on supplementary data, as described in Table 1. As might be expected from

                                                                                 69
intermediate cases, their movements relative to the dollar were larger than currencies more clearly

anchored to the dollar, but less so than the freely-floating Euro or currencies that were not anchored to the

dollar. (In both episodes, we cannot reject the hypothesis that exchange rate movement relative to the

dollar in these intermediate cases was the same as either of the other two groups of countries, on average.)




                                  .Appendix 2: Classifying the Eurozone

        In what follows, we describe the approach adopted and results obtained from estimating an

individual Taylor rule for the countries that make up the Eurozone. We regress the ECB’s policy interest

rate on inflation, unemployment, and on a constant term. Specifically, we estimate A2.1 below for each

country:


𝑖𝑡,𝑛 = 𝛼 + 𝛽1 𝜋𝑡,𝑛 + 𝛽2 𝑦𝑡,𝑛 + 𝜀𝑡,𝑛                                                                   A2.1


Where 𝜋𝑡,𝑛 is year-on-year inflation for country n; the output gap, 𝑦𝑡,𝑛 proxy is the difference between

average unemployment in country n over 1992-2007 and unemployment in month t.


The Taylor principle is satisfied when α + β1 > 1. Given the definition of the output gap, countercyclical

policy implies, β2 > 0.


        Figure A2.1 shows, the coefficients on inflation (top panel) and the output/unemployment gap

(bottom panel) for all original Eurozone members, plus Greece. The whiskers depict the 95 percent

confidence intervals of the estimates. The data is monthly and spans from January 1999, when the Euro

was adopted, to September 2014 when the ECB set interest rates at zero and the connection to a simple

Taylor rule loses meaning (variants that incorporate quantitative easing are not explored here.)


        The contrast between the coefficient estimates for Germany and other Eurozone members is of

note. The coefficient on the inflation rate for Germany is estimated at slightly below one, but the standard

error is large enough to encompass the possibility that the coefficient is greater than one, the necessary


                                                     70
response for monetary policy to be stabilizing. This result becomes even stronger when the post-2008

crisis years are excluded. Therefore, we cannot reject the hypothesis that the ECB follows the Taylor

principle—that the real interest rate should rise in response to an increase in inflation—for Germany.

This result is anticipated in Smant (2002), who concludes that, after an initial period of lower than

expected interest rates, the ECB since mid-2000 set the policy interest rate consistent with the

Bundesbank’s old policy rule.


             In contrast, for all other Eurozone members, we can reject at the standard levels of significance

that the coefficient is greater than one. 33 The Taylor principle is also violated for the Eurozone as a

whole. In other words, we cannot reject the hypothesis that the ECB’s practice has been to stabilize

inflation in Germany, but not for the currency area as a whole. On the surface, at least, these estimates

indicate that in the decade and a half of its existence, the ECB may have de facto placed a greater

emphasis on stabilizing inflation in Germany than elsewhere. Beyond the Taylor rule, there is broad

agreement and clear theoretical foundations for the notion that a central banks’ interest rate policy ought

to respond actively to inflation. Based on this notion, it is hard to argue that countries other than Germany

have had the type of monetary autonomy that would justify classifying them as having a freely floating

currency.


            The coefficient on the output gap, shown in the bottom panel of Figure A2.1, paints a somewhat

different picture, as it is positive for all Eurozone members other than Finland and Germany with the

interpretation that the ECB does conduct countercyclical monetary policy for most EZ members. There is

less agreement as to the necessity that the central bank responds to unemployment, nor on the value that

the coefficient on unemployment should take. Given that the ECB’s dominant mandate is achieving and

maintaining price stability, one cannot rule out that the countercyclical nature of its policy is indeed

secondary.



33
     Or that it is significantly different from zero, for that matter.

                                                                71
Figure A2.1. Taylor Rule Coefficients and Confidence Bands: January 1999 – September 2014
      Figure A1.1 Taylor Rule Coefficients and Confidence Bands: January, 1999:1 – September, 2014
      Inflation

      1.2                                                                             1.2

      1.0                                                                             1.0

      0.8                                                                             0.8

      0.6                                                                             0.6

      0.4                                                                             0.4

      0.2                                                                             0.2

      0.0                                                                             0.0

     -0.2                                                                             -0.2

      Unemployment gap


      Unemployment gap

     1.5                                                                               1.5

     1.0                                                                               1.0

     0.5                                                                               0.5

     0.0                                                                               0.0

    -0.5                                                                               -0.5

    -1.0                                                                               -1.0

    -1.5                                                                               -1.5




      Sources: Eurostat, OECD, International Monetary Fund, and the authors.




                                                     72
        A different way to pose the same question is to re-construct what interest rate policy would have

looked like using a Taylor rule for the Eurozone and for individual Eurozone members, and ask whether

actual policy followed that path. Taylor’s (1993) original rule, given by:


𝑖𝑡 = 𝜋𝑡 + .5𝑦𝑡 + .5(𝜋𝑡 − 2) + 2                                                                               A. 2.2


where 𝑖𝑡 is the recommended policy rate, 𝑦𝑡 is the output gap, and 𝜋𝑡 is inflation over the 12 previous

months. The output gap is measured as the difference between average unemployment in the country in

question and unemployment in month t.


        Figures A2.2and A2.3, present the evolution of the hypothetical policy rate associated with a

Taylor rule as a dashed line for two Eurozone countries Portugal, and France; and for Germany and the

Eurozone as a whole.34 Policy rates were far lower than the Taylor rule would have advocated for

countries like France and Portugal and indeed for the currency union as a whole until 2008. By contrast,

from 1999 to the onset of the global financial crisis, the ECB followed Germany’s “Taylor rule” with a

remarkable degree of precision.


        As the crisis hit, the ECB became more willing to loosen policy due to conditions in the crisis

countries, which in varying degrees included France, Greece, Germany, Ireland, Italy, the Netherlands,

Portugal, and Spain, as documented in Reinhart and Rogoff (2014). As a result, the policy rate has

followed the Eurozone Taylor rule more closely (Figure A2.3, bottom panel). In recent years it would

appear that no single Eurozone member country, including Germany, has had any great degree of

monetary autonomy and the independently floating label that the IMF assigns to all EZ countries.




34
  We report the results for France and Portugal, as these are representative of the remaining Eurozone countries
(with the exception of Germany, as discussed). The Taylor rule for all the remaining Eurozone countries are not
reported to economize on space but are available from the authors.

                                                        73
         In sum, apart from Germany’s case during 1999-2007, we conclude that the de facto practice of

the ECB (alongside the other criteria discussed in Section III) justifies classifying Eurozone members as

tantamount to having an exchange rate arrangement with no separate legal tender.


Figure A2.2. Taylor Rule versus Actual Policy Rate: France and Portugal, 1992 to 2015

France


 12%

 10%
                 DM                     DM Regime                  € Regime

  8%

  6%                                       Rule

  4%

  2%
                                           Policy
  0%
       2009
       2010
       2011
       2012
       2013
       1992
       1993
       1994
       1995
       1996
       1997
       1998
       1999
       2000
       2001
       2002
       2003
       2004
       2005
       2006
       2007
       2008




       2014
       2015



Portugal


 12%

 10%
                 DM                     DM Regime                  € Regime
  8%

  6%                                                 Rule
  4%

  2%

  0%
                                            Policy
 -2%

 -4%
       1999

       2001

       2003

       2005

       2007

       2009

       2011

       2013

       2015
       1992
       1993
       1994
       1995
       1996
       1997
       1998

       2000

       2002

       2004

       2006

       2008

       2010

       2012

       2014




Sources: Eurostat, International Monetary Fund, and OECD.

                                                       74
Figure A2.3. Taylor Rule versus Actual Policy Rate: Germany and Eurozone, 1992 to 2015


Germany

 12%

 10%
                 DM                      DM Regime            € Regime

  8%                                                           Hypothetical
                                                               Rule
  6%

  4%

  2%                                                            Actual
                                                                Policy
  0%
        2009
        2010
        2011
        2012
        2013
        1992
        1993
        1994
        1995
        1996
        1997
        1998
        1999
        2000
        2001
        2002
        2003
        2004
        2005
        2006
        2007
        2008




        2014
        2015
Eurozone


 12%

 10%
                 DM                      DM Regime            € Regime
  8%

  6%                                          Rule

  4%

  2%
                                            Policy
  0%
        1999

        2001

        2003

        2005

        2007

        2009

        2011

        2013

        2015
        1992
        1993
        1994
        1995
        1996
        1997
        1998

        2000

        2002

        2004

        2006

        2008

        2010

        2012

        2014




  -2%



Sources: Eurostat, International Monetary Fund, and OECD .




                                                      75
Appendix 3. IT Countries: A Breed Apart?

        This appendix delves into the details of the two exercises summarized in Section II of the paper.

The first of these focuses on a pair of event studies over 2008-2014 while the second involves estimating

an augmented Taylor rule for the IT group over the period 1990-2015. The aim of these exercises is to

ascertain whether IT countries behave distinctly as a single group or whether that overarching de jure

label needs to be qualified with additional considerations.


Lehman, September 2008 and FOMC Minutes, June 2014


        The average response of (nearly) all currencies during two episodes is plotted in Figures A3.1 and

A3.2. The period surrounding the collapse of Lehman in the fall of 2008 is shown in Figure A3.1 while

the following figure presents the comparable data around the June 2014 meeting of the Federal Open

Market Committee (FOMC). The grey solid and dashed lines trace the responses of currencies within the

less flexible arrangements, which include de jure and de facto pegs, crawling pegs, or narrow (less than

+/-2%) bands or crawling bands (Coarse-grid 1 and 2). The black solid and dashed lines chart the

responses of currencies with managed or freely floating regimes (Coarse-grid 3 and 4). Solid lines give

the average exchange rate index of IT countries vis a vis their anchor currency and dashed lines present

the comparable index for the control group of non-IT countries.


        As shown in Figure A3.1, the depreciation cycle around the Lehman shock in fact began in July

of 2008, when commodity prices peaked and the ECB increased its policy rate. Depreciations accelerated

following the collapse of Lehman Brothers. For the IT cases (solid lines), it is evident that our

classification picks up large differences in exchange rate practices. Currencies that we classify as floating

depreciated sharply: peaking at more than 20%. In contrast, exchange rate movements were more muted

among IT countries we classify as having a variant of a peg, with a median depreciation of merely 10%.

The difference between the average depreciation in these two groups of countries is statistically

significant at the 95% confidence interval. The response of the IT group with a de-facto crawling



                                                     76
crawling peg was almost identical to their 1-2 counterparts without an inflation target. In assessing

exchange rate movements, our classification adds important information to the de-jure label of IT.


Figure A3.1. Inflation Targeters and Control Group: Lehman, September 2008

 105
                                                                           IT, less flexible
 100                                                                       arrangements
                                                                           Coarse grid 1-2
                                                                           (solid grey line)
        95
 Index, T=100




                                                 IT, more flexible
        90                                       arragements
                       Non-IT, less              Coarse-grid 3-4
        85             lexible                   (solid black line)
                       arrangements
                       Coarse-grid 1-                   Non-IT, more flexible
        80                                              arragements,
                                                        Coarse-grid 3-4
        75




Sources: Bloomberg and authors’ calculations.

                A similar pattern is evident as the Fed tightened policy in 2014. IT countries with flexible

exchange arrangements posted a depreciation of 10% from the FOMC meeting in June to the end of the

year. This contrasts with a 2% cumulative depreciation among IT cases with comparatively fixed

exchange arrangements. The difference between the two groups is again statistically significant at the

95% confidence interval. As before, exchange rate movements among inflation targeters that we classify

as having a fixed exchange arrangement is strikingly similar to the non-IT control group. The temporary

bout of exchange rate flexibility in mid-December among IT countries with fixed or semi fixed exchange

arrangements reinforces rather than contradicts our argument. This spike is driven by a single currency—

the Armenian dram, with a de-facto inflation target, but which we classify as having a narrow crawling

band.




                                                            77
Figure A3.2. Inflation Targeters and Control Group: FOMC Minutes June 17-18, 2014

 102                                                                                                               102




 100                                                                                                               100




     98                                                                                                            98




     96                                                                                                            96




     94                                                                                                            94




     92                                                                                                            92




     90                                                                                                            90
      Mar-14      Apr-14   May-14    Jun-14      Jul-14       Aug-14        Sep-14      Oct-14   Nov-14   Dec-14

                                    NON-IT 1+2       IT 1+2      IT 3+4        NON-IT 3+4




Sources: Bloomberg and authors’ calculations.

               Following a 30% depreciation in a single week, the dram recovered by 28% in two trading days

(December 17-18).35 Tracing the dram’s monthly movements over a number of years (Figure A2.3) it is

evident that the currency’s trajectory is strikingly similar to currencies under a traditional crawling peg

(or crawling narrow band), and illustrates the value of lower frequency measures of exchange flexibility.

The dram shows remarkable stability vis a vis the US dollar for long stretches, punctuated with the

occasional devaluation.




35
  The Central Bank of Armenia auctioned $4 million in reserves on the 17 th, although it claimed that it attracted no
purchase bids. The ruble recovered 9% on the 17th and it is impossible to reject the possibility that the dram’s
movements were merely a reaction to the recovering ruble.

                                                                       78
Figure A3.3. The Armenian Dram-US Dollar Exchange Rate, 2007:1 to 2016:8

                         550

                         500

                         450
   Drams per US dollar




                         400

                         350

                         300

                         250

                         200

                         150
                          2007M1 2008M1 2009M1 2010M1 2011M1 2012M1 2013M1 2014M1 2015M1 2016M1



Source: International Monetary Fund, International Financial Statistics.

Augmented Taylor Rule


                           To demonstrate our contention that IT cases are far less distinctive as a group than advertised, we

estimate an augmented Taylor rule for the sample of countries with an inflation targeting framework in

place. Specifically,


𝑖𝑡 = 𝑟̅ + 𝜋𝑡 + 𝑎(𝜋𝑡 − 𝜋̅) + 𝑏𝑦𝑡 + 𝑐𝑠𝑡                                                                                 A3.1


where 𝜋𝑡,𝑛 is year on year inflation in country n in month t, 𝑦𝑡,𝑛 is the output gap, measured by the

difference between a country’s average unemployment rate and that in month t. The usual specification is

augmented by the inclusion of the exchange rate, s. Of course, Taylor rules are the only way to

characterize monetary policy, but they do contain the key variables of interest to most central banks. As

we shall see, the exercise is quite revealing.


                           The version of equation A3.1 we estimate for a panel of IT countries is given by equation A2.2.

The regressions include country fixed effects, so that they exploit the time variation within countries,



                                                                       79
giving the average Taylor rule coefficient for countries in the panel. We then augment our Taylor rule

with a reaction to exchange rates. Formally, we estimate the following regression:


𝑖𝑡,𝑛 = 𝛽1 𝜋𝑡,𝑛 + 𝛽2 𝑦𝑡,𝑛 + 𝛽3 𝐹𝐼𝑋𝑡,𝑛 𝜋𝑡,𝑛 + 𝛽4 𝐹𝐼𝑋𝑡,𝑛 𝑦𝑡,𝑛 + 𝛼𝑛 + 𝜀𝑡,𝑛                                  A3.2


where 𝐹𝐼𝑋𝑡,𝑛 is a dummy variable that obtains a value of 1 if we classify country n as following a variant

of a peg or crawling peg in month t, and 𝛼𝑛 is a vector of country fixed effects.


        Results are summarized in Table A3.1. In the first three columns, we treat central banks as

having a strict inflation target. Regressing the policy rate on inflation alone gives a coefficient of 0.68.

This is consistent with a response to inflation, albeit not sufficient to increase the (ex-post) real interest

rate in response to inflation. In the second column, we include the natural logarithm of the bilateral

exchange rate with respect to each country’s anchor currency. We find that the policy rate responds to the

exchange rate, with a sign that is consistent with exchange rate stabilization. IT central banks increase the

policy rate by an average of 20 basis points in response to a10 percent exchange rate depreciation.


        Column 3 provides interaction terms that allow a separate Taylor rule estimates for countries with

“fixed” exchange rates and those with more flexible arrangements. We classify countries with a coarse

classification of 2 as “fixed” and those with coarse classifications of 3 or 4 as “flexible”. We see that

inflation targeting central banks with more flexible exchange arrangements stabilize inflation more

aggressively, with a coefficient of 0.74 on inflation. They nevertheless do appear to respond to the

exchange rate. However, countries with more rigid de-facto exchange rate arrangements target inflation

less aggressively, with a coefficient of 0.55. Instead, they respond more aggressively to exchange rate

movements, with a coefficient that is 17% larger than in countries with more flexible arrangements. This

may in fact understate the full difference between countries with different exchange arrangements as

much currency intervention is conducted with non-interest-rate tools.




                                                       80
         Column 4 includes unemployment in the Taylor rule. The coefficient is of the “wrong” sign, with

central banks increasing interest rates when unemployment is high. This is plausible if a country follows a

strict inflation target.


                     Table A3.1: Estimated Taylor Rules for Inflation Targeting Countries
                                        Unbalanced Panel 1990-2015

                                     Regression Results w. Country Fixed Effects
                                     Dependent Variable = Nominal Interest Rate
                                                            1             2           3           4          5
 Inflation                                                .68***      .67***      .74***      .74***     .73***
                                                         (.014)        (.015)      (.017)      (.017)     (.017)
 Log(Exchange Rate)                                                  2.24***     2.03***     1.99***    1.60***
                                                                       (.144)      (.147)      (.150)     (.150)
 Unemployment                                                                                 .10***     .07***
                                                                                               (.017)     (.017)
 Commodity Price Inflation                                                                                 1.00
                                                                                                          (.628)
 Inflation*”Fixed”                                                               -.19***     -.19***    -.18***
                                                                                   (.026)      (.026)     (.026)
 Log(Exchange Rate)*”Fixed”                                                       .34***      .36***     .34***
                                                                                   (.053)      (.053)     (.054)
 Commodity Price Inflation*”Fixed”                                                                          .22
                                                                                                          (.168)
 R2                                                        0.32       0.35        0.36         0.36        0.36
 N                                                         4717       4666        4665         4574        4529


         It is possible that the exchange rate may embed information about future inflation and the central

bank is responding to this information in its interest rate policy. While we cannot fully reject this

possibility, we include a forward looking variable in the regression reported in column 5. Commodity

prices have been suggested as an important forward looking variable, whose exclusion may bias estimates

of central banks’ policy rules (see Sims 1992). Central banks do respond to commodity price inflation,

with a coefficient of 1, although the coefficient is not precisely estimated. We use an index of the prices

of global commodities (from the IMF’s International Finance Statistics). Once accounting for the

response to commodity prices, the average response to the exchange rate is smaller. The difference across

exchange arrangements, however, remains almost identical, with countries classified as having fixed




                                                      81
exchange arrangement responding less aggressively to inflation and more to the exchange rate. Similar

results follow when controlling for oil prices or food prices.


Appendix 4: Trade Invoicing Index

Using data from Gopinanth (2016), who studies trade invoicing patterns and exchange rate pass-through,

we create an index of trade invoicing by anchor currency. Based on her data for 49 countries over the

period 1999-2014, we construct a composite measure of invoicing importance for the four major

currencies: the US dollar, the euro, the UK pound, and the Japanese yen. This measure combines

information on the incidence of use of the four currencies for invoicing (i.e., the share of countries who

quote some of their trade in these currencies) and the quantitative importance, as measured by the share of

total imports and exports in each currency. The two components are complementary since it is possible

that many countries invoice some of their trade in, say, the UK pound. However, it may be the case, that

the fraction of total trade that is invoiced in pounds is so small that its overall quantitative importance is

quite limited. Table A4.1 summarizes the components and the summary measure of the trade invoicing

index for the four anchor currencies.


Table A4.1 Trade Invoicing Patterns in 49 Countries, 1999:Q1-2014:Q4

Share of countries (excluding home country)           Average share (excluding home country):          Summary of
where invoicing in the anchor currency > 0            imports, exports, trade in the anchor currency     incidence
                  Imports      Exports        Trade       Imports       Exports         Trade          and volume
   US dollar         93.8          95.8        94.8           43.0          44.1          43.6                69.2
       Euro          93.3          83.9        88.6           25.0          19.7          22.3                55.5
  UK pound           18.8          14.6        16.7              0.3         0.4           0.4                 8.5
Japanese yen         22.9          14.6        18.8              0.7         0.3           0.5                 9.6



Source: Gopinanth (2015) and authors' calculations.




                                                            82
                             Table AI.1. Country Coverage


     Country         Official exchange rate          Parallel market exchange rate
      Albania          1954:12-2001:12                      1954:12-1998:12
      Algeria           1946:1-2001:12                       1955:1-1998:12
     Argentina          1946:1-2001:12                       1946:1-1998:12
     Armenia            1992:4-2001:12                            n.a.
     Australia          1946:1-2001:12                       1946:1-1998:12
      Austria           1946:1-2001:12                       1946:1-1998:12
    Azerbaijan         1992:12-2001:12                            n.a.
      Belarus           1992:1-2001:12                       1991:8-1998:12
     Belgium            1946:1-2001:12                       1946:1-1998:12
       Benin            1946:1-2001:12                       1970:7-1998:12
      Bolivia           1946:1-2001:12                       1948:1-1998:12
Bosnia-Herzegovina      1997:1-2001:12                            n.a.
     Botswana           1946:1-2001:12                       1989:1-1998:12
       Brazil           1946:1-2001:12                       1946:1-1998:12
     Bulgaria           1946:7-2001:12                       1946:7-1998:12
   Burkina Faso         1946:1-2001:12                       1970:7-1998:12
      Burundi           1946:1-2001:12                       1983:1-1998:12
    Cameroon            1946:1-2001:12                       1970:7-1998:12
      Canada            1946:1-2001:12                       1947:1-1998:12
  Central African       1946:1-2001:12                       1970:7-1998:12
     Republic
       Chad             1946:1-2001:12                      1970:7-1998:12
       Chile            1946:1-2001:12                      1948:1-1998:12
       China            1951:1-2001:12                      1949:9-1998:12
     Colombia           1946:1-2001:12                      1952:1-1998:12
Congo, Democratic       1946:1-2001:12                      1962:1-1996:12
    Republic of
Congo, Republic of      1946:1-2001:12                       1970:7-1998:12
    Costa Rica          1946:1-2001:12                       1948:1-1998:12
   Cote D’Ivoire        1946:1-2001:12                       1970:7-1998:12
      Croatia          1992:12-2001:12                      1991:12-1998:12
      Cyprus            1955:1-2001:12                       1970:7-1998:12
  Czech Republic        1946:1-2001:12                       1946:1-1998:12
     Denmark            1946:1-2001:12                       1946:1-1998:12
Dominican Republic      1946:1-2001:12                       1960:3-1998:12
     Ecuador            1946:1-2001:12                       1947:1-1998:12
       Egypt            1946:1-2001:12                       1946:1-1998:12
    El Salvador         1946:1-2001:12                       1961:1-1998:12
 Equatorial Guinea      1946:1-2001:12                       1970:7-1998:12
      Estonia           1992:62001:12                        1991:8-1998:12
      Finland           1946:1-2001:12                       1946:1-1998:12
      France            1946:1-2001:12                       1946:1-1998:12
       Gabon            1946:1-2001:12                       1970:7-1998:12
      Gambia           1946:1- 2001:12                       1985:1-1998:12
      Georgia          1995:10-2001:12                            n.a.
     Germany            1946:1-2001:12                       1946:1-1998:12
       Ghana           1946:1- 2001:12                       1962:3-1998:12
      Greece            1946:1-2001:12                       1946:1-1998:12




                                              83
                          Table AI.1. Country Coverage (continued)

      Country          Official exchange rate             Parallel market exchange rate
     Guatemala            1946:1-2001:12                          1985:1-1998:12
        Guinea            1949:1-2001:12                          1970:7-1998:12
   Guinea-Bissau          1946:1-2001:12                          1970:7-1998:12
       Guyana             1946:1-2001:12                          1985:1-1998:12
         Haiti            1946:1-2001:12                          1985:1-1998:12
      Honduras            1946:1-2001:12                          1985:1-1998:12
     Hong Kong            1946:1-2001:12                          1946:1-1998:12
       Hungary            1946:8-2001:12                          1946:8-1998:12
       Iceland            1946:1-2001:12                          1949:1-1998:12
         India            1946:1-2001:12                          1946:1-1998:12
      Indonesia           1946:1-2001:12                          1947:1-1998:12
          Iran            1946:1-2001:12                          1947:1-1998:12
          Iraq            1946:1-2001:12                          1947:2-1998:12
        Ireland           1946:1-2001:12                          1946:1-1998:12
         Israel           1948:5-2001:12                          1946:1-1998:12
          Italy           1946:3-2001:12                          1946:1-1998:12
       Jamaica            1946:1-2001:12                          1974:1-1998:12
         Japan            1946:3-2001:12                          1946:3-1998:12
        Jordan            1950:7-2001:12                          1955:1-1998:12
     Kazakhstan          1993:11-2001:12                               n.a.
        Kenya            1946:12- 2001:12                        1966:12-1998:12
       Kuwait             1949:9-2001:12                          1970:7-1998:12
  Kyrgyz Republic         1993:5-2001:12                               n.a.
         Laos             1946:1-2001:12                          1959:1-1998:12
        Latvia            1992:2-2001:12                          1991:8-1998:12
       Lebanon            1946:1- 2001:12                         1946:1-1998:12
       Lesotho            1946:1-2001:12                          1985:1-1998:12
        Liberia           1946:1-2001:12                          1989:1-1998:12
Libyan Arab Republic      1952:1-2001:12                          1955:1-1998:12
      Lithuania           1992:1-2001:12                          1991:9-1998:12
    Luxembourg            1946:1-2001:12                          1946:1-1998:12
     Macedonia           1993:12-2001:12                          1997:6-1998:12
    Madagascar            1946:1- 2001:12                         1985:1-1998:12
       Malawi             1946:1 2001:12                          1970:7-1998:12
      Malaysia            1946:1-2001:12                          1946:1-1998:12
          Mali            1946:1-2001:12                          1970:7-1998:12
         Malta            1946:1-2001:12                          1985:1-1998:12
     Mauritania           1946:1- 2001:12                         1974:1-1998:12
      Mauritius           1946:1-2001:12                          1985:1-1998:12
       Mexico             1946:1-2001:12                          1947:1-1998:12
      Moldova            1991:12-2001:12                               n.a.
      Mongolia            1970:3-2001:12                          1970:3-1998:12
      Morocco            1956:10-2001:12                          1959:1-1998:12
      Myanmar             1946:1-2001:12                          1955:1-1998:12
         Nepal           1955:12-2001:12                          1970:7-1998:12
    Netherlands           1946:1-2001:12                          1946:1-1998:12
    New Zealand           1946:1-2001:12                          1948:1-1998:12
     Nicaragua            1946:1-2001:12                          1947:1-1998:12
         Niger            1946:1-2001:12                          1970:7-1998:12
       Nigeria            1946:1-2001:12                          1970:7-1998:12




                                                84
                                    Table AI.1. Country Coverage (concluded)

       Country                 Official exchange rate             Parallel market exchange rate
        Norway                    1946:1-2001:12                          1946:1-1998:12
        Pakistan                  1946:1-2001:12                          1948:4-1998:12
        Panama                    1946:1-2001:12                               n.a.
       Paraguay                   1946:1-2001:12                          1951:3-1998:12
          Peru                    1946:1-2001:12                          1946:1-1998:12
      Philippines                 1946:1-2001:12                          1949:8-1998:12
         Poland                   1946:1-2001:12                          1946:1-1998:12
        Portugal                  1946:1-2001:12                          1946:1-1998:12
       Romania                    1957:1-2001:12                          1946:7-1998:12
  Russian Federation              1992:6-2001:12                          1946:1-1998:12
     Saudi Arabia                1952:10-2001:12                         1959:12-1998:12
        Senegal                   1946:1-2001:12                          1970:7-1998:12
       Singapore                  1946:4-2001:12                          1973:5-1998:12
   Slovak Republic                1993:1-2001:12                          1993:1-1998:12
        Slovenia                 1991:12-2001:12                               n.a.
     South Africa                 1946:1-2001:12                          1946:1-1998:12
     South Korea                  1946:1-2001:12                          1946:1-1998:12
          Spain                   1946:1- 2001:12                         1946:1-1998:12
       Sri Lanka                  1946:1-2001:12                          1956:1-1998:12
       Suriname                   1949:9-2001:12                          1970:7-1998:12
       Swaziland                  1946:1-2001:12                          1985:1-1998:12
        Sweden                    1946:1-2001:12                          1946:6-1998:12
      Switzerland                 1946:1-2001:12                          1946:1-1998:12
 Syrian Arab Republic             1947:7-2001:12                          1970:7-1998:12
       Tajikistan                 1992:1-2001:12                               n.a.
       Tanzania                  1946:12- 2001:12                         1970:7-1998:12
        Thailand                  1946:5-2001:12                          1948:1-1998:12
          Togo                    1946:1-2001:12                          1970:7-1998:12
        Tunisia                   1956:3-2001:12                          1960:1-1998:12
         Turkey                   1946:1- 2001:12                         1946:1-1998:12
     Turkmenistan                1993:11-2001:12                               n.a.
        Uganda                   1946:12- 2001:12                         1970:7-1998:12
        Ukraine                  1992:12-2001:12                          1991:8-1998:12
   United Kingdom                 1946:1-2001:12                          1946:1-1998:12
     United States                1946:1-2001:12                               n.a.
        Uruguay                  1946:12- 2001:12                         1946:1-1998:12
      Venezuela                   1946:1-2001:12                         1960:11-1998:12
        Zambia                   1946:12- 2001:12                         1970:7-1998:12
      Zimbabwe                   1946:12- 2001:12                         1970:7-1998:12

                                            Table AI.2. Data Sources
Variable                                    Source
Official exchange rate, 1946-1956           Pick’s Currency Yearbook and Pick’s World Currency
                                            Report, various issues.
Official exchange rate, 1957-2001           IMF, International Financial Statistics
Parallel Market exchange rate 1946-1980     Pick’s Currency Yearbook, Pick’s Black Market Yearbooks,
                                            and Pick’s World Currency Report, various issues.
Parallel Market exchange rate 1980-1998     World Currency Yearbook, various issues.
Consumer price index, 1957-2001             IMF, International Financial Statistics




                                                        85
