NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE EFFECT OF PRESCRIPTION DRUG MONITORING PROGRAMS ON OPIOID
UTILIZATION IN MEDICARE
Thomas C. Buchmueller
Colleen Carey
Working Paper 23148
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23148

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2017

This research was supported by the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation Scholars in Health Policy
Research Program. Anup Das provided excellent research assistance. The authors thank Jean
Abraham, Melinda Beeuwkes Buntin, and seminar participants at Cornell University, the
Midwestern Health Economic Conference, and the 2016 Association for Public Policy Analysis
and Management Annual Meeting. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Thomas C. Buchmueller and Colleen Carey. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Effect of Prescription Drug Monitoring Programs on Opioid Utilization in Medicare
Thomas C. Buchmueller and Colleen Carey
NBER Working Paper No. 23148
February 2017
JEL No. I12,I18
ABSTRACT
The misuse of prescription opioids has become a serious epidemic in the US. In response, states
have implemented Prescription Drug Monitoring Programs (PDMPs), which record a patient's
opioid prescribing history. While few providers participated in early systems, states have recently
begun to require providers to access the PDMP under certain circumstances. We find that "must
access" PDMPs significantly reduce measures of misuse in Medicare Part D. In contrast, we find
that PDMPs without such provisions have no effect. We find stronger effects when providers are
required to access the PDMP under broad circumstances, not only when they are suspicious.

Thomas C. Buchmueller
Stephen M. Ross School of Business
University of Michigan
701 Tappan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER
tbuch@umich.edu
Colleen Carey
298 Martha van Rensselaer Hall
Ithaca, NY 14850
cmc528@cornell.edu

1

Introduction

In recent years, the use of prescription opioids has grown dramatically in the United States; between 1999
and 2010, opioid prescriptions increased by 300% (Kunins et al., 2013). Opioids are an effective analgesic,
but bring a high risk of addiction and overdose, and over the same period deaths from opioid poisoning
more than quadrupled (Chen et al., 2014). Increases in opioid overdose deaths contributed to a historical
reversal in the decline of mid-life all-cause mortality over the period 1999 to 2013 (Case and Deaton, 2015).
In addition, it became clear that opioids prescribed legitimately by well-meaning medical professionals were
being diverted to street sale for non-medical use (Dart et al., 2015). In October 2015, President Obama and
health care provider groups announced a set of joint public-private initiatives aiming to improve prescribing
practices and expand addiction treatment; the bipartisan 21st Century Cures Act awards more than $1
billion in new funding for grants to states for related efforts.
The most significant policy responses to the opioid problem have taken place at the state level. Most
importantly, nearly every state has implemented a Prescription Drug Monitoring Program, or PDMP, that
collects data on prescriptions for controlled substances to facilitate detection of suspicious prescribing and
utilization. A PDMP allows authorized individuals to view a patient’s prescribing history in order to identify
those who are misusing or diverting opioids. State programs have evolved over time and continue to vary
along several dimensions, including the extent to which medical providers are encouraged to access the data.
Early programs were developed by law enforcement agencies and had provisions that made it difficult for
providers to access the data. Other programs did not block provider access, but did not actively encourage
them to utilize the data. PDMP administrative data show that, when provider access is possible but not
mandatory, only a small share of providers create PDMP logins and actually request patient histories (PDMP
Center of Excellence, 2014). A goal of the October 2015 initiative was to “double the number of health care
providers registered with their state PDMPs in the next two years”, showing the recent acknowledgment of
this problem (White House, 2015). Low provider utilization of these programs may explain why a number of
studies find that PDMPs have little or no effect on opioid use and related adverse health outcomes (Meara
et al., 2016; Paulozzi et al., 2011; Reifler et al., 2012; Jena et al., 2014; Li et al., 2014; Brady et al., 2014;
Haegerich et al., 2014).
Between 2007 and 2013, seventeen states implemented PDMPs for the first time but did not require
providers to access them. Ten states enacted stronger laws requiring providers to access the PDMP under
certain circumstances prior to prescribing. In nine of these ten states the “must access” requirement was
enacted to improve the efficacy of a PDMP that was already in place. Prior studies fail to account for
differences between programs that do and do not require providers to access the database. This requirement
2

is the main focus of this paper. Applying difference-in-differences models to aggregated claims data from
Medicare’s prescription drug program (Medicare Part D), we evaluate the effect of PDMPs on the prescription
drug utilization of Medicare beneficiaries. Our large-N microdata allows us to go beyond measures of average
utilization, which have been the main focus of previous studies, to measure rare outcomes in the upper tail of
the distribution – the exact outcomes that PDMPs are meant to impede. For example, a key outcome that
we analyze is the percentage of opioid users who obtain prescriptions from five or more prescribers, which
is a commonly used marker for “doctor shopping”. The Part D claims also allow us to construct multiple
measures capturing the intensity of opioid utilization. Additional data on hospital, outpatient, and physician
claims provide information on opioid poisoning incidents. Effects among the Medicare population are likely
to correlate with effects among the general population, and due to the program’s size effects in Medicare are
noteworthy in their own right. Meara et al. (2016) note that nearly one in four prescription overdose deaths
in 2008 was a disabled Medicare beneficiary.
We first establish that a PDMP without a “must access” provision is not associated with opioid misuse
in Medicare. In contrast, we find that implementing a “must access” PDMP reduces many of measures
of excessive quantity – the share of beneficiaries obtaining more than seven months supply in each halfyear, and the share that fill claims before the previous claim’s days supply has been used. In addition,
we find that “must access” PDMPs reduce “shopping” behavior. In treatment states relative to controls,
the percentage of Medicare Part D enrollees who obtain prescriptions from five or more prescribers falls by
8% and the percentage of enrollees who obtain prescriptions from five or more pharmacies by more than
15%. These results suggest that measures that require prescribers to access the PDMP can be an effective
way to reduce questionable opioid use patterns. And even though our quantity and shopping measures are
strongly correlated with opioid poisoning incidents as observed in medical claims data, we find a negative
but statistically insignificant relationship between “must access” PDMP laws and opioid poisoning incidents.
Because there is little or no integration of state databases, drug-seeking individuals trying to avoid
scrutiny may cross state borders to escape detection by the PDMP in their home state. We test for such
avoidance behavior using a novel measure of whether a Part D enrollee disproportionately obtains opioids
from out-of-state prescribers or pharmacies (relative to her out-of-state rate for non-opioid prescriptions).
Our results indicate that a “must access” PDMP in a given state raises the rate at which that state’s residents
obtain opioids from out-of-state prescribers by roughly a third of a standard deviation.
We also exploit the Medicare medical claims for a new measure of shopping behavior, also novel to our
knowledge. An individual shopping for a provider willing to prescribe opioids will incur an unusual number
of claims in which the provider bills Medicare for a “new patient” procedure code. A “must access” PDMP
reduces the share of individuals with four or more new patient visits in a half-year by 15%. Given Medicare
3

outlays for these visits, a “must access” PDMP in every state would avert $174 million in expenditures each
half-year.
As is the case in many areas where public policies are enacted at the state level, there is some heterogeneity
among “must access” PDMP laws. Although our main analysis estimates the average effect of these laws,
we also estimate models that exploit this heterogeneity to compare what can plausibly be characterized as
stronger or weaker forms of “must access”. Specifically, we allow for differences among laws that pertain
to certain care settings (2 states), laws that require providers to access the PDMP only when they are
suspicious of an individual (3 states), and laws that effectively pertain to all providers and all patients (5
states). We find that the broadest laws, which apply to all ingredients and settings and do not rely on
provider discretion, have the strongest impacts on our measures of excessive quantity. However, even the
weaker laws have effects on measures of shopping behavior.
Additional results support a causal interpretation of our findings for “must access” laws. We estimate
event-study regression models to test for differences in trends prior to the implementation of “must access”
laws and generally find no statistically significant difference between “treatment” and “control” states in the
pre period. We also investigate whether the estimated effects of “must access” PDMPs might be driven by
other state policies, including either other aspects of PDMP design or non-PDMP opioid control policies.
Based on an extensive review of state policies, we identified three policies that co-occur with our policy of
interest, but these policies have little or no independent impact on opioid misuse and the estimated effects
for “must access” laws are unchanged when we control for these alternative policies. We also show that our
results are very robust to dropping any one of our treatment states, suggesting our findings are not driven by
unusual circumstances in one of our implementing states. Finally, as a sort of placebo test, we examine the
utilization of statins and antidepressants. It is very uncommon to obtain these drug classes from multiple
prescribers or pharmacies, suggesting that our opioid “misuse” measures do not simply reflect poor care
coordination among Medicare beneficiaries. We find no effects of a “must access” PDMP on the utilization
of either of these two types of drugs.
Individuals who qualify for Medicare on the basis of a disability are known to have high rates of opioid
misuse and abuse (GAO, 2011). We find that the majority of the policy impacts we find in the overall
Medicare population are driven by the disabled subpopulation, particularly the low-income disabled. We
also consider as a population of special interest all those who historically met our criteria for doctor-shopping
at least once. Effects are quite large in percentage terms among this population, consistent with this policy
curbing misuse among the targeted population.
With sizable financial support from the Federal government, every state but Missouri has implemented a
PDMP in response to the prescription opioid epidemic. Our results help explain why the existing literature
4

provides little consistent evidence of their effectiveness. Given that PDMPs are designed to combat the
misuse and diversion of opioids by alerting providers of questionable utilization patterns, they will only be
successful if providers make use of the data collected by the program. Based on this logic, in recent years
states have begun strengthening their PDMPs by requiring providers to access the data. In this paper, we
provide the first empirical evaluation of such “must access” laws.

2

Background

2.1

Opioids and Medicare Part D

In recent decades, many physicians have argued that pain, “the fifth vital sign”, was historically undertreated
(Pasero and McCaffery, 1997). In response, the medical community began to treat pain more aggressively,
often using prescription opioids. The top panel of Figure 2 shows the spread in opioid prescriptions between
2007 and 2013, the time period covered by this analysis. Much of the increase came in prescriptions for
chronic pain, despite the fact that research suggests that opioids are less effective for chronic pain than for
acute pain, such as after surgery (Manchikanti et al., 2010). Along with the increase in utilization came
significant increases in rates of misuse and overdose; the dashed line in Figure 2 shows a steep increase
in emergency department visits for opioid poisoning. According to the National Survey on Drug Use and
Health (NSDUH), by 2013 more than 35 million Americans had used pain relievers non-medically at least
once in their life (NSDUH, 2014).
Given the significant disease burden of the elderly and disabled, it is not surprising that opioid use is quite
common in Medicare Part D. The bottom half of Figure 2 depicts opioid utilization and poisonings among
Part D enrollees, demonstrating the national trends are reproduced in the sample we consider. In 2010,
approximately one-quarter of Part D enrollees took opioids (Jena et al., 2014). Use is especially prevalent
among disabled Medicare beneficiaries: in 2011 nearly half filled an opioid prescription (Morden et al., 2014).
Over the time period of this analysis, the median days supply among disabled opioid takers rose from 60
days in the first half of 2007 to 105 days in the second half of 2013. A 2011 report by the Government
Accountability Office (GAO) found that in 2008 2% of Medicare beneficiaries obtained frequently-abused
drugs (opioids as well as some stimulants and benzodiazepines) from five or more prescribers per year,
which they deemed indicative of “doctor shopping” (GAO, 2011). Patterns of questionable access are more
prevalent among the disabled, who comprise about a third of opioid takers in Medicare Part D. However,
opioid misuse among the elderly has been rising in the very recent past. In 2012, the opioid mortality rate
among those over sixty years of age surpassed that of those between twenty and fifty-nine (West et al., 2015).
For most years since the Medicare prescription drug program was established in 2006, program adminis5

trators and plan sponsors have had a limited ability to identify or curtail opioid misuse (GAO, 2011). Efforts
to address the problem have largely been limited to encouraging plans to “provide practitioner and beneficiary education as appropriate” when suspicious patterns were identified. While state Medicaid programs
can require suspected opioid abusers to receive their drugs from only one prescriber or one pharmacy, the
legislation authorizing Medicare Part D did not permit either Part D plans or the Center for Medicare and
Medicaid Services (CMS) to restrict access in this way (GAO, 2011). In addition, while beneficiaries can
change Part D plans at least yearly, an insurer that has identified suspected drug abuse was not permitted
to transmit that information to future insurers (Blum, 2013). In July 2013, the last half-year of our sample,
Medicare began notifying plans of individuals with potentially inappropriate opioid utilization as defined by
its own PDMP-style Overutilization Monitoring System, although no action was required. In 2017 or 2018,
CMS recommends that plans begin denying inappropriate claims at “point-of-sale”, and plans will gain the
authority to limit high-risk beneficiaries to certain prescribers or pharmacies (Agrawal, 2016). To note, opioids are relatively inexpensive, incurring a negotiated price of $1.61 per day in our sample. Opioids account
for only about 3% of Part D insurers’ total drug costs in 2011, whereas antidepressants, for example, are
taken by about as many individuals but account for nearly 10%. If only a small portion of opioid utilization
is inappropriate, insurers may not choose to undertake self-financed efforts to interdict it.

2.2

State Prescription Drug Monitoring Programs

The most important policies aimed at curbing opioid abuse are prescription drug monitoring programs, or
PDMPs, which are established and operated by states to collect and facilitate the sharing of data on opioid
prescriptions. The earliest programs were primarily designed to assist law enforcement in investigations,
and were based around carbon copies. In the past decade, PDMPs have automated reporting, migrated
online, and increased reporting frequency, meaning they now contain an up-to-date and complete patient
prescription history. Policymakers have hypothesized that informing medical providers of potential misuse
could help impede diversion and recreational use of opioids. A physician or pharmacist may agree to proceed
if a prescribing history, such as in Figure 1, shows only a single prescriber, but might refuse if the history
reflects multiple providers or an unusually large quantity of opioids.
However, even as information technology made it easier to obtain the data in a timely fashion, state
programs established different rules regarding provider access. In some states, PDMPs began to allow
providers to query the PDMP, while in others it was explicitly prohibited or allowed only for current (but
not prospective) patients (Davis et al., 2014). Similarly, in some states, the PDMP actively generated reports
to prescribers and pharmacies when a patient appeared to be misusing opioids; in other states, it was illegal
for the PDMP to do so (Davis et al., 2014).
6

Despite a growing recognition of the dangers of opioids, physician groups have not generally endorsed
PDMP access as a solution. Physicians complained about interference with clinical practice, new paperwork
burdens, and the difficulty of contextualizing and interpreting a prescribing history (Islam and McRae,
2014; Gourlay, 2013). When prescribers were allowed access, they were sometimes granted immunity from
prosecution for not checking the PDMP (Davis et al., 2014). In this context, it is not surprising that when
not mandated, only the most conscientious providers actively used the PDMP to inform prescribing decisions
(Haffajee et al., 2015). For example, in the first year after a voluntary PDMP was established in Florida, a
state with a well-publicized opioid misuse problem, fewer than 1 in 10 physicians had even created a login for
the system (Poston, 2012). Similarly, two years after Rhode Island allowed prescribers to query its PDMP,
officials estimated it was used in only 10% of prescriptions (Arditi, 2014). Levy et al. (2015) show that nearly
half of prescriptions for opioids from the United States are written by primary care specialists, suggesting
that even if the heaviest prescribers are enrolling, low rates of uptake will limit the effectiveness of PDMPs.
In recent years, a number of states have strengthened their PDMPs by requiring providers to access the
data under certain circumstances. These “must access” provisions appear to have substantially increased
provider take-up. When New York implemented a “must access” provision in 2013, the number of registrants
increased fourteenfold, and the number of daily queries rose from fewer than 400 to more than 40,000.
Similarly, in Kentucky, Tennessee and Ohio, implementing a “must access” provision increased by several
orders of magnitude the number of providers registered and the number of queries received per day (PDMP
Center of Excellence, 2014).
Table 1 summarizes state laws studied in this paper by providing, in the first two columns, the half-year
that the state’s original PDMP law went into effect and when a “must access” provision went into effect. Our
main source of information on state laws is the detailed database of PDMPs collected by the Prescription
Drug Abuse Policy System (pdaps.org). This database was created by multiple legally-trained researchers
independently reviewing state laws relevant to PDMP operations for content and dates of enactment (Davis
et al., 2014). Note that we do not report laws for states whose first PDMP law passed before 2007, since
they do not contribute to identification in later analyses. By the end of 2013, all states except Missouri
and DC have passed some form of PDMP. In this paper we focus on the ten states that began to require
providers (under certain circumstances) to access the PDMP prior to prescribing opioids. In all cases but
one (Delaware) the “must access” provision strengthened an existing PDMP.
In our main analyses we treat all ten states that have a policy that requires providers to access the
PDMP under certain circumstances as “must access” states, but in fact the laws do differ. In general, more
recent “must access” policies are stronger than earlier laws. Louisiana’s law applies only to pain clinics and
Oklahoma’s to methadone. In Nevada, Delaware, and Ohio providers must access the PDMP if they have
7

“a reasonable belief that the patient may be seeking the controlled substance...for any reason other than
the treatment of an existing medical condition.” In 2012 or 2013, Kentucky, West Virginia, New Mexico,
Tennessee and New York required access for all care settings and ingredients, and providers must check even
if they are not suspicious. In Section 4.3 we explore how the impact of a “must access” provision varies by
strength of the law.
Early studies on PDMPs generally did not attempt to distinguish among different types of programs.
For example, Paulozzi et al. (2011) examine the relationship between whether a state has any kind of
PDMP between 1999 and 2005 and opioid poisoning incidents and mortality. They find no effect. Similarly,
using cross-sectional data from 2010, Jena et al. (2014) find no relationship between the presence of a state
PDMP and the number of Medicare beneficiaries obtaining prescriptions from multiple providers. Reifler et
al. (2012), considering 1999-2003, find that the growth in opioid use slows when states pass PDMP laws.
Brady et al. (2014) and Li et al. (2014) find no effect on opioids dispensed or drug overdose mortality from
PDMPs between 1999 and 2008. Meara et al. (2016) test the impact of PDMPs and a variety of other opioid
interdiction policies in a difference-in-difference framework using disabled Medicare beneficiaries; they find
no significant effects. In a review, Haegerich et al. (2014) conclude that 14 studies of PDMPs “have not
clearly established significant effects on total opioid prescribing or health outcomes with PDMPs.”
Two recent papers that are more optimistic about the effectiveness of PDMPs look more carefully, as
we do, at PDMP characteristics. Patrick et al. (2016) find a greater impact on opioid overdose deaths in
the general population in states whose PDMP monitors more drugs and updates data at least weekly. A
study by Dowell et al. (2016) shares our focus on “must access” PDMP provisions; their results suggest that
“must access” PDMPs are associated with a reduction in opioid overdose deaths and the morphine milligram
equivalents of prescribed opioids per state resident. Neither of these recent papers examines the relationship
between PDMPs and the type of extreme utilization that the programs are designed to reduce.

3

Data and Methods

3.1

Measures of Opioid Use, Misuse, and Poisoning

Our primary dataset is the prescription drug and medical claims of a random 5% subsample of Medicare
beneficiaries enrolled in Part D and fee-for-service Medicare (not Medicare Advantage) in any year between
2007 and 2013. The prescription drug claims denote the exact drug purchased, days supply, purchase date,
prescriber identifier and pharmacy identifier. Opioids are identified using the United States Pharmacopeia
2011 Medicare Model Guideline Formulary Reference File.1 Because several of the legislative changes during
1 We

do not distinguish between Schedule II (most opioids) and Schedule III (hydrocodone combinations and buprenorphine)
claims. Over our time period, all PDMPs covered Schedule II and nearly all covered Schedule III drugs (Davis et al., 2014).

8

this period occurred in the middle of the calendar year, to better match the claims data to the appropriate
policy regime, we divide the data into six-month periods, assigning laws to a period if they were in effect for
more than half of the time.
Table 2 provides basic summary statistics for the full panel of FFS/Part D enrollees (first column) and
the subsample with at least one opioid claim during each half-year (second column). For each of fourteen
half-years, the sample size is approximately 950,000; individuals appear about eleven times. A quarter of the
sample is entitled to Medicare due to disability and two in five are dually-eligible for Medicaid due to low
wealth and income. In any half-year, 28% of FFS/Part D enrollees fill at least one prescription for opioids.
Opioid takers are more likely than the average Part D enrollee to be eligible for Medicaid or disabled. Not
surprisingly, opioid users also have higher rates of cancer and are more likely to be near the end of life.2 We
consider the full population of opioid takers, even though more than a third of these individuals fill only a
single prescription (often as part of post-operative care).
Even with this rich detail, it is difficult to distinguish appropriate and inappropriate use of prescription
opioids. We draw on prior research to construct several proxy measures of misuse. Table 3 describes the
measures of opioid use and misuse that we construct using the claims data. We have three groups of outcomes:
quantity-based outcomes, “shopping” outcomes, and medical service outcomes.
Our simplest quantity-based outcome is a measure of the share of Part D enrollees who take any opioids
at all. However, our other quantity-based outcomes are intended to reflect the upper tail of the utilization
distribution; the goal is to capture utilization patterns that previous research suggests are either indicative
of misuse or dangerous per se. First, we create an indicator variable that equals one for all individuals who
obtained 211 or more days supply (more than seven thirty-day prescriptions) of opioids in a half-year. The
distribution of days supply is given in Figure 3, with the right panel zooming in on the distribution above the
cutoff. The right panels show the frequency of observations, revealing thousands of observations of even rare
phenomena. Nearly 9% of opioid takers fill more than 210 days supply of opioid prescriptions in a half-year;
high days supply could indicate abuse or opioid diversion, but could also result from patients experimenting
with different ingredients or strengths, or combinations of long-acting and short-acting opioids.
The potential for mistaking these benign reasons for having high days supply can be reduced by converting
each prescription to morphine-equivalent dosage (MED). The morphine-equivalent dosage allows opioids of
different ingredients, strengths, and form (routes of administration) to be converted into equivalent milligrams
of morphine.3 We divide the total MED obtained in a six-month period by 180 days to create a “daily MED.”
2 Cancer identified by the ICD9 codes that comprise CMS Hierarchical Condition Codes 7, 8, 9, and 10 in any position in
the inpatient, outpatient, and carrier (physician) medical claims. Cause of death is not noted in Medicare claims data.
3 We collected the conversion of each opioid ingredient × strength × form from the following three sources: Palliative.org
(2016); CMS (2015); Ohio Bureau of Workers’ Compensation (2016). The exact conversion is available upon request.

9

For example, hydrocodone has a morphine-equivalence factor of one; if an individual obtains an 18 day supply
of 10mg of hydrocodone, he or she has obtained a “daily MED” of 1 over the half-year. Figure 4 depicts the
distribution of this variable. The height of the first bar shows that more than three-quarters of opioid takers
have less than ten MED over the six month period, most likely consistent with acute use over a limited
period. 1.7% of opioid takers obtain enough opioids to have a continuous daily dosage of more than 120
MED. Guidelines for providers, e.g. Washington State Agency Medical Directors’ Group (2010), suggest
that chronic usage above this threshold is associated with an escalation in risk.
A final quantity-based measure is the prevalence of overlapping claims – i.e., having multiple prescriptions
for the same drug at a point in time. We create a binary flag for whether an individual fills a second claim
for the same ingredient more than a week before the first prescription should have been finished, based on
its days supply.4 If the two claims are for different ingredients, we attribute their overlap to the patient
experimenting with other opioids and do not code the individual as having overlapping claims. This measure
is similar to the concurrently supplied measure in previous research (Jena et al., 2014). More than 91%
of observations have no overlapping claims. Most of those with overlapping claims have only one, but
individuals in the top percentile have six claims overlapping by more than a week in a six month period.
One of the main ways that a PDMP can reduce opioid abuse is by curtailing “shopping” behavior, whereby
an individual visits multiple prescribers or pharmacies to obtain opioids. This outcome is of particular interest
since the information provided by PDMPs is specifically designed to inform a provider of doctor shopping
behavior. In the Part D claims, we can count the number of distinct providers from whom an enrollee
received a prescription for opioids during the half-year and the number of different pharmacies at which
opioid prescriptions were filled.5 For both variables, the modal value is one, though there is a long right tail,
especially for the number of physicians. We construct a measure of doctor-shopping by identifying all Part
D enrollees who received opioid prescriptions from five or more prescribers in a single period. In our data,
2.3% of opioid takers meet this criterion. It is possible that there are other explanations for a large number
of prescribers, such as uncoordinated care. However, obtaining opioids from five or more prescribers is nine
times as likely for opioids as it is for antidepressants, and more than 200 times as likely as it is for statins.
We construct an analogous measure for individuals who fill opioid prescriptions at five or more pharmacies
in a half-year. Seven of our ten implementing states require dispensers to check on the same grounds as
prescribers (the exceptions are DE, LA, and NY). Such “pharmacy shopping” is less common: approximately
half of a percent of opioid users visit five or more pharmacies in a half-year. Figures 5 and 6 present the
4 Because we follow a person longitudinally across years, we can properly account for prescriptions filled in, say, late December
and early January.
5 Pharmacy and prescriber identifiers are not included on our 2007 Part D claims file; therefore, variables using those data
are reported for the 2008-2013 period.

10

distribution of these variables, again showing the distribution above the threshold in the right panel.
The data collected by a state PDMP is generally limited to prescriptions that have been written and
filled in that state. Similarly, access to the data is generally limited to physicians, pharmacists and law
enforcement officials in that state. Therefore, to the extent that a PDMP does curtail doctor-shopping it
may push some drug abusers to obtain or fill prescriptions in other states. An out-of-state prescriber or
pharmacist would be unaware of a suspicious record in another state’s PDMP; in addition, the individual’s
home state PDMP will remain unaware of prescriptions filled in another state. Indeed state and Federal
policymakers have complained for more than a decade that uncoordinated state efforts are vulnerable to this
behavior (GAO, 2002). Since the Medicare claims data provides information on geographic location, we can
test for this type of avoidance behavior. One challenge, however, is that it is not uncommon for Medicare
beneficiaries to fill prescriptions out-of-state, either because they live near a state border, are traveling, or
live part of the year in another state (e.g., “snow-birds”). To distinguish border-crossing for the purpose
of obtaining opioids from other reasons that a patient would fill prescriptions in more than one state, we
calculate an individual-level measure of “excess” opioid claims from out-of-state prescribers as

Excess Opioid Claims from OOS Prescriber =
P

Opioid Prescriptions
from OOS Prescribers
P
Opioid Prescriptions

−

P

Non-opioid
P Prescriptions from OOS Prescribers
Non-opioid Prescriptions

We construct an analogous measure of excess claims from out-of-state pharmacies; on average, individuals
are less likely to fill opioids at an out-of-state pharmacy than to fill non-opioids at such pharmacies, making
the mean of this measure in Table 3 negative. As with our other proxies, this type of behavior is rare; only a
few percent of opioid takers are more likely to obtain opioids from out-of-state than from in-state providers.
Lacking guidance from the literature to suggest a cutoff for these variables, we analyze them as continuous
outcomes. In analysis, we standardize this variable to have a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one,
meaning its coefficient is directly interpretable as the impact of the policy being tested in terms of standard
deviations.
Our last two measures leverage each opioid taker’s medical history, as reported in the medical claims
files.6 We use the medical claims to construct an alternative measure of doctor shopping. In the outpatient
and physician (carrier) medical claims, we identify all claims where the provider billed for a “new patient”
code.7 About a third of opioid takers have at least one new patient visit in a six month period, and the 99th
percentile has four or more such visits. Of course, the majority of new patient visits for opioid takers will
be innocuous. Again, lacking guidance from the literature, we choose a cutoff of four or more new patient
6 We
7A

do not have medical claims for 2013; therefore, these measures are reported for the 2007-2012 period.
“new patient” visit has a HCPCS code of 99201, 99202, 99203, 99204, or 99205.

11

visits, a rate of new patient visits that is limited to the top 1.3% of opioid takers.8 This variable differs from
the doctor shopping variable constructed using Part D claims in that this measure includes “unsuccessful”
shopping–i.e., visits where a drug-seeking patient was not able to obtain a prescription. We note that policies
designed to make opioids harder to obtain could move this measure in either direction – if shopping efforts
become less likely to yield opioids, shopping intensity could either increase or decrease.
Finally, the incidence of opioid poisonings is a key outcome of interest. An opioid poisoning incident is
indicated by an ICD code for an “opioid related overdose”; we apply the exact codes reported by Meara
et al. (2016).9 We should note that while many researchers report on opioid overdose deaths, our measure
includes both fatal and non-fatal poisonings. Since the same opioid poisoning incident might generate claims
in several settings of care, we simply note whether an individual has any opioid poisoning incidents; the rate
in each half-year is 0.2% of opioid takers.
In addition to allowing us to analyze extreme types of utilization, an important advantage of our microdata compared to the aggregate data used in most other studies is that we can observe the joint distribution
of opioid utilization and health outcomes at the individual level. Figure 7 illustrates the special role of doctor
shopping in opioid abuse and misuse in our dataset. Figure 7 separates our sample population by whether
they ever had an opioid poisoning incident. The number within the bar represents the highest number of
prescribers ever seen in a half-year, and the height of the bar segment is the percent of beneficiaries who
see that number at least once. Overall, the figure shows that most of those who ever experience an opioid
poisoning incident are using multiple prescribers. Half of those who experience an opioid poisoning incident
met our criterion for doctor shopping at least once, whereas only 18% of those who are never poisoned do
so. Among those who experience an opioid poisoning incident, less than 5% of individuals never see more
than a single prescriber; the comparable figure for those who never experience an opioid poisoning incident
is 44%.
Patients that we identify as doctor shoppers are also more likely to obtain extremely large amounts of
prescription opioids. This can be seen in Table 4, which reports the correlation of our misuse measures
with each other and opioid poisonings. At the same time, the data suggest that doctor shopping is not the
only pathway to potential misuse: 33% of patients who obtain more than seven months’ supply see only one
8 In

Section 4, we test robustness to the thresholds used to define misuse for days, prescribers, and pharmacies.
an opioid poisoning incident involves ICD code 9650∗ , E8501, E8502, E9500, or E9800, in any position in the
ICD codes of the inpatient, outpatient, and carrier claims. We include poisonings with suicidal intent. We exclude heroin
poisoning 96501 from this definition, although several authors have noted the substitutability of heroin and opioids (Alpert et
al., 2016; Dart et al., 2015; Unick et al., 2013). We do not find enough heroin poisoning incidents in the data to evaluate it as
a separate outcome.
Under a policy in effect between 2014 and early 2017, Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services redacted claims for substance
use disorders. This policy does not target opioid poisoning incidents per se, but if a single claim reports ICD codes for an opioid
poisoning incident and a substance use disorder, the entire claim might be redacted. Our 2012 medical claims are partially
affected by redaction; however, we find a similar rate of opioid poisonings in 2012 relative to earlier years, and similar to rates
published by Meara et al. (2016), whose claims are not redacted.
9 Specifically,

12

prescriber. This suggests the utility of analyzing a number of proxy measures which capture various aspects
of opioid misuse. The bottom row of Table 4 indicate that our prescription-based measures of misuse are
positively correlated with opioid poisoning, as measured in the medical claims. The relationship can also
be seen by running probit regressions of our poisoning outcome on the misuse proxies. Estimated marginal
effects from such regressions are reported in Appendix Table A.2. Consistent with the work of Jena et al.
(2014), nearly all of our misuse measures bilaterally predict opioid poisoning, with some measures raising
the rate of opioid poisoning incidents tenfold.

3.2

Estimation Strategy

Our principal analysis tests the impact of a state policy on state-halfyear aggregates of opioid use, misuse,
and poisoning incidents. Our regression model is

Yst = δs + δt + β1(policyst ) + εst ,

(1)

where Yst is an opioid outcome averaged over a state×halfyear and 1(policyst ) is 1 if the state has a particular
type of PDMP in the half-year. One outcome, the percentage of Part D enrollees using any opioids, is
calculated using data from all enrollees in a given state and half-year. For all outcomes related to misuse
or abuse, we use the number of enrollees with at least one opioid prescription as the denominator. Each
observation is weighted by the number of enrollees represented in the denominator.10 Each regression contains
fixed effects for states (δs ) and years (δt ) and clusters the standard errors at the state; for our main estimates
we also report wild cluster-bootstrap percentile-t confidence intervals (Bertrand et al., 2004; Cameron et al.,
2008). Brewer et al. (2013) show that this bootstrap provides correct inference – hypothesis testing of correct
size – in the presence of autocorrelated errors when the number of treated groups is as low as five.
We use this basic setup to evaluate the impact of two types of PDMPs: those that do and do not require
providers to access the data collected by the program. Seventeen states implemented a PDMP without a
“must access” provision between 2007 and 2013; ten others implemented a “must access” PDMP.11 Our
main hypothesis is that PDMPs will have a stronger impact when providers are required to access the data.
To test this, we first estimate the effect of PDMPs that do not have a “must access” provision, dropping
the ten “must access” states. Then using the full sample of states we estimate two models to evaluate the
effect of the “must access” laws. The first model includes the indicator for non-“must access” laws as an
10 In results available upon request, we find broadly similar estimates when equally weighting states. However, the unweighted
standard errors are much larger, suggesting weighting correctly adjusts for heteroskedasticity driven by differences in state sample
size (Solon et al., 2015).
11 As described in Section 3.1, we lack shopping outcomes for 2007 and medical services outcomes for 2013. Because of this
data limitation, only eight of the ten treatment states identify the policy impact for some outcomes. Details are provided in
Appendix Table A.1.

13

independent variable. In the second specification, we combine the states with the PDMPs without a “must
access” provision with states having no PDMP at all.
Within the limits imposted by our short-T panel, we can also evaluate “must access” PDMPs within
an event study framework. The event study reorients each state’s first post-treatment period to zero, and
measures the difference between a treatment and control state in the periods prior to and following this period.
This analysis serves two purposes. Firstly, systematic differences between treatment and control states in
the pre-treatment period could suggest nonparallel trends or policy endogeneity. Secondly, evaluating the
impact of the treatment several periods post implementation can suggest whether the policy’s impact fades
out or grows over time. The event study estimates the following equation:

Yst = δs + δt +

X

βh Tsh + εst

(2)

h=−4,−3,...0...2

where Tsh = 1 if state s implemented a must access PDMP h half-years ago (or if h is negative, will implement
a PDMP −h half-years in the future.) The first post period is denoted by h = 0, and we combine all post
periods after the third (h = 2) into the third.

3.3

Methodological Limitations

The use of Medicare claims data for this analysis brings several advantages: individual-level data allows us
to measure extremes of the distribution, the large sample size provides many observations of rare outcomes,
and the medical claims allow us to directly observe the linkage between opioid utilization and poisonings.
However, the Part D program only began in 2006, several years into the escalation of opioid utilization. We
therefore have only a short time period on which to assess state-specific trends in opioid misuse prior to
PDMP implementation.
Other limitations of our dataset are inherent to administrative claims. Part D claims could undercount
an individual’s utilization if they purchase opioids on the street. In addition, a Medicare beneficiary can
fill opioid prescriptions using cash instead of Part D benefits, although over our sample period there was
little reason to do so. The possibility of beneficiaries obtaining opioids outside of Medicare Part D is not
a concern for our analysis of opioid poisonings, although there we rely on the accuracy of medical coding
for fee-for-service beneficiaries. Finally, our perspective could be affected by beneficiaries in jail or prison.
Medicare does not pay claims during periods of incarceration, but the standard claims files do not reflect
incarceration status.12 In principle, a “must access” PDMP could reduce misuse rates via the channel of
incarceration.
12 Individuals

remain enrolled in Part A and can remain in Parts B or D if they or a public entity continue to pay premiums.

14

Finally, our 5% random sample is well-designed for characterizing the experience of Medicare enrollees.
However, it is not possible to use these data for prescriber-level analyses. A slight majority of opioid
prescribers write only a single prescription to one of our sampled individuals, and even at the 99th percentile
the prescriber writes prescriptions to only six individuals. We leave a fuller investigation of how prescribers
respond to opioid control policies to future work.

4

Results

4.1

Effect of a PDMP Without a “Must Access” Provision on Opioid Misuse
and Poisonings

In Table 5, we report the results of our difference-in-difference strategy for the PDMPs that do not require
providers to access the database, dropping the ten states that implement a “must access”’ PDMP from the
analysis. Most of our point estimates cannot be distinguished from zero. The exceptions are an increase
in the rate of filling opioids at five or more pharmacies, and an increase in the share of opioid takers with
at least four new patient visits. The first result is clearly contrary to the sign we expect from a successful
opioid control policy. The hypothesized effect for the number of new patient visits is theoretically ambiguous,
though it seems more plausible that a successful PDMP would reduce such visits. Indeed, that is what we
find for “must access” PDMPs. This logic, combined with the fact that none of the estimates for the quantity
measures are statistically significant, suggests that positive and significant coefficient on the 4+ new patients
variable should be discounted.
In order for a PDMP to provide useful information to a prescriber or pharmacist who checks it, the
PDMP needs to first populate its database of utilization.13 The implementation of a PDMP at time t is
actually the implementation of data reporting requirements, and so it may take time for a provider to see a
representative record for any patient. Therefore, in the third panel of this table, we again test for the impact
of a non-must access PDMP lagging the implementation date by six months. That is to say, we assume a
newly-implemented PDMP is only effective six months after its actual implementation date. We again find
that a PDMP without a “must access” provision is largely ineffective. Overall, the results in Table 5 are
consistent with our hypothesis that PDMP that rely entirely on the voluntary participation of providers are
unlikely to be successful.
13 Among our ten states implementing a “must access” PDMP, only Delaware did not first have a non-“must access” PDMP
which had already begun collecting data.

15

4.2

The Effect of “Must Access” PDMPs on Opioid Misuse and Poisonings

In Table 6, we report the results of estimating Equation 1 for a “must access” PDMP. The models reported
in the upper panel also include indicators for the presence of a non-“must access” PDMP. Because we find
few significant differences between the seventeen states with non-“must access” laws and other states that
did not implement a new PDMP during this period, our preferred model combines these two categories of
states into a single control group. Results from this more parsimonious specification are reported in the
lower panel of Table 6. The two models produce similar point estimates for the effect of a “must access”
PDMP. For every estimate, we report below it the 95 percent wild cluster-bootstrap percentile-t confidence
interval, with CIs that exclude zero in bold. Our inference is unaffected by this procedure.14
Our first set of outcomes reflect the quantity of opioids obtained. A “must access” PDMP is associated
with a statistically significant 2.4% decline in the share of Part D enrollees taking opioids. Similarly, we find
a 6% decline in the share of opioid takers with overlapping claims, and a 5% decline (significant at the ten
percent level) in the share with more than seven months supply. In contrast to these statistically significant
effects, we estimate a fairly precise zero on the share of those obtaining more than 120 MED/day.
We find larger declines in our shopping outcomes – a statistically significant 8% fall in the share of
individuals obtaining opioids from five or more prescribers and a 16% decline for five or more pharmacies.
The passage of a “must access” PDMP may prompt individuals to cross state lines in search of less-regulated
prescribers and pharmacies. We find evidence consistent with that hypothesis for the case of out-of-state
prescribers: a “must access” PDMP raises the rate at which individuals obtain prescriptions from out-ofstate prescribers by about a third of a standard deviation, although this result is only significant at the ten
percent level. The next column tests whether a “must access” PDMP affects opioid takers’ number of new
patient visits (measured from the medical claims). We find a 14% decline in this rate (significant at the five
percent level).
Each new patient visit is reimbursed by Medicare under standard rules, even if the visit is motivated
purely by opioid-seeking behavior and no other care takes place.15 If the decline in new patient visits is not
offset by other episodes of care, then the reduction in new patient visits is net Federal savings. To calculate
these savings, we estimate the impact of a “must access” PDMP on the average number of new patient
visits, which yields a coefficient of -0.024 (SE 0.010). When multiplied by the cost of a “new patient” visit,
on average $119 in our 2012 medical claims, and the represented population, we find that a “must access”
14 We also computed the pairs cluster-bootstrap percentile-t CIs. The pairs cluster assigns a given state’s outcomes to an
alternative state’s policy history, obtaining the distribution of estimates under a null hypothesis of no effect. We find similar
CIs using this procedure; results available upon request.
15 We do not explicitly test how a “must access” PDMP affects the volume of medical services. However, in results available
upon request, we find that a “must access” PDMP reduces the share of individuals seeing a high number of providers, although
for some thresholds the effect is insignificant.

16

PDMP in every state would reduces outlays on new patient visits by $174 million each half-year.
The final column tests whether a “must access” PDMP affects an important health outcome: opioid
poisonings. Despite the fact that we find negative effects on several measures of misuse which are positively
correlated with opioid poisonings, we cannot reject the null hypothesis that these programs reduce poisonings.
The estimated coefficients in the last column of the table are negative, but they are small relative to their
standard errors.
An extension of this analysis shows that our results are not sensitive to the thresholds used to define
misuse. In Figure 8, we test the impact of a “must access” PDMP using Equation 1 on various thresholds
for days supply, number of prescribers, number of pharmacies, and number of new patient visits. The yaxis reports the percentage change associated with a “must access” PDMP, and the mean of the variable is
reported along the x-axis. Point estimates for each threshold are always negative; however, it is clear that
standard errors grow as the threshold cuts off a smaller share of opioid takers.

4.3

Model Assumptions: Pretrends, Co-Occurring Policy Changes, and Policy
Heterogeneity

An assumption underlying our difference-in-difference strategy is that states that implement a “must access”
PDMP were similar prior to implementation to those that do not. The event history model presented in
Equation 2 represents a standard way to evaluate this assumption; an additional benefit of this specification
is that it can inform us how a policy’s impact increases or decreases with time since implementation. The
results of estimating Equation 2 are reported in Figure 9. We depict each βh for four half-years prior to
implementation and three half-years post implementation. βh signifies the difference between implementing
and nonimplementing states on this measure h periods before or after implementation, net of state and
calendar half-year dummies. We drop states that implement in either the first or last year of our panel, which
leaves us six states that contribute to identification of every βh , eliminating impacts on βh that result from
composition alone. In general, the coefficients are not significantly different from zero, suggesting that prior
to implementation the states that implemented “must access” PDMPs did not differ from controls. However,
some of the results are suggestive of anticipatory effects, particularly for the pharmacy shopping outcome.
We note that, in the lead-up to the implementation of a “must access” PDMP, all states except Delaware had
existing PDMPs which allowed, but did not require, provider access. Since the policy process for a change
like a “must access” PDMP would have involved consultation with health care providers, it is possible that
they were made aware in the late pre-period of the scope of the problem and the potential applicability of
the PDMP to which they already had access. Presumably, in advance of the official start date, the agency
managing the PDMP would have begun encouraging providers to create PDMP accounts and begin accessing
17

the data. Similarly, providers may have made changes in workflow earlier than required in order to ensure
they were in compliance with the law on its first applicable date. If so, then the implementation timing of
a “must access” PDMP is actually fuzzy, with the true post-period beginning earlier than what we record.
With respect to the impact of the policy over time in the post policy, there is no systematic pattern of either
growth or reduction in impacts over time.
Another important assumption that underlies our interpretation of the results is that they are not picking
up the effect of other opioid-related policies that states were implementing around the same time. In some
cases, the legislation that established “must access” rules contained other measures aimed at strengthening
the PDMP. The Prescription Drug Abuse Policy System describes a broad set of PDMP characteristics.16
For each of ten states implementing a “must access” PDMP, we looked for any policies implemented at the
same time in more than one “must access” state. Three states – Kentucky, West Virginia, and New York –
began to allow providers’ “delegates” to access the PDMP at the same time as the “must access” provision
began. Allowing delegates lowers the labor costs of accessing the PDMP by enabling, for example, a medical
assistant to query the PDMP instead of the prescribing physician. Three states – Ohio, Kentucky, and New
York – increased the frequency with which PDMP data must be updated. Increasing frequency of reporting,
e.g. from weekly to daily, improves the quality of data available to a provider accessing the PDMP. States
enacted policies besides PDMPs as well. The dataset collected and analyzed by Meara et al. (2016) identifies
laws that set limits on days supply, establish new requirement for the physician-patient relationship and
verifying patient identification at pharmacies, increase the use of tamper-resistant prescription pads, and
establish new regulations pertaining to pain clinics. There were two instances where states enacted one of
these policies close to the time they implemented a “must access” rule: pain clinic laws in Kentucky and
Ohio.
Intuitively, the two PDMP-related provisions can be seen as complements laws requiring PDMP access.
Providers who access a PDMP will obtain more useful information when the database is updated more
frequently and the cost of complying with a “must access” requirement will be lower when providers can
delegate the task of checking the database. Therefore, we first test whether these policies have an independent
effect when passed in the absence of a “must access” law. If they have little or no impact on misuse outcomes
when passed alone, they cannot be responsible for the policy impacts reported in Table 6. We view pain clinic
laws as targeting a slightly different channel of misuse than PDMP-related policies. “Must access” policies
bring information to the mass of providers, including many who prescribe opioids only rarely, while pain
16 This dataset is a comprehensive resource on all aspects of PDMPs: which agency operates the PDMP; who – prescribers,
pharmacists, patients, law enforcement, out-of-state entities – may access the PDMP and under what circumstances; whether
the PDMP is permitted or required (or neither) to identify suspicious activity and whether it is permitted or required (or
neither) to inform licensing boards, law enforcement, providers, or patients of such activity; and which substances must be
reported to the PDMP and at what frequency.

18

clinic laws directly regulate the behavior of a small share of providers who account for a disproportionate
share of all opioid prescribing. The two approaches may both be effective against different patterns of opioid
abuse.
We test for an independent effect of each of the three co-occurring policies using data on the 41 states
without “must access” laws. Ten states among the 41 began to allow delegates to access their PDMPs,
20 increased the frequency of PDMP reporting, and 3 implemented pain clinic regulations (Table 1). The
results from this analysis are presented in Table 7. To facilitate comparisons, the first row reports the results
from Table 6. Neither allowing delegates nor increasing reporting frequency have estimated effects that are
significant at the .05 level, so we conclude that these policies do not affect opioid misuse when providers are
also not required to access the PDMP. We find that pain clinic regulations are associated with an increase
in the rate of four or more new patient visits and the use of out-of-state pharmacies. These coefficients have
the opposite sign as our “must access” estimates, which suggests that failing to account for pain clinic laws
may cause the magnitude of the latter to be understated. The other significant coefficient, on use of five or
more pharmacies, has the same sign and similar magnitude as our main estimate. Taken as a whole, these
results do not suggest that our “must access” results are being driven by other co-occurring policies.
An alternative way to test the sensitivity of our results is to simply add controls for those laws to our
main regressions. The policy variation to precisely parse the effects of these different provisions is somewhat
limited, since as stated some are passed by the same states at the same time. In Appendix Table A.3 we
present estimates from such regressions. In general, controlling for these other policies moves the effects of
a “must access” PDMP slightly towards zero, although the point estimates never differ significantly from
our preferred, more parsimonious specification. We see that when controlling for pain clinic laws “must
access” PDMPs are still associated with a reduction in the use of five or more pharmacies, which supports
our hypothesis that these laws affect different channels of misuse.
The results presented so far do not account for differences among “must access” laws related to the types
of providers targeted and the discretion providers are granted (see Section 2). To consider the importance
of these differences, we categorize our ten states’ laws into three subtypes: limited laws that apply only to
certain ingredients (Methadone in OK) or settings of care (pain clinics in LA), discretionary laws that require
the provider to access the PDMP if they are suspicious (NV, DE, and OH), and broad laws that apply to
all ingredients and settings and do not rely on provider suspicion (KY, WV, NM, TN, and NY). Figure 10
shows the point estimates we obtain if we include each subtype of policy as independent variables in a single
regression. The gray bar shows our overall estimate, for reference. Among our quantity outcomes (top four
figures), the pattern of estimates suggests that broad policies have stronger effects than discretionary laws,
which in turn appear to be stronger than limited policies (although the differences between the subtypes
19

are not always significant). The other outcomes do not display such a clear pattern. However, even limited
laws significantly affect shopping outcomes, and in most cases the estimate for each subtype cannot be
distinguished from the overall estimate.
As an addendum to this analysis, we test the robustness of our estimates to dropping one of our implementing states. These results are presented in Appendix Figure A.1. A gray bar again represents the overall
estimate, and each estimate drops the state noted on the x-axis (which orders states by implementation
date). Finding that removing a single state significantly changes our estimated policy impact would suggest
that special circumstances in that state are actually driving our results. Instead we find that point estimates
are very similar when estimated on a subset of nine or seven implementing states.

4.4

Results by Subsample

In addition to our main analysis, which is based on state-year averages for all opioid users, we also analyze
the same outcomes calculated for key subsamples of Medicare enrollees. As noted, it is generally believed
that the problem of opioid abuse is most serious among lower-income Medicare beneficiaries and those who
qualify due to disability. Therefore we conduct separate analyses by Medicare eligibility category. Table 8
tests the impact of a “must access” PDMP on aggregate outcomes within four Medicare subsamples. We
find that the probability of taking opioids is reduced among all groups (insignificantly for disabled and nondually eligible.) However, the effects of “must access” PDMPs on measures of high quantity or shopping are
primarily found among the low-income disabled. In fact, given the number of dual disabled and the point
estimates of their behavioral response, the impact on the low-income disabled is responsible for more than
two-thirds of the overall Medicare impact on 211+ days supply, overlapping claims, five or more prescribers
or pharmacies, and excess out-of-state pharmacies.17 Consistent with the literature reviewed in Section 2,
the disabled are more likely to have utilization patterns that suggest “misuse” and have a much higher rate
of opioid poisoning incidents. It’s possible that a “must access” PDMP has larger effects in the low-income
disabled because the policy is well-targeted towards the type of “misuse” that is more common among
this subpopulation. Alternatively, a “must access” PDMP may simply have a larger impact among the
low-income disabled population. If physicians are more likely to suspect “misuse” among the low-income
disabled, then a “must access” provision in states with a discretionary policy may result in more PDMP
checks for this group than for elderly opioid users.
Table 9 considers the subsample of 41,709 individuals who met our doctor shopping criteria – obtained
opioids from five or more prescribers in a six month period – at least once in their state’s pre period (any
17 To make these calculations, we multiple the subsample’s effect by its size, and then divide by product of the overall sample
and its size. For the case of 211+ days supply, the calculation is (-0.0128*940,362 dual disabled)/(-.00429*3,703,389 opioid
takers).

20

time for control states). On average, a state-halfyear still contains more than 600 individuals. If a “must
access” PDMP is successful, it should result in behavior change among these individuals. Consistent with
this, effects among this sample of previous doctor shoppers are larger in magnitude than among Medicare
beneficiaries as a whole; for example, the share of beneficiaries with overlapping claims and the use of five
or more pharmacies falls by a quarter, and four or more new patient visits falls by 37%. However, we still
do not find any reduction in opioid poisoning incidents among this group; the insignificant point estimate
amounts to only a 10% reduction.
Appendix Table A.4 describes the impact of a “must access” PDMP on subsamples defined by health
status. An unintended consequence of a “must access” PDMP might be a “chilling effect” on appropriate
opioid utilization. The top two panels of the table report the effect of a “must access” PDMP on statehalfyear aggregates of cancer patients and those without cancer. We limit this analysis to 2007-2012 because
we do not have the medical claims to identify cancer for 2013. A first note is that while taking opioids is more
common among cancer patients, our measures of opioid “misuse” are not markedly higher, suggesting we are
not mislabeling high but appropriate utilization too often. Among the quantity outcomes, a “must access”
PDMP actually raises the rate at which cancer patients obtain high quantities of opioids, perhaps because
providers are more comfortable allowing high quantities when they are certain of the absence of misuse. Our
results show that a “must access” PDMP affects shopping outcomes among both cancer patients and those
without cancer. Finally, we find that a “must access” PDMP reduces poisonings among cancer patients.
In results available upon request, we find that this effect is unchanged when we exclude the small number
of poisonings explicitly characterized as “with suicidal intent”. The table shows that a “must access”
PDMP reduces measures of misuse among those without cancer, without impeding the utilization of cancer
patients. Inasmuch as some cancer patients show behavior consistent with shopping, such behavior becomes
less common after a “must access” PDMP is implemented. The second two panels consider two different
subsamples: those who die in the half-year versus those who do not. Again, while those who die are more
likely to take opioids, they are if anything less likely to meet our “misuse” criteria.18 In this comparison,
it’s clear that the effects of a “must access” PDMP are driven by those who do not die in the half-year. The
utilization of those who die is less affected, although there is a reduction in overlapping claims and the use
of five or more pharmacies.

4.5

Placebo Test: “Must Access” PDMPs’ Effect on Non-opioids

Finally, we also estimate a set of “placebo” regressions that test for an effect of PDMP laws on the use or
“abuse” of statins and antidepressants. If a “must access” PDMP is correlated for some reason with general
18 We make no adjustment for the amount of time in the half-year the patient was alive. If utilization were identical, means
of measures would still be lower among those who die in the half-year due to censoring.

21

trends in prescription drug utilization or prescribing patterns, we will incorrectly attribute the change in
opioid misuse measures to the “must access” PDMP. As a placebo test, Table 10 looks at the impact of a
“must access” PDMP on outcomes for statins and antidepressants, which are taken by a similar share of
the Medicare population. The excess out-of-state prescriber and pharmacy measures are not standardized
in this table to show their levels across these three types of drugs. As mentioned above, it is vanishingly
rare to obtain statins or antidepressants from five or more prescribers or pharmacies. However, these other
types of drugs are more often provided in large quantities or in ways that create overlap in fill dates. One
interpretation is that individuals commonly experiment with drugs in these categories, and that prescribers
are comfortable allowing overlapping claims and large quantities among drugs with low potential for overdose
and abuse. We find no significant effects of a “must access” PDMP on outcomes for drug types besides opioids.

5

Conclusion

Several key conclusions emerge from our analysis. First, our results suggest that PDMPs that do not require
provider participation are not effective in reducing questionable or inappropriate use of prescription opioids.
In contrast, we do find evidence that “must access” PDMPs have the desired effect of curbing certain types
of extreme utilization. Specifically, such policies reduce several measures of excessive quantity and shopping
behavior. The strongest laws, which cover all ingredients and settings of care and do not require providers to
be suspicious, have larger effects on utilization than weaker laws, but even “limited” and “discretionary” laws
lower rates of shopping behavior. Several additional analyses suggest that these estimates represent causal
effects. We show that states that pass a “must access” PDMP are not dissimilar to states that do not on our
key measures during the pre period. Since our sample period was a time of active policy experimentation
among states, we search for policies that co-occur with “must access” laws, but no potential confounding
policies have strong independent effects when passed in the absence of a “must access” PDMP. Finally, our
results are very robust to dropping any of our implementing states. Subsample analyses show that, as we
expect, the policy’s impacts are concentrated among previous misusers and low-income disabled enrollees,
who have the highest rates of misuse measures.
Although these results point to the effectiveness of “must access” PDMPs, other results suggest the
limits of this policy. We find no statistically significant effect on a key medical outcome: opioid poisoning
incidents. This is despite the fact that several outcomes for which we find significant effects are themselves
positively correlated with poisoning. The explanation for this result may have to do with the fact that
in the Medicare Part D data that we analyze, we observe prescription fills rather than actual utilization.
Perhaps poisonings do not fall because Medicare beneficiaries who are misusing opioids are able to find other
ways to maintain consumption. The fact that we find some evidence that stronger PDMP laws induce some
22

beneficiaries to turn to out-of-state sources is suggestive of this type of compensatory effect. There are other
possible spillover effects, such as substitution to street sources of prescription opioids or heroin that we are
not able to measure. Alternatively, the PDMP effects that we observe may be driven by a reduction in
opioid diversion. That is, rather than reducing the amount of opioids that beneficiaries take, these laws may
reduce the amount that they sell to others.
Another possibility is that a “must access” PDMP reduces the rate at which individuals become opioid
misusers, delaying the effects on poisonings beyond our sample period. Borgschulte et al. (2016) suggest that
the impact of opioid control policies interacts with a state’s capacity to provide substance abuse treatment
to those who are now incentivized to reduce utilization.
To our knowledge, no evaluation yet exists of recent changes CMS has made to opioid access policies in
Part D A collaboration between CMS and state PDMPs could allow states access to CMS’s data resources,
allowing improved identification of suspicious patterns of prescribing and utilization and smoother sharing
of information across state lines.

23

References
Agrawal, Shantanu, “Combatting The Opioid Epidemic: A Review of Anti-Abuse Efforts By Federal Authorities and Private Insurers, Testimony before U.S. Senate Committee on Homeland Security and Government Affairs,” Technical Report, CMS, Washington, DC September 2016. Available at https://www.
hhs.gov/about/agencies/asl/testimony/2016-09/a-review-of-anti-abuse-efforts/index.html.
Alpert, Abby, David Powell, and Rosalie Liccardo Pacula, “Supply-Side Drug Policy in the Presence
of Substitutes: Evidence from the Introduction of Abuse-Deterrent Opioids,” December 2016. Available
at http://www.rand.org/pubs/working_papers/WR1181.html.
Arditi, Lynn, “New law: Health-care providers must register in prescription database,” Providence Journal,
2014, May 29, 2014.
Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan, “How Much Should We Trust
Differences-In-Differences Estimates,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2004, 119 (1).
Blum, Jonathan, “Curbing Prescription Drug Abuse in Medicare, Testimony before U.S. Senate Committee
on Homeland Security and Government Affairs,” Technical Report, Director, Center for Medicare Management, Washington, DC June 2013. Available at http://www.hhs.gov/asl/testify/2013/06/4483.html.
Borgschulte, Mark, Adriana Corredor-Waldron, and Guillermo Marshall, “A Path Out: Prescription Drug Abuse and Suicide,” December 2016. Available at https://sites.google.com/site/
markborgschulte/research.
Brady, Joanne E., Hannah Wunsch, Charles J. DiMaggio, Barbara H. Lang, James Giglio,
and Guohua Li, “Prescription drug monitoring and dispensing of prescription opioids,” Public Health
Reports, 2014, 129.
Brewer, Mike, Thomas F. Crossley, and Robert Joyce, “Inference with Difference-in-Differences
Revisited,” November 2013. IZA Discussion Paper No. 7742.
Cameron, A. Colin, Jonah B. Gelbach, and Douglas L. Miller, “Bootstrap-Based Improvements for
Inference with Clustered Errors,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 2008, 90 (3).
Case, Anne and Angus Deaton, “Rising morbidity and mortality in midlife among white non-Hispanic
Americans in the 21st century,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2015, 112 (49), 15078–
15083.
24

Chen, Li Hui, Holly Hedegaard, and Margaret Warner, “Drug-poisoning Deaths Involving Opioid
Analgesics: United States, 1999–2011,” Technical Report, National Center for Health Statistics, Washington, DC September 2014. NCHS Data Brief No. 166.
CMS,

“Opioid

Morphine

Equivalent

Conversion

Factors,”

https://www.cms.gov/

Medicare/Prescription-Drug-Coverage/PrescriptionDrugCovContra/Downloads/
Opioid-Morphine-EQ-Conversion-Factors-March-2015.pdf 2015. Accessed: February 2, 2016.
Dart, Richard C., Hilary L. Surratt, Theodore J. Cicero, Mark W. Parrino, Geoff Severtson,
Becki Bucher-Bartelson, and Jody L. Green, “Trends in Opioid Analgesic Abuse and Mortality in
the United States,” New England Journal of Medicine, 2015, 372 (3).
Davis, Corey S., Matthew Pierce, and Nabarun Dasgupta, “Evolution and Convergence of State
Laws Governing Controlled Substance Prescription Monitoring Programs, 1998-2011,” American Journal
of Public Health, August 2014, 104.
Dowell, Deborah, Kun Zhang, Rita K. Noonan, and Jason M. Hockenberry, “Mandatory Provider
Review And Pain Clinic Laws Reduce The Amounts Of Opioids Prescribed And Overdose Death Rates,”
Health Affairs, 2016, 35 (10), 1876–1883.
GAO, “State Monitoring Programs Provide Useful Tool to Reduce Diversion,” Technical Report, Government Accountability Office, Washington, DC May 2002. GAO-02-634.
, “Instances of Questionable Access to Prescription Drugs,” Technical Report, Government Accountability
Office, Washington, DC September 2011. GAO-11-699.
Gourlay, Kristin, “Fighting Prescription Drug Abuse, One Log In At a Time,” Rhode Island Public Radio,
2013.
Haegerich, Tamara M., Leonard J. Paulozzi, Brian J. Manns, and Christopher M. Jones, “What
we know, and don’t know, about the impact of state policy and systems-level interventions on prescription
drug overdose,” Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 2014, 145, 34 – 47.
Haffajee, Rebecca L., Anupam B. Jena, and Scott G. Weiner, “Mandatory Use of Prescription Drug
Monitoring Programs,” JAMA, 2015, 313 (9), 891–892.
Islam, M. Mofizul and Ian S McRae, “An Inevitable Wave of Prescription Drug Monitoring Programs
in the Context of Prescription Opioids: Pros, Cons and Tensions,” BMC Pharmacology & Toxicology,
2014, 15 (46).
25

Jena, Anupam B., Dana Goldman, Lesley Weaver, and Pinar Karaca-Mandic, “Opioid Prescribing
By Multiple Providers in Medicare: Retrospective Observational Study of Insurance Claims,” British
Medical Journal, 2014, 348.
Kunins, Hillary V., Thomas A. Farley, and Deborah Dowell, “Guidelines for opioid prescription:
why emergency physicians need support,” Annals of Internal Medicine, 2013, 158.
Levy, Benjamin, Leonard Paulozzi, Karin A. Mack, and Christopher M. Jones, “Trends in Opioid
Analgesic Prescribing Rates by Specialty, U.S., 20072012,” American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 2015,
49 (3), 409 – 413.
Li, Guohua, Joanne E. Brady, Barbara H. Lang, James Giglio, Hannah Wunsch, and Charles
DiMaggio, “Prescription drug monitoring and drug overdose mortality,” Injury Epidemiology, 2014, 1
(1), 1–8.
Manchikanti, Laxmaiah, Bert Fellows, Hary Ailinani, and Vidyasagar Pampati, “Therapeutic
use, abuse, and nonmedical use of opioids: a ten-year perspective,” Pain Physician, February 2010, 13.
Meara, Ellen, Jill R. Horwitz, Wilson Powell, Lynn McClelland, Weiping Zhou, A. James
O’Malley, and Nancy E. Morden, “State Legal Restrictions and Prescription-Opioid Use among
Disabled Adults,” New England Journal of Medicine, 2016, 375 (1), 44–53.
Morden, Nancy E., Jeffrey C. Munson, Carrie H. Colla, Jonathan Skinner, Julie P.W. Bynum,
Weiping Zhou, and Ellen Meara, “Prescription Opioid Use Among Disabled Medicare Beneficiaries:
Intesity, Trends, and Regional Variation,” Medical Care, September 2014, 52 (9).
NSDUH, “National Survey on Drug Use and Health: Summary of National Findings,” September
2014. Available at http://www.samhsa.gov/data/sites/default/files/NSDUHresultsPDFWHTML2013/
Web/NSDUHresults2013.htm; some results from authors’ tabulation at http://www.icpsr.umich.edu/
icpsrweb/SAMHDA/studies/35509/datasets/1/sdaxml.
Ohio Bureau of Workers’ Compensation, “MED Table,” https://www.bwc.ohio.gov/downloads/
blankpdf/MEDTable.pdf 2016. Accessed: February 2, 2016.
Palliative.org, “INSTRUCTIONS FOR MORPHINE EQUIVALENT DAILY DOSE (MEDD),” http://
palliative.org/NewPC/_pdfs/tools/INSTRUCTIONsMEDD.pdf 2016. Accessed: February 2, 2016.
Pasero, Christine L. and Margo McCaffery, “Pain Ratings: The Fifth Vital Sign,” American Journal
of Nursing, February 1997, 97.
26

Patrick, Stephen W., Carrie E. Fry, Timothy F. Jones, and Melinda B. Buntin, “Implementation
Of Prescription Drug Monitoring Programs Associated With Reductions In Opioid-Related Death Rates,”
Health Affairs, 2016, 35 (7), 1324–1332.
Paulozzi, Leonard J., Edwin M. Kilbourne, and Hema A. Desai, “Prescription Drug Monitoring
Programs and Death Rates from Drug Overdose,” Pain Medicine, May 2011, 12 (5), 747–54.
PDMP Center of Excellence, “Mandating PDMP participation by medical providers: current status and
experience in selected states,” Technical Report, Brandeis University, Waltham, MA October 2014. Available at http://www.pdmpexcellence.org/sites/all/pdfs/COE_briefing_mandates_2nd_rev.pdf.
Poston, Rebecca, “E-FORCSE 2011–2012 Prescription Drug Monitoring Program Annual Report,”
December 2012.

Available at http://www.floridahealth.gov/statistics-and-data/e-forcse/

news-reports/_documents/2011-2012pdmp-annual-report.pdf.
Reifler, Liza M., Danna Droz, J. Elise Bailey, Sidney H. Schnoll, Reginald Fant, Richard C.
Dart, and Becki Bucher-Bartelson, “Do Prescription Monitoring Programs Impact State Trends in
Opioid Abuse/Misuse?,” Pain Medicine, 2012, 13.
Solon, Gary, Steven J. Haider, and Jeffrey Wooldridge, “What Are We Weighting For?,” Journal of
Human Resources, 2015, 50 (2), 301–316.
Unick, George Jay, Daniel Rosenblum, Sarah Mars, and Daniel Ciccarone, “Intertwined Epidemics: National Demographic Trends in Hospitalizations for Heroin- and Opioid-Related Overdoses,
1993-2009,” PLOS One, February 2013, 8 (2).
Volkow,

Nora D., “Testimony before the Senate Caucus on International Narcotics Control

on America’s Addiction to Opioids:

Heroin and Prescription Drug Abuse,” 2014.

Avail-

able at www.drugabuse.gov/about-nida/legislative-activities/testimony-to-congress/2015/
americas-addiction-to-opioids-heroin-prescription-drug-abuse.
Washington State Agency Medical Directors’ Group, “Interagency guideline on opioid dosing for
chronic non-cancer pain: an educational aid to improve care and safety with opioid treatment,” http:
//www.agencymeddirectors.wa.gov/files/opioidgdline.pdf 2010. Accessed: February 5, 2016.
West, Nancy A., Stevan G. Severtson, Jody L. Green, and Richard C. Dart, “Trends in Abuse
and Misuse of Prescription Opioids Among Older Adults,” Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 2015, 149.

27

White
tor
2015.

House,
Efforts

“Obama

to

Administration

Address

Available

Prescription
at

Announces

Drug

Abuse

Public
and

and

Heroin

Private
Use,”

SecOctober

https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2015/10/21/

fact-sheet-obama-administration-announces-public-and-private-sector.
Wisconsin Prescription Drug Monitoring Program, “Training Guide for Wisconsin Practitioners and
Pharmacists,” http://dsps.wi.gov/Documents/PDMP/Practitioners_Pharmacists_Training_Guide.
pdf October 2013. Accessed: February 2, 2016.

28

9 From this window, you may perform the following functions:

pharmacists. (Wisconsin Prescription Drug Monitoring Program, 2013)

Accessing PDMP Data

Note: Your search criteria and the recipient names you selected are located above
Figure 1: Wisconsin PDMP Training Screenshot
your report. You may click the down arrow in the Recipients field to view the
The Wisconsin
Department
Safety and
ProfessionalinServices
patients
you of
chose
to include
your provided
report.this screenshot in an October 2013 training manual for prescribers and

Your report results are displayed similar to the following:

Wisconsin Department of Safety and Professional Services - Pharmacy Examining Board
Training Guide for Wisconsin Practitioners and Pharmacists

29

500
2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

18
20
22
24
Number with Poisoning Incident (thousands)

40

Opioid Prescriptions
Number with Poisoning Incident

16

Opioid Prescriptions (millions)
45
50

55

2007

300

350
400
450
Poisoning Incidents (thousands)

220
Opioid Prescriptions (millions)
190
200
210
180

Opioid Prescriptions
Poisoning Incidents

2013

Figure 2: Opioid Utilization and Poisoning, Overall (top) and in Medicare Part D (bottom)
Overall opioid prescriptions collected from Volkow (2014). Overall poisoning incidents, which reflect
emergency department visits alone, are collected from the Drug Abuse Warning Network Emergency
Department Data for 2007 to 2011 (the dataset was discontinued in 2011). Medicare opioid prescriptions
(available 2007-2013) and poisoning incidents (available 2007-2012) are from a 5% random sample of
enrollees in free-standing Part D and fee-for-service Medicare.

30

Table 1: State Laws
State
Alabama
Alaska
Arizona
Arkansas
California
Colorado
Connecticut
Delaware
District of Columbia
Florida
Georgia
Hawaii
Idaho
Illinois
Indiana
Iowa
Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana
Maine
Maryland
Massachusetts
Michigan
Minnesota
Mississippi
Missouri
Montana
Nebraska
Nevada
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico
New York
North Carolina
North Dakota
Ohio
Oklahoma
Oregon
Pennsylvania
Rhode Island
South Carolina
South Dakota
Tennessee
Texas
Utah
Vermont
Virginia
Washington
West Virginia
Wisconsin
Wyoming

Any PDMP

“Must Access”
PDMP

PDMP Allows
Delegates

2008h2
2007h2
2011h2

Increase
Reporting
Frequency

Pain Clinic
Regulation

2012h1
2013h1

2013h2
2012h1

2012h1

2009h2
2011h2

2011h2

2007h2
2008h2
2012h2
2008h1

2012h2
2013h2

2011h2
2011h2
2007h2

2010h2
2010h1
2007h2
2009h2
2011h1
2012h2
2013h1
2011h2
2013h1
2010h2

2011h1

2012h2

2010h2
2012h2

2011h2
2012h2

2012h1
2007h2

2008h1

2011h2
2009h2
2012h2
2013h2

2011h2
2013h2
2013h2

2012h1
2011h1

2013h1

2007h2

2009h2

2011h2

2011h2
2013h2
2010h1
2011h2
2012h1
2009h2
2010h2

2011h2

2010h2
2013h2

2007h2
2012h2
2010h2

2012h2
2009h2
2013h2
2009h1
2011h2
2012h2
2013h1

2012h2
2011h2

2012h2
2010h1

2008h2
2011h2
2013h2

2013h2

2009h2

This table reports on laws enacted between January 1, 2007 and December 31, 2013. Note that all states
besides Missouri and DC have enacted a PDMP by the end of 2013; however, many states (e.g., Alabama)
did so prior to our sample period.

Table 2: Summary Statistics: Beneficiaries
Share taking opioids
Share dually eligible for Medicaid
Share entitled to Medicare due to disability
Share with cancer
Share who die this half-year
Number of person X half-years
Mean number of half-years observed

All Medicare
0.280
0.400
0.246
0.094
0.025
13,221,396
10.871

Opioid Takers
1.000
0.496
0.347
0.122
0.033
3,703,389
7.078

“All Medicare” are individuals enrolled in Part D and fee-for-service Medicare
(not Medicare Advantage). Opioid takers are those filling at least one opioid
prescription.

Table 3: Summary Statistics: Outcomes Among Opioid Takers
Total Days Supply
211+ Days Supply
Mean Daily MED
120+ Daily MED
Share with Claims Overlapping
Number of Prescribers
5+ Prescribers
Number of Pharmacies
5+ Pharmacies
Excess Share of Claims from OOS Prescriber
Excess Share of Claims from OOS Pharmacy
Number of New Patient Visits
4+ New Patient Visits
Share with Opioid Poisoning Incident

Mean
85.5814
0.0889
9.1519
0.0169
0.0915
1.5854
0.0229
1.2457
0.0059
0.0068
-0.0343
0.5068
0.0128
0.0020

Median
40.0

99th percentile
420.0

1.3

158.4

1.0

6.0

1.0

4.0

0.0
0.0
0.0

0.9
0.5
4.0

Outcomes reported for opioid takers sample described in Table 2. “OOS” signifies
out-of-state and “MED” signifies morphine equivalent dosage. See text for definition
of morphine-equivalent dosage measures, share of claims overlapping, and excess OOS
claims.

32

6.0e+04

.4

Frequency
4.0e+04

.3

2.0e+04

Fraction
.2

0

.1
0
0

500

1000

1500

2000

0

500

1000

1500

2000

0

0

.2

2000

Fraction
.4

Frequency
4000

6000

.6

8000

.8

Figure 3: Days supply of opioids in a half-year, each bar=30 days, vertical line at 211 days. Right figure
depicts the frequency for only 211+ days.

0

200

400

600

800

1000

200

400

600

800

1000

0

0

.2

1.0e+04

Fraction
.4

Frequency
2.0e+04

.6

3.0e+04

.8

4.0e+04

Figure 4: Daily Morphine-Equivalent Dosage obtained in a half-year, each bar=10 daily MED, vertical line
at 120 MED each day in the half-year. Right figure depicts the frequency for only 120+ daily MED.

0

10

20

30

40

50

0

10

20

30

40

50

Figure 5: Number of prescribers of opioids, each bar=1,vertical line at 5 prescribers. Right figure depicts
the frequency for only 5+ prescribers.
33

1.0e+04
8000

.8

Frequency
4000
6000

.6
Fraction
.4

0

2000

.2
0
0

10

20

30

40

0

10

20

30

40

Percent
60

80

100

Figure 6: Number of pharmacies for opioids, each bar=1, vertical line at 5 pharmacies. Right figure depicts
the frequency for only 5+ pharmacies.

7+
6
5
4
3

7+

2

5

6

40

4
3

20

1

0

2
1

No

Yes

Figure 7: Maximum Number of Prescribers, by Ever Has an Opioid Poisoning Incident
This figure illustrates the distribution of the highest number of prescribers from whom an individual
obtains opioids in a half-year, separated by whether the individual ever experiences an opioid poisoning.
Table 4: Correlations Among Measures of Misuse
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)

211+ Days Supply
120+ Daily MED
Overlapping Claims
5+ Prescribers
5+ Pharmacies
Excess OOS Prescribers
Excess OOS Pharmacies
4+ New Patient Visits
Opioid Poisonings

(1)
1
0.349
0.416
0.172
0.147
-0.0009
0.037
0.013
0.041

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

1
0.174
0.045
0.054
0.0007
0.014
0.0008
0.021

1
0.188
0.131
-0.004
0.039
0.026
0.037

1
0.291
0.006
0.018
0.071
0.044

1
0.004
0.016
0.051
0.035

1
0.166
0.003
-0.0001

1
0.0009
0.005

1
0.006

1

Pairwise correlations for measures of misuse and opioid poisoning incidents. Means for each variable available in
Tables 2 and 3. Bold text signifies that the correlation differs from zero at the 0.001 level.
34

0.0884
574

0.00137
(0.0015)

0.0884
574

0.0169
574

0.00041
(0.0005)

0.0169
574

0.0926
574

0.00035
(0.0008)

0.0926
574

Overlapping
Claims
0.00011
(0.0008)

0.0229
492

0.00079
(0.0009)

0.0229
492

0.00100
(0.0009)

5+
Prescribers

0.00591
492

0.000809*
(0.0004)

0.0059
492

-0.0396
492

-0.0459
(0.0921)

-0.0396
492

Shopping Outcomes
5+ PharExcess
macies
OOS
Prescribers
0.000987*
-0.0455
(0.0004)
(0.1170)

0.0314
492

-0.1760
(0.2180)

0.0314
492

Excess
OOS Pharmacies
-0.1000
(0.1910)

0.0153
492

0.00521*
(0.0025)

0.0153
492

0.00205
492

0.00017
(0.0002)

0.0021
492

Medical Services Outcomes
Opioid
4+ New
PoisonPatient
ings
Visits
0.00408+
0.000218
(0.0021)
(0.0002)

This table reports the impact of a PDMP without a “must access” provision. The top panel estimates Equation 1 using a binary measure of whether a
PDMP without a “must access” provision is in place, excluding from the analysis the ten states with a “must access” PDMP. The bottom panel repeats
the top with the implementation of a non-must access PDMP lagged by six months, e.g. a PDMP implemented in January 2008 is said to come into
effect in July 2008. Each observation is weighted by the number of individuals represented. Fixed effects for states and halfyears are always included, and
standard errors are clustered at the state. +, *, **, and *** represent significance at the 10, 5, 1, and 0.1 percent levels, respectively. The impact on
quantity outcomes is estimated for 2007h1 to 2013h2; the impact on shopping outcomes is estimated for 2008h1 to 2013h2; the impact on medical services
outcomes is estimated for 2007h1 to 2012h2.

0.278
574

-0.00214
(0.0020)

Non Must Access,
Lagged

Mean of LHS
N

0.2780
574

Mean of LHS
N

Non Must Access

P(taking
opioids)
-0.00187
(0.0021)

Quantity Outcomes
120+
211+
Daily
Days
MED
Supply
0.00114
0.00053
(0.0017) (0.0006)

Table 5: Effects of Non-“Must Access” PDMPs on Opioid Misuse and Poisonings

0.2800
714
-0.00673*
(0.0032)

Mean
N

0.2800
714

Mean
N

0.0889
714

-0.0118
0.0030

0.0889
714
-0.00429+
(0.0024)

0.00153
(0.0016)

0.0169
714

-0.0006
0.0011

0.0169
714
0.000188
(0.0004)

0.00042
(0.0006)

0.0915
714

-0.0095
-0.0016

0.0915
714
-0.00552**
(0.0016)

0.00094
(0.0009)

Overlapping
Claims
-0.00541**
(0.0016)

0.0229
612

-0.0035
-0.0001

0.0229
612
-0.00189*
(0.0008)

0.00097
(0.0008)

-0.00181*
(0.0009)

5+
Prescribers

0.0059
612

-0.0015
-0.0003

0.0059
612
-0.000935**
(0.0003)

0.000996*
(0.0004)

0.0000
612

-0.2296
0.9455

0.0000
612
0.366+
(0.2080)

-0.0428
(0.1300)

Shopping Outcomes
5+ PharExcess
macies
OOS
Prescribers
-0.000843**
0.362+
(0.0003)
(0.2120)

0.0000
612

-0.4964
0.3329

0.0000
612
-0.09
(0.1810)

-0.0475
(0.1890)

Excess
OOS Pharmacies
-0.0944
(0.1800)

0.0154
612

-0.0031
-0.0004

0.0154
612
-0.00223**
(0.0007)

0.00403+
(0.0021)

0.00203
612

-0.0003
0.0003

0.00203
612
-0.000044
(0.0002)

0.000242
(0.0002)

Medical Services Outcomes
Opioid
4+ New
PoisonPatient
ings
Visits
-0.00177*
-0.000016
(0.0007)
(0.0002)

This table estimates the impact of a “must access” PDMP on opioid misuse and poisonings in Medicare Part D. In the top panel, we estimate Equation 1
with two independent variables: whether a PDMP with a “must access” provision is in effect and whether a PDMP without a “must access” provision is
in effect. The bottom panel, our baseline specification, uses “must access” alone. Each column is the result of OLS regression on state-halfyear aggregates.
Each observation is weighted by the number of individuals represented. Fixed effects for states and halfyears are always included, and standard errors (in
parentheses) are clustered at the state. In the bottom panel, we report the 95 percent wild cluster-bootstrap percentile-t CI, with CIs that exclude zero in
bold. +, *, **, and *** represent significance at the 10, 5, 1, and 0.1 percent levels, respectively. The impact on quantity outcomes is estimated for 2007h1 to
2013h2; the impact on shopping outcomes is estimated for 2008h1 to 2013h2; the impact on medical services outcomes is estimated for 2007h1 to 2012h2.

-0.0133
-0.0004

BS CI LB
BS CI UB

Must Access

-0.00141
(0.0022)

Non Must
Access

Must Access

P(taking
opioids)
-0.00689*
(0.0031)

Quantity Outcomes
120+
211+
Daily
Days
MED
Supply
-0.00410+
0.00024
(0.0024)
(0.0004)

Table 6: Effect of “Must Access” PDMPs on Opioid Misuse and Poisonings

0

10

-9.4

-11

Percentage Change
-10
-5

-4.3

-4.8

-8.3

-8.6

-8.9

-20

-30

>10 Mos.
0.0470

>13 Mos.
0.0150

>16 Mos.
0.0051

3+ Pres
0.1291

4+ Pres
0.0521

5+ Pres
0.0229

6+ Pres
0.0110

7+ Pres
0.0059

0

20

>7 Mos.
0.0889

-5.8

-9

-9.9

-11

-7.1
-15
-23

-25

-50

-40

-40

-16

-4.6

Percentage Change
-30
-20
-10

-3.3

Percentage Change
-20
0

-4.5

-15

-20

Percentage Change
-10
0

-3.2

3+ Pharm
0.0450

4+ Pharm
0.0151

5+ Pharm
0.0059

6+ Pharm
0.0026

7+ Pharm
0.0012

1+ new
0.3269

2+ new
0.1127

3+ new
0.0403

4+ new
0.0154

5+ new
0.0062

6+ new
0.0027

Figure 8: Extremes: Prescribers, Pharmacies, Days Supply, New Patients
These figures extend the analysis reported in Table 6 by sequentially raising the threshold for extreme
outcomes for days supply, number of prescribers, number of pharmacies, and new patient visits. The y-axis
shows the percentage change that the policy impact of a “must access” PDMP represents as a share of the
variable’s mean, which is reported along the x-axis. The 95 and 90 percent confidence intervals are
depicted by thick and thin bars, respectively.

37

211+ Days Supply

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2+

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2+

0

1

2+

0

1

2+

0

1

2+

0

1

2+

.005

Overlapping Claims

-.005
-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2+

-4

-3

-2

-1

5+ Pharmacies

-.003

-.008

-.006

-.002

-.004

-.001

-.002

0

0

.001

5+ Prescribers

-.015

-.01

.001
0
-.001

-4

0

.002

.003

120+ Daily MED

-.015

-.02

-.01

-.01

-.005

0

0

.01

.005

P(Taking Opioids)

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2+

-4

-3

-1

Excess OOS Pharmacies

-1

-.5

0

-.5

.5

0

1

.5

1.5

Excess OOS Prescribers

-2

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2+

-3

-2

-1

.0015

Poisonings

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2+

-.001

-.01

-.0005

-.005

0

.0005

0

.001

.005

4+ New Patient Visits

-4

-4

-3

-2

-1

Figure 9: Event Studies; first implementation period is denoted zero
These figures report the estimation of Equation 2, showing the difference between implementation
states in the four half-years prior to a “must access” policy and the three half-years following. For
each period, we show the point estimate (dot) and its 95 percent confidence interval.

-0.000896
(0.0016)
574

-0.00158
(0.0032)
574

Increase
Frequency
N

Pain Clinic
Regulation
N

0.00138
(0.0011)
574

-0.00142
(0.0011)
574

-0.00268+
(0.0014)
574

0.00101
(0.0007)
574

0.00042
(0.0007)
574

-0.000507
(0.0005)
574

-0.00107
(0.0020)
574

-0.00182+
(0.0010)
574

-0.00116
(0.0012)
574

Overlapping
Claims
-0.00552**
(0.0016)
714

0.000753
(0.0015)
492

-0.00003
(0.0009)
492

-0.00100
(0.0015)
492

-0.00189*
(0.0008)
612

5+
Prescribers

-0.000714*
(0.0003)
492

-0.000385
(0.0004)
492

0.00004
(0.0006)
492

-0.0126
(0.0791)
492

0.012
(0.0863)
492

0.128
(0.0777)
492

Shopping Outcomes
5+ PharExcess
macies
OOS
Prescribers
-0.000935**
0.366+
(0.0003)
(0.2080)
612
612

0.274*
(0.1030)
492

0.032
(0.1720)
492

-0.0759
(0.2320)
492

Excess
OOS Pharmacies
-0.09
(0.1810)
612

0.00469*
(0.0018)
492

0.000192
(0.0011)
492

-0.000418
(0.0013)
492

0.00007
(0.0001)
492

-0.000155
(0.0002)
492

0.00000
(0.0001)
492

Medical Services Outcomes
4+ New
Opioid
PoisonPatient
ings
Visits
-0.00223**
-0.00004
(0.0007)
(0.0002)
612
612

This table estimates the independent impact of three different policies that sometimes co-occur with “must access’ provisions. The top row repeats the
analysis of Table 6 for reference. The next three panels test the impact of allowing delegates, increasing reporting frequency, and regulating pain clinics in
independent estimations of Equation 1. The lower three panels drop the ten states that ever implement a “must access” PDMP. Each column is the result
of OLS regression on state-halfyear aggregates. Each observation is weighted by the number of individuals represented. Fixed effects for states and halfyears
are always included, and standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the state. The impact on quantity outcomes is estimated for 2007h1 to 2013h2;
the impact on shopping outcomes is estimated for 2008h1 to 2013h2; the impact on medical services outcomes is estimated for 2007h1 to 2012h2.

-0.00168
(0.0028)
574

Allow
Delegates
N

N

Must Access

P(taking
opioids)
-0.00673*
(0.0032)
714

Quantity Outcomes
211+
120+
Days
Daily
Supply
MED
-0.00429+
0.000188
(0.0024)
(0.0004)
714
714

Table 7: “Must Access” PDMPs, Laws Allowing Delegates, Increasing Reporting Frequency, and Regulating Pain Clinics

-.02

-.01

-.01

-.005

0

0

.01

.005

.01

211+ Days Supply

.02

P(Taking Opioids)

Limited

Discretionary

Broad

Discretionary

Broad

.005

Overlapping Claims

Limited

Discretionary

Broad

Limited

Discretionary

Broad

5+ Pharmacies

-.001
Limited

Discretionary

Broad

-.002

-.0015

-.002

0

-.0005

0

.002

5+ Prescribers

-.004
-.006

-.015

-.001

-.01

0

-.005

.001

0

.002

120+ Daily MED

Limited

Limited

Broad

Excess OOS Pharmacies

-.5

-.6

-.4

0

-.2

0

.5

.2

.4

1

Excess OOS Prescribers

Discretionary

Limited

Discretionary

Broad

Discretionary

Broad

.0015

Poisonings

-.0005
Limited

Discretionary

Broad

-.001

-.006

-.004

0

-.002

.0005

0

.001

.002

4+ New Patient Visits

Limited

Limited

Discretionary

Broad

Figure 10: Limited, Discretionary, and Broad Must Access PDMPs.
These figures show how the impact of a “must access” PDMP varies across three subtypes of laws:
limited laws that apply to certain ingredients or settings of care, discretionary laws where
providers must access the PDMP if suspicious, and broad laws with neither restriction. The
figures report the point estimate and 95% CI from Equation 1, where we include each of the three
subtypes as independent variables. Gray bar represents overall estimate from Table 6.

-0.00556
(0.0062)
0.1650

-0.00323
(0.0023)
0.0671

-0.000546
(0.0017)
0.0396

-0.0101*
(0.0048)
0.3960

-0.00853
(0.0059)
0.3730

-0.00629+
(0.0032)
0.3150

-0.00683*
(0.0030)
0.2160

0.000194
(0.0006)
0.0070

-0.000453
(0.0012)
0.0150

0.00268
(0.0017)
0.0304

-0.000192
(0.0012)
0.0298

-0.0128*
(0.0053)
0.1620

P(taking
opioids)

0.349+
(0.1800)
0.0000

0.123
(0.1560)
0.0000

0.0742
(0.1490)
0.0000

Elderly & Dual Eligible
0.000168
-0.000435
0.0000374
(0.0021)
(0.0011)
(0.0003)
0.0831
0.0126
0.0018
Elderly & Not Dual Eligible
-0.00367**
-0.000107
0.0000294
(0.0013)
(0.0005)
(0.0001)
0.0588
0.0075
0.0007

Shopping Outcomes
5+ PharExcess
macies
OOS
Prescribers
Eligible
-0.00373**
0.59
(0.0007)
(0.3930)
0.0168
0.0000

Disabled & Not Dual Eligible
-0.00115
-0.00103
0.000628
(0.0028)
(0.0020)
(0.0009)
0.1270
0.0283
0.0095

5+
OverPrescribers
lapping
Claims
Disabled & Dual
-0.0138**
-0.00482**
(0.0033)
(0.0016)
0.1390
0.0554

-0.142
(0.1680)
0.0000

-0.141
(0.1430)
0.0000

-0.0386
(0.2600)
0.0000

0.266+
(0.1430)
0.0000

Excess
OOS Pharmacies

-0.00440**
(0.0015)
0.0164

-0.00228*
(0.0009)
0.0117

-0.00261+
(0.0014)
0.0147

0.00103
(0.0009)
0.0177

0.000226
(0.0003)
0.0007

-0.000274
(0.0004)
0.0013

-0.00116
(0.0007)
0.0030

0.000106
(0.0005)
0.0045

Medical Services Outcomes
Opioid
4+ New
PoisonPatient
ings
Visits

This table repeats our baseline analysis on subsamples defined by Medicare eligibility category. The panels show the results for OLS regressions on
state-halfyear aggregates of opioid takers in each of the specified eligibility subsamples. Each observation is weighted by the number of individuals
represented. Fixed effects for states and halfyears are always included, and standard errors are clustered at the state. +, *, **, and *** represent significance
at the 5, 1, and 0.1 percent levels, respectively. The impact on quantity outcomes is estimated for 2007h1 to 2013h2; the impact on shopping outcomes is
estimated for 2008h1 to 2013h2; the impact on medical services outcomes is estimated for 2007h1 to 2012h2.

Must Access

Must Access

Must Access

Must Access

Quantity Outcomes
120+
211+
Daily
Days
MED
Supply

Table 8: Effect of “Must Access” PDMP Law: Disabled and Dual-Eligible

714
0.8240

714
0.2360

714
0.0408

714
0.2140

Overlapping
Claims
-0.0521**
(0.0066)
612
0.1820

-0.126**
(0.0075)

5+
Prescribers

612
0.0380

612
0.0000

Shopping Outcomes
5+ PharExcess
macies
OOS
Prescribers
-0.0156**
0.2670
(0.0025)
(0.4350)

612
0.0000

Excess
OOS Pharmacies
0.508**
(0.1670)

612
0.0270

612
0.0073

Medical Services Outcomes
Opioid
4+ New
PoisonPatient
ings
Visits
-0.0118**
-0.00071
(0.0017)
(0.0016)

This table repeats our baseline analysis on a subsample composed of individuals who obtained opioids from five or more prescribers in their state’s
pre-period (entire sample period for control states). The panels show the results for OLS regressions on state-halfyear aggregates of opioid takers in each
of the specified eligibility subsamples. Each observation is weighted by the number of individuals represented. Fixed effects for states and half-years are
always included, and standard errors are clustered at the state. +, *, **, and *** represent significance at the 5, 1, and 0.1 percent levels, respectively.
The impact on quantity outcomes is estimated for 2007h1 to 2013h2; the impact on shopping outcomes is estimated for 2008h1 to 2013h2; the impact on
medical services outcomes is estimated for 2007h1 to 2012h2.

Observations
mean of LHS

Must
Access

P(taking
opioids)
-0.0492**
(0.0061)

Quantity Outcomes
120+
211+
Daily
Days
MED
Supply
-0.0366** -0.00013
(0.0122)
(0.0040)

Table 9: Effect of “Must Access” PDMP Law: Those Previously Doctor-Shoppers

43

-0.00429+
(0.0024)
0.0889

-0.000868
(0.0021)
0.2250

-0.0004
(0.0011)
0.0429

-0.00673*
(0.0032)
0.2800

-0.0010
(0.0038)
0.2610

0.0009
(0.0021)
0.3740

-0.00002
(0.0000)
0.0000

0.0005
(0.0049)
0.1490

Statins
-0.00002
(0.0000)
0.0001

-0.000935**
(0.0003)
0.0059

5+
Pharmacies

0.00004
(0.0001)
0.0004

Opioids
-0.00189*
(0.0008)
0.0229

5+ Prescribers

Antidepressants
-0.00233
0.00008
(0.0025)
(0.0002)
0.2110
0.0025

-0.00552**
(0.0016)
0.0915

Overlapping
Claims

-0.0004
(0.0003)
-0.0017

-0.00005
(0.0004)
-0.0014

0.00194+
(0.0011)
0.0068

Excess OOS
Prescribers

0.0009
(0.0017)
0.0225

-0.000307
(0.0007)
0.0055

-0.00146
(0.0030)
-0.0343

Excess OOS
Pharmacies

This table reports our baseline results on the impact of a “must access’ PDMP on utilization of the indicated drug type in Medicare Part
D between 2007 and 2013. Each column is the result of OLS regression on state-halfyear aggregates of takers of the indicated drug; each
observation is weighted by the number of takers represented. Fixed effects for states and halfyears are always included, and standard errors
are clustered at the state. *, **, and *** represent significance at the 5, 1, and 0.1 percent levels, respectively. The impact on the first
three outcomes is estimated for 2007h1 to 2013h2; the impact on prescriber and pharmacy outcomes is estimated for 2008h1 to 2013h2. The
excess out-of-state prescriber and pharmacy measures are not standardized in this table to emphasize how they differ across the three types of drugs.

mean of LHS

Must Access

mean of LHS

Must Access

mean of LHS

Must Access

211+ Days
Supply

P(Taking
Drug)

Table 10: Effect of “Must Access” PDMP Law on Placebo Drugs

The Effect of Prescription Drug Monitoring Programs on Opioid Utilization in Medicare
Online Appendix
Thomas Buchmeuller & Colleen Carey
TBuch@umich.edu & Colleen.Carey@cornell.edu

Appendix
A.1

Variable Availability

Table A.1: Variable Availability
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
Quantity Variables: P(taking opioids), 211+ Days Supply, 120+ Daily MED, Overlapping Claims
States Identifying Impact: NV, LA, OK, OH, DE, WV, KY, NM, TN, NY
Shopping Variables: 5+ Prescribers/Pharmacies, Excess OOS Prescribers/Pharmacies
States Identifying Impact: OK, OH, DE, WV, KY, NM, TN, NY
Medical Services Variables: Poisonings, New Patient Visits
States Identifying Impact: NV, LA, OK, OH, DE, WV, KY, NM
Due to data availability constraints, not all variables studied in this paper are measured over the entire
seven year (fourteen half-year) time period covered in this paper. Table A.1 describes the exact availability
of our outcome variables. Quantity variables related to taking opioids or days supply are observed in all time
periods. Our 2007 Part D Event dataset was from a preliminary release which did not record prescriber or
pharmacy; therefore, outcomes related to prescribers or pharmacies are missing for 2007. We do not have
inpatient, outpatient, or carrier medical claims for 2013, so variables calculated from those datasets, such as
opioid poisoning incidents or new patient visits, are missing for 2013.

A.2

Supplementary Figures and Tables

44

45
2,619,193

0.01290***
(0.000476)

2,619,193

0.02070***
(0.001179)

2,603,764

-0.00004
(0.000187)

2,603,667

0.00260***
(0.000142)
0.00085***
(0.000157)
0.00171***
(0.000114)
0.00456***
(0.000272)
0.00206***
(0.000280)
-0.00029
(0.000166)
0.00090***
(0.000154)
0.00033
(0.000172)

(9)
Poisonings

This table reports the marginal effects of probits predicting an opioid poisoning incident in a half-year using contemporaneous measures of misuse
among opioid takers enrolled in Part D and fee-for-service Medicare (not Medicare Advantage) in the period 2007–2012. The number of observations
varies because in 2007 we do not observe prescribers and pharmacies, and in any year a few prescribers and pharmacies cannot be reliably assigned to
states.

2,603,734

0.00148***
(0.000172)

3,082,143

3,082,143

0.00571***
(0.000160)

(8)
Poisonings

Observations

3,082,143

0.00721***
(0.000413)

(7)
Poisonings

0.00214***
(0.000296)
3,082,143

0.00651***
(0.000172)

(1)
Poisonings

4+ New Patient Visits

Excess OOS Pharmacies

Excess OOS Prescribers

5+ Pharmacies

5+ Prescribers

Overlapping Claims

120+ Daily MED

211+ Days Supply

VARIABLES

Table A.2: Probits on Opioid Poisoning Incidents
Misuse measures and opioid poisonings, Sample mean = 0.00203
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Poisonings
Poisonings
Poisonings
Poisonings Poisonings

-0.00225
(0.0021)

-0.00282
(0.0028)

-0.00543*
(0.0026)

0.00041
(0.0013)

-0.00417
(0.0029)

Must Access

Allow
Delegates

Increase
Frequency

Pain Clinic
Regulation

0.00063
(0.0005)

0.00035
(0.0006)

-0.00031
(0.0004)

-0.00006
(0.0005)

0.000188
(0.0004)

-0.00171
(0.0017)

-0.00112
(0.0008)

-0.00150
(0.0012)

-0.00368**
(0.0013)

-0.00552**
(0.0016)

Overlapping
Claims

-0.000227
(0.0013)

-0.00004
(0.0007)

-0.00101
(0.0012)

-0.00125
(0.0010)

-0.00189*
(0.0008)

5+
Prescribers

-0.000608*
(0.0003)

-0.000314
(0.0003)

0.00029
(0.0004)

-0.000668*
(0.0003)

-0.000935**
(0.0003)

0.0153
(0.1100)

-0.0968
(0.1030)

0.0681
(0.0933)

0.375+
(0.1970)

0.366+
(0.2080)

Shopping Outcomes
5+ PharExcess
macies
OOS
Prescribers

0.227*
(0.0899)

0.005
(0.1310)

-0.148
(0.1840)

-0.110
(0.1790)

-0.0900
(0.1810)

Excess
OOS Pharmacies

0.00391*
(0.0015)

-0.000955
(0.0009)

0.000117
(0.0012)

-0.00301*
(0.0013)

-0.00223**
(0.0007)

0.000099
(0.0001)

-0.000194
(0.0002)

0.000049
(0.0001)

-0.000002
(0.0002)

-0.000044
(0.0002)

Medical Services Outcomes
Opioid
4+ New
PoisonPatient
ings
Visits

This table estimates the impact of a “must access” PDMP, controlling for three different policies that sometimes co-occur with “must access’ provisions.
The top row repeats the analysis of Table 6 for reference. The lower panel adds as extra independent variables dummies for allowing delegates, increasing
reporting frequency, and regulating pain clinics. Each column is the result of OLS regression on state-halfyear aggregates. Each observation is weighted
by the number of individuals represented. Fixed effects for states and halfyears are always included, and standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at
the state. The impact on quantity outcomes is estimated for 2007h1 to 2013h2; the impact on shopping outcomes is estimated for 2008h1 to 2013h2; the
impact on medical services outcomes is estimated for 2007h1 to 2012h2.

-0.00031
(0.0014)

-0.000888
(0.0010)

-0.00328*
(0.0013)

-0.00429+
(0.0024)

-0.00673*
(0.0032)

Must Access

P(taking
opioids)

Quantity Outcomes
120+
211+
Daily
Days
MED
Supply

Table A.3: “Must Access” PDMPs, Laws Allowing Delegates, Increasing Reporting Frequency, and Regulating Pain Clinics

.005

211+ Days Supply

-.01

-.015

-.01

-.005

-.005

0

0

.005

P(Taking Opioids)

NV

LA

OK

OH

DE

WV

KY

NM

TN

NY

LA

OK

OH

DE

WV

KY

NM

TN

NY

NM

TN

NY

Overlapping Claims

0

-.006

-.004

.0005

.001

-.002

0

.0015

120+ Daily MED

-.01

-.008

-.0005
-.001

NV

NV

LA

OK

OH

DE

WV

KY

NM

TN

NY

NV

LA

OK

OH

WV

KY

5+ Pharmacies

-.0015

-.004

-.003

-.001

-.002

-.0005

-.001

0

0

5+ Prescribers

DE

OK

OH

DE

WV

KY

NM

TN

NY

OK

OH

WV

KY

NM

TN

NY

NM

TN

NY

WV

KY

NM

Excess OOS Pharmacies

-.6

-.5

-.4

0

-.2

0

.5

.2

.4

1

Excess OOS Prescribers

DE

OK

OH

DE

WV

KY

NM

TN

NY

OH

DE

KY

-.0004
NV

LA

OK

OH

DE

WV

KY

NM

-.0006

-.004

-.003

-.0002

-.002

0

-.001

.0002

0

WV

Poisonings

.0004

4+ New Patient Visits

OK

NV

LA

OK

OH

DE

Figure A.1: State-by-State Analysis: Dropping Each State Sequentially. Gray bar denotes overall estimate.
The figures report the point estimate and 95% CI from Equation 1, where in each regression we drop one
state that implements a “must access” PDMP.

-0.00234
(0.0026)
0.0907

-0.00415
(0.0040)
0.0295

-0.00432+
(0.0025)
0.0909

-0.00383
(0.0050)
0.3700

-0.000106
(0.0038)
0.2720

-0.00404
(0.0051)
0.3750

-0.00673*
(0.0032)
0.2780

0.00018
(0.0004)
0.0172

0.000261
(0.0022)
0.0086

-0.0000786
(0.0004)
0.0173

0.00290*
(0.0012)
0.0166

0.00468*
(0.0019)
0.0729

P(taking
opioids)

0.091
(0.2320)
0.0000

0.363+
(0.2100)
0.0000

Die in the Half-Year
-0.00274
-0.00137*
(0.0021)
(0.0006)
0.0140
0.0021

Do Not Die in the Half-Year
-0.00538**
-0.00187*
-0.000920**
(0.0017)
(0.0009)
(0.0003)
0.0908
0.0232
0.0060

-0.0106*
(0.0042)
0.1110

-0.00432*
(0.0018)
0.0918

0.389
(0.2400)
0.0000

Shopping Outcomes
5+ PharExcess
macies
OOS
Prescribers
Cancer Patients
-0.00550**
-0.00146
0.114
(0.0019)
(0.0012)
(0.2550)
0.0296
0.0053
0.0000
5+
Prescribers

Not Cancer Patients
-0.00275**
-0.00160**
(0.0009)
(0.0004)
0.0237
0.0062

-0.000957
(0.0044)
0.1010

Overlapping
Claims

-0.0825
(0.1800)
0.0000

-0.215
(0.1290)
0.0000

0.289*
(0.1140)
0.0000

0.495**
(0.1130)
0.0000

Excess
OOS Pharmacies

-0.00237**
(0.0007)
0.0156

0.00185
(0.0034)
0.0085

-0.00170*
(0.0007)
0.0125

-0.00338
(0.0021)
0.0363

-0.0000376
(0.0002)
0.0020

-0.000231
(0.0015)
0.0036

0.000107
(0.0002)
0.0020

-0.00121**
(0.0003)
0.0020

Medical Services Outcomes
Opioid
4+ New
PoisonPatient
ings
Visits

This table repeats our baseline analysis on health subsamples. The panels show the results for OLS regressions on state-halfyear aggregates of opioid takers
in each of the specified eligibility subsamples. Each observation is weighted by the number of individuals represented. Fixed effects for states and halfyears
are always included, and standard errors are clustered at the state. +, *, **, and *** represent significance at the 5, 1, and 0.1 percent levels, respectively.
The impact on quantity outcomes is estimated for 2007h1 to 2013h2; the impact on shopping outcomes is estimated for 2008h1 to 2013h2; the impact on
medical services outcomes is estimated for 2007h1 to 2012h2.

mean of LHS

Must Access

mean of LHS

Must Access

mean of LHS

Must Access

mean of LHS

Must Access

Quantity Outcomes
120+
211+
Daily
Days
MED
Supply

Table A.4: Effect of “Must Access” PDMP Law on Health Status Subsamples

