NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

REVISIONS IN UTILIZATION-ADJUSTED TFP AND ROBUST IDENTIFICATION
OF NEWS SHOCKS
André Kurmann
Eric Sims
Working Paper 23142
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23142

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2017

This paper combines the previous drafts by Sims (“Differences in Quarterly Utilization-Adjusted
TFP by Vintage, with an Application to News Shocks" March 2016) and Kurmann and Otrok
(“New Evidence on the Relationship between News Shocks and the Slope of the Term Structure”
June 2016). We are grateful to John Fernald for helpful conversations and for making some of the
past data vintages available to us. We also thank Chris Otrok for earlier involvement in the
project, Susanto Basu for his thoughtful discussion, as well as Rudi Bachmann, Deokwoo Nam
and different seminar participants for comments. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by André Kurmann and Eric Sims. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Revisions in Utilization-Adjusted TFP and Robust Identification of News Shocks
André Kurmann and Eric Sims
NBER Working Paper No. 23142
February 2017
JEL No. E22,E23,E32,O47
ABSTRACT
This paper documents large revisions in a widely-used series of utilization-adjusted total factor
productivity (TFP) by Fernald (2014) and shows that these revisions can materially affect
empirical conclusions about the macroeconomic effects of news shocks. We propose an
alternative identification that is robust to measurement issues with TFP, including the revisions in
Fernald’s series. When applied to U.S. data, the shock predicts sustained future productivity
growth while simultaneously generating strong impact responses of novel indicators of
technological innovation and forward-looking information variables. The shock does, however,
not lead to comovement in macroeconomic aggregates as typically associated with business cycle
fluctuations.

André Kurmann
Drexel University
Lebow College of Business
School of Econonmics
3220 Market Street
Philadelphia PA 19104
kurmann.andre@gmail.com
Eric Sims
Department of Economics
University of Notre Dame
723 Flanner Hall
South Bend, IN 46556
and NBER
esims1@nd.edu

1

Introduction

Dating back to Pigou (1927), economists have argued that changes in expectations about future
fundamentals may be an important source of economic fluctuations. This view has reemerged
recently in part due to an influential paper by Beaudry and Portier (2006) who report that news
shocks about future productivity are closely related to innovations driving long-run variations in
productivity and constitute one of the main drivers of business cycles. While the importance of
news shocks for business cycle fluctuations remains hotly debated, the main identifying assumption
behind news shocks is almost universally accepted: productivity reacts to a news shock only with
a delay.1
In this paper, we critically revisit this assumption. Two conditions have to be met for the zero
impact restriction on productivity to be satisfied. First, news about future productivity must not
coincide with innovations in (true) productivity. Second, the empirical measure of productivity
must not be confounded by current business cycle conditions. In reality, there is no a priori reason
to assume that news is unrelated to changes in current productivity; and productivity is notoriously
hard to measure in the data and may therefore be confounded by cyclical fluctuations.2 We show
empirically and through model-based simulations that the identification of news shocks can be
affected importantly if either condition is violated. We then propose an alternative identification
that is robust to these issues and apply it to U.S. data.3
The starting point of our investigation is the quarterly utilization-adjusted series of total factor
productivity (TFP) constructed by Fernald (2014) that has become the main measure of productivity in the news literature. Fernald frequently revises the adjusted TFP series based on new
data and methodological refinements. We document that one of these revisions concerning the
estimate of factor utilization significantly changes the cyclical behavior of Fernald’s adjusted TFP
series. We assess the consequences of this change in cyclical behavior for news shock identifica1

See Beaudry and Portier (2014) and Barsky, Basu, and Lee (2015) for excellent reviews of this literature.
News coincide with innovations in current productivity if, for example, the successful adoption of a new technology by a firm both raises current productivity and provides news that other firms will adopt the same technology
in the future.
3
A separate question is whether changes in expectations about future productivity are exogenous – as the
news literature typically assumes – or whether these changes are related to other shocks. While not of immediate
importance for the issue of whether imposing the zero impact restriction is appropriate or not, we return to this
question below when we assess the empirical implications of our alternative identification approach.
2

1

tion by redoing the empirical analysis of Barsky and Sims (2011). Based on the 2007 vintage
of Fernald’s adjusted TFP series, as originally used by Barsky and Sims (2011), a positive news
shock leads to a jump in consumption on impact but an initial decline in hours worked. As a
result, the implied conditional correlation of consumption growth with hours growth is negative,
leading Barsky and Sims (2011) to conclude that news shocks do not constitute a main driver of
business cycles. Based on more recent vintages of Fernald’s adjusted TFP series published after
the revision in utilization, in contrast, a positive news shock generally leads to an initial increase in
consumption, hours, and other real aggregates, thereby affording a more favorable interpretation
of the news-driven business cycle hypothesis laid out by Beaudry and Portier (2006).
The sensitivity of these results to a seemingly innocuous revision in Fernald’s adjusted TFP
series suggests – as acknowledged by Fernald (2014) himself but otherwise mostly ignored by
the literature – that measurement issues about productivity may be a quantitatively important
concern. We therefore propose an alternative identification based on the observation that the
diffusion of productivity-enhancing changes in technology is slow and typically occurs in an Sshaped pattern, as documented for example in the works of Griliches (1957), Mansfield (1961),
Mansfield (1989), Gort and Klepper (1982), and Rogers (1995). Under the assumption that
agents are aware of these changes, innovations to long-run productivity should therefore contain
a substantial amount of news. We implement this idea by extracting the shock consistent with
the VAR that accounts for the maximum forecast error variance (FEV) share of adjusted TFP
at a long but finite forecast horizon. Our identification differs from the existing news literature
in two important dimensions. First, we do not impose the zero restriction that adjusted TFP
is orthogonal to news shocks on impact. Second, as opposed to Barsky and Sims (2011) and
many others, we identify news shocks by maximizing the FEV share at a long but finite horizon
instead of maximizing the FEV share over an entire range of short- and longer forecast horizons.
So long as any mismeasurement of productivity is transient, our identification should extract
news shocks independent of whether adjusted TFP is confounded by measurement error, and
independent of whether innovations to expected future productivity have an immediate impact on
(true) productivity. We verify this through several Monte Carlo simulations from a DSGE model
in which our max share identification outperforms the Barsky and Sims (2011) identification when
adjusted TFP is measured with error or when news shocks move true technology on impact.
2

When applied to U.S. data, we find compelling evidence that this max-share shock indeed
captures news about future productivity. First, the shock predicts delayed TFP growth, accounting
for only a small fraction of TFP fluctuations at short forecast horizons but for 70 percent or more
at longer horizons. Second, the shock is associated with large and persistent jumps in two novel
measures of innovation – an index of books published in the fields of technology by Alexopoulos
(2011), and an index of technological standardization by Baron and Schmidt (2015). The shock is
also followed by a hump-shaped increase in R&D expenditures and a gradual decline in the relative
price of investment goods. Third, the shock generates strong positive reactions in asset prices and
measures of consumer and business confidence. Fourth, the shock leads to a decline in forecast
uncertainty indices constructed by Bachmann, Elstner, and Sims (2013) and Jurado, Ludvigson,
and Ng (2015). Taken together, these responses suggest that the max-share identification picks
up exogenous innovations in productivity-enhancing technologies as opposed to other shocks that
endogenously lead to innovation later on; and that agents are aware of these innovations and
update their expectations accordingly. The news shock interpretation therefore seems natural.
The macroeconomic implications of our max-share identification of news are very similar to
the ones originally reported in Barsky and Sims (2011), with the important difference that the
results are robust to the revisions in Fernald’s adjusted TFP series. Consumption increases on
impact of the shock and then gradually rises further towards a new permanent level, while hours
worked initially declines and later increases in a hump-shaped pattern before returning to its preshock level. The shock therefore implies a negative correlation between consumption growth and
hours worked, which makes it an unlikely source of business cycle fluctuations. Nevertheless, the
shock accounts for a large share of macroeconomic fluctuations at medium and longer horizons
and generates sharp impact responses of inflation and asset prices.
Relation to the literature. The premise of our proposed alternative identification is that
measurement issues can materially affect the identification of news shocks based on the zero impact restriction.4 While measurement error occupies a central role in many fields of economics, it
4

In contemporaneous work, Cascaldi-Garcia (2016) also points out that revisions in Fernald’s adjusted TFP
series affect the macroeconomic implications of news shocks based on the Barsky and Sims (2011) identification.
The paper does not document the source of these revisions as extensively as we do, nor does the paper discuss why
these revisions raise questions about the zero impact restriction imposed by the news literature. Instead, the paper
is intended as a comment on Kurmann and Otrok (2013) to which Kurmann and Otrok (2016) respond using the
alternative identification approach proposed here.

3

has generally taken a back seat in the news literature and in quantitative macroeconomics more
generally. A notable exception is Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Vigfusson (2004) who argue, as
we do, that adjusted TFP may be confounded by measurement error.5 They then apply the
infinite-horizon strategy of Gali (1999) to identify a technology shock based on the assumption
that measurement errors in adjusted TFP are only transient. While we share this concern about
measurement issues with Christiano et al. (2004), our identification differs in crucial aspects from
theirs. First, we do not impose that technology is the only source of fluctuations in adjusted TFP
at an infinite horizon and instead identify the shock that accounts for the maximum FEV share
of adjusted TFP at a long but finite horizon. This max-share approach, which has been proposed
to identify technology shocks based on labor productivity by Francis, Owyang, Roush, and DiCecio (2013), addresses the criticism in the literature that infinite-horizon zero restrictions imply
potentially large biases in finite-order VARs.6 The max-share approach also has the conceptual
advantage that the identified shock is only required to be the main source, as opposed to the only
source, of long-run productivity. As such, the max-share approach affords the possibility that
other shocks (e.g. a surprise productivity shock) exert long-lasting effects on adjusted TFP.7
Second, while Christiano et al. (2004) and the literature to which they relate is primarily concerned with the dynamics of hours worked in response to a technology shock, our primary interest
is to devise a more robust approach to identifying news shocks. We go to considerable length to
establish the news content of our max-share shock by relating it to measures of technological in5

Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Vigfusson (2004) base their argument on Granger causality tests with respect to
hours. However, as pointed out by Basu, Fernald, and Kimball (2006), if technology is affected by news shocks, then
hours can Granger-cause adjusted TFP even if technology is exogenous and adjusted TFP is a perfect measure of
technology. The working paper by Sims (2016), which serves as a supporting document for the present paper, also
runs Granger causality tests on different vintages of Fernald’s adjusted TFP series against different non-technology
shock measures but finds the results to be inconclusive.
6
See for example Erceg et al. (2005); Chari et al. (2008); and Christiano et al. (2004). The difference to our
work is that this literature does not directly target TFP and instead focuses on labor productivity. As such these
papers do not directly speak to the news literature and the idea that improvements in productivity disseminate
slowly and in a predictable manner. Indeed, in many of these papers, labor productivity jumps immediately to
essentially its new permanent level – a pattern that is very different from adjusted TFP as we document in our
results. Moreover, as argued for example by Uhlig (2004), labor productivity is susceptible to being affected in
the long-run by non-technology shocks that change the capital stock; e.g. permanent changes in taxation. One
exception is Chen and Wemy (2015) who also apply the max-share approach to adjusted TFP but do not investigate
the robustness of the approach to revisions in adjusted TFP nor whether the resulting shock is a news shock.
7
Another, practical advantage of the max-share approach is that it can be implemented either with a VAR
in levels that includes non-stationary variables, as we do, or a stationary VAR. In contrast, the infinite-horizon
approach of Gali (1999) requires the VAR to be stationary, which implies that the researcher needs to take a stand
on various cointegration restrictions that can affect the results in important ways.

4

novation and forward-looking information variables. The idea that forward-looking variables and
in particular stock prices should contain valuable information for the identification of news shocks
is at the center of the influential paper by Beaudry and Portier (2006). The problem with using
this information directly is that stock prices are affected by many different shocks. So, identifying
news off of stock price movements directly is challenging.8 We adopt an indirect approach instead
by first extracting the shock that accounts for most of the unpredictable variation in long-term
productivity and then relate that shock to variables that should contain information about future
productivity. Since the max-share identification is a partial identification, one does not need to
take a stand about the nature of any of the other shocks affecting the economy. The identification
is therefore very flexible, allowing the researcher to jointly investigate the effects of the shock on
many different variables.
Conceptually, our idea of identifying news shocks based on medium to long-run identification
relates to a recent literature on the macroeconomic effects of slowly disseminating technology
due to costly adoption. In that respect, the paper most close to ours is Rotemberg (2003), who
proposes a model in which random technological progress leads to stochastic variations in longrun output while deviations of output from trend are mostly driven by temporary shocks. As in
our empirical investigation, he finds that slowly diffusing technical progress leads to a temporary
drop in hours worked and economic activity. Other papers that document the slow diffusion of
technology and build models of costly adoption are Comin and Gertler (2006), Comin and Hobijn
(2010), or Comin, Gertler, and Santacreu (2009).

2

TFP and its Use in the News Literature

Following the lead of Kydland and Prescott (1982) and Long and Plosser (1983), the business cycle
literature has typically measured productivity as the residual of aggregate output not accounted
for by capital and labor inputs, commonly known as TFP. Economists quickly realized, however,
that TFP may be a poor measure of productivity for a variety of reasons, most notably unobserved
factor utilization.9 In response to these concerns, Basu, Fernald, and Kimball (2006) apply restric8

One paper that operates directly on stock prices using a sign restriction approach is Nam and Wang (2016).
The idea that observed TFP fluctuations might be driven by endogenous responses of factor utilization to nonproductivity shocks is mentioned by Summers (1986) in his early critique of real business cycle models. Burnside,
9

5

tions derived from economic theory to industry-level data to construct an aggregate measure of
TFP that takes into account sectoral heterogeneity, imperfect competition, compositional changes
in the quality of labor and capital, and unobserved factor utilization. Fernald (2014) extends the
analysis of Basu et al. (2006), which is carried out with annual data, to construct a quarterly
measure of TFP. Because of the higher frequency, not all of the corrections in the original Basu
et al. (2006) series are captured in the quarterly series, but perhaps the most important one –
the correction for variable factor utilization – is. The resulting quarterly utilization-adjusted TFP
series, which is available for download on John Fernald’s website, has proven highly influential
and has become the primary measure of productivity in the news literature.10
In what follows, we describe the construction of Fernald’s utilization-adjusted TFP. We then
review how the literature uses this series to identify news shocks, and illustrate through the lens
of a DSGE model how different measurement issues in the construction of the series may affect
news shock identification.

2.1

Fernald’s utilization-adjusted TFP series

Fernald’s construction of a utilization-adjusted TFP series is based on the assumption that there
exists an aggregate production function of the form

Yt = F (Et Lt , Zt Kt , At ),

(1)

where Yt denotes output, Lt labor input, Kt capital input, Et labor effort, Zt capital utilization,
and At technology. As discussed for example in Acemoglu (2009), At should be understood simply
as a shifter of the production function that captures a “...broad notion of technology, incorporating
the effects of the organization of production and of markets on the efficiency with which the factors
of production are utilized (page 28).” We call At technology rather than productivity because we
want to distinguish it from TFP, which is an empirical concept, and because the news literature
treats At as exogenous to current business cycle conditions.
Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (1993) construct a structural model with labor hoarding and conclude that much of the
variation in TFP is not due to exogenous productivity shocks.
10
As of January 2017, the working paper describing the construction of Fernald’s TFP series has been cited 274
times on Google Scholar.

6

Differentiating with respect to time and omitting time subscripts to simplify notation, the
contribution of technology to output growth can be expressed as
Ẏ
Ė
L̇
Ż
K̇
Ȧ
= − εE − εL − ε Z − εK ,
A
Y
E
L
Z
K

(2)

where εE ≡ FE E/Y is defined as the elasticity of output with respect to labor effort and so forth
for the other arguments of the production function; and the elasticity of output with respect to
technology is normalized to one. Assuming further that input and output markets are perfectly
competitive, that inputs can be instantaneously adjusted without cost, and that production is
constant returns to scale, (2) can be rewritten as
Ȧ
=
A
where ωL =

WL
PY

L̇
Ẏ
K̇
− ωL − (1 − ωL )
Y
L
K

!
−

Ė
Ż
ωL + (1 − ωL )
E
Z

!
,

(3)

is the share of nominal labor payments, W L, in nominal output, P Y . The term in

the first parenthesis is typically referred to as TFP growth, and the term in the second parenthesis
as the change in factor utilization.
Based on (3), Fernald (2014) constructs a quarterly estimate of TFP growth as
∆ ln T F Pt = ∆ ln Yt − ωL,t ∆ ln Lt − (1 − ωL,t )∆ ln Kt .

(4)

Output growth is measured as the log change in the equally weighted average of real expenditures
and income in the business sector from the NIPAs. Labor input growth is measured as the sum
of the log change in total hours worked in the business sector from the BLS and the log change
in labor quality, which is based on worker skill estimates from wage regressions by Aaronson and
Sullivan (2001) and BLS multifactor productivity data. Capital input growth is measured as the
weighted log change of different capital stocks, with the weights determined by the relative income
shares, and the different capital stocks computed from NIPA investment data using the perpetual
inventory method. The labor share of income ωL,t is constructed using interpolated annual NIPA
data on payments to labor.
For the utilization adjustment, Fernald (2014) follows Basu, Fernald, and Kimball (2006) and
estimates an aggregate quarterly utilization series from disaggregated industry-level data. The
7

basic idea behind this estimation is that cost-minimizing firms simultaneously vary inputs along
all margins. This implies that variations in observed hours per worker can be used as a proxy
for variations in unobserved utilization rates, with the factor of proportionality estimated from
industry-level data. The resulting industry utilization estimates are then aggregated to obtain a
quarterly economy-wide utilization estimate using average industry weights. Finally, utilizationadjusted TFP growth is computed as
∆ ln T F PtU = ∆ ln T F Pt − ∆ ln Ut ,

(5)

where ∆ ln Ut denotes the estimated growth in factor utilization.

2.2

Measurement issues for the news literature

Following Beaudry and Portier (2006), the news literature typically assumes that technology is
driven by two exogenous components, one related to news shocks about expected future changes
in fundamentals and the other capturing unanticipated or current shocks. The news shock is
then identified by imposing that it affects technology only with a delay.11 While this zero impact
restriction has intuitive appeal, it comes with potentially important caveats. As discussed in the
Introduction, there is no a priori reason to think that news about growth-enhancing advances in
technology are, despite their slow diffusion, completely unrelated to current productivity. Indeed,
it seems equally intuitive to assume that market participants revise their expectations about future
fundamentals only once there is evidence that at least some firms have successfully adopted the new
technology.12 Moreover, even if technology reacts to news shocks only with a delay, the zero impact
restriction may still be violated in the data if the empirical measure of technology is confounded
by measurement error. This is a distinct possibility for Fernald’s adjusted TFP series (as for
any other series that one may consider in its place). First, the estimated utilization rate used to
correct TFP may be an inaccurate measure of actual factor utilization. Second, as acknowledged
11
As discussed further in Section 4, while this zero restriction is sufficient to identify news shocks in bivariate
VARs, additional assumptions need to be imposed in VARs with more variables. Nevertheless, the zero restriction
remains a key assumption in all of the empirical applications of which we are aware.
12
To our knowledge, the only other paper that discusses this possibility is Barsky, Basu, and Lee (2015) who
write: “It is possible that news about future productivity arrives along with innovations in productivity today (page
233).”

8

by Fernald (2014) himself, “...with markups, possibly heterogeneous across producers, of price above
marginal cost, or with factor adjustment costs that lead the shadow cost of inputs to differ across
firms...aggregate TFP and aggregate technology are not the same – even in the absence of variable
factor utilization...[s]imilarly, if observed factor shares do not equal output elasticities – as is the
case with imperfect competition – then those effects will also show up in utilization-adjusted TFP
growth (page 26).”
To illustrate the potential perils of identifying news shocks through the zero impact restriction
when the underlying conditions are violated, we consider a medium scale New Keynesian DSGE
model that is very similar to Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (2005) or Smets and Wouters
(2007). Here, we only discuss key parts of the model as they relate to the measurement of
productivity. The full set of equilibrium conditions is provided in an online Appendix.
Abstracting from trend growth and price dispersion, the aggregate production function of the
model is
Yt = At (Zt Kt )α L1−α
− F,
t

(6)

where the different variables have the same interpretation as in (1); and F ≥ 0 is a fixed cost of
production. Contrary to Fernald’s empirical approach, which allows for time-varying utilization of
both capital and labor, the model features only capital utilization. This would be straightforward
to change (e.g. by introducing labor hoarding) but would not affect the measurement issues we
want to illustrate here.13
Following the news literature, technology is the sum of two components

ln At = ln St + ln Γt ,

(7)

where St is the stationary component, governed by an AR(1) process
ln St = ρS ln St−1 + σS εS,t ,

(8)

13
The model abstracts from several other features considered by Fernald, including time-variation in the quality of
labor and capital, or sectoral heterogeneity in their utilization. Abstracting from these features does not invalidate
the measurement issues illustrated by the model.

9

and Γt is the permanent component, governed by an AR(1) process in the growth rate

ln Γt − ln Γt−1 = (1 − ρΓ ) ln g + ρΓ (ln Γt−1 − ln Γt−2 ) + σg εg,t−q ,

(9)

with g denoting the steady state gross growth rate of technology; 0 < ρS < 1, 0 < ρΓ < 1; and εS,t ,
εg,t−q independent and identically distributed. When q > 0, agents update expectations about the
permanent component before the shock impacts technology, which is the identifying assumption
in the news literature. However, even with q = 0, the process given in (9) embodies elements of
slow diffusion as long as ρΓ > 0; i.e. a positive shock to the permanent component of technology
today portends even larger increases in the level of technology in the future. Consistent with our
argumentation in the Introduction and the empirical work below, we therefore refer to the shock
to the permanent component as the news shock regardless of whether agents observe it in advance
(q > 0) or not (q = 0).14
We measure adjusted TFP in the model as Fernald does in the data. In particular, the growth
rate of model TFP is defined as

∆ ln T F PtM = ∆ ln Yt − ωL,t ∆ ln Lt − (1 − ωL,t )∆ ln Kt ,

(10)

where ωL,t denotes the labor share. The growth rate of model adjusted TFP is then
∆ ln T F PtM,U = ∆ ln T F PtM − (1 − ωL,t )∆ ln Zt .

(11)

Even if Yt , Lt , Kt , and Zt are perfectly observed, there are nevertheless two incongruities between
adjusted TFP, (11), and true technology, (7). First, if there is a fixed cost F > 0, then the
production function is not constant returns to scale and the construction of TFP is misspecified.
Second, since firms have market power and are subject to nominal price rigidities, ωL,t and 1 − ωL,t
do not in general correspond to the true factor elasticities 1 − α and α of the model. Specifically,
cost-minimization with respect to labor input implies
14

Most of the literature associates news shocks with the permanent component of technology. As discussed in
the Introduction and again in Section 5, this choice is motivated by the idea that growth-enhancing advances in
technology diffuse slowly and are therefore anticipated by market participants, whereas the current component is
taken to capture transitory unexpected changes in productive capacity. However, nothing about the illustration
here would change if we associated news shocks with the stationary component of technology.

10

wt Lt = (1 − α)µ−1
t [Yt − F ] ,

(12)

where µ−1
denotes the inverse price markup over marginal cost. If the fixed cost F is chosen to
t
ensure zero profit in steady state, which is a standard assumption, then (12) becomes

ωL,t =

wt Lt
∗
= (1 − α)µ−1
t µ ,
Yt

(13)

with µ∗ denoting the average markup. In this case, the labor share corresponds to the factor
elasticity 1 − α on average but fluctuates over time due to undesired fluctuations in the markup
owing to price rigidity.15
In light of the empirical evidence presented in the next section, we introduce measurement
error with respect to utilization of the form

uob
t = ut + DSt + σu εu,t ,

(14)

where uob
t is the utilization rate observed by the econometrician; and ut ≡ (1 − ωL,t ) ln Zt is the
true utilization rate implied by the model. The difference between the two is measurement error
composed of both a systematic component, DSt , where St denotes the state vector of the loglinearized model and D is a conformable row vector of weights; and an idiosyncratic component
σu εu,t , with εu,t drawn from a standard normal distribution. While ad hoc, this formulation has the
advantage that it can accommodate many different ways in which utilization may be mis-measured.
We illustrate the extent to which the different misspecifications may affect identification by
calibrating the model and computing the model-implied impulse responses of true technology and
adjusted TFP to a news shock εg . The parameterization of the model is given in the online Appendix. The structural parameters are set in line with the estimates in Smets and Wouters (2007)
and Justiniano, Primiceri, and Tambalotti (2010). The parameters of the permanent component
of technology in (9) are inspired by the empirical results obtained below although the exact values
15

In the absence of fixed costs, the production function is constant returns to scale, consistent with the assumption
underlying the construction of TFP, while the labor share becomes ωL,t = wYt Lt t = (1 − α)µ−1
t . Hence, the labor
share differs from 1 − α even on average. All the simulations below assume a positive fixed cost although we also
experimented with zero fixed cost. The results remained largely unchanged.

11

do not matter for the illustration.16
Figure 1 shows the impulse responses to a news shock for true technology (solid line) and for
adjusted TFP (dotted line) under four alternative scenarios: (i) a “baseline” scenario according
to which utilization is measured without error (D = O, σu = 0) and the news shock affects
technology with a one period lag (q = 1); (ii) an “idiosyncratic measurement error” scenario
(D = O, σu 6= 0, q = 1); (iii) a “systematic measurement error” scenario (D 6= O, σu = 0, q = 1);
and (iv) a “contemporaneous news impact” scenario (D = O, σu = 0, q = 0). For the “systematic
measurement error” case, we assume that all elements of D are zero, with the exception of the
element corresponding to the news shock itself being equal to −3 (note that the news shock is a
state variable, given that it is anticipated in advance) and the combination of states corresponding
to consumption equal to 1. This selection of coefficients is certainly arbitrary but motivated by
the quantitative exercises performed in Section 6.
In the baseline scenario (upper left panel), there is virtually no discrepancy between the responses of adjusted TFP and true technology to a news shock. As we show later in Section 6, this
result not only obtains conditional on a news shock but is more general: as long as utilization and
all other inputs are measured correctly, adjusted TFP and true technology are almost collinear
inspite of the fact that the presence of the fixed cost and time-varying markups invalidate Fernald’s assumptions in our model. This is an interesting result, as it suggests that inconsistencies
between Fernald’s assumptions and common modeling assumptions about returns to scale and
time-varying markups may not be quantitatively important.
Similarly, in the idiosyncratic measurement error scenario (upper right panel), the responses
of adjusted TFP and true technology lie virtually on top of each other. This is because the
idiosyncratic measurement error is orthogonal to the news shock, making it irrelevant for the
model-implied impulse responses. As we discuss in Section 6, however, idiosyncratic measurement
error may make VAR identication more difficult.
The lower left panel shows the systematic measurement error scenario. Here we observe that the
impulse responses of adjusted TFP and true technology do not align with one another. Adjusted
TFP jumps up on impact of the news shock whereas true technology does not. This means that
16

Since we are only considering impulse responses to a news shock here, we do not need to take a stand about the
parameterization of the stationary component of technology nor any of the other shock processes that may buffet
the model economy.

12

even though impact orthogonality between news and true technology is satisfied in the model, it
is not satisfied with respect to adjusted TFP as measured by an econometrician.
The lower right panel shows the contemporaneous news impact scenario; i.e. when the news
shock affects technology on impact (q = 0). Similarly to the first two scenarios considered in the
upper row of the Figure, the responses of true technology and adjusted TFP lie virtually on top
of one another. Differently than the other cases considered, however, true technology and hence
adjusted TFP react on impact.
The impulse responses shown in Figure 1 illustrate that imposing the zero impact restriction
on adjusted TFP can be problematic if utilization is mis-measured in a way that is systematically
related to economic conditions, or if news affects technology immediately as opposed to with a lag.
Of course, the extent to which these violations of the zero impact restrictions matter quantitatively
for empirical applications remains a quantitative question. We examine this in detail in Sections
4 – 6 after documenting the revisions in Fernald’s adjusted TFP series.

3

Revisions to Utilization-Adjusted TFP

Fernald frequently revises his adjusted TFP series based on new data and methodological refinements. In this section, we analyze the consequences of these revisions. In particular, we document
that a major change in business cycle properties of adjusted TFP occurred in March of 2014 when
Fernald switched to using new estimates for the computation of unobserved factor utilization.

3.1

Time series properties of different vintages

The first part of Table 1 provides basic unconditional first and second moments of adjusted TFP
growth for the December 2007, the December 2013, the May 2014, and the May 2016 vintages.17
As in Fernald, TFP growth is computed as the quarterly log change, expressed in annualized
percentage points. While the means and standard deviations of adjusted TFP growth are very
similar across vintages, there is an important decline in comovement that occurs primarily from
the 2014 vintage onward, with the correlation coefficient between the 2007 vintage and post-2013
17

We also have data for the September 2011 vintage and the May 2015 vintage. The results for the 2011 vintage
are very similar to the results for the 2007 and the 2013 vintage, while the results for the 2015 vintage are very
similar to the results for the 2014 and the 2016 vintage.

13

vintages of adjusted TFP dropping to below 0.6. This decline in comovement across vintages of
adjusted TFP holds for different subsamples and is therefore not driven by a change in business
cycle behavior during a particular time period.18
As the second part of Table 1 shows, the decline in comovement across vintages of adjusted TFP
growth also matters in significant ways for correlations with prominent macroeconomic aggregates.
The 2007 and 2013 vintages of adjusted TFP growth are positively correlated with growth rates
of output, consumption, and investment, and essentially uncorrelated with aggregate labor hours.
In contrast, the 2014 and 2016 vintages of adjusted TFP growth are less positively correlated
with the growth rates of output and consumption, uncorrelated with investment, and negatively
correlated with hours.

3.2

What drives the changes across vintages?

Fernald’s data contains not only the adjusted TFP series but also the different aggregates used
in calculating adjusted TFP. We use these variables to assess what drives the large differences in
business cycle correlations across vintages of adjusted TFP.
Note from (4) and (5) that all variables but the estimate for utilization enter into the computation of non-adjusted TFP. As a first step, we therefore consider separately the time series
behavior of non-adjusted TFP and utilization across different vintages. Figure 2 plots the log
levels of the 2007 and 2016 vintages of adjusted TFP (top panel), non-adjusted TFP (middle
panel), and utilization (bottom panel). The 2007 vintages are depicted as black lines while the
2016 vintages are shown as blue lines. The grey shaded bars show NBER-defined recessions.
As the top panel shows, the two vintages of the adjusted TFP series share roughly the same
trend over the full sample but there are sizable differences over subsamples. The 2016 vintage
grew more slowly during the first 25 years of the sample as well as from the mid-1980s to the
mid-1990s. Concurrently, the 2016 vintage grew considerably faster from the late 1990s through
the mid-2000s. Finally, whereas the 2016 vintage declined from 2005 onwards, the 2007 vintage
showed an uptick near the end of the sample. As the middle panel shows, some of these differences
in subsample trends are attributable to differences in non-adjusted TFP across vintages. But an
18

Very similar results obtain if we apply a Hodrick-Prescott filter to the log level of adjusted TFP instead of
first-differencing.

14

equally if not more important part is driven by differences in utilization across vintages. As the
bottom panel shows, while both the 2007 and the 2016 vintage of utilization are stationary and
display overall similar fluctuations, there are sizable and persistent differences.19 In particular,
the 2016 vintage displays substantially larger swings and is less smooth than the 2007 vintage.
To provide further insights, Table 2 reports the same summary statistics for the 2007, 2013,
2014 and 2016 vintages as in the first part of Table 1 but for non-adjusted TFP and utilization.
Unadjusted TFP growth remains essentially unchanged across vintages in terms of overall mean,
standard deviation, and comovement. Utilization growth, in contrast, becomes significantly more
volatile starting with the 2014 vintage and there is an important decline in correlation with the 2007
vintage. This indicates that the large changes in business cycle properties of utilization-adjusted
TFP across vintages are not due to data revisions in output, capital, labor, labor quality, or the
labor share of income but rather are a direct consequence of the changes in volatility and business
cycle properties of utilization that occurred primarily between the December 2013 and the May
2014 vintage.20 This conclusion aligns with revision notes included in Fernald’s dataset. Indeed,
in March 2014, Fernald switched from using industry utilization estimates by Basu, Fernald, and
Kimball (2006), which relied on data through 1995, to estimates from Basu, Fernald, Fisher, and
Kimball (2013), which uses data through 2005.21
To confirm that the change in the estimate of factor utilization after 2014 drives the change
in time series behavior of adjusted TFP, we construct synthetic measures of adjusted TFP by
combining the 2007 vintage of the utilization estimate with non-adjusted TFP series from other
vintages. Correlations for the resulting synthetic measures are presented in Table 3. The correlation of the 2007 adjusted TFP vintage with the synthetic 2014 and 2016 vintages are both 0.91
(compared to 0.56 and 0.58 for the actual vintages of the adjusted TFP series). Hence, while the
19

By construction, Fernald’s utilization series evolves around a constant mean as the different industry-specific
utilization rates are estimated based on bandpass-filtered (and therefore demeaned) data. The aggregate utilization
rate does not have an exact zero mean because it is a weighted average of industry-specific rates. However, the
actual means for both the 2007 and the 2016 vintages are close to zero (see Table 2). The figure reports the
demeaned utilization rates to make the comparison of the two utilization vintages easier.
20
We should note that there are large differences in volatility and comovement of the labor quality series between
the 2007 vintage and later vintages, including the 2011 vintage. These revisions to labor quality account for some
of the differences in subsample trends of TFP across vintages, but not a significant amount. For example, the
correlation between the 2011 vintage and the 2016 vintage of adjusted TFP growth is less than 0.6 despite the fact
that the labor quality series for these two vintages is virtually identical.
21
An email exchange with Fernald confirms that the switch to the Basu, Fernald, Fisher, and Kimball (2013)
estimates is the principal source for the change in the utilization series.

15

change in utilization after 2013 does not explain all of the divergence in the different vintages of
adjusted TFP, it explains the large majority.

4

Implications for the Identification of News Shocks

To quantify the implications of the changes in business cycle behavior of adjusted TFP for the
identification of news shocks, we redo the empirical analysis of Barsky and Sims (2011). They
identify news shocks in a VAR context as the innovation that is orthogonal to Fernald’s adjusted
TFP series but maximally accounts for the FEV share of adjusted TFP over a ten year horizon.
We choose to focus on this identification rather than on one of the other identifications proposed
in the literature because it performs well in small-sample Monte Carlo simulations (provided, of
course, that the zero impact restriction is satisfied in the data generating process and technology
is measured correctly) and because it is a partial identification approach that does not require
taking a stand on the nature of non-news shocks.22

4.1

Barsky-Sims identification

Since the alternative identification proposed below shares many of the elements with the identification by Barsky and Sims (2011), we review the details here. Let Yt be a k × 1 random
vector process of which the first variable is a measure of productivity (e.g. Fernald’s utilizationadjusted TFP), and let the reduced form moving average representation of this process be given
by Yt = B(L)ut , where ut is a k × 1 vector of prediction errors with variance-covariance matrix
E(ut u0t ) = Σu , and B(L) = I + B1 L + B2 L2 + . . . is a matrix lag polynomial. The coefficients of
B(L) and Σu can be estimated with an unrestricted VAR.
Now assume that there exists a linear mapping between the prediction errors and the structural
shocks, ut = At , where t is a k × 1 vector of structural shocks characterized by E(t 0t ) = I,
and A is a k × k matrix satisfying AA0 = Σu . Given the symmetry of Σu , there are a multitude
22

Indeed, full identification approaches are often subject to important robustness issues with respect to non-news
shocks. See for example Kurmann and Mertens (2014) who show that the identification by Beaudry and Portier
(2006) does not have a unique solution in their VAR systems with more than two variables; or Fisher (2010) who
shows that the results by Beaudry and Lucke (2010) depend importantly on the number of cointegration restrictions
imposed.

16

of A consistent with AA0 = Σu . The Choleski decomposition of Σu is one potential solution.
e The entire set of permissible values of A consistent with AA0 = Σu is then
Denote this by A.
e
described by AQ,
where Q is an orthonormal rotation matrix; and the structural moving average
e
representation is Yt = C(L)t , where C(L) = B(L)AQ.
The h step ahead forecast error of Yt can be written as

Yt+h − Et−1 Yt+h =

h
X

e t+h−l .
Bl AQ

(15)

l=0

The FEV share of variable i attributable to shock j at horizon h is then
h
X

Ωi,j (h) =

e 0A
e 0 B0
Bi,l Aγγ
i,l

l=0
h
X

,

(16)

Bi,l Σu B0i,l

l=0

where Bi,l is the ith row of lag polynomial evaluated at L = l and γ is the jth column of Q.
The news shock identification of Barsky and Sims (2011) consists of picking γ to maximize the
sum of FEV shares of productivity (the first variable in the VAR) up to some truncation horizon
H subject to the restriction that the shock is orthogonal to current productivity. Formally

max
γ

H
X

Ω1,2 (h)

(17)

h=0

s.t. γ 0 γ = 1 and γ(1, 1) = 0.
The first restriction ensures that γ belongs to an orthonormal matrix. The second restriction
imposes that the news shock has no immediate impact on productivity.

4.2

Results

We apply the Barsky-Sims identification to a four-variable VAR in Fernald’s utilization-adjusted
TFP series (either the 2007 or 2016 vintage), real personal consumption expenditures per capita,
total hours worked per capita in the non-farm business sector, and inflation as measured by the

17

growth rate of the GDP price deflator.23 Results for larger VARs that contain additional macro
aggregates would be similar. With the exception of the inflation rate, the variables enter the VAR
in log levels. The VAR is estimated with four lags via Bayesian methods subject to a Minnesota
prior.24 Confidence bands are computed by drawing from the resulting posterior distribution. The
sample period is fixed at 1960q1-2007q3.25 As in Barsky and Sims (2011), the truncation horizon
is set to H = 40.
Figure 3 presents impulse responses to a news shock using the Barsky and Sims (2011) news
identification. Here and below, the solid black lines show the posterior median impulse responses
implied by the posterior distribution of the VAR estimated with the 2016 vintage of adjusted TFP,
and the gray bands are the corresponding 16 to 84 percent posterior coverage intervals. In turn,
the red dash-dotted lines show the posterior median impulse responses implied by the posterior
distribution of the VAR estimated with the 2007 vintage of adjusted TFP, and the red dashed
lines are the corresponding 16 to 84 percent posterior coverage intervals.
Using the 2007 vintage of adjusted TFP, the responses are similar to those estimated by
Barsky and Sims (2011). Adjusted TFP starts to increase within a couple of quarters of the
shock; consumption jumps up while inflation falls significantly on impact; and hours worked
initially declines, turning positive only after several quarters. As shown in Table 4, these impulse
responses imply that if the economy was buffeted solely by news shocks, the correlation between
consumption growth and hours growth would be strongly negative (second row), whereas in the
data it is robustly positive (first row).26 This leads Barsky and Sims (2011) to conclude that news
shocks about future productivity cannot be a major source of business cycle fluctuations and that
qualitatively, at least, the impact decline of hours worked is consistent with the predictions of a
23

Though we focus on vintages of the adjusted TFP data from 2007 and 2016, we note that the results with
the 2011 or 2013 vintages of the data result in impulse responses which are similar to those when using the 2007
vintage of adjusted TFP. In contrast, when using the 2014 (post-adjustment in the measurement of utilization) or
2015 vintages, the results are similar to when using the 2016 vintage.
24
The Minnesota prior assumes a random walk process for adjusted TFP and consumption, and a white noise
process for hours worked and the inflation rate.
25
The beginning of the sample is chosen to facilitate comparison with Barsky and Sims (2011) and because some
additional variables of interest which we study later are unavailable prior to 1960. Furthermore, the omission of
the immediate post-war data from the sample removes some large influences due the 1951 Treasury Accord and
Korean War. The end date is the last available observation for the 2007 vintage of adjusted TFP data.
26
The different business cycle moments implied by the Barsky-Sims news shock are very precisely estimated.
In particular, the 16-84 coverage interval for the correlation between consumption growth and hours growth is
[−0.57, −0.50] if the VAR is estimated with the 2007 vintage of adjusted TFP; and [0.22, 0.37] if the VAR is
estimated with the 2016 vintage of adjusted TFP. To save on space, we do not report these coverage bounds here.

18

relatively frictionless real business cycle model.
Using the 2016 vintage of adjusted TFP instead, the impulse responses look quite different in
economically important ways. Adjusted TFP reacts to the news shock with a substantially longer
delay while hours worked increase from the beginning (although not significantly so for the first
two quarters) and reach a peak response only a few quarters after the shock. This difference in the
response of hours worked implies that the correlation of consumption growth and hours growth
conditional on news shocks is now significantly positive (third row of Table 4), making news shocks
a potentially important source of business cycle fluctuations. Moreover, the deflationary impact
of news shocks, which Barsky, Basu, and Lee (2015) cite as one of the most robust features of the
data, is no longer statistically significant.
Overall, the results based on the 2016 vintage of adjusted TFP are different in economically
important ways compared to the responses estimated with vintages of adjusted TFP that predate
the March 2014 revision. This difference has important implications for how we interpret business
cycle fluctuations. In particular, as Barsky and Sims (2011) argue, the impulse responses based
on the 2007 vintage are at least qualitatively consistent with a basic RBC model in which news
shocks have a delayed permanent effect on technology. By contrast, the impulse responses obtained
with the 2016 vintage are more in line with the view that news shocks have significant short-term
demand effects that are accommodated by the economy and thus lead to comovement in real
macro aggregates as observed over the business cycle.

5

An Alternative Identification of News Shocks

In this section, we propose an alternative identification of news shocks that provides similar impulse
responses regardless of the vintage of adjusted TFP used. We first motivate the alternative
identification and describe its implementation. Then, we present results for the same data and VAR
specification as above and provide evidence for the news shock interpretation of this alternative
identification.

19

5.1

Motivation and implementation

An extensive empirical literature documents that new technologies diffuse slowly in an S-shaped
pattern. See for example Griliches (1957), Mansfield (1961), Mansfield (1989), Gort and Klepper
(1982) or Rogers (1995). According to Mansfield (1989), the time until half of potential adopters
actually adopt a new technology varies between five and fifteen years, depending on technology.
This strongly contrasts with much of the business cycle literature, including most of the literature
on news shocks, which typically models technology as a jump process where innovations lead to
an immediate change of productivity to a new level that is either permanent or highly persistent.
The central, and to our knowledge new, insight for the purpose of this paper is that the
slow dissemination of productivity-enhancing changes in technology – broadly defined as actual
technological advances as well as changes in factor input quality and efficiency of allocations –
constitutes news in as much as these developments are expected in advance and therefore lead to
predictable changes in productivity growth. As long as long-run productivity is primarily driven
by technology, a shock that accounts for unexpected changes in long-run productivity should
therefore capture news.27
We extract this shock using similar VAR methods as Barsky and Sims (2011) but with two
important differences. The first is that we look for the shock that accounts for the maximum FEV
share of adjusted TFP at one long horizon H instead of maximizing the sum of FEV shares from
impact onward. Second, we drop the zero restriction and do not impose that the news shock is
orthogonal with respect to the innovation in adjusted TFP. Formally, our alternative identification
is given by the solution to the following optimization problem

max
γ

Ω1,2 (H)

(18)

s.t. γ 0 γ = 1
where γ is, as above, a column vector belonging to orthonormal rotation matrix Q of the
Choleski decomposition of the reduced form variance covariance matrix. This column vector is
27

The idea that unexpected changes in long-run productivity captures news is consistent with the main result
of Beaudry and Portier (2006) from their bivariate VARs with stock prices and a measure of TFP that news
shocks identified through the zero impact restriction are almost perfectly collinear to the shocks driving long-run
movements in TFP. Subsequently, the news literature has focused mainly on the zero impact restriction although
in some identifications, the news shock is also assumed to have long-run effects on TFP.

20

restricted to have unit length, but we do not restrict it to have a zero in its first entry, meaning
that we allow the news shock to impact adjusted TFP immediately.
As discussed in the Introduction, our alternative identification approach has two potentially
important advantages over the existing practice of identifying news shocks based on the zero
impact restriction. First, the identification allows us to avoid taking a stand on whether (true)
technology reacts to the shock only with a lag or not. Second, if adjusted TFP growth is for
any reason an imperfect measure of cyclical variations in technology, then imposing a zero impact
restriction induces potentially significant bias into the estimated responses, as suggested by the
results above. By focusing on one long forecast horizon, our alternative identification aims to
diminish the potential contribution of measurement error, which is putatively only transient in
nature, to the extracted shock.
Before continuing, let us highlight that from a methodological point of view, our identification
strategy is essentially the same as the “max-share” identification proposed by Francis, Owyang,
Roush, and DiCecio (2013), which has important advantages over infinite horizon identification
as discussed in the Introduction. Our work differs, however, in that we use adjusted TFP rather
than average labor productivity and that Francis, Owyang, Roush, and DiCecio (2013) do not
associate the extracted shock with news. One advantage of using adjusted TFP is that labor
productivity is presumably affected in more important ways by business cycle fluctuations than
adjusted TFP. This can lead to important differences in the impact response to a shock. Indeed,
the VAR results by Francis, Owyang, Roush, and DiCecio (2013) indicate that in response to their
max-share shock, labor productivity jumps immediately to what is essentially a new permanent
level. This would suggest that productivity may indeed be modeled as a jump process as discussed
above. Our results below show that if instead the identification is applied to adjusted TFP, the
results suggest that technology is slowly diffusing, consistent with the empirical literature cited
above.
Another important advantage of focusing on adjusted TFP instead of average labor productivity is that non-technology shocks such as persistent changes in capital taxes or worker composition
may also affect labor productivity in the long-run but should leave long-run TFP unaffected (provided that Fernald’s aggregate production function assumption and his measures of effective labor

21

and capital are correct).28 Of course, non-technology shocks may still affect adjusted TFP (as
well as labor productivity) in the long-run if the discovery and adoption of new technologies arises
endogenously as a function of the state of the business cycle. In this case, the proposed identification as well as all of the existing approaches that impose the zero impact restriction will confound
news shocks with non-technology shocks. This point remains very much an open issue for the
literature on technology shocks that we start to address below by examining the response of novel
indicators of technological innovation to our extracted shock.

5.2

Results

We first apply the proposed max-share identification to the same four-variable VAR used above.
The horizon at which the FEV share of adjusted TFP is maximised is set to H = 80 quarters,
although similar results would obtain for shorter horizons above 40 quarters. The estimated
impulses responses are shown in Figure 4. As before, the solid black lines show the median impulse
responses when the VAR is estimated with the 2016 vintage of adjusted TFP while dash-dotted
red lines show the median impulse responses when the 2007 vintage is used.
Although the max-share identification does not impose the zero impact restriction, the estimated response of adjusted TFP is slow and protracted, with the estimated long run response of
adjusted TFP two to three times larger than the impact response. In other words, the news shock
predicts sustained future TFP growth.
In contrast with the results based on the Barsky and Sims (2011) news identification, there is
also very little difference in the impulse responses of the macroeconomic variables when estimating
the VAR with the 2007 vintage of adjusted TFP instead of the 2016 vintage. In both cases,
consumption jumps on impact and then gradually increases further to a permanently higher level;
hours worked decline significantly on impact before turning positive after about five quarters; and
inflation drops sharply and significantly on impact of the shock before gradually returning towards
its initial level.
Overall, these results look very much in line with the original results reported in Barsky and
Sims (2011). Indeed, as Table 5 shows, the median correlation between consumption growth and
28

See Uhlig (2004) or Bocola et al. (2014) for examples when non-technology shocks affect labor productivity in
the long-run.

22

hours growth implied by the max-share shock is robustly negative, contrary to what we observe in
the data.29 Similarly, consumption growth is strongly negatively correlated with inflation, whereas
in the data the two are essentially uncorrelated.

5.3

Does the max-share identification capture news shocks?

A key issue is whether the proposed identification captures news about future productivity growth
and to what extent this shock can be considered as exogenous. To address this issue, we ask
whether the max-share shock has the key characteristics of what one would expect from a news
shock about future productivity; i.e.
1. Does the max-share shock lead to predictable changes in future TFP?
2. Is the max-share shock correlated with measures of technological innovation?
3. Does the max-share shock generate sizable responses in forward-looking news indicators?
For the first question, we already know from the results with the four-variable VAR that the
max-share shock leads to persistent and therefore predictable changes in future TFP growth. We
now extend the analysis by considering an eight-variable VAR system that contains, on top of
the four variables already included above, real gross domestic product (GDP) per capita, real
private investment expenditures per capita, the real S&P500 index (deflated by the consumer
price index) and the Federal Funds rate.30 This choice of variables is motivated by the desire to
learn about the effects of the max-share shock for other prominent macroeconomic aggregates and
by the idea that including forward-looking information variables may help sharpen the results and
address issues of non-fundamentalness.31 Indeed, as Beaudry and Portier (2006) argue, there is a
large literature suggesting that stock prices reflect expectations about future economic conditions
and should therefore be an important indicator of news. Similarly, the Federal Reserve with its
hundreds of Ph.D. economists on staff should have superior forecasting abilities and thus, news
29
Similar to the results reported above, the business cycle moments implied by the max-share shock are estimated
very precisely.
30
The real S&P500 index is taken directly from Robert Shiller’s website. None of the results would change if the
index was instead transformed into real terms with another deflator. The other variables are taken from the FRED
database of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.
31
See Beaudry and Portier (2014) for an excellent discussion about non-fundamentalness and potential remedies.

23

might also be reflected in the Federal Funds rate, the main monetary policy instrument up until
the recent financial crisis.
As before, the VAR is estimated with four lags for the 1960:1-2007:3 period subject to a
Minnesota prior. Figure 5 displays the impulse responses to the max share shock, both when the
VAR is estimated with the 2016 vintage of adjusted TFP (solid black lines) and when the VAR is
estimated with the 2016 vintage of adjusted TFP (dash-dotted red lines).
As in the four-variable VAR, the estimated responses match closely across the two vintages,
confirming the robustness of the max-share approach to the revisions in Fernald’s adjusted TFP
series. Compared to the four-variable VAR, adjusted TFP reacts more gradually to the shock,
with an impact response that is not significantly different from zero. This difference in results
is primarily due to the inclusion of the real S&P500 index in the VAR, confirming the point of
Beaudry and Portier (2006) that stock prices contain valuable information about market expectations of future economic conditions. The real S&P500 index itself reacts strongly on impact
and then displays a hump-shaped response before gradually returning towards its pre-shock level.
Investment and hours worked both decline initially while output rises slightly and consumption
jumps up robustly on impact. Thereafter, output, consumption, and investment gradually increase
towards a permanently higher level while hours worked increases in a hump-shaped manner before
returning towards its original level before the shock. Inflation and the Federal Funds rate both
decline significantly on impact and then remain persistently below their original values. The initial
decline of inflation substantially exceeds the decline in the Federal Funds rate, implying that real
short interest rates increase on impact of the shock. Hence, the shock triggers a contractionary
monetary policy response despite the deflationary effect that the shock has on the economy.32
The opposite-signed impact responses of consumption relative to hours and investment implies
that the max-share shock generates negative business cycle comovement between these variables.
This confirms the conclusion from the four-variable VAR that the shock is unlikely to be a main
driver of business cycle dynamics. This does not mean, however, that the shock is unimportant for
macroeconomic fluctuations more generally. Indeed, as Table 6 shows, while the shock accounts
for only a small fraction of the FEV of real macroeconomic aggregates at short horizons (with
32

The initial drop in inflation would be even more pronounced if prices were measured with the CPI deflator or
the PCE deflator instead of the GDP deflator.

24

consumption being the notable exception), the shock is the main driver of these variables at
longer horizons with the exception of hours worked.33 Indeed, at the 80 quarter horizon, the shock
accounts for about three-fourths of unpredictable variations in adjusted TFP, GDP, consumption,
and investment. Quite strikingly, the shock also accounts for almost half of unpredicted variations
in the real S&P500 index and inflation at forecast horizons of 20 quarters and more, and about
one-third of unpredictable variations in the Federal Funds rate at horizons of 40 quarters or more.
The results in Figure 5 and Table 6 indicate that the max-share shock predicts sustained
increases in future productivity, accounting for almost none of the fluctuations in adjusted TFP
at short horizons but three-fourths of fluctuations at long horizons. Stock market participants,
consumers, firms, and the Federal Reserve immediately react to the shock.
To answer the second and third question listed above, we re-estimate the eight-variable VAR
with the Federal Funds rate replaced sequentially with different measures of technological innovation and forward-looking information variables. The rest of the VAR specification is kept
unchanged except when we have to adapt the sample due to data availability, as described below.
To save on space, we only report impulse responses for the variables that replace the Federal Funds
rate. The seven other variables in the VAR, which are kept the same throughout the exercise,
react very similarly to the max-share shock as reported above in Figure 5.
We first consider four different measures of technological innovation: the index of information
and communications technology (ICT) standards by Baron and Schmidt (2015); the index of new
technology manuals by Alexopoulos (2011); real R&D expenditures per capita from the NIPAs;
and the inverse of the relative price of investment price from Justiniano et al. (2010). The index
by Baron and Schmidt (2015) counts the number of new ICT industry standards per quarter
released by standard setting organizations (SSOs) in the U.S.34 As Baron and Schmidt (2015)
argue, standardization is an essential step in the introduction and adoption of new technologies.
33
All of the results in Table 6 refer to median estimates from the VAR estimated with the 2016 vintage of adjusted
TFP. The results are very similar for the VAR estimated with the 2007 vintage and are therefore omitted to save
on space.
34
SSOs are mostly private organizations that exist in many industries to establish voluntary and regulatory
standards. Prominent examples include the electricity plug, the USB key, the WiFi communications protocol or
quality standards (e.g. ISO). The standardization index by Baron and Spulber (2015) and Baron and Schmidt
(2015) is based on information from the Searle Center database on technology standards and standard setting
organizations. See their papers for details. We thank Justus Baron and Julia Schmidt for making their index
available.

25

It precedes the implementation of new technologies but presumably provides an important signal
about the commercial viability of an innovation and thus future growth opportunities. As such,
standardization represents an ideal measure to assess the extent to which our max-share shock
captures news. As in Baron and Schmidt (2015), we focus on ICT standards because ICT have
constituted the dominant type of general purpose technology, although results are robust to using
broader industry standards. Alexopoulos (2011)’s count of books published in the field of technology provides a complementary measure even though she develops her measure primarily to
investigate the role of contemporaneous technology shocks.35 As explained in her paper, new book
titles in this area “... appear precisely when the innovation is first introduced to market, for the
very good reason that the whole purpose of publications is to spread the word about the new product
or process.” R&D expenditures and the relative investment price are common measures of the
quality and/or efficiency of newly produced investment goods. If our max-share shock captures
news about future productivity growth, then we would expect both of these measures to react
gradually as new technologies are being implemented and start to affect productivity.36
Alexopoulos’ book measure is only available at annual frequency and stops in 1995. We therefore estimate a smaller, annual VAR for this case, containing adjusted TFP, consumption, inflation
and Alexopoulos’ book measure. For all the other variables, the impulse responses are estimated
with the above described VAR based on quarterly data for the 1960:3-2007:3 sample.
Figure 6 reports the impulse responses to the max-share shock. Both the index of new ICT
standards and the index of new technology manuals jump markedly on impact of the shock. The
index of new ICT standards then declines back towards its pre-shock level while the new manuals
measure remains permanently higher. The response of the ICT standards index is particularly
striking and matches closely with the evidence reported in Baron and Schmidt (2015), who use
a recursive identification approach based on zero impact restrictions. R&D expenditures and the
35
As emphasized above, the two are not necessarily distinct as news about future productivity growth may coincide with contemporaneous innovations to productivity. Alexopoulos (2011) also constructs different new book
titles for different technology categories, including new titles for computer hardware and software, and telecommunications. The results presented below are robust to using these alternative measures.
36
One could argue that as long as Fernald’s TFP series appropriately controls for quality changes in the capital
stock, news shocks derived from TFP should be unrelated to capital-embodied technological change. However, it
is doubtful that the the quality adjustments made to the different capital series that Fernald uses fully capture
these quality changes. Moreover, as argued for example by Chen and Wemy (2015), there may be spillovers from
capital-embodied technological change to neutral, general-purpose technology.

26

(inverse of the) relative price of investment goods, in turn, increase only gradually after the shock,
although this increase occurs at a considerably faster pace than for adjusted TFP, as reported in
Figure 5.
Taken together, the impulse responses indicate that the max-share shock picks up the introduction of new technologies to markets instead of other shocks that endogenously lead to more
R&D activity and eventually more innovation and higher productivity. Otherwise, one would expect ICT standards and new technology book titles to respond not with an initial jump but only
gradually and with a delay relative to R&D expenditures.
Next, we consider three forward-looking information variables that have been interpreted as
capturing news: the spread between long-term (5-year) treasury bond yields and the Federal
Funds rate as used in Kurmann and Otrok (2013); the Michigan Survey’s 5-year ahead consumer
confidence index as used in Barsky and Sims (2012); and the business confidence index from the
Business Outlook Survey (BOS) conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia as used in
Bachmann, Elstner, and Sims (2013). Figure 7 shows the impulse responses of these series to the
max-share shock. For reference, we also include the impulse response of the real S&P500 index,
which is part of the VAR used to generate these results. All of the indicators jump up sharply on
impact of the news shock and then decline gradually back to their original level. These responses
are highly significant and indicate that the identified max-share shock captures news about the
future that is picked up not only by financial markets but also the Fed, consumers, and businesses.
We complete this investigation by considering an additional set of forward-looking information
variables that, to our knowledge, have not formally been linked to news shocks: the excess stock
market return by Fama and French (1993); the return on capital computed by Gomme, Ravikumar,
and Rupert (2011); as well as two recent indicators of uncertainty, the forecast dispersion index
constructed by Bachmann, Elstner, and Sims (2013), and the 12-month ahead macroeconomic
uncertainty index constructed by Jurado, Ludvigson, and Ng (2015). The excess stock market
return is the value-weighted return on all CRSP firms incorporated in the U.S. and listed on the
NYSE, AMEX, or NASDAQ minus the one month Treasury bill rate.37 The return on capital
is computed from the investment first-order condition of a neoclassical business cycle model and
is driven by fluctuations in the marginal product of capital and relative prices of investment
37

The data are regularly updated and available on Kenneth French’s website.

27

goods. We view both of these returns as complementary measures of how the market reacts to
news about the future value of capital. The uncertainty indicator by Bachmann et al. (2013)
is sourced from the same BOS data as the business confidence index above and is constructed
as the cross-sectional dispersion of survey participants’ assessment of future business conditions.
Lastly, the uncertainty indicator by Jurado et al. (2015) is constructed as the weighted mean of
conditional volatilities of unforecastable components of future macroeconomic time series, with the
forecasting part obtained from a diffusion index based on a large set of predictors. As opposed to
other measures of uncertainty proposed in the literature, the two indicators are explicitly designed
to capture uncertainty about the future.
Figure 8 shows the impulse responses of these series to the max-share shock. Similar to the news
indicators above, both return variables jump up sharply on impact of the shock. This response
is short-lived: after two quarters, the variables have essentially returned back to their pre-shock
value. These impulse responses confirm that the max-share shock contains important news for
capital markets. Interestingly, the two uncertainty indicators show a significant negative reaction
on impact of the shock that, in the case of Jurado et al. (2015)’s measure, is quite persistent.
In conjunction with the above results, this decline in uncertainty suggests that the news picked
up by the max-share shock provides resolution of uncertainty about the productive potential of
innovations.
The different results provide in our view compelling evidence that the max-share shock captures news about future productivity growth. The shock predicts sustained future TFP growth,
accounting for only a small fraction of TFP fluctuations at short forecast horizons but for 70
percent or more of TFP fluctuations at longer horizons. Perhaps more importantly, the shock
is associated with large and persistent jumps in two novel measures of innovation, followed by
a hump-shaped increase in R&D expenditures and a gradual decline in the relative price of investment goods; and the shock generates jumps in a wide variety of forward-looking information
variables. Taken together, these responses suggest that the max-share identification picks up technological innovation as opposed to other business cycle shocks or noise that endogenously lead
to changes in productivity; and that market participants clearly update their forecasts about the
economy. The news interpretation therefore seems natural.

28

6

Monte Carlo Simulations

This section returns to the New Keynesian DSGE model of Section 2 and uses it to further
investigate the performance of the proposed max-share identification relative to the Barsky-Sims
identification under different scenarios about measurement error and timing of news shocks. We
simulate time series for adjusted TFP, consumption, inflation, and hours worked from the model
and estimate a four-variable VAR from these series. We then compare the impulse responses to a
news shock from the model with the impulse responses from the VAR under the Barsky-Sims and
the max-share identifications.

6.1

Specification

The calibration of the different structural parameters is the same as in Section 2. To avoid
stochastic singularity, we need at least as many shocks in the model as variables in the VAR.
In addition to the unanticipated shock and the news shock from the technology processes in (8)
and (9), we consider a shock to the marginal efficiency of investment (MEI) and a shock to the
disutility from labor (which is isomorphic to a wage markup shock). The online appendix provides
details. The shock magnitudes are parameterized so that the MEI shock accounts for the majority
of short run fluctuations, as documented in Justiniano, Primiceri, and Tambalotti (2010).38
Before proceeding, let us pause to note that we have not attempted to specify the mismeasurement of utilization to mimic the observed business cycle properties of Fernald’s adjusted TFP
series reported in Section 3. Given the flexibility of the model equation for observed utilization in
(14), this would be relatively straightforward to accomplish. However, the model abstracts from
many of the features that Fernald considers in his construction of the series and so, even if we
matched the unconditional business cycle properties of utilization, it is unclear what lessons one
would derive from such an exercise. Instead, our Monte Carlo simulations simply seek to provide
further illustration that mismmeasurement of utilization potentially matters in important ways
for the empirical identification of news shocks.
38

In particular, the MEI shock accounts for 50 percent, the news shock for 25 percent, and the labor supply and
the unanticipated technology shocks for 12.5 percent each of the unconditional variance of output growth. The
results that follow are similar under alternative parameterizations of the shock processes.

29

6.2

Business cycle moments

We start by reporting select unconditional business cycle moments for true technology and adjusted
TFP as measured by an econometrician in the model under the four different scenarios considered
in Section 2. Table 7 reports the results. The first column shows the unconditional correlations
between true technology growth and adjusted TFP growth. The second and third columns show
the correlations between true technology growth and hours growth and adjusted TFP growth and
hours growth, both conditional on news shocks only (i.e. all other shocks are set to zero). These
conditional correlations are what matters for the news shock identification.
Focusing on the first column, one observes that true technology growth and measured adjusted
TFP growth are nearly perfectly collinear so long as utilization is measured accurately. This
is true independent of whether the news shock impacts true technology immediately or with a
lag and suggests, as noted in Section 2, that the incongruities between the model and Fernald’s
assumptions concerning constant returns to scale and time-varying markups do not seem to matter
quantitatively. The presence of either idiosyncratic or systematic measurement error in utilization,
in contrast, lowers the correlation between true technology growth and adjusted TFP growth
somewhat.39
Moving to the second column, the correlation of true technology growth with hours growth
conditional on news shocks is close to zero for the baseline scenario as well as for the two scenarios
with measurement error (these correlations are exactly the same because measurement error only
affects adjusted TFP but not true technology). When news shocks have a contemporaneous impact
on technology, the correlation of true technology growth with hours growth becomes positive.
As shown in the third column, finally, the correlations of adjusted TFP growth with hours
growth conditional on news shocks are similar to the correlations for true technology growth
reported in the second column, with the notable exception of the scenario with systematic measurement error for which the correlation becomes strongly positive. These results suggest, as we
will see in what follows, that idiosyncratic measurement error ought not to affect identification
of news shocks, since identification is conditional on the realization of a shock which induces
39

The extent of this reduction in correlation is modest, which obviously depends on the importance of the
measurement error. One can make this correlation arbitrarily small by sufficiently increasing the variance of the
measurement error.

30

movements in variables other than adjusted TFP (although idiosyncratic measurement error may
make identification more difficult in finite samples). By contrast, systematic measurement error
can result in significant biases in the empirical identification of news shocks since it has such a
large impact on the comovement of adjusted TFP growth with news-driven fluctuations in spite
of the fact that the reduction in the unconditional correlation between adjusted TFP and true
technology in this specification is rather modest.

6.3

Impulse responses to a news shock

For our Monte-Carlo exercises, we simulate 100,000 periods of data of adjusted TFP, consumption,
inflation, and hours worked from the model and estimate a VAR with twenty lags from these
series. We then identify a news shock using the Barsky-Sims identification (labelled “BS”) and
the proposed max-share identification (labelled “MS”). The point of basing our simulations on
such a long sample is that we want to examine the asymptotic properties of the two identification
procedures. The high VAR lag order, in turn, is intended to diminish the role of “lag-truncation
bias” that arises when estimating data generated from linearized DSGE models with a finite-order
VAR (although our results are qualitatively similar with a much smaller number of lags). Of
course, one could also investigate the small-sample properties of our estimates, although Francis,
Owyang, Roush, and DiCecio (2013) show that these properties are quite good for max-share
identification.
First, we consider the baseline scenario in which news shocks impact true technology with a
lag and utilization is measured without error. Figure 9 reports the results. Here and below, the
solid lines show the impulse responses to a news shock in the model; the dotted red lines the
responses implied by the BS identification; and the dashed blue lines the responses implied by
the MS identification. In the model, consumption increases on impact, inflation falls, and hours
worked increases in a hump-shaped manner. Though there are minor differences, both the BS and
MS identifications do a good job of recovering these impulse responses.
Second, we consider the scenario with idiosyncratic measurement error while keeping with
the assumption that news shocks affect true technology with a delay. As Figure 10 reports, the
different impulse responses are virtually identical to those shown in Figure 9. Once again, there is
little difference between the performance of the BS and MS identifications – both do a good job at
31

recovering the dynamic responses to a news shock in the model. This underscores the point made
above that idiosyncratic measurement error ought not to affect identification in sufficiently large
samples (such as the Monte Carlo exercise considered here). We should note that if idiosyncratic
measurement error is sufficiently large, or sufficiently non-transient, the properties of the MS
identification can be negatively affected relative to the BS identification, since some of what the
MS identification will pick up is purely noise.
In both of these scenarios, the BS restriction that the news shock has no impact on adjusted
TFP is satisfied in that true technology in the model only reacts to the news shock with a lag.
Even though adjusted TFP is not identical to true technology because of non-constant factor
shares and a fixed production cost, as documented above these differences are minor. In both
cases, the BS and MS identifications perform similarly, which illustrates that one does not seem to
lose accuracy by not imposing the zero impact restriction even if the restriction is approximately
satisfied in the model.
Third, we consider the scenario with systematic measurement error. In this case, the zero
impact restriction of the BS identification is satisfied with respect to true technology, but it is
not consistent with the behavior of adjusted TFP due to the systematic mis-measurement of
utilization. Figure 11 reports the results. The MS identification now clearly outperforms the BS
identification. Although the MS procedure over-estimates the impact response of true technology
on impact (since true technology only reacts with a lag), it closely matches the dynamic paths
of adjusted TFP, consumption, inflation, and hours worked. The BS identification, in contrast,
implies impulse responses for adjusted TFP and consumption that remain below their model
counterparts, even at long horizons, produces the wrong sign for the impact response of inflation,
and substantially over-estimates the impact response of hours.
Fourth and finally, we revert to assuming that utilization is measured without error but assume
that the news shock impacts true technology in the model immediately rather than with a lag.
As Figure 12 shows, the MS identification again outperforms the BS identification. The BS
identification generates the wrong sign of the impact response of hours, significantly underestimates
the response of inflation, and underestimates the response of true technology and consumption at
all horizons. The MS identification, in contrast, does a good job recovering the dynamic responses
to the news shock.
32

In both scenarios (iii) and (iv), the BS assumption of impact orthogonality between the news
shock and adjusted TFP is violated in the data generating process. This is what drives its poor
relative performance relative to our MS identification. In scenarios (i) and (ii), where the BS
assumption of impact orthogonality is consistent with the data generating process, the BS and
MS identification perform about as well as one another. We conclude from these Monte Carlo
exercises that there is little to gain from imposing impact orthogonality in the identification of the
news shock, while the costs of doing so can be large.

7

Conclusion

An almost universally imposed assumption in the empirical literature is that news shocks impact
productivity only with a delay. This assumption is not necessarily consistent with a broader view
of slow technology adoption, and may be violated empirically if one’s measure of productivity does
not perfectly align with true technology.
In this paper, we documente large changes in the cyclical properties of the popular series of
adjusted TFP produced by Fernald (2014). These changes materially affect empirical conclusions
about the macroeconomic effects of news shock as identified by Barsky and Sims (2011). We
therefore propose an alternative identification, which does not impose the zero impact restriction.
We show that our identification is robust to the revisions in Fernald’s series, and performs well
in Monte Carlo simulations under different assumptions about measurement of productivity and
the data-generating process for technology. When applied to U.S. data, we find results that are
consistent with a news interpretation: adjusted TFP increases slowly and with a significant lag
whereas indicators of technological innovation and forward-looking information variables jump on
impact. At the same time, the identified shock does not generate comovement in real macroeconomic aggregates and is therefore not a main driver of business cycle fluctuations. This does not
imply that the shock is unimportant for macroeconomics. The shock accounts for the majority of
unpredictable fluctuations in real aggregates at medium- and long horizons and generates strong
impact responses of inflation, the Federal Funds rate, asset prices as well as different measures of
uncertainty. Investigating these results further and assessing the type of models that are consistent
with these dynamics are important topics of future research.
33

References
Aaronson, D. and D. Sullivan (2001). Growth in worker quality. Economic Perspectives 25 (4),
53–74. 2.1
Acemoglu, D. (2009). Introduction to Modern Economic Growth. Princeton: Princeton University
Press. 2.1
Alexopoulos, M. (2011, June). Read All about It!! What Happens Following a Technology Shock?
American Economic Review 101 (4), 1144–79. 1, 5.3, 35
Bachmann, R., S. Elstner, and E. R. Sims (2013, April). Uncertainty and Economic Activity:
Evidence from Business Survey Data. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 5 (2),
217–49. 1, 5.3
Baron, J. and J. Schmidt (2015). Technological Standardization, Endogenous Productivity and
Transitory Dynamics. Technical report. 1, 5.3, 34
Baron, J. and D. F. Spulber (2015). Technology Standards and Standards Organizations: Introduction to the Searle Center Database. Technical report, Northwestern University Pritzker
School of Law. 34
Barsky, R., S. Basu, and K. Lee (2015). Whither news shocks? In NBER Macroeconomics Annual
2014, Volume 29, NBER Chapters, pp. 225–264. National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
1, 12, 4.2
Barsky, R. and E. Sims (2011). News shocks and business cycles. Journal of Monetary Economics 58 (3), 273–289. 1, 4, 4, 4.1, 4.1, 4.2, 25, 5.1, 5.2, 7
Barsky, R. B. and E. R. Sims (2012, June). Information, Animal Spirits, and the Meaning of
Innovations in Consumer Confidence. American Economic Review 102 (4), 1343–77. 5.3
Basu, S., J. Fernald, J. Fisher, and M. Kimball (2013). Sector-specific technical change. Technical
report. 3.2, 21

34

Basu, S., J. G. Fernald, and M. S. Kimball (2006). Are technology improvements contractionary?
American Economic Review 96 (5), 1418–1448. 5, 2, 2.1, 3.2
Beaudry, P. and B. Lucke (2010). Letting difference views about business cycles compete. In NBER
Macroeconomics Annual 209, Volume 23, NBER Chapters, pp. 413–455. National Bureau of
Economic Research, Inc. 22
Beaudry, P. and F. Portier (2006). Stock prices, news, and economic fluctuations. American
Economic Review 96 (4), 1293–1307. 1, 2.2, 22, 27, 5.3
Beaudry, P. and F. Portier (2014). News-driven business cycles: Insights and challenges. Journal
of Economic Literature. 1, 31
Bocola, L., I. Manovskii, and M. Hagedorn (2014). Identifying Neutral Technology Shocks. Technical report, Department of Economics, University of Pennsylvania. 28
Burnside, C., M. Eichenbaum, and S. Rebelo (1993). Labor hoarding and the business cycle.
Journal of Political Economy 101 (2), 245–273. 9
Cascaldi-Garcia, D. (2016). News shocks and the slope of the term structure of interest rates:
Comment. Technical report, Warwick Business School. 4
Chari, V., P. J. Kehoe, and E. R. McGrattan (2008, November). Are structural VARs with long-run
restrictions useful in developing business cycle theory? Journal of Monetary Economics 55 (8),
1337–1352. 6
Chen, K. and E. Wemy (2015). Investment-specific technology shocks: The source of long-run tfp
fluctuations. European Economic Review 80, 230–252. 6, 36
Christiano, L. J., M. Eichenbaum, and C. L. Evans (2005). Nominal rigidities and the dynamic
effects of a shock to monetary policy. Journal of Political Economy 113 (1), 1–45. 2.2
Christiano, L. J., M. Eichenbaum, and R. Vigfusson (2004). The response of hours to a technology
shock: Evidence based on direct measures of technology. Journal of the European Economic
Association (2). 1, 5, 6

35

Comin, D. and M. Gertler (2006).

Medium-term business cycles.

American Economic Re-

view 96 (3), 523–551. 1
Comin, D., M. Gertler, and A. M. Santacreu (2009). Technology innovation and diffusion as sources
of output and asset price fluctuations. Working Paper 15029, National Bureau of Economic
Research. 1
Comin, D. and B. Hobijn (2010). An exploration of technology diffusion. American Economic
Review 100 (5), 2031–2059. 1
Erceg, C. J., L. Guerrieri, and C. Gust (2005). Can Long-Run Restrictions Identify Technology
Shocks? Journal of the European Economic Association 3 (6), 1237–1278. 6
Fama, E. and K. French (1993). Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds. Journal
of Financial Economics 33 (1), 3–56. 5.3
Fernald, J. (2014). A quarterly, utilization-adjusted series on total factor productivity. Federal
Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper Series 2012-19. (document), 1, 2, 2.1, 2.1, 2.2, 7
Fisher, J. (2010). Comment on: Letting difference views about business cycles compete. In NBER
Macroeconomics Annual 2009, Volume 23, NBER Chapters, pp. 457–474. National Bureau of
Economic Research, Inc. 22
Francis, N., M. Owyang, J. Roush, and R. DiCecio (2013). A flexible finite-horizon alternative
to long-run restriction with an appication to technology shocks. Review of Economics and
Statistics 96 (4), 638–648. 1, 5.1, 6.3
Gali, J. (1999). Technology, employment, and the business cycle: Do technology shocks explain
aggregate fluctuations? American Economic Review 89 (1), 249–271. 1, 7
Gomme, P., B. Ravikumar, and P. Rupert (2011, April). The Return to Capital and the Business
Cycle. Review of Economic Dynamics 14 (2), 262–278. 5.3
Gort, M. and S. Klepper (1982). Time paths in the diffusion of product innovations. Economic
Journal 92 (367), 630–653. 1, 5.1

36

Griliches, Z. (1957). Hybrid corn: An exploration in the economics of technological changes.
Econometrica 25 (4), 501–522. 1, 5.1
Jurado, K., S. Ludvigson, and S. Ng (2015). Measuring uncertainty. American Economic Review 105 (3), 1177–1216. 1, 5.3
Justiniano, A., G. Primiceri, and A. Tambalotti (2010). Investment shocks and business cycles.
Journal of Monetary Economics 57 (2), 132–145. 2.2, 5.3, 6.1
Kurmann, A. and E. Mertens (2014). Stock prices, news, and economic fluctuations: Comment.
American Economic Review 104 (4), 1439–1445. 22
Kurmann, A. and C. Otrok (2013). News shocks and the slope of the term structure of interest
rates. American Economic Review 103 (6), 2612–2632. 4, 5.3
Kurmann, A. and C. Otrok (2016). New evidence on the relationship between news shocks and
the slope of the term structure. Technical report. 4
Kydland, F. E. and E. C. Prescott (1982). Time to build and aggregate fluctuations. Econometrica 50 (6), 1345–1370. 2
Long, J. B. and C. Plosser (1983). Real business cycles. Journal of Political Economy 91 (1),
39–69. 2
Mansfield, E. (1961). Technical change and the rate of imitation. Econometrica 29 (4), 741–766.
1, 5.1
Mansfield, E. (1989). The diffusion of industrial robots in japan and the united states. Research
Policy 18 (4), 183–192. 1, 5.1
Nam, D. and J. Wang (2016). Mood Swings and Business Cycles: Evidence from Sign Restrictions.
Technical report. 8
Pigou, A. C. (1927). Industrial Fluctuations. London: Macmillan. 1
Rogers, E. (1995). Diffusion of Innovations. New York: Free Press. 1, 5.1

37

Rotemberg, J. (2003). Stochastic technical progress, smooth trends, and nearly distinct business
cycles. American Economic Review 93 (5), 1543–1559. 1
Sims, E. (2016). Differences in quarterly utilization-adjusted tfp by vintage, with an application
to news shocks. Working Paper 22154, National Bureau of Economic Research. 5
Smets, F. and R. Wouters (2007). Shocks and frictions in US business cycles: A bayesian DSGE
approach. American Economic Review 97 (3), 586–606. 2.2, 2.2
Summers, L. H. (1986). Some skeptical observations on real business cycle theory. Federal Reserve
Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review Fall, 23–27. 9
Uhlig, H. (2004). Do technology shocks lead to a fall in total hours worked?
European Economic Association 2 (2-3), 361–371. 6, 28

38

Journal of the

Tables and Figures
Table 1: Moments of Adjusted TFP Growth for Different Vintages

Mean
Standard Deviation
Corr w/ ∆ ln T F PtU,07
Corr
Corr
Corr
Corr

w/
w/
w/
w/

∆ ln Yt
∆ ln Ct
∆ ln It
∆ ln Lt

∆ ln T F PtU,07
1.49
3.41
1.00

∆ ln T F PtU,13
1.41
3.30
0.85

∆ ln T F PtU,14
1.42
3.79
0.56

∆ ln T F PtU,16
1.42
3.46
0.58

0.53
0.26
0.20
-0.01

0.38
0.21
0.13
-0.06

0.18
0.05
-0.00
-0.24

0.07
0.11
-0.02
-0.35

Notes: This table shows descriptive statistics for different vintages of adjusted TFP growth and correlations with growth rates of
prominent macroeconomic aggregates. ∆ ln T F PtU,j is the log first difference of Fernald’s adjusted TFP series for vintages j = 07, 13,
14 or 16; Yt is headline real GDP; Ct is real personal consumption expenditures; It is real private fixed investment; and Lt is total
hours worked in the non-farm business sector. Both personal consumption expenditures and private fixed investment are deflated by
their own deflators. All macroeconomic aggregates are from the NIPA tables and are log first differenced. The sample period for each
of the statistics is 1947q3-2007q3.

Table 2: Moments of Non-adjusted TFP and Utilization Growth for Different Vintages

Mean
Standard Deviation
Corr w/ ∆ ln T F Pt07

Mean
Standard Deviation
Corr w/ ∆ ln u07
t

∆ ln T F Pt07

∆ ln T F Pt13

∆ ln T F Pt14

∆ ln T F Pt16

1.42

1.37

1.37

1.39

3.75

3.55

3.55

3.55

1.00

0.92

0.92

0.93

∆ ln u07
t
-0.08
2.34
1.00

∆ ln u13
t
-0.04
2.94
0.94

∆ ln u14
t
-0.05
3.75
0.58

∆ ln u16
t
-0.03
3.76
0.65

Notes: This table shows descriptive statistics for the 2007, 2013, 2014 and 2016 vintages of the non-adjusted TFP and utilization series.
The sample period for these statistics is fixed at 1947q3-2007q3.

39

Table 3: Moments of the Synthetic Measures of Adjusted TFP Growth for Different Vintages

Mean
Standard Deviation
Corr w/ ∆ ln T F PtU,07,07
Corr w/ ∆ ln T F PtU,13,07
Corr w/ ∆ ln T F PtU,14,07
Corr w/ ∆ ln T F PtU,16,07

∆ ln T F PtU,07,07

∆ ln T F PtU,13,07

∆ ln T F PtU,14,07

∆ ln T F PtU,16,07

1.49

1.45

1.44

1.46

3.41

3.16

3.16

3.16

1.00

0.91

0.91

0.91

1.00

0.99

0.99

1.00

0.99
1.00

Notes: This table shows descriptive statistics for synthetic measures of adjusted TFP for the 2007, 2013, 2014, and 2016 vintages,
constructed by combining the 2007 vintage of utilization and combining it with non-adjusted TFP from vintagej = 2007, 2013, 2014,
or 2015.

Table 4: Unconditional Business Cycle Moments Implied by Barsky-Sims Shock

Data
Barsky-Sims shock (TFP 2007)
Barsky-Sims shock (TFP 2016)

sdev(∆lnCt )
0.68
0.36
0.44

sdev(∆ ln Ht )
0.79
0.30
0.18

sdev(πt )
1.13
0.39
0.27

corr(∆ ln Ct , ∆lnHt )
0.42
-0.56
0.27

corr(∆ ln Ct , πt )
-0.09
-0.73
-0.75

Notes: The sample period for each of the statistics is 1960q1-2007q3. The model statistics pertain to medians from the posterior
distribution of each data series implied by the Barsky-Sims news shock. All results are rounded to two digits after the decimal point.

Table 5: Unconditional Business Cycle Moments Implied by Max-Share Shock

Data
Max-share shock (TFP 2007)
Max-share shock (TFP 2016)

sdev(∆lnCt )
0.68
0.43
0.39

sdev(∆ ln Ht )
0.79
0.25
0.26

sdev(πt )
1.13
0.60
0.53

corr(∆ ln Ct , ∆lnHt )
0.42
-0.23
-0.34

corr(∆ ln Ct , πt )
-0.09
-0.73
-0.71

Notes: The sample period for each of the statistics is 1960q1-2007q3. The model statistics pertain to medians from the posterior
distribution of each data series implied by the max-share shock. All results are rounded to two digits after the decimal point.

40

Table 6: Fraction of FEV Explained by Max-Share Shock

Adjusted TFP (2016)
Gross domestic product
Consumption
Investment
Hours
Real S&P500 index
Inflation
Federal Funds rate

Forecast horizon (quarters)
20
40
0.16
0.49
0.60
0.77
0.74
0.86
0.41
0.60
0.18
0.23
0.45
0.52
0.47
0.46
0.26
0.32

4
0.07
0.08
0.34
0.05
0.04
0.20
0.38
0.13

80
0.77
0.83
0.88
0.72
0.25
0.49
0.45
0.33

Notes: The sample period for each of the statistics is 1960q1-2007q3. The model statistics pertain to medians from the posterior
distribution of each data series implied by the max-share shock. All results are rounded to two digits after the decimal point.

Table 7: Model-implied business cycle correlations

Baseline
(D = O, σu = 0, q = 1)
Idiosyncratic measurement error
(D = O, σu = 0.01, q = 1)
Systematic measurement error
(D 6= O, σu = 0, q = 1)
Contemporaneous news impact
(D = O, σu = 0, q = 0)

corr(∆At , ∆T F PtM,U )
0.99

corr(∆At , ∆Ht | news)
-0.08

corr(∆T F PtM,U , ∆Ht | news)
-0.01

0.85

-0.08

-0.01

0.89

-0.08

0.66

0.99

0.24

0.30

Notes: This table shows business correlations of different variables implied by the solution of the medium scale DSGE model laid out
in the text. ∆ ln At refers to the log first difference of true technology; ∆ ln T F PtM,U refers to the log first difference of
utilization-adjusted TFP as measured in the model; and ∆Ht refers to the log first difference of hours worked. The first column shows
the unconditional correlation of ∆ ln At and ∆ ln T F PtM,U while the second and third column show the correlation of ∆ ln At ,
respectively ∆ ln T F PtM,U with ∆Ht conditional on news shocks only.

41

Figure 1: Model Responses of True Technology and Adjusted TFP to a News Shock
q = 1, Utilization Measured Correctly

q = 1, Utilization Idiosyncratic Mis-Measurement
1

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.6

percent

percent

1

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0

0

-0.2

-0.2
0

2

4

6

8

10

0

2

quarters

6

8

10

quarters

q = 1, Utilization Systematic Mis-Measurement
1

1

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.6

percent

percent

4

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0

0

-0.2

q = 0, Utilization Measured Correctly

True Technology
Measured Adjusted TFP

-0.2
0

2

4

6

8

10

0

quarters

2

4

6

8

10

quarters

Notes: This figure plots model impulse responses of true technology (solid lines) and adjusted TFP (dashed lines)
to a news shock for the four scenarios described in the text.

42

Figure 2: Adjusted TFP, Non-adjusted TFP and Utilization: 2007 vs. 2016 Vintages

Utilization-adjusted TFP
1

0.5
Adjusted TFP 2007 vintage
Adjusted TFP 2016 vintage

0
1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

Unadjusted TFP
1

0.5
Unadjusted TFP 2007 vintage
Unadjusted TFP 2016 vintage

0
1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

Utilization
Utilization 2007 vintage
Utilization 2016 vintage

0.05
0
-0.05
1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

Notes: This figure plots the log levels of both the 2007 and 2016 vintages of the utilization-adjusted
TFP series (top panel), the unadjusted TFP series (middle panel) and the utilization series (bottom
panel). The 2007 vintages are depicted as black lines. The 2016 vintages are depicted as blue lines.
The grey shaded bars show NBER recessions. The sample period for all graphs is 1947q3-2007q3.

43

Figure 3: Empirical Responses, BS Identification, 2007 vs. 2016 Vintage of Adjusted TFP
Adjusted TFP

Consumption
1.2

0.4

1

0.3

0.8

percent

percent

0.5

0.2

0.6
0.4

0.1

0.2
0
0
5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

5

10

15

quarters

20

25

30

35

40

quarters

Hours

Inflation
0
2016 TFP vintage
2007 TFP vintage

-0.1
-0.2

0.2

percent

percent

0.4

0

-0.3
-0.4
-0.5

-0.2
-0.6
5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

5

quarters

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

quarters

Notes: Solid black lines are the posterior median estimates from the VAR system estimated with the 2016 vintage
of adjusted TFP. The gray bands correspond to the 16 to 84 percent posterior coverage intervals.

The red

dash-dotted lines are the posterior median estimates for the system estimated with the 2007 vintage of adjusted
TFP. The red dashed lines correspond to the 16 to 84 percent posterior coverage intervals. The impulse responses
are identified using the BS identification.

44

Figure 4: Impulse Responses of Four-Variable VAR to Max-Share Shock
Adjusted TFP

Consumption
1.4

0.5

1.2
1

percent

percent

0.4
0.3
0.2

0.6
0.4

2016 TFP vintage
2007 TFP vintage

0.1

0.8

0.2
0
0
5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

5

10

15

quarters

0.4

-0.1

0.3

-0.2

0.2

-0.3

0.1
0

-0.5
-0.6

-0.2

-0.7
15

20

25

30

35

40

30

35

40

-0.4

-0.1

10

25

Inflation
0

percent

percent

Hours
0.5

5

20

quarters

30

35

40

5

quarters

10

15

20

25

quarters

Notes: Solid black lines are the posterior median estimates from the VAR system estimated with the 2016 vintage
of adjusted TFP. The grey bands correspond to the 16 to 84 percent posterior coverage intervals.

The red

dash-dotted lines are the posterior median estimates for the system estimated with the 2007 vintage of adjusted
TFP. The red dashed lines correspond to the 16 to 84 percent posterior coverage intervals. The shock is identified
using the max-share identification, which does not impose the zero impact restriction with respect to adjusted
TFP and instead just maximizes the FEV share of adjusted TFP at a 80 quarter horizon.

45

Figure 5: Impulse Responses of Eight-Variable VAR to Max-Share Shock
Real S&P500 index
percent

percent

Adjusted TFP
0.6
0.4
0.2
0

5

0
5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

5

10

15

quarters

1
0.5

30

35

40

30

35

40

30

35

40

35

40

1
0.5
0

0
5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

5

10

15

quarters

percent

1
0
-1
10

15

20

25

25

Hours

2

5

20

quarters

Investment
percent

25

Gross domestic product
percent

percent

Consumption

30

35

0.4
0.2
0
-0.2

40

5

10

15

quarters

20

25

quarters

Inflation

Federal Funds rate
0

0

percent

percent

20

quarters

-0.2
2016 TFP vintage
2007 TFP vintage

-0.4
-0.6
5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

-0.2
-0.4
5

quarters

10

15

20

25

30

quarters

Notes: Solid black lines are the posterior median estimates from the VAR system estimated with the 2016 vintage of adjusted
TFP. The grey bands correspond to the 16 to 84 percent posterior coverage intervals. The red dash-dotted lines are the posterior
median estimates for the system estimated with the 2007 vintage of adjusted TFP. The red dashed lines correspond to the 16
to 84 percent posterior coverage intervals. The impulse responses are identified using the max-share identification.

46

Figure 6: Impulse Responses of Innovation Measures to Max-Share Shock
ICT standardization

New technology book titles

15

percent

percent

2

10

1.5

1

5
0.5

0

0
5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

2

4

quarters

6

8

10

years

Real R&D expenditures

Relative investment price (inverse)
1

1.5

1

percent

percent

0.8
0.6
0.4

0.5
0.2
0

2016 TFP vintage
2007 TFP vintage

0
5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

5

quarters

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

quarters

Notes: Solid black lines are the posterior median estimates from the VAR system estimated with the 2016 vintage of adjusted
TFP. The gray bands correspond to the 16 to 84 percent posterior coverage intervals. The red dash-dotted lines are the
posterior median estimates for the system estimated with the 2007 vintage of adjusted TFP. The red dashed lines correspond
to the 16 to 84 percent posterior coverage intervals. The impulse responses are identified using the max-share identification.

47

Figure 7: Impulse Responses of News Indicators to Max-Share Shock
Real S&P500 index

5year-FFR Spread

7
0.4
6
0.3

percent

percent

5
4
3

0.2

0.1

2
1

0

0
5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

5

10

15

quarters

20

25

Consumer confidence

35

40

Business confidence
5

4

2016 TFP vintage
2007 TFP vintage

4
3

3

percent

percent

30

quarters

2

2
1
0

1

-1
0
5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

5

quarters

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

quarters

Notes: Solid black lines are the posterior median estimates from the VAR system estimated with the 2016 vintage of adjusted
TFP. The gray bands correspond to the 16 to 84 percent posterior coverage intervals. The red dash-dotted lines are the
posterior median estimates for the system estimated with the 2007 vintage of adjusted TFP. The red dashed lines correspond
to the 16 to 84 percent posterior coverage intervals. The impulse responses are identified using the max-share identification.

48

Figure 8: Impulse Responses of Asset Returns and Uncertainty Measures to Max-Share Shock
Excess mkt return

GRR capital return
0.6

1.2
1

percent

percent

0.4
0.8
0.6

0.2

0.4
0

0.2
0

-0.2
2

4

6

8

10

2

4

6

8

quarters

quarters

BOS uncertainty

JLN u12 uncertainty

10

1
0
0

percent

percent

-0.2
-1
-2

-0.4
-0.6

-3

2016 TFP vintage
2007 TFP vintage

-0.8
5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

5

quarters

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

quarters

Notes: Solid black lines are the posterior median estimates from the VAR system estimated with the 2016 vintage of adjusted
TFP. The gray bands correspond to the 16 to 84 percent posterior coverage intervals. The red dash-dotted lines are the
posterior median estimates for the system estimated with the 2007 vintage of adjusted TFP. The red dashed lines correspond
to the 16 to 84 percent posterior coverage intervals. The impulse responses are identified using the max-share identification.

49

Figure 9: Model and Estimated Responses to a News Shock; No Measurement Error and q = 1

Adjusted TFP

Consumption

1

1.5

percent

percent

0.8
0.6
Estimated, MS
Estimated, BS
Model

0.4
0.2
0

1

0.5

0
0

10

20

30

40

0

10

quarters

30

40

30

40

quarters

Hours

Inflation

0.8

0.04
0.02

percent

0.6

percent

20

0.4
0.2

0
-0.02
-0.04

0

-0.06
0

10

20

30

40

0

quarters

10

20

quarters

Notes: Solid lines are the true impulse responses to an estimated news shock in the model. The dashed black lines
are the estimated responses using the max share identification at a 80 quarter horizon, without imposing impact
orthogonality. This is labeled “MS” for “Max Share.” The dashed blue lines are the estimated responses using
the BS identification with a 40 quarter truncation horizon, imposing impact orthogonality between the identified
shock and adjusted TFP. This is labeled “BS”. In the model generating the data, we assume that q = 1, so that
there is a one period lag between when agents observer news and when it impacts true productivity in the model.

50

Figure 10: Model and Estimated Responses to a News Shock; Idiosyncratic Measurement Error
and q = 1

Adjusted TFP

Consumption

1

1.5

percent

percent

0.8
0.6
Estimated, MS
Estimated, BS
Model

0.4

1

0.5

0.2
0

0
0

10

20

30

40

0

10

quarters

Hours

30

40

30

40

Inflation

0.8

0.04
0.02

percent

0.6

percent

20

quarters

0.4
0.2

0
-0.02
-0.04

0

-0.06
0

10

20

30

40

0

quarters

10

20

quarters

Notes: Solid lines are the true impulse responses to an estimated news shock in the model. The dashed black lines
are the estimated responses using the max share identification at a 80 quarter horizon, without imposing impact
orthogonality. This is labeled “MS” for “Max Share.” The dashed blue lines are the estimated responses using
the BS identification with a 40 quarter truncation horizon, imposing impact orthogonality between the identified
shock an adjusted TFP. This is labeled “BS”. In the model generating the data, we assume that q = 1, so that
there is a one period lag between when agents observer news and when it impacts true productivity in the model.

51

Figure 11: Model and Estimated Responses to a News Shock; Systematic Measurement Error and
q=1

Adjusted TFP

Consumption

1

1.5

percent

percent

0.8
0.6
Estimated, MS
Estimated, BS
Model

0.4

1

0.5

0.2
0

0
0

10

20

30

40

0

10

quarters

Hours

30

40

30

40

Inflation

0.6

0.04
0.02

percent

0.4

percent

20

quarters

0.2
0

0
-0.02
-0.04

-0.2

-0.06
0

10

20

30

40

0

quarters

10

20

quarters

Notes: Solid lines are the true impulse responses to an estimated news shock in the model. The dashed black lines
are the estimated responses using the max share identification at a 80 quarter horizon, without imposing impact
orthogonality. This is labeled “MS” for “Max Share.” The dashed blue lines are the estimated responses using
the BS identification with a 40 quarter truncation horizon, imposing impact orthogonality between the identified
shock an adjusted TFP. This is labeled “BS”. In the model generating the data, we assume that q = 1, so that
there is a one period lag between when agents observer news and when it impacts true productivity in the model.

52

Figure 12: Model and Estimated Responses to a News Shock; No Measurement Error and q = 0

Adjusted TFP

Consumption

1

1.5

percent

percent

0.8
0.6
Estimated, MS
Estimated, BS
Model

0.4
0.2
0

1

0.5

0
0

10

20

30

40

0

10

quarters

20

30

40

30

40

quarters

Hours

Inflation

0.8

0.05

percent

percent

0.6
0.4
0.2

0

-0.05

0
-0.2

-0.1
0

10

20

30

40

0

quarters

10

20

quarters

Notes: Solid lines are the true impulse responses to an estimated news shock in the model. The dashed black lines
are the estimated responses using the max share identification at a 80 quarter horizon, without imposing impact
orthogonality. This is labeled “MS” for “Max Share.” The dashed blue lines are the estimated responses using
the BS identification with a 40 quarter truncation horizon, imposing impact orthogonality between the identified
shock an adjusted TFP. This is labeled “BS”. In the model generating the data, we assume that 0, so that there
is a one period lag between when agents observer news and when it impacts true productivity in the model.

53

