NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SHOCKS VS. RESPONSIVENESS:
WHAT DRIVES TIME-VARYING DISPERSION?
David Berger
Joseph Vavra
Working Paper 23143
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23143

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2017

This research was funded in part by the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago
Booth School of Business. We would like to thank the editor and anonymous referees as well as
seminar participants at Princeton, Chicago Booth, Cleveland Fed, Duke Macro Jamboree,
Chicago Fed, SED, NBER SI IFM, Columbia, Purdue, Northwestern, Dallas Fed Uncertainty
Conference, EIEF, CESifo, and Michigan. We would also like to thank our discussant Linda
Tesar as well as Rudi Bachmann, Nick Bloom, Ariel Burstein, Jeff Campbell, Gabe ChodorowReich, Larry Christiano, Allan Collard-Wexler, Marty Eichenbaum, Tarek Hassan, Matthias
Kehrig, Oleg Itskhoki, Amy Meek, Emi Nakamura, Brent Neiman, Sergio Rebelo, Gita Gopinath,
Johannes Stroebel and Rozi Ulics. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by David Berger and Joseph Vavra. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Shocks vs. Responsiveness: What Drives Time-Varying Dispersion?
David Berger and Joseph Vavra
NBER Working Paper No. 23143
February 2017
JEL No. E10,E3,E31,E52,F3,F31
ABSTRACT
The dispersion of many economic variables is countercyclical. What drives this fact? Greater
dispersion could arise from greater volatility of shocks or from agents responding more to shocks
of constant size. Without data separately measuring exogenous shocks and endogenous responses,
a theoretical debate between these explanations has emerged. In this paper, we provide novel
identification using the open-economy environment: using confidential BLS microdata, we
document a robust positive relationship between exchange rate pass-through and the dispersion of
item-level price changes. We show this relationship arises naturally in models with time-varying
responsiveness but is at odds with models featuring volatility shocks.

David Berger
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
david.berger@northwestern.edu
Joseph Vavra
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
joseph.vavra@chicagobooth.edu

1

Introduction
The cross-sectional dispersion of many economic variables is countercyclical, but there is much debate

over the source of this empirical phenomenon.1 This is because existing research measures the dispersion
of endogenous variables, which will reflect some combination of exogenous shocks and firms’ optimal
responses to those shocks. As such, greater dispersion of endogenous outcomes could occur because
exogenous shocks get bigger (what we refer to as greater volatility) or because firms respond more to
shocks which are the same size (what we refer to as greater responsiveness).2
With only data on outcomes and not the separate contributions of exogenous shocks and endogenous
responses, a theoretical debate between these explanations has emerged. Many models such as Bloom
et al. (2012) and Vavra (2014) assume that firms draw exogenous idiosyncratic shocks with time-varying
volatility in order to generate time-variation in dispersion. On the other side of the debate, papers such as
Bachmann and Moscarini (2012), Ilut et al. (2014), Baley and Blanco (2016) and Munro (2016) propose a
more varied set of mechanisms such as learning, ambiguity aversion, incomplete information and customer
search to generate variation in dispersion through the responsiveness channel. Resolving this debate is
important for understanding the nature of business cycles and shocks. At stake is the empirical viability
of one potential source of economic fluctuations: exogenous changes in volatility have been proposed as
a possible cause of business cycles. If it is responsiveness which is instead reacting to the cycle, then
time-varying dispersion is merely a symptom of business cycles arising from some other source.
Making empirical progress differentiating time-varying responsiveness from time-varying volatility is
difficult, but we show that the open economy environment can be used to provide identification. This is
because it provides a large and observable cost shock, the nominal exchange rate, which can be used to
differentiate between these channels. In the first half of the paper, we use confidential BLS import price
data to document that item-level price change dispersion is both countercyclical and highly correlated
with exchange rate pass-through. In the second half of the paper, we use a workhorse open-economy
model to show that these facts strongly support time-varying responsiveness over time-varying volatility.
The intuition is straightforward: increasing responsiveness increases both dispersion and pass-through. In
contrast, when volatility increases, dispersion increases but pass-through actually declines as price changes
become dominated by idiosyncratic forces. Indeed, we estimate our model using indirect inference and
show that time-varying responsiveness can match a variety of facts in BLS micro data while time-varying
volatility is strongly rejected. In more detail, our paper proceeds in three steps.
First, we start by documenting new facts. We begin by showing that, like many other economic
outcomes, the dispersion of item-level price changes in BLS import price data is strongly countercyclical.
For example, Figure 1 shows that the interquartile (IQR) range of price changes in our data moves
substantially across time and exhibits a strong negative correlation with real GDP growth. Second, the
dispersion of price changes is highly correlated with exchange rate pass-through. As a simple illustration
of this fact, we divide our entire sample into 8-month long windows and compute the IQR of price
1

Countercyclical dispersion is found in Bloom (2009) (sales growth), Bloom et al. (2012) (revenue TFP and employment
growth), and Vavra (2014) (prices). Bachmann and Bayer (2014) finds procyclical dispersion of investment rates, but as we
discuss in footnote 20, this is highly consistent with our results since their measure includes zeros.
2
To avoid confusion, we distinguish between “dispersion” and “volatility” throughout the paper. We define dispersion as
the spread of endogenous outcome variables, while volatility is the spread of exogenous shocks.

2

Figure 1: Price Change Dispersion is Countercyclical
0.02

0.14
0.13

0.015
Correlation = -0.47

0.12

0.01

0.11
0.005
0.1
0
0.09
-0.005
0.08
-0.01

0.07
0.06

-0.015

IQR (Left)
Real GDP Growth (Right)

1995

2000

2005

2010

-0.02
2015

This figure shows the IQR (75-25 range) of all non-zero price changes in our benchmark sample, described below, and
chained real GDP growth from 1993m10 to 2015m1. The monthly IQR is averaged quarterly for consistency with GDP
measures, and both series are smoothed with a 3-period moving average.

changes and our preferred measure of exchange rate pass-through separately in each window.3 The
resulting scatter plot of IQR vs. pass-through in Figure 2 shows the strong positive relationship between
these variables. Since the time-series graph in Figure 1 shows that the IQR in the Great Recession is an
outlier, we include Great Recession observations separately as blue squares in Figure 2 to show that the
pass-through-IQR relationship is not driven by this single recession.
Figure 2: Dispersion vs. pass-through
0.45
0.4
0.35

Pass-through

0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
-0.05
0.06

0.08

0.1

0.12

0.14

IQR

This figure shows the IQR of all non-zero price changes against our preferred measure of exchange rate pass-through,
described below. Both statistics are computed separately in a series of 8-month disjoint windows which span our sample
period. Windows which have a majority of months during the Great Recession, as defined by NBER, are shown in blue.
The black regression line includes all observations while the red-dotted line excludes Great Recession observations. The
regression with all observations has a slope coefficient of 3.625, t-stat of 3.36 and R2 of 0.27.
3

Appendix Figure A.1 shows similar patterns hold for different window lengths.

3

This positive relationship between price change dispersion and pass-through is extremely robust. We
show it is not driven by changes in the frequency of price adjustment, secular trends, changes in exchange
rate volatility, by particular products or countries, or by mechanical reverse causation, and it holds under a
variety of alternative specifications designed to deal with certain misspecification concerns.4 We also show
that although price change dispersion is countercyclical, our patterns reflect a dispersion-pass-through relationship not a business cycle-pass-through relationship. In particular, the positive relationship between
dispersion and pass-through holds after controlling for various business cycle indicators. It also holds
at the sector-level after controlling for time dummies to flexibly absorb common aggregate variation,
and similar results arise at the individual item level: items which exhibit disperse price changes across
time also exhibit high exchange rate pass-through when they change prices. Together these results allay
concerns about spurious correlation and the effects of confounding aggregate shocks.
If one views exchange rate pass-through as a simple reduced form measure of responsiveness, our
empirical results then suggest an important link between countercyclical dispersion and responsiveness.
However, such “suggestive” evidence should be viewed with caution. While pass-through is a widely
computed moment in the open-economy literature, interpreting this moment and its relationship with
dispersion requires imposing additional structure.5
In the second part of the paper, we move in this direction by adopting the flexible price framework
of Burstein and Gopinath (2014). In this model, the mapping from structural parameters to observables
is straightforward, which allows us to starkly illustrate the nature of the identification problem as well
as its solution. With flexible prices, the dispersion of price changes across firms is determined by two
parameters: i) the volatility of idiosyncratic shocks and ii) the response of optimal prices to shocks. This
means that changes in dispersion could be explained by changes in either parameter. However, these
parameters have very different implications for exchange rate pass-through. Increasing volatility increases
price change dispersion but has no effect on pass-through, since optimal pass-through is scale-invariant.6
In contrast, increasing responsiveness simultaneously increases dispersion and pass-through. Thus, in
this simple flexible price environment, changes in responsiveness can explain the positive relationship
between dispersion and pass-through observed in the data, while changes in volatility cannot.
In the final part of the paper, we turn to a quantitative environment with more realistic pricing frictions. In this environment, the mapping from structural parameters to observables is more complicated.
However, we show that price frictions only amplify our previous conclusions: while increases in responsiveness continue to increase both dispersion and pass-through, increases in volatility increase dispersion
but lead to a counterfactual decrease in pass-through. This is because when the volatility of idiosyncratic shocks increases, exchange rate movements become less relevant for optimal price adjustment and
measured pass-through (conditional on adjusting a firms price) declines.7
4
In particular, one might be concerned that this positive correlation reflects mechanical reverse causality whereby increases
in pass-through make prices more sensitive to exchange rate shocks and increase price change dispersion. However, we show
in our quantitative results that this mechanical effect on variance is completely negligible and plays no role in our results.
The intuition is that in the data the variance of price changes is orders of magnitude larger than the variance of exchange
rate changes, which means that the variance of price changes is dominated by idiosyncratic shocks and so changing the
sensitivity to exchange rates has essentially no effect on overall price change dispersion. This also means that changes in the
volatility of exchange rates across time have little effect on dispersion.
5
See e.g. Burstein and Gopinath (2014) for a detailed discussion of the mapping between pass-through regressions and a
variety of commonly used models of incomplete pass-through as well as associated pitfalls.
6
That is, doubling the size of a cost shock doubles the optimal price change.
7
More formally, as we show in section 4.2 state-dependent pricing implies an upward statistical “selection bias” in our

4

In addition, this quantitative model provides a laboratory which we use to explicitly test the validity
of our earlier empirical methodology. In particular, there are valid concerns that our empirical patterns
might be driven by censoring, small samples, sample turnover, or misspecification. We address these
concerns head-on by formally estimating our quantitative model using indirect inference to match our
empirical regressions. In doing so, we simulate data from our model, replicate BLS sample sizes and
sampling and then run regressions on this simulated data identical to those in our empirical work. This
indirect inference estimation procedure allows us to rule out many potential concerns with our empirical
results, since the same biases should arise when running regressions on simulated and actual data. Put
differently, as usual with indirect inference, identification does not require our empirical regressions to be
correctly specified or have any structural interpretation in the true model. It merely requires that changes
in structural parameters manifest themselves distinctly in our reduce form regressions, and this is indeed
the case: our estimation formally rejects variation in volatility in favor of variation in responsiveness.
What does variation in responsiveness represent? As described above, a variety of mechanisms have
been proposed to endogenously generate countercyclical dispersion. In Appendix B, we show that the
forces in these models all map to the same responsiveness parameter that is key to our qualitative results.8
This means that our empirical strategy rejects volatility shocks in favor of responsiveness shocks, but it
cannot isolate a particular model of responsiveness. However, this also means that our qualitative insights
do not require taking a stand on a particular model of responsiveness, and in reality it seems likely that
many of these responsiveness forces coexist and complement each other.
Moving from qualitative results to quantitative results necessarily comes with some tradeoff: in order
to formally estimate our model and reach conclusions about magnitudes, we must impose more structure
on the data generating process. Since it is infeasible to simultaneously include all potential mechanisms
that can generate countercyclical responsiveness, we focus solely on variation in responsiveness which
arises from movements in the “super-elasticity” of demand in Kimball’s preferences.9 We focus on this
source of responsiveness shocks for three reasons: 1) This is an extremely standard specification in the
open economy literature for generating incomplete pass-through, which has been used to rationalize a
number of related cross-sectional pass-through facts. It is important that matching our new facts not come
at the cost of missing existing results. 2) It is parsimonious and straightforward to solve numerically.
The full version of our quantitative model includes four aggregate and two idiosyncratic states and
requires global solution methods in an equilibrium environment, so estimation would be infeasible in more
complicated settings such as those with learning and incomplete information. 3) It fully nests existing
models in the literature, such as Vavra (2014), which explain countercyclical dispersion via countercyclical
volatility, and so it gives these models equal footing in matching our new empirical evidence.
It is difficult to directly assess the plausibility of our estimated super-elasticity shocks, since no
empirical estimates of this statistic exist.10 However, we show that these relatively simple shocks produce
observable series which are quite reasonable in many dimensions. In particular, after picking exchange
exchange rate pass-through regression since firms are more likely to adjust when the exchange rate and idiosyncratic shock
reinforce each other. As idiosyncratic volatility rises, this bias declines and our measure of pass-through falls.
8
More broadly, any force which changes the response of firms’ desired prices to cost shocks rather than the size of cost
shocks should deliver similar implications.
9
That is the elasticity of the elasticity of demand with respect to a firm’s relative price. See Klenow and Willis (2006)
for the first use of this terminology.
10
Note that we would require time-series estimates of super-elasticity. Given the controversy over the cyclicality of the
elasticity of demand, it is not surprising that no estimates exist measuring the behavior of the super-elasticity across time.

5

rates in our model to match data from 1993-2015, we show that we are able to well-match the behavior
of the IQR, overall inflation, import inflation, output growth and adjustment frequency over our 19932015 sample with only super-elasticity and nominal demand shocks. The model also matches time-series
variation in exchange rate pass-through which is not directly targeted, and it generates markup movements
across time which are relatively small and well-within the range of estimates in the literature. Thus, we
conclude that even though super-elasticity movements cannot be directly measured in the data, such
shocks produce reasonable results along dimensions which are observable.11
It is important to note that our analysis focuses on import prices, so one should be cautious when
extrapolating to other contexts. However, several recent papers reach similar conclusions in other environments and suggest that our conclusions indeed have external validity. First, Fleer et al. (2015) extends
our analysis from imports to broader consumer prices in Switzerland and finds similar results. Moving
beyond prices, Ilut et al. (2014) shows that individual firms’ employment responds more to idiosyncratic
TFP changes during recessions, and Decker et al. (2016) shows that secular reallocation trends in US
manufacturing are driven by changes in responsiveness rather than changes in the volatility of shocks.
Finally, a growing literature argues for cyclical changes in market structure and demand which should
lead to exactly the sort of time-varying responsiveness necessary to explain our results.12
Our paper is related to some recent empirical work trying to determine if aggregate volatility is a
source of, or response to, business cycles. These papers study aggregate time-series volatility rather than
cross-sectional dispersion, and so they use identification strategies which focus on relationships between
aggregate variables. This makes them quite distinct from our micro data based strategy.13 For example,
Baker and Bloom (2013) uses natural disasters to instrument for stock market first and second moments
in order to assess their independent effects on GDP growth, and Ludvigson et al. (2016) and Berger et al.
(2016) use time-series VAR strategies to explore similar questions of causality.
Within the pass-through literature, we are most closely related to Gopinath and Itskhoki (2010). The
most important distinction is that we focus on time-series variation in pass-through and explore its link to
the dispersion of price changes. In contrast, their paper focuses on long-run differences in pass-through
across different items and links this to the frequency of price adjustment. Our focus on time-series
variation leads us to alternative empirical specifications which are better suited for this purpose as well
as to the estimation of a model with a variety of aggregate shocks. Nevertheless our results are broadly
complementary, and we ultimately find that similar structural forces can help to jointly explain both
their cross-sectional and our time-series evidence.

2
2.1

Empirical Results
Data Description

In this section we describe the data employed in this study. We use confidential micro data on import
prices collected by the Bureau of Labor Statistics for the period October 1993-January 2015. This data
11
It is also useful to note that rejecting volatility shocks does not necessarily require one to accept our particular formulation
of responsiveness variation. A model without either super-elasticity or volatility shocks actually does better than a model
with volatility shocks at matching empirical dispersion-pass-through relationships.
12
See e.g. Stroebel and Vavra (2016), Munro (2016) and Kaplan and Menzio (2016).
13
Bachmann et al. (2016) explore a useful related micro exercise looking at the behavior of investment expectation errors,
but since investment is highly endogenous their evidence cannot distinguish changing responsiveness from changing volatility.

6

is collected on a monthly basis and contains information on import prices for very detailed items over
time. This data set has previously been used by Gopinath and Rigobon (2008), Gopinath et al. (2010),
Gopinath and Itskhoki (2010), Neiman (2010), and Berger et al. (2012). Below, we provide a brief
description of how the data is collected. See the IPP (Import Price Program) Data Collection Manual
for a much more detailed description (U.S. Department of Labor, 2005).
The target universe of the price index consists of all items purchased from abroad by U.S. residents
(imports). An ”item” in the data set is defined as a unique combination of a firm, a product and the
country from which a product is shipped. An example of the type of item in our data is “Lot # 12345,
Brand X Black Mary Jane, Quick On/Quick Off Mary Jane, for girls, ankle height upper, TPR synthetic
outsole, fabric insole, Tricot Lining, PU uppers, Velcro Strap.”14
Price data are collected monthly for approximately 10,000 imported items. The BLS collects “free on
board” (fob) prices at the foreign port of exportation before insurance, freight or duty are added, and
almost 90% of U.S. imports have a reported price in dollars.
The BLS collects prices monthly using voluntary confidential surveys, which are usually conducted
by mail. Respondents are asked for prices of actual transactions that occur as close as possible to the
first day of the month. Typically a company specifies if a price has been contracted and the period for
which it is contracted, including the months in which actual trade will take place. For the periods when
the price is contracted, the BLS will use the contracted price without contacting the firm directly and
enters a flag for whether the good is traded or not in those months.15
As with all surveys, there are some concerns about data quality. However, there are many reasons
to believe that reporting is accurate. First, the BLS is very concerned with ensuring high data quality.
In the first step of data collection, the BLS negotiates with the company over the number of price quotes
reported to limit the reporting burden.

The BLS also contacts a respondent if the reported price is

unchanged or the item has not traded for 12 months, which helps reduce misreporting. Second, Gopinath
and Rigobon (2008) uses the Anthrax scare of 2001, which forced the IPP to conduct interviews by phone,
as a natural experiment. They found almost no difference in reported price setting around these months.
Finally, simple forms of measurement error would, if anything, work against our finding.16
We focus on a subset of the data that satisfies the following three criteria: 1) We restrict attention
to market transactions and exclude intrafirm transactions, as we are interested in price-setting driven by
market forces.17 2) We require that a good have two price changes during its life so that we can measure
pass-through of cumulative exchange rate movements over a completed spell into the item’s new price.18
3) We restrict attention to imports whose prices are invoiced in dollars rather than in foreign currency.
We use data from all countries and all products, however we exclude commodities since these items have
little market power.

We restrict attention to dollar-priced items, so as to focus on the relationship

between dispersion and pass-through after removing variation due to currency choice. Gopinath et al.
14

This example is taken from Gopinath and Rigobon (2008).
According to Gopinath and Rigobon (2008), the BLS contacted 87% of the items at least once every 3 months, with
45% of the items contacted on a monthly basis. 100% of the items are contacted at least once a year.
16
In a frictionless price environment, it is straightforward to show that measurement error in the exchange rate leads to
a negative relationship between pass-through and dispersion, while measurement error in price changes and thus dispersion
attenuates any fundamental relationship. We have confirmed in our quantitative model that similar results obtain in the
presence of nominal frictions.
17
Neiman (2010) shows that pass-through depends on whether transactions take place within or between firms.
18
Some alternative pass-through specifications we explore allow us to relax this requirement and it does not change our
results. We also show that all results are robust to only including items with many price changes.
15

7

(2010) has shown large differences in pass-through across goods invoiced in different currencies, but the
vast majority of products in the database are invoiced in dollars rather than foreign currency.
Overall these sample choices conform with the now large literature studying exchange rate passthrough from a micro perspective. In Appendix A we provide further statistics on the properties of our
benchmark sample and additional information on each cut of the data. More importantly, we show that
our results are robust to a variety of alternative sample selection criteria.

2.2

Measuring Dispersion and pass-through

Our primary dispersion measure is the interquartile range (IQR) of all non-zero log price changes in a
given month.19 The IQR is robust to outliers and has been widely used in the literature, but we show
throughout that all results are similar when using other measures of dispersion such as the standard
deviation of price changes. Since this dispersion measure varies across months as the distribution of
price changes moves, we refer to it as “month-level dispersion”. Measuring dispersion excluding zeros
helps to isolate mechanical effects of frequency from changes in the price change distribution conditional
on adjustment, and is ultimately crucial for identification.20 More specifically, since the frequency of
adjustment is low, increasing it leads to an increase in dispersion of price changes when zeros are included,
even if price always change by the same amount when adjusting. Measuring dispersion excluding zeros
and frequency separately allows us to explore their independent relationships with pass-through.
While we focus on changes in month-level dispersion, we also document that similar dispersion-passthrough relationships hold across items by calculating what we call “item-level” dispersion: the standard
deviation of all non-zero price changes for a particular item across time.21
Our benchmark measure of exchange rate pass-through is standard in the literature. In particular, we
focus on what Gopinath and Itskhoki (2010) calls medium-run pass-through (MRPT), which measures
the fraction of exchange rate movements passed through into an item’s price after one price adjustment.
Specifically, we estimate the following regression on adjusting prices:
0
∆pi,t = β∆et + Zi,t
γ + i,t

(1)

Here, ∆pi,t is item i’s log price change, ∆et is the cumulative change in the bilateral exchange rate
0 is a vector of item and country level controls.22 We estimate this
since item i’s last price change, and Zi,t

regression with country and sector fixed effects.23 The coefficient β measures the fraction of cumulated
exchange rate movements “passed-through” to an item’s price when adjusting.24
19

Similar results obtain if we calculate the average IQR within sectors instead of across all price changes.
See Bachmann and Bayer (2014) for related discussion. They show that the standard deviation of investment rates
including zeros is procyclical while the standard deviation conditional on “spike” adjustment is countercyclical. This difference is driven by changes in the frequency of adjustment spikes. Overall, their conclusions are highly consistent with other
patterns of counteryclical dispersion and could similarly be driven by either changing volatility or responsiveness.
21
We use the standard deviation since items typically have a small number of price changes and IQR is undefined.
22
As usual, there are some concerns about interpreting exchange rate movements as exogenous, which is one reason for
including controls for macro conditions. In addition, we are mainly interested in the relative ranking of pass-through across
firms and time-periods rather than the absolute level, so endogeneity is less of a concern. Finally, our monthly data means we
are identifying off of high frequency variation in exchange rate movements, which are hard to relate to anything observable.
23
The sector fixed effects are at the primary strata lower (PSL) level, defined by the BLS as either the 2 or 4-digit
harmonized tariff code. The other baseline controls are U.S. GDP and CPI and foreign country CPI.
24
Holding the frequency of price adjustment constant, a decline in β thus implies that the real exchange rate moves more
strongly with the nominal exchange rate.
20

8

The use of MRPT, which conditions on price adjustment, is important for our identification argument:
in our quantitative results we show that increasing responsiveness increases dispersion, frequency and
MRPT. In contrast, increasing volatility increases dispersion and frequency but not MRPT. If one instead
measures pass-through without conditioning on price adjustment, the increase in frequency when volatility
rises will cause pass-through to rise. This means that pass-through specifications which do not condition
on price adjustment cannot disentangle greater volatility from greater responsiveness.
The results from estimating average pass-through for the entire sample using (1) are shown in column
1 of Table 1. Consistent with prior literature, we find that average MRPT is low. When a price changes,
it passes through only 0.154% of a 1% change in the nominal exchange rate.25

2.3

Baseline Results

Figure 1 shows that price change dispersion varies substantially across time. However, as discussed
above, it is impossible to tell from Figure 1 whether this variation is driven by changes in the volatility
of exogenous shocks or in the endogenous responsiveness to those shocks. We now document the central
empirical fact of our paper, that we show in subsequent sections allows us to discriminate between these
explanations: time periods with greater price change dispersion also exhibit greater exchange rate passthrough. To test for a time-series relationship between price change dispersion and MRPT we begin by
splitting our sample into quintiles by the value of IQRt and then estimate equation (1) separately using
only observations in each quintile. Figure 3 shows that pass-through more than quadruples from the
lowest quintile of month-level dispersion to the highest quintile.26
Figure 3: Dispersion vs. pass-through

0.25

Pass-through

0.2

0.15

0.1

0.05

0
0.08

0.085

0.09

0.095

0.1

0.105

0.11

Interquartile Range

This figure shows separate estimates of regression (1) in each of 5-quintiles by the value of IQRt . All regressions have
country × PSL fixed effects and robust standard errors are clustered at the country × PSL level. We also include controls
for foreign CPI growth, US gdp growth and US CPI growth. 95% confidence intervals are shown with dotted lines, and the
average IQR value in each quintile is shown on the x-axis.
25

Existing papers typically find pass-through coefficients closer to 0.24. Our slightly lower number is due to the use
of bilateral exchange rates, all countries rather than OECD countries, and the use of a moderately longer sample. Using
trade-weighted currencies and OECD countries increases MRPT to close to 0.3.
26
Figure A.2 in Appendix A.1 shows that estimating this binned-pass-through relationship more non-parametrically using
100 overlapping bins produces extremely similar results.

9

Of course, the months in each IQR bin differ from each other in many ways besides their month-level
dispersion. To what extent is the positive relationship between pass-through and dispersion driven by
changes in other observables? To explore this, we move from binned regressions to a more structured
regression that interacts exchange rate movements with dispersion which we use to show that the positive
dispersion-pass-through continues to hold after controlling for a wide variety of time-varying covariates.
In particular, we begin by running the following regression:
0
∆pi,t = β0 ∆et + β1 IQRt × ∆et + λIQRt + Zi,t
γ + +i,t ,

(2)

where all variables are defined as in Regression (1). Table 1 column (2) shows the results of this regression
with no additional covariates. Consistent with the results in Figure 3, an increase in IQR is associated
with a large increase in pass-through. To ease interpretation, coefficients in all tables are standardized,
so the 0.07 coefficient on IQR × ∆e means that a one standard deviation increase in IQR is associated
with an increase in MRPT of seven percentage points. This is a very substantial effect relative to average
passthrough of 14.3% given by the coefficient on ∆e. For example, it implies that a 10% increase in
exchange rates occurring during a month at the 5th percentile of IQR will lead adjusting prices to
increase by an average of only 0.3% while the same exchange rate increase occurring during a month at
the 95th percentile of IQR will lead prices to rise by 2.6%.
Since our MRPT specification conditions on price adjustment and Gopinath and Itskhoki (2010) show
an important relationship between frequency and long-run pass-through, it is natural to ask whether IQR
effects are driven by changes in frequency. Column (3) provides evidence that this is not the case. This
regression adds controls for f reqt and f reqt × ∆e and shows that IQR effects are unchanged.27 While
frequency is perhaps the most obvious potential confounding effect, many other variables also move across
time. In column (4), we allow pass-through to vary with a wide array of additional controls. In particular,
we introduces interactions of ∆e with the frequency of product substitution, the time-series volatility of
the exchange rate, seasonality, secular time trends and the business cycle, as measured by GDP growth.28
Product substitution can potentially affect measured pass-through as shown in Nakamura and Steinsson (2012), and changes in the volatility of exchange rates might affect both dispersion and pass-through.
We allow for secular trends since a prior debate using aggregate data has sometimes found such trends,
the presence of which could lead to spurious relationships with dispersion.29 Finally, since Figure 1 shows
that IQR is countercyclical, we control for GDP growth to show that our fact is indeed a dispersionpass-through relationship not just a business cycle-pass-through relationship. In Appendix A.1, we show
results are similar with a variety of other business cycle controls.
Introducing all of these controls mildly reduces the one SD effect of IQR on pass-through from 0.07
27

Controlling for frequency also partially proxies for changes in the importance of price-spell censoring, which can in turn
potentially affect measures of both pass-through and dispersion through selection effects as described in Section 4.2.
28
The time-series volatility of the exchange rate is measured as the standard-deviation of the bilateral exchange rate
associated with a particular item’s country of origin in the 12-month period around the month of its price change. Seasonality
is captured with 12 month dummies, interacted with exchange rate changes. Secular changes are modeled as a linear trend
in pass-through, but similar results obtain when using a quadratic or cubic trend. Real GDP growth is given by chained
GDP growth in the quarter corresponding to a given month’s price change.
29
For example, Marazzi et al. (2005) argues that aggregate measures of pass-through have declined, but Hellerstein et al.
(2006) show this is largely driven by commodities. Using our micro data, we find no evidence of trends in MRPT regardless
of the treatment of commodities. This difference between our micro results and Marazzi et al. (2005) arises in part because
their study uses aggregate data which means that their pass-through statistic measures f requency× MRPT rather than just
MRPT, and frequency did have a declining trend over the period they studied.

10

to 0.05 but our effect of interest remains economically large and highly statistically significant.30 Thus,
the positive relationship between dispersion and pass-through is robust to including a large set of timevarying covariates. The final columns of Table 1 show that our results also hold when using the standard
deviation as an alternative measure of dispersion instead of the IQR. In Appendix A.1, we repeat results
separately for imports from individual countries as well as for different product classifications to show
that changing composition of the sample along these dimensions does not drive our results.

2.4
2.4.1

Robustness
Does the Great Recession Drive All Results?

Since the increase in IQR during the Great Recession shown in Figure 1 is a large outlier, it is important
to show that our results are not driven by this single period. In Table 2, we repeat our regressions
excluding the Great Recession.31 We continue to find very large and significant effects of dispersion
on pass-through even outside the Great Recession. While the coefficients are somewhat smaller, it is
important to note that units in our tables are standardized so that the regression coefficients represent
one-standard deviation effects. Most of the decline in the coefficient on IQR × ∆e reflects the fact that
IQR has a lower standard deviation outside of the Great Recession rather than a decline in the response
of pass-through to a given change in IQR: computing the elasticity of pass-through to an increase in
IQR, instead of one standard deviation effects, delivers an elasticity of 2.57 over the entire sample and
2.23 when excluding the Great Recession. These large and similar elasticities are not surprising in light
of the scatter plot in Figure 2, which we return to below.
We now show that the time-series relationship between dispersion and pass-through also holds within
sectors. This provides additional evidence that our results are not driven solely by the Great Recession or
by any other confounding aggregate shock since each sector exhibits different IQR time-series. In column
(1) of Table 3, we repeat Regression (2), but replace IQR with IQRsector , which is the interquartile
range of all price changes in an item’s one-digit sector in a given month. The effect of IQRsector is
large and significant. However, it is possible that this is driven by movements in IQRsector that are
common across sectors. That is, if IQRsector increases for all sectors then so does IQR, which means
the positive coefficient in Column (1) could potentially just be picking up the previously documented
IQR effects. Column (2) shows that this is not the case since IQR and IQRsector both independently
increase pass-through. However, this behavior could still be driven by the response to a confounding
shock which increases pass-through, if IQR and IQRsector also increase at the same time. To eliminate
the effect of any common shock which moves both series, in Columns (3) and (4) we include only changes
in IQRsector relative to changes in IQR. That is, in these specifications we ask whether sectors that
had a relative increase in dispersion have a relative increase in pass-through. Column (3) measures this
using the absolute deviation of IQRsector from IQR while Column (4) uses the percentage deviation.
Indeed in both cases, relative increases in sectoral dispersion increase relative pass-through. Finally, in
Column (5), we redo the regression in Column (1) but with the addition of month-date dummies and
30

It is unsurprising that introducing a large set of covariates which have previously been shown to have importance for
pass-through would absorb some of the initial effects of IQR. Nevertheless, this attenuation is small, and we actually cannot
reject equality of coefficients at conventional significance levels.
31
We exclude all price changes which occur during the Great Recession, but some price changes which occur shortly after
the Great Recession end might be changing from a price previously determined during the Great Recession. Repeating
results using only completed price spells which are entirely outside of the Great Recession delivers nearly identical results.

11

month-date dummies interacted with ∆e. This is the most stringent test of sector specific effects since in
this specification, month dummies absorb the effects of any common aggregate shocks which affect passthrough, not just shocks which change aggregate IQR. For example, if the Great Recession increases
overall pass-through and IQR through any mechanism, this will be absorbed by these dummies and
will not generate a positive coefficient on IQRsector × ∆e, since that coefficient is only identified off of
differences across sectors within a given calendar month.
Across all specifications, there is an economically and statistically significant positive relationship
between dispersion within sectors and pass-through. Together this greatly alleviates any concerns that
our results are spurious or explained by failure to control for confounding shocks.32
2.4.2

Misspecification

Our baseline regression 2 is intentionally simple both to illustrate effects transparently and to align
our results with much of the existing micro oriented pass-through literature. In particular, we impose a
simple linear relationship between pass-through and IQR and assume that only exchange rate movements
accumulated over the current spell affect current price changes. The presence of large shocks to exchange
rates or IQR could make the first assumption problematic while strategic complementarities or any other
force which leads firms to adjust gradually to exchange rate movements could violate the second. More
generally, misspecification in our exchange rate regression could lead us to falsely conclude that there
is a fundamental relationship between dispersion and pass-through when none exists under a correct
specification. We address this concern in two ways. 1) In this section, we show that our empirical results
are robust to a wide variety of alternative specifications which are less sensitive to the above concerns.
2) When we turn to quantitative estimation, we use an indirect inference procedure which maps true
structural relationships into the same reduced form regression we use in our empirical analysis to show
that misspecification within that structural model cannot explain our results.
In Column (1) we show that the positive interaction between IQR and pass-through is not just picking
up some non-linearity in the true pass-through specification together with correlation between IQR and
∆e by including (∆e)2 and (IQR)2 in the regression. That is, we allow for non-linearities as captured
by a full second order Taylor expansion for each of our effects. In Column (2) we include non-linear
effects of IQR on pass-through but find they are insignificant. Column (3) instead allows for the effects
of IQR on pass-through to depend non-linearly on ∆e. Unsurprisingly, pass-through rises with the size
of the exchange rate shock, and we find similar interactions with dispersion. In Columns (4) and (5)
we include cumulative exchange rate movements over prior price spells rather than just over the current
spell. Consistent with our theoretical model in 5, increasing IQR increases the response of prices to both
current and lagged exchange rate movements, but the effects become weaker at longer lags as items have
essentially reached their long-run pass-through after several price changes. In Columns (6) and (7) we
split our sample separately into observations with positive and negative exchange rate movements since
there might be asymmetry in the response of prices to exchange rate shocks of opposite signs and the sign
of exchange rate movements might also be correlated with dispersion. However, we find strong positive
relationships in both sub-samples. Column (8) shows results only including items with 5+ price changes
32
The estimates in Column (2) suggest that roughly 2/3 of the pass-through-dispersion relationship is driven by factors
common to all sectors while 1/3 is driven by sector specific factors. Since columns (3)-(6) remove these common effects it is
not surprising that they deliver pass-through-dispersion relationships which are somewhat dampened relative to Table 1.

12

to address concerns that our results might be driven by censoring or biases induced by conditioning on
price adjustment.33 Since these items have many price changes, selection and censoring are much less
of a concern but results are nearly identical to our baseline. In Column (9) we instead restrict to items
with few price changes and again find a positive relationship.34 . In Appendix Table A5 we also show that
results are similar for pass-through specifications which do not condition on price adjustment and so are
unaffected by censoring. As noted in Section 2.2, such specifications are less useful for our identification
purposes but can still be helpful for diagnosing misspecification. Finally, column (10) runs a median
regression instead of OLS to again address misspecification concerns as well as limit the influence of
outliers. This continues to deliver a strong positive relationship between IQR and pass-through.
2.4.3

Cross-Item Evidence

In our final set of robustness results, we show that our results extend from the time-series to the crosssection. In particular, we calculate “item-level” dispersion: the standard deviation of all non-zero price
changes for a particular item across time and then show that item-level dispersion is positively correlated
with that item’s exchange rate pass-through. This robustness check is useful in two ways: 1) When we
move to structural models, we will show that variation in responsiveness drives a positive relationship
between dispersion and pass-through. Gopinath and Itskhoki (2010) argue that heterogeneity in responsiveness across items is crucial for understanding long-run frequency-pass-through differences in the
cross-section. Under this hypothesis, we should also see a positive dispersion-pass-through relationship
across items in the data. 2) More importantly, if items differ in their dispersion and pass-through, then
we want to ensure that the time-series relationship between dispersion and pass-through is not driven by
changes in sample composition across time.
Table 5 shows that there is indeed a positive relationship between the standard deviation of item
level price changes and pass-through. Furthermore, this relationship is not driven by differences in the
frequency of adjustment across items, and both month-level dispersion (IQR) and item-level dispersion
(XSD) have independent positive effects on pass-through. This means that our time-series effects are
not explained by composition shifts from low dispersion and pass-through items to high dispersion and
pass-through items across time. In Appendix A.1 we show similar results using a less-structured bin
regression as in Figure 3 and robustness to a number of the issues raised above.

3

Time-Variation in pass-through

In the previous section we documented a robust link between exchange rate pass-through and microeconomic price change dispersion.

Before demonstrating how our empirical fact can help discriminate

between time-varying volatility and time-varying responsiveness as sources of time-varying dispersion,
we first argue that our fact is also interesting per se.

In particular, we show that an implication of

the positive correlation between dispersion and pass-through is that there is large variation in exchange
rate pass-through at business cycle frequencies. That is, pass-through is not a single number; it varies
significantly over time and is high when dispersion is high.
33

Results are similar as this threshold is increased to 10 or 15 price changes, but sample sizes decline rapidly.
Unsurprisingly, selecting on items with few changes attenuates all results modestly since overall pass-through is also
lower.
34

13

The results from the previous section allow us to construct implied time-series for exchange rate
pass-through by multiplying observed variables by their estimated effects on pass-through. For example,
using regression specification (2) we estimate pass-through in each period t as Md
RP T t = βb0 + βb1 IQRt .
Figure 4: Dispersion vs. pass-through
IQR effects

All Effects
0.02

0.4

0
0.2
-0.02
95

00

05

10

15

95

00

05

10

15

Pass-through (left)
GDP growth (right)

All Effects Except IQR
0.02

0.4

0
0.2
-0.02
95

00

05

10

15

This figure shows separate estimates of pass-through across time plotted against GDP growth, using versions of (2). The
upper left panel allows pass-through to vary only with IQR. The upper right panel allows pass-through to vary with IQR,
frequency, the volatility of exchange rates and real GDP growth and the bottom panel allows pass-through to vary with each
of these variables except IQR.

The identifying assumption in this specification is that the only thing that varies across time that
affects exchange rate pass-through is IQR. The left hand panel of Figure 4 shows the resulting estimates
for exchange rate pass-through under this specification is strongly countercyclical. During the height of
the Great Recession, this estimate of exchange rate pass-through rises to almost 50% relative to a low
under 5% towards the end of the sample and in the late 90s.

The assumption that time-variation in

exchange rate pass-through is solely driven by variation in IQR is very strong but can be easily relaxed.
In the right hand panel of Figure 4 we allow pass-through to vary with IQR, the frequency of adjustment,
the volatility of exchange rates, and real GDP growth.35
Allowing for these additional interactions does not change the conclusion that pass-through is countercyclical and that time-series variation is largely driven by IQR. This can be seen most clearly in the
bottom panel of Figure 4, which shows pass-through estimates for a specification with the additional interactions but excluding IQR. Essentially all the variation in pass-through at business cycle frequencies
is captured by time-series variation in IQR.
While the above results show that pass-through varies across time in a specification with a variety of
controls, there is always concern that omitted variables might undo this time-series variation. That is,
there are many possible additional variables we are not controlling for that might affect pass-through and
undo the time-series variation we have found. We can assess this concern by allowing pass-through to vary
across time non-parametrically.

Ideally, we could re-estimate the baseline pass-through regression (1)

35

We exclude the seasonal dummies, time-trend and frequency of product substitution from our prior list of all controls since
while point estimates were not zero, none of these coefficients were even marginally significant. Including them as explanatory
variables thus introduces additional spurious random noise into the resulting pass-through estimates. Nevertheless, including
these effects does not change the substantive conclusion.

14

with a full set of month dummies. However, small sample sizes make such regressions infeasible. Instead,
we estimate the baseline regression using a series of disjoint, rolling windows. That is, our estimate of
pass-through for period t is given by re-running regression 1 using only price changes occurring in a
window from 4 months before to 3 months after t:36
0
∆pi,τ = βt ∆eτ + Zi,τ
γ + i,τ | t − 4 ≤ τ ≤ t + 3.

This allows us to construct a monthly measure of βt that varies fully non-parametrically across time.37
Figure 2 from the introduction shows that there remains a strong positive relationship between this fully
flexible pass-through specification and IQR so that even being completely agnostic about what drives
pass-through movements across time does not change our conclusions. In particular, this scatter plot of
pass-through in each 8 month window against the value of IQR in this same window shows a clear positive
relationship. It is also worth noting again that we identify the Great Recession observations separately
in blue, as additional evidence that our relationship is not driven by this single recession. Reassuringly,
best-fit regression lines are nearly identical whether we include or exclude these observations.
Overall these results show that exchange rate pass-through varies substantially with price change dispersion. This means that estimating average pass-through regressions without looking at the distribution
of price changes induces a significant time-varying bias, with pass-through substantially understated during periods of high dispersion.

A large literature tries to understand average pass-through and its

implications for the nominal transmission mechanism, but the above evidence shows that pass-through
is not a single number and that concentrating on average pass-through may be misleading for how prices
will respond to nominal shocks at a moment in time.
We now turn from documenting the fact that price change dispersion is positively correlated with passthrough to showing that it can be used to distinguish changing volatility from changing responsiveness.

4

Basic theoretical framework

4.1

Flexible price model

In this section we lay out a simple framework following Burstein and Gopinath (2013) to show how economic primitives shape the relationship between exchange rate pass-through and price change dispersion.
In order to build intuition, we start with the simplest possible setting by assuming flexible prices, no aggregate shocks and no equilibrium effects. This allows us to develop simple formulas relating permanent
changes in responsiveness and volatility to pass-through and the dispersion of price changes.38

In the

quantitative section which follows, these assumptions are relaxed but the intuition is similar.
Consider the problem of a foreign firm selling items to U.S. importers. The firm has perfectly flexible
prices, set in dollars. The optimal flexible price (in logs) of item i at the border is the sum of the gross
markup (µi ) and dollar marginal cost (mci (e, ηi )) which depends on both the exchange rate (e) and an
36
Shorter windows allow for more time-variation but induce larger standard errors while larger windows have the reverse
trade-off. However, Appendix Figure A.1 shows that results are nearly identical for 4, 6 and 12-month windows.
37
In order to ensure that each estimate is independent and deliver correct standard errors, we run regressions only using
values for t which are 8-months apart so that each regression uses disjoint observations. That is, each price change observation
is attributed to a unique window. However, some prices may be changing from prices last set in a different window. Redoing
results only including price spells contained entirely in each window produces very similar patterns.
38
In the appendix, we consider a more general model which includes GE effects and scale-dependent marginal cost.

15

item-specific component orthogonal to the exchange rate (ηi ):
pi = µi + mci (e, ηi ) .

(3)

Taking the total derivative of equation (3) gives:
∆pi = −Γi (∆pi − ∆p) + αi ∆e + i

(4)

i
where Γi ≡ − ∂(∆p∂µ
is the elasticity of a firm’s optimal markup with respect to its relative price.
i −∆p)

We define this Γi parameter as “responsiveness”, for reasons described below.

It captures the classic

pricing to market channel of Dornbusch (1987) and Krugman (1987), where firms adjust their optimal
markups in response to cost shocks, leading to incomplete pass-through. A positive value for Γi implies
a negative relationship between markups and relative prices, pi − p, which Burstein and Gopinath (2013)
show is a robust implication of models that generate incomplete pass-through. αi ≡

∂mci
∂e

is the partial

elasticity of the dollar marginal cost to the exchange rate, e. We refer to αi as “import intensity”. Finally,
i = ∆ηi captures the innovation of idiosyncratic marginal cost.39 We call changes in the variance of this
idiosyncratic component changes in “volatility”. Rearranging this equation gives an explicit expression
for the direct effect (that is when ∆p = 0) of a change in the exchange rate on prices at the border:40
∆pi
αi
=
∆e
1 + Γi

The first factor affecting pass-through is the fraction of marginal cost denominated in dollars.

(5)

If

marginal cost is entirely denominated in dollars (αi = 0), then fluctuations in the exchange rate are
irrelevant for the foreign firm’s optimal dollar price and pass-through is zero. In general, exchange rate
pass-through is increasing in import intensity.
The second factor affecting pass-through is the response of the foreign firm’s optimal markup to
changes in its relative price.

If Γi = 0 (the CES case) the firm’s optimal markup does not change as

its price deviates from its competitors and pass-through is at its maximum. If Γi > 0, then as the price
of the firm increases relative to its competitors, the elasticity of its demand rises, lowering its optimal
markup. Similarly, when the firm’s price is relatively low, its optimal markup rises. Thus, if Γi > 0,
the foreign firm will move its price less than one-for-one in response to cost shocks.
Notice that in this flexible price framework, pass-through is determined exclusively by these two
factors. Importantly, this means that changing volatility has zero effect on pass-through when prices are
fully flexible. This is because pass-through is scale invariant: doubling the size of a cost shock doubles the
size of the optimal price change leaving pass-through, which is measured in percentage terms, unchanged.
Since lowering Γi means that firms will be more responsive to all cost shocks, we refer to lowering Γi as
increasing total “responsiveness”. That is, firms with low Γi will respond strongly to both idiosyncratic
and exchange rate shocks. In contrast, firms with high αi will respond more to exchange rate shocks but
not to idiosyncratic cost shocks. Thus, the term responsiveness is used exclusively to refer to Γi , which
determines general cost pass-through of all shocks, as distinct from parameters such as αi that affect
39
40

Since we do not observe this shock, it is without loss of generality to normalize the price response to η to be one.
We also set the innovation of the idiosyncratic shock to its average value (zero).

16

exchange rate specific pass-through.
The open economy literature has extensively studied mechanisms which can generate Γ > 0 and thus
less than full responsiveness to explain incomplete pass-through, but explaining our empirical results
require time-variation in this parameter. What can generate such variation? Interestingly, such variation
in Γ is precisely what is predicted by the growing set of models in which countercyclical dispersion arises
as an endogenous phenomenon. In particular, in Appendix B, we show that a variety of mechanisms
such as learning, consumer search, experimentation, ambiguity aversion and market power all naturally
map into variation in this responsiveness parameter. This in turn implies that there is an important and
heretofore unrecognized link between models explaining pass-through and those trying to understand
time-varying dispersion and that these models have very similar reduced form implications.
In addition to its implications for pass-through, we can also use equation (4) to show how α and Γ
affect the variance of ∆pi . Solving for ∆pi and computing its time-series variance gives:

var(∆pi ) =

αi
1 + Γi

2


var(∆e) +

1
1 + Γi

2
var(i ),

(6)

where we have used the fact that exchange rate and idiosyncratic shocks are uncorrelated.41
Intuitively, the variance of the firm’s optimal price is larger if it faces more volatile exchange rate
or idiosyncratic shocks. The variance of price changes also rises with responsiveness and with import
sensitivity (αi ↑, Γi ↓). Importantly, increases in responsiveness and import sensitivity both also increase
pass-through, as shown in (5). However, it can be shown that for empirically relevant values of αi and
Γi , changing Γi has much larger effects on price change variance than changing αi .42

The intuition is

that empirical estimates of var(∆pi ) greatly exceed var(∆e). In addition, estimates of αi are typically
small. (See Figure 3). This means that the first term in (6) contributes little to the overall variance of
price changes, so changing its size also has little effect. In the quantitative modeling section, we show
that this simple intuition survives in a realistic model. That is, the mechanical effect of greater αi on
exchange rate pass-through and thus var(∆pi ) is not quantitatively important.

4.2

Modeling Price Stickiness

Price stickiness is a pervasive feature of micro price data. For example, Gopinath and Rigobon (2008)
find that the median price duration for imports to the U.S. is 10.6 months. More importantly, the price
adjustment mechanism can have direct effects on measured pass-through.

For example, in menu cost

models, where price adjustment is endogenous, conditioning on price adjustment will induce a selection
bias with important potential effects for MRPT estimates.43
41

If we instead compute the variance of price changes across items at a point in time (month-level dispersion) in this
flexible price environment, the first term disappears and so dispersion is wholly determined by Γi and var(i )
42
More formally, combine the two formulas in elasticity form to get:


∂var(∆pi )
Γ


∂Γ
var(∆pi )
Γ
1 var(∆ηi )

 =
1+ 2
∂var(∆pi )
α
1+Γ
α var(∆ei )
∂α

var(∆pi )

Substituting calibrated values from the modeling section yields a ratio of approximately 200.
This is a selection bias in the classic statistical sense, in which residuals (ε) are uncorrelated with the explanatory
variable (∆e) in the population but are correlated in the sample selected for our regression. We are not first to notice this
bias. See the brief discussion in footnotes 7 and 26 of Gopinath et al. (2010). Note that in Calvo pricing models where price
43

17

To understand how primitives of a menu cost model affect measured pass-through, it is useful to
examine our baseline MRPT specification in equation (1). By definition, the MRPT regression coefficient
is equal to:
cov(∆pi,t , ∆et )
βb =
= β + cov(i,t , ∆et )/var(∆et )
var(∆et )
|
{z
}
selection bias

where β is the “true” uconditional responsiveness of desired prices to exchange rate movements.44
Menu cost models induce cov(i,t , ∆et ) > 0 for firms that choose to adjust, even if the unconditional
covariance is zero. This is because in a menu cost model, firms are more likely to choose to adjust when
the idiosyncratic shock and the exchange rate movement reinforce each other. Thus, cov(i,t , ∆et ) > 0,
b is larger
for adjusters. This implies that estimated pass-through conditional on price adjustment, β,
than true unconditional desired pass-through, β.45
Higher menu costs lead firms to adjust less often and by larger amounts (which increases the dispersion
of price changes) as firms economize on the number of times they adjust prices. Increases in the menu
cost lead to a wider range of inaction, which leads the importance of selection effects and cov(i,t , ∆et )
to increase. This then leads to an increase in measured MRPT.
Conversely, increasing the variance of idiosyncratic cost shocks lowers MRPT because the magnitude
of the selection bias is decreasing in the size of these shocks.

The intuition is simple: as the size

of idiosyncratic shocks increases, firms are more likely to adjust their prices for purely idiosyncratic
reasons, which lowers cov(i,t , ∆et ), conditional on adjustment. At the same time, larger shocks mean
larger price dispersion.

Thus changes in the volatility of idiosyncratic shocks induce a counterfactual

negative relationship between MRPT and dispersion and so already suggests that volatility shocks will
have difficulty replicating empirical facts in the open economy environment.
Reviewing the conclusions from this and the previous section, it follows that changes in volatility
var(i ) should generate a counterfactual negative relationship between measured MRPT and price change
dispersion while changes in α, Γ or in menu costs should generate a positive relationship. However, we
now show that only the responsiveness channel arising from variation in Γ is quantitatively successful.

5

Quantitative Model

We now formally assess the theoretical link between price change dispersion and exchange rate passthrough in an estimable quantitative model. The model allows for all the theoretical channels discussed
in the previous section and also includes indirect equilibrium effects that the simple model in Section 4.1
ignored. In Appendix B we show that a variety of models which generate time-variation in dispersion
endogenously ultimately do so by generating variation in Γ. Since these models all have a similar reduced
form interpretation, our qualitative insights do not require taking a stand on a particular source of Γ
variation. However, in order to deliver quantitative results we must specify a particular mechanism and
functional form for this variation. We do so by building directly on the menu cost model of Gopinath and
adjustment is exogenous, this bias is absent but in this case volatility increases still do not increase pass-through.
44
This underlying β is determined by α and Γ, as shown in the previous section. It is also declining with price stickiness if
exchange rate movements are not permanent, but exchange rates are close to a random walk in the data so that the flexible
price expression provides a close approximation even for firms with relatively sticky prices.
45
It is worth noting that this is a “bias” if one is trying to measure desired pass-through in the population. But if one is
interested in measuring how much prices actually respond to exchange rate movements, the relevant object is βb not β.

18

Itskhoki (2010) which includes Kimball demand and introduces heterogeneity in responsiveness by including cross-sectional heteroeneity in the “super-elasticity” of demand in preferences.46 We intentionally
build on this workhorse model of incomplete pass-through and adopt this particular form of responsiveness variation for two primary reasons: 1) Gopinath and Itskhoki (2010) show that this model can hit a
wide variety of cross-sectional microeconomic facts, and it is important that matching our new facts not
come at the expense of missing ones hit by previous models. 2) It is highly parsimonious relative to many
other models which give rise to variation in responsiveness. This is crucial in order to estimate our model
with a variety of potential aggregate shocks using our previous time-series evidence and then infer the
underlying nature of shocks. However, it is important to again emphasize that this does not imply that
we think other mechanisms such as experimentation or incomplete information are unimportant, and in
reality many of these mechanisms are likely simultaneously present in the data.

5.1

Model Description and Calibration

We begin by describing the model with no aggregate shocks, the baseline calibration and show simple
comparative statics to provide a quantitative complement to the results in the previous section. We then
formally introduce aggregate shocks to these parameters. In order to infer the importance of various
shocks we estimate the model via indirect inference: for a given set of shocks, we solve for the sectoral
equilibrium of the model and then simulate data mimicking BLS procedures, run our empirical regressions
on this simulated data and compare these results to those in Section 2.3. We then repeat this process
repeatedly with alternative sets of aggregate shocks until we find the best fit to the empirical data.
5.1.1

Industry Demand Aggregator

The industry is characterized by a continuum of varieties indexed by j. There is a unit measure of domestic
varieties and a measure ω < 1 of foreign varieties available for domestic consumption, which captures the
idea that not all varieties are traded internationally.
We generate variable markups by utilizing a Kimball (1995) style aggregator:
1
|Ω|



Z
Ψ
Ω

|Ω| Cj
C


dj = 1

(7)

with Ψ(1) = 1, Ψ0 (.) > 0 and Ψ00 (.) < 0. Cj is the quantity demanded of variety j ∈ Ω, where Ω is the
set of all varieties available domestically. Ω has measure 1 + ω. Individual varieties are aggregated into
a final consumption good C. This intermediate aggregator contains the CES specification as a special
case. The demand function for Cj implied by equation (7) is:


Pj
Cj = ϕ D
P



C
, where ϕ(.) ≡ Ψ0−1 (.)
|Ω|

Here Pj is the price of variety j, P is the sectoral price index and D ≡

hR

0
ΩΨ

(8)


|Ω|Cj
C



Cj
C dj

i
. P is defined

implicitly by the following equation
Z
PC =

Pj Cj dj
Ω

46

A Calvo model delivers similar conclusions about the importance of responsiveness but fits micro facts less well.

19

5.1.2

Firm’s problem

Consider the problem of a firm producing variety j. Foreign and domestic firms face symmetric problems
and we label foreign variables with asterisks. The firm faces a constant marginal cost:47
M Cjt =

Wt1−α (Wt∗ )α
Ajt

where Wt is the domestic wage and the parameter α is the share of foreign inputs in the firm’s cost
function. Ajt denotes idiosyncratic productivity, which follows an AR(1) in logs:
log(Ajt ) = ρA log(Aj,t−1 ) + µjt with µjt ∼ iid N (0, σA )
Combining unit revenues, unit costs and total demand for variety j yields firm profits from selling variety
j in the domestic market:


W 1−α (Wt∗ )α
Πjt = Pjt − t
Cjt
Ajt
Firms are price-setters but face a menu cost κ when adjusting prices.
be Sjt =

(Pj,t−1 , Ajt ; Pt , Wt , Wt∗ )

Let the state vector of firm j

where Pj,t−1 and Ajt are idiosyncratic states and Pt , Wt , and Wt∗ are

aggregate states. The value of a firm selling variety j is characterized by the following Bellman equation:
V N (Sjt ) = Πjt (Sjt ) + E{Q(Sjt+1 )V (Sjt+1 )}
V A (Sjt ) = max {Πjt (Sjt ) + E{Q(Sjt+1 )V (Sjt+1 )}}
Pjt

V (Sjt )

= max{V N (Sjt ), V A (Sjt ) − κ}

where V N (.) is the value function if the firm does not adjust its price, V A (.) is the value function if it
adjusts, and V (.) is the value of making the optimal price adjustment decision. Q(Sjt+1 ) is the stochastic
discount factor. Each period the firm chooses whether to adjust its price by comparing the value of not
adjusting to the value of adjusting net of the menu cost.
5.1.3

Sectoral equilibrium

We define et ≡ ln(Wt∗ /Wt ) as the log real exchange rate.

Sectoral equilibrium is characterized by a

path of the sectoral price level, {Pt }, consistent with optimal pricing policies of firms given the exogenous
idiosyncratic productivity process and wage rates in the two countries. This sectoral equilibrium allows
for indirect effects that we shut down in Section 4.1 but explore in our model appendix.

Following

Krusell and Smith (1998) and its open economy implementation in Gopinath and Itskhoki (2010), we
assume that Et ln Pt+1 = γ0 + γ1 ln Pt + γ2 et .

We then solve the firm’s Bellman equation for a given

conjecture for γ, simulate the model and iterate to convergence. As in Gopinath and Itskhoki (2010),
this forecasting rule is highly accurate in equilibrium.
We assume that all prices are set in the domestic currency, since our empirical analysis is restricted to
dollar prices. Following Gopinath and Itskhoki (2010), we assume that Wt = 1 and that all fluctuations
in the real exchange rate arise from fluctuations in Wt∗ . In economic terms, these assumptions derive from
47

This cost function can be derived from a CRS production function in domestic and foreign inputs.

20

assuming that the value of the domestic currency and real wage are stable relative to the exchange rate.
It is indeed the case in the U.S. that exchange rates have little explanatory power for these variables in
the U.S. since net exports are a small part of the overall U.S. economy.
5.1.4

Calibration

While there are a number of strategic complementarities that can generate variable markups (and thus
incomplete pass-through), the specific form we explore in our quantitative results is the Klenow and
Willis (2006) specification of the Kimball aggregator (equation 7):




Ψ = 1 − ε ln

σxj
σ−1

 σ
ε

, where xj ≡ D

Pj
P

This demand specification is governed by two parameters: σ > 1 and ε > 0. The elasticity and the
super-elasticity of demand are given by:
σ
e(xj ) =

σ
ε

 and εe(xj ) =


σxj
σx
1 − ε ln σ−1
1 − ε ln σ−1j

Under these assumptions the markup is given by
µ
e=

σ
σ − 1 + ε ln



σxj
σ−1



so that when ε −→ 0, we get a CES demand structure with an elasticity of substitution equal to σ and
a markup equal to

σ
σ−1 .

The price elasticity of desired markups is given by:
Γ≡−

∂ ln µ
e
ε

.
=
σx
∂ ln Pj
σ − 1 + ε ln σ−1j

Thus, responsiveness is decreasing in ε and increasing in σ (if ε > 0).

Since we do not directly

observe σ or ε we cannot separately identify changes in these two parameters.

For simplicity and

following Gopinath and Itskhoki (2010), we assume that variation in Γ is driven solely by ε but note
that variation in σ would yield similar results. We return to this point in Appendix B when discussing
additional sources of variation in Γ.
Calibrated values for all parameters are reported in Table 6. The period in our model is one month
so we calibrate the discount rate to generate an annual 4% real interest rate (β = 0.961/12 ). We set the
elasticity of demand, σ, equal to 5 to yield a steady-state markup of 25%. This is the middle of the range
estimated for U.S. imports by Broda and Weinstein (2006). We assume that the log of the real exchange
rate, e, follows a random walk. Empirically this series is highly persistent. We set the mean increment
of the innovation of the real exchange rate equal to 2.5% following Gopinath and Itskhoki (2010). To
calibrate the share of imports,
of Economic

Analysis.48

ω
1+ω ,

we use the share of imports as a percentage of GDP from the Bureau

The average of this import share for the U.S. over our sample period is 14.5%,

which implies that ω = 0.17.We set the persistence of the idiosyncratic shock process, ρA , to be equal to
48

Calibrating this import share is important to allow for realistic sectoral equilibrium effects, as discussed in Appendix B.

21

0.85, which is in between the values used by Gopinath and Itskhoki (2010) and Nakamura and Steinsson
(2008), and we set κ = 0.05 to match the frequency of price adjustment of 17% in our sample.49
Finally, the parameters α, ε, and σA are jointly calibrated to match three moments of the data:
average pass-through, the R2 from our MRPT regression and the mean standard deviation of item level
price changes. In Appendix Figure B.4 we plot the relationship between each parameter and these
moments, but to get a sense for why these moments separately identify our parameters, it is useful to
remember the intuition from our simple model and our baseline MRPT regression:
∆pi,t = β∆et + i,t

(9)

Decreasing ε means that firms respond more to both exchange rate movements and idiosyncratic
shocks when adjusting prices. This increases pass-through and the standard deviation of price changes
but has little effect on the R2 from estimating equation (9). This is because lowering ε increases both
explained variance coming from ∆et and unexplained variance coming from i,t by roughly equal amounts
so that the ratio of the residual sum of squares to the total sum of squares remains unchanged. Increasing
σA leads to a large increase in the variance of price change and a decrease in estimated pass-through since
the selection bias conditional on price adjustment is decreasing in σA . Increasing σA also leads to a large
decrease in R2 , since amplifying i,t increases the residual sum of squares. Finally, increasing α leads to
large increases in measured pass-through but has little effect on the variance of price changes since the
variance of price changes is almost entirely driven by idiosyncratic shocks. At the same time, increasing
α leads to modest increase in R2 since it increases the signal to noise ratio in the pass-through regression.
Thus, movements in these three parameters produce distinctly different effects on the average level
of pass-through, the R2 from our MRPT regression, and the mean standard deviation of item level price
changes so that these three moments allow us to identify our parameters of interest. We find that the
best fit parameters for α, ε, and σA are 0.165, 2.35 and 0.08, respectively.

5.2

Simple Comparative Statics

To understand the role of various channels in explaining the empirical relationship between MRPT and
the dispersion of price changes, we begin with a simple comparative statics exercise.

Each panel of

Figure 5 shows results when we fix three of ε, κ, α and σA at their baseline calibrated values and vary the
fourth parameter. For each value of this parameter we solve the model, simulate a panel of firms with
the same number of observations as in the BLS data and compute MRPT, frequency and the standard
deviation of price changes exactly as in Section 2.
This comparative statics exercise allows us to trace out how changes in structural parameters affect
the joint-behavior of these 3 statistics and provides a quantitative counterpart to the intuition in Section
4.1.50 This cannot be mapped directly to the empirical results in Section 2.3, since it is showing the
49
Note that our sample in both the model and data only includes items with at least two price changes, so this frequency
is moderately higher than the frequency of price adjust of all items in the IPP.
50
The relation between our comparative statics and those in Gopinath and Itskhoki (2010) Proposition 3 bears some
mention. They find that in a simple static model, pass-through increases with α, declines with ε and is unaffected by κ or
σA . Our conclusion for α and ε is identical, but our results for κ and σA differ because we study MRPT while they study
LRPT. LRPT is not subject to the selection effects that induce cov(i,t , ∆et ) > 0 but these effects are important for MRPT.

22

Figure 5: Comparative Statics
Markup Elasticity (!)

0.3

Pass-Through
Frequency
XSD

0.2

Shock Volatility (<)

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.1

0

0
0

2

4

0.05

Imports Cost Share (,)

0.1

0.15

0.2

Menu Cost (5)

0.3

0.4
0.2

0.3
0.2

0.1

0.1
0

0
0

0.2

0.4

0

0.1

0.2

Holding all other parameters at their baseline values, this figures shows the effect of varying individual parameters on
frequency, pass-through and the standard deviation of price changes. The solid blue line shows MRPT, the dashed red line
shows frequency and the dotted yellow line shows the standard deviation of price changes. The x-axis in each plot shows
the value of the parameter being varied.

implications of permanently changing parameters within a model and so does not correspond exactly to
our empirical exercise. However, it gives a sense of the quantitative response of observable moments to
underlying structural parameters and so is useful for guiding the indirect inference exercise which follows.
There we introduce aggregate shocks, simulate time-series and run regressions just as in Section 2.3.
The top-left panel shows the effects of changing responsiveness by varying the markup elasticity Γ from
0 to 4 (corresponding to moving ε from 0 to 16). It is apparent that lowering responsiveness (increasing
Γ) causes pass-through, frequency and the standard deviation of price changes to all fall. The upperright panel shows that increasing the volatility of shocks σA also increases the standard deviation of price
changes and frequency but instead lowers pass-through. This is because larger σA increases price makes
firms more likely to adjust their prices for purely idiosyncratic reasons, which reduces selection effects
and MRPT. Thus, variation in responsiveness results in a positive pass-through-dispersion relationship
while variation in volatility generates a counterfactual negative relationship.
The bottom-left panel shows what happens as we vary α from 0 to 0.5. This leads to large changes
in MRPT but negligible movements in the variance of price changes and frequency. This quantitatively
confirms the intuition in Footnote 4 that reverse causality, in which increasing α mechanically increases
dispersion, is unimportant for our results. This is because idiosyncratic shocks are much more important
than exchange rate shocks for explaining price change dispersion so that increasing the sensitivity to the
exchange rate barely raises price change dispersion.
The bottom-right panel shows the model-simulated results when we vary κ from 0 to 0.2. Consistent
with the discussion in the previous section, variation in κ generates a positive relationship between MRPT
and dispersion. This positive correlation occurs because higher menu costs lead firms to tolerate wider
price imbalances before adjusting, which amplifies selection effects. This increases price change dispersion
23

as well as measured pass-through, but it also leads to a large decline in the frequency of price adjustment.
Since this strong negative relationship between dispersion and frequency is counterfactual, this is what
ultimately leads us to reject variation in menu costs as an explanation for our empirical results.
While we view this comparative statics exercise as very informative, it has some weaknesses: 1) In the
data, we are sorting months and firms into bins by the dispersion of price changes. Since our comparative
statics exercise instead computes results for a series of models that vary by a single parameter, we are
implicitly sorting by this (unobserved) parameter rather than by price change dispersion. Thus, there is
not a clean match between our comparative statics simulations and our empirical exercise. 2) In the data,
firms and time periods are likely to differ along many dimensions simultaneously so that heterogeneity
is unlikely to be well-captured by a single parameter. 3) The comparative statics exercise is relatively
informal. For example, both κ and ε generate positive relationships between MRPT and dispersion and
there is little formal guidance for which is a better fit even along this single moment.
We now turn to a formal estimation strategy that squarely addresses each of these weaknesses.

5.3

Indirect Inference

In this section, we allow for aggregate shocks, which we assume are unobserved by the econometrician.
We then formally estimate the importance of different shocks in explaining our empirical results using
indirect inference. More specifically, we assume that
ln εt = ln εss (1 − ρ) + ρ ln εt−1 + t with t ∼ N (0, σε )
ln σt = ln σ ss (1 − ρ) + ρ ln σt−1 + st with st ∼ N (0, σσ )
ln κt = ln κss (1 − ρ) + ρ ln κt−1 + γt with γt ∼ N (0, σκ ).
where εss , σ ss , κss are the steady-state values shown in Table 6. Since each additional aggregate shock
increases the computational burden in estimation substantially, and since Figure 5 shows that changes
in α do not affect dispersion, we do not model shocks to α.51 Once we introduce aggregate shocks, we
must also modify the equilibrium transition rules, which assume then take the form:
Et ln Pt+1 = γ0 + γ1 ln Pt + γ2 et
+ γ3 ln εt + γ4 ln Pt ln εt + γ5 et ln εt
+ γ6 ln σt + γ7 ln Pt ln σt + γ7 et ln σt
+ γ8 ln κt + γ9 ln Pt ln κt + γ10 et ln κt .
That is, we allow the price level to have an intercept, persistence and sensitivity to exchange rates
that depends on the current realization of our three aggregate shocks. For a given set of parameters, we
then solve for the model equilibrium and then construct a firm panel, which we sample exactly as in BLS
51

Previous versions of this paper, which calibrated instead of estimating shocks, also included shocks to the volatility of
exchange rates and to the “common-ness” of exchange rate shocks, to reflect the fact that the Great Recession was a large,
common aggregate shock. We found they were unable to explain our empirical results. Including these shocks would make
estimation computationally infeasible. Furthermore, our empirical results control for the volatility of exchange rates and are
not driven by the Great Recession. Similarly, while we could in principle estimate a different ρ for each aggregate shock,
this increase in the parameter space would also render estimation currently infeasible, since estimating the 4 parameters in
our restricted model requires roughly one month of calendar time on a computing cluster and several years of cpu time.

24

microdata to account for any small sample issues or other misspecification concerns which might arise
in our reduced form empirical specification. From this firm panel we calculate an auxiliary model that
consists of fifteen reduced form moments g (θ) which capture essential features of the data, and we pick
our four parameters (ρ, σε , σσ , σκ ) to best match these simulated moments to their empirical counterparts.
This indirect inference estimation procedure explicitly addresses the concerns identified with the
comparative statics exercise: simulated and actual data are treated identically and we use no information
from simulated data that is not available in actual data. In addition, we explicitly allow for the presence
of multiple simultaneous shocks and formally assess their relative importance.
To construct our empirical moments, we first sort months into five bins by their month-level price
change standard deviation.

We then calculate the relative standard deviation of price changes, the

relative MRPT, and the relative frequency for each standard deviation bin.52 The first five moments test
the model’s ability to capture the time-series variation in price change dispersion observed in the data.
The second five moments capture the relationship between this dispersion and pass-through. The final
five moments capture the relationship between dispersion and frequency, which we previously showed can
help identify shocks to menu costs from shocks to responsiveness.53
Given these 15 moments, we pick our 4 parameters to solve θb = arg minθ g (θ)0 W (θ) g (θ) with positive
definite weight-matrix W (θ).54 Table 7 shows resulting parameter estimates and measures of model fit.
The main take-away from Table 7 is that we estimate an important role for σε but no role for σσ or σκ .
In fact, even though we allow for simultaneous aggregate shocks to responsiveness, volatility and menu
costs, our estimation ultimately prefers a single shock model with only responsiveness shocks. Inspecting
standard errors around these point estimates, the model rejects essentially any role for volatility shocks
while it allows for some possibility of modest shocks to menu costs. Conversely, versions of the model
without responsiveness are strongly rejected: inspecting the goodness of fit, we can easily reject all models
with σε = 0 in favor of the unrestricted model that allows for such variation.
These numerical results can be seen more easily in Figure 6, which shows the unrestricted model
fit to each moment as well as that of the restricted model with no responsiveness shocks. Clearly, the
model with no responsiveness shocks is unable to match the positive correlation between dispersion and
pass-through.55
While the bulk of the paper has focused on time-series variation in dispersion, Section 2.4.3 documented similar patterns across items. In Appendix B.5, we thus repeat our indirect inference including
permanent cross-item heterogeneity rather than aggregate shocks and show that this exercise delivers
similar conclusions. In particular, our estimation using cross-item empirical data finds an important
role for permanent responsiveness differences across items. Reassuringly, this is also consistent with the
52

We concentrate on the relative values rather than the absolute values because our benchmark calibration is not perfectly
able to match the level of XSD, MRPT and freq. We think of our exercise with shocks as largely about trying to match
relative differences across time. Nevertheless, redoing the results using absolute rather than relative moments did not
qualitatively change the conclusions but modestly reduces the overall fit of relative movements.
53
As is standard in indirect inference and in contrast to typical simulated GMM implementations, our auxiliary model
need not have any structural interpretation. For example, we have already noted that our OLS MRPT regression will pick
up both direct effects of parameters on β as well as indirect effects on covariance terms.
54
We pick W (θ) to be the standard efficient weight matrix so that we can apply asymptotic formulas for standard errors
but using an identity weight matrix did not change our qualitative conclusions.
55
More precisely, some parameter configurations with large menu cost shocks can match this relationship, but they do so
at the cost of a terrible fit to frequency. Our estimation optimally weights the deviation from each moment and the restricted
model prefers hitting frequency and missing the dispersion-pass-through relationship rather than hitting this relationship
and missing frequency even more dramatically.

25

Figure 6: Indirect Inference Estimation Results
Relative PT
by IQR bin

Relative IQR
by IQR bin

1.5

Best Fit

1

1.2

Model
Data

1.2

1.1

1

0.5

Relative Freq
by IQR bin

1
0.9

0.8

0.8

1.2

No 0 variation

1.5
1.2
1

1.1

1

0.5

1
0.9

0.8

0.8
1

2

3

4

5

1

2

3

4

5

1

2

3

4

5

This figure sorts months into 5 bins by IQR. The left panels show how pass-through varies across these 5 bins, the middle
panels show how IQR varies across the 5 bins and the right panels show how frequency varies. Model moments are shown in
solid blue and data moments are shown in dashed red. The first row shows results for the best fit estimates of ρ, σε , σσ , σκ
and the second row shows the best fit for the restricted model with σε = 0. Weights on moment deviations are computed
using an estimate of the efficient weight matrix.

conclusions in Gopinath and Itskhoki (2010), which arise from matching a different set of facts.

5.4

Interpreting Magnitudes: Implications for Other Observables

Beginning from the steady-state value of Γ = 0.59, our estimates imply that a one standard deviation
decline in responsiveness lowers Γ to 0.43. Interpreting the plausibility of this variation directly is somewhat challenging for two reasons: 1) In reality changes in Γ are likely driven by a variety of mechanisms
acting simultaneously so that our estimates of super-elasticity changes are likely standing in as a reduced
form for a variety of mechanisms discussed in Appendix B. 2) More importantly, even if one views superelasticity shocks as the sole source of responsiveness variation in reality, we have no empirical measures
of how this elasticity-of-elasticity of demand varies across time to compare our model to. Just measuring
the elasticity of demand is difficult much less how it moves with a firm’s relative price. We thus instead
argue for the plausibility of our estimates by showing that they imply reasonable time-series variation in
many economic variables which we can measure in the data.
In particular, we show that our model is capable of explaining time-series patterns for the IQR of
price changes, overall inflation, import inflation, output growth, frequency and pass-through while also
generating plausible markup behavior over our 1993-2015 sample period.
Before describing these results, we must first introduce one additional shock which is necessary for
this exercise to be well-defined. In our results thus far we have abstracted from aggregate nominal shocks
by assuming total nominal ouptut P C is constant. While this assumption is not important for any of our
prior conclusions, it must be relaxed in order to simultaneously match aggregate inflation and output in
26

the data since if nominal output is fixed then inflation and real output growth are perfectly negatively
correlated.56 Following Nakamura and Steinsson (2010), we assume that these shocks are iid normal and
calibrate their standard deviation to .005 to match the standard deviation of nominal output growth net
of real output growth over our 1993-2015 sample period.
Figure 7: Time-Series Fit of Model

IQR

2

1

Output Growth

Inflation - Overall

Targeted

1
1.5

0
0
-1

1

-2
0.5

-1
95

1

00

05

10

15

95

00

05

10

15

00

05

10

15

1.4
1.2

Targeted

95

Frequency

Inflation - Imports

0

Model
Data

1
0.8

-1

0.6
95

00

05

10

15

Untargeted

Pass-through

95
0.28

00

05

10

15

Model Markup

2
0.26

1
0

0.24
95

00

05

10

15

95

00

05

10

15

Beginning from the ergodic distribution, this figure shows results when we pick exchange rates in the model to match the
major currencies trade-weighted exchange rate from 1993-2015 and pick the value of the nominal and responsiveness shock
to fit the five targeted series.

Beginning from the ergodic steady-state of the model, we feed the observed sequence of exchange
rates from 1993-2015 into the model and then pick the value of the two remaining shocks (ε and nominal
output) period-by-period to best fit the IQR of price changes, overall inflation, import inflation, output
growth and frequency.57 Figure 7 shows that we are able to quite well-match these five series with only
these two shocks.58 Importantly, the model does a good job matching time-series patterns of pass-through
shown in Figure 4, despite not directly targeting this series. Finally, we also show the time-series for
the average realized markup in the model. There is a vast debate empirical debate on both the size and
cyclicality of markup variation, so there is no obvious empirical counterpart to this series. Nevertheless,
the overall variation we find is relatively small, meaning that the super-elasticity shocks necessary to
match the other time-series do not imply markup variation which seems at odds with the data.
In sum, our parsimonious model provides a good fit to the data along multiple dimensions. We
56

While it is infeasible to reestimate the model with this additional aggregate shock, we have recomputed moments for
our best fit parameters (as well as for several other parameter values) when including this additional shock, and it has a
negligible effect. This is because while this shock is important for explaining aggregate inflation and output comovement, it
is much, much smaller than exchange rate and idiosyncratic shocks and so has almost no effect on firm pricing behavior.
57
We use the major currencies trade-weighted exchange rate from the IMF. In order to estimate effects beginning from the
ergodic distribution, we simulate an initial 10 year burn-in period and average our results over 20 replications to eliminate
any effects of initial conditions.
58
If we focus only on nominal variables and ignore output, we can match the other four series almost as well with only
the single responsiveness shock.

27

view this as significant evidence that our estimated shocks to responsiveness are both plausible and an
important driver of many aggregate variables.

6

Conclusion

An active theoretical literature debates whether time-variation in the dispersion of economic variables is
driven by changes in the volatility of exogenous shocks or in the endogenous response to shocks of constant size. In this paper, we provide evidence from import prices that variation in price change dispersion
is driven by changing responsiveness rather than volatility. Using confidential item-level micro price data
from BLS import price indices, we document a robust positive relationship between price change dispersion and exchange rate pass-through, both across time and across items. We then estimate a structural
price-setting model using indirect inference to match these facts and show it strongly supports variation
in responsiveness while rejecting variation in volatility. This is because greater idiosyncratic volatility
leads to price changes which are more orthogonal to exchange rate movements, reducing measured passthrough. In contrast, increasing endogenous responsiveness leads firms to respond more strongly to both
idiosyncratic and exchange rate shocks and so increases dispersion and pass-through.
The result that volatility shocks induce a negative relationship between pass-through and dispersion
is quite general since it arises from a simple statistical selection effect and so should hold in any any model
in which larger shocks increase the probability of price adjustment.59 Since volatility shocks induce a
negative relationship between dispersion and pass-through, this means they are not just a worse fit to the
data on this dimension than models with responsiveness shocks; they are a worse fit than models with no
volatility or responsiveness shocks at all. This means that our paper simultaneously provides evidence
against models with volatility shocks and evidence in favor of models with responsiveness changes, but
these conclusions are to some extent independent. While we make a case that a particular model of
responsiveness can match the data well, accepting that volatility shocks are at odds with the data does
not actually require one to accept our model of responsiveness.
Conversely, our assertion that the price data favors time-variation in responsiveness does not depend
crucially on our simplifying assumption that this variation arises from changes in the super-elasticity
of demand. We adopt this parsimonious specification from Gopinath and Itskhoki (2010), but in Appendix B, we show explicitly that a variety of models which have been used to endogenously generate
countercyclical dispersion all share a common reduce form representation. In particular, the forces in
each of these models give rise to reduced form variation in responsiveness, Γ. While these models were
designed in part to endogenously generate time-variation in dispersion, since they do so by changing Γ,
they also lead to a positive relationship between dispersion and pass-through. In this sense, one should
not interpret our modeling assumption as endorsing or rejecting any particular mechanism which generates endogenous responsiveness. It should instead be interpreted as providing broad support for models
which generate time-variation in responsiveness.
Finally, it is important to reiterate the caveat in the introduction that our analysis is focused on
import prices. However, there is a limited but growing body of research arriving at similar conclusions in
other contexts. We focus on imports since we measure shocks to costs using exchange rate movements.
59

In a Calvo model where frequency is exogenously fixed or in a flexible price model, price adjustment does not rise with
volatility. In those models the correlation between dispersion and pass-through is zero, which is still counterfactual.

28

However, our methodological insight, that the joint behavior of pass-through and dispersion can be used
to differentiate changes in volatility from changes in responsiveness, should apply to shocks other than
exchange rates and outcomes other than prices. This means that with different microdata, a similar
exercise could be performed studying the pass-through of any well-identified aggregate or sectoral shock
into any outcome variable of interest and how that relates to the dispersion of that variable. We think it is
an interesting avenue for future research to extend our analysis to variety of shocks such as credit, energy
price, or monetary shocks identified using high frequency financial data and to explore pass-through into
a variety of endogenous outcomes.

References
Bachmann, R. and C. Bayer (2014). Investment Dispersion and the Business Cycle. American Economic
Review .
Bachmann, R. and G. Moscarini (2012). Business Cycles and Endogenous Uncertainty.
Baker, S. and N. Bloom (2013). Does uncertainty reduce growth? using disasters as natural experiments.
NBER Working Paper 19475 .
Baley, I. and J. Blanco (2016). Menu costs, uncertainty cycles, and the propagation of nominal shocks.
Mimeo.
Berger, D., I. Dew-Becker, and S. Giglio (2016). Uncertainty shocks as second-moment news shocks.
Berger, D., J. Faust, J. Rogers, and K. Steverson (2012). Border Prices and Retail Prices. Journal of
International Economics 88 (1).
Bloom, N. (2009). The Impact of Uncertainty Shocks. Econometrica 77 (3).
Bloom, N., M. Floetotto, N. Jaimovich, I. Saporta-Eksten, and S. Terry (2012). Really Uncertain Business
Cycles. NBER Working Paper 18245 .
Broda, C. and D. Weinstein (2006). Globalization and the Gains from Variety. Quarterly Journal of
Economics 121 (2).
Burstein, A. and G. Gopinath (2013). International Prices and Exchange Rates. Handbook of International
Economics 4.
Burstein, A. and G. Gopinath (2014). International prices and exchange rates.
Decker, R., J. Haltiwanger, R. Jarmin, and J. Miranda (2016). Changing business dynamism and productivity: Shocks vs. responsiveness.
Dornbusch, R. (1987). Exchange Rates and Prices. American Economic Review 77 (1).
Fleer, R., B. Rudolf, and M. Zurlinden (2015). Price change dispersion and time-varying pass-through
into consumer prices.
29

Gopinath, G. and O. Itskhoki (2010). Frequency of Price Adjustment and Pass-Through. Quarterly
Journal of Economics 125 (2).
Gopinath, G., O. Itskhoki, and R. Rigobon (2010). Currency Choice and Exchange Rate Pass-through.
American Economic Review 101 (1).
Gopinath, G. and R. Rigobon (2008). Sticky Borders. Quarterly Journal of Economics 123 (2).
Hellerstein, R., D. Daly, and C. Marsh (2006). Have U.S. Import Prices Become Less Responsive to
Changes in the Dollar? NY Fed: Current Issues in Economics and Finance.
Ilut, C., M. Kehrig, and M. Schneider (2014). Slow to hire, quick to fire: Employment dynamics with
asymmetric responses to news.
Kaplan, G. and G. Menzio (2016). Shopping externalities and self-fulfilling unemployment fluctuations.
Journal of Political Economy.
Klenow, P. and J. Willis (2006). Real Rigidities and Nominal Price Changes.
Krugman, P. (1987). Pricing to Market When the Exchange Rate Changes. Real-Financial Linkages
Among Open Economies.
Krusell, P. and A. A. Smith (1998). Income and Wealth Heterogeneity in the Macroeconomy. The Journal
of Political Economy 106 (5).
Ludvigson, S. C., S. Ma, and S. Ng (2016). Uncertainty and business cycles: Exogenous impulse or
endogenous response? Working Paper 21803, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Marazzi, M., N. Sheets, R. Vigfusson, J. Faust, J. Gagnon, J. Marquez, R. Martin, T. Reeve, and J. Rogers
(2005). Exchange Rate Pass-Through to U.S. Import Prices: Some New Evidence. International
Finance Discussion Papers.
Munro, D. (2016). Consumer behavior and firm volatility.
Nakamura, E. and J. Steinsson (2008). Five Facts about Prices: A Reevaluation of Menu Cost Models.
The Quarterly Journal of Economics 123 (4).
Nakamura, E. and J. Steinsson (2010, August). Monetary Non-Neutrality in a Multi-Sector Menu Cost
Model. Quarterly Journal of Economics 154 (4).
Nakamura, E. and J. Steinsson (2012). Lost in Transit: Product Replacement Bias and Pricing to Market.
American Economic Review 102 (7).
Neiman, B. (2010). Stickiness, Synchronization, and Passthrough in Intrafirm Trade Prices. Journal of
Monetary Economics.
Stroebel, J. and J. Vavra (2016). House Prices, Local Demand, and Retail Prices. NBER Working Paper
20710 .
Vavra, J. (2014). Inflation Dynamics and Time-Varying Volatility: New Evidence and an Ss Interpretation. Quarterly Journal of Economics.
30

Table 1: Relationship Between pass-through and Dispersion
Δe

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

Overall

IQR

IQR+Freq

IQR+All Ctrls

XSD

XSD+Freq

XSD+All Ctrls

0.154

0.143

0.143

0.174

0.141

0.141

0.176

(0.012)

(0.011)

(0.011)

(0.015)

(0.012)

(0.012)

(0.015)

0.070

0.070

0.050

(0.009)

(0.009)

(0.009)

-0.002

-0.002

-0.002

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

0.058

0.058

0.038

(0.009)

(0.009)

(0.009)

-0.002

-0.002

-0.002

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

IQR×Δe
IQR
XSD×Δe
XSD
Freq×Δe
Freq

0.010

0.019

0.012

(0.009)

(0.009)

(0.009)

0.004

0.004

0.004

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

All Ctrls
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
Yes
Num obs
129260
129260
129260
129260
129260
129260
129260
R2
0.035
0.038
0.039
0.040
0.037
0.038
0.039
“All controls” are frequency of adjustment (freq), frequency of product substitutions (subs), freq and subs×∆e, gdp growth,
gdp growth×∆e, SDe, SDe×∆e, month dummies, month dummies×∆e, t, t×∆e, ∆ cpi, ∆us gdp, ∆uscpi. All regressions
have country×PSL fixed effects and standard errors are clustered by country×PSL. Primary Strata Lower (PSL) 2 to 4-digit
harmonized codes defined by BLS. Dispersion and freq results standardized so that coefficients give a one-standard deviation
effect. Sample period: Oct 1993-Jan 2015.

Table 2: Relationship Between pass-through and Dispersion, Excluding Great Recession
Δe

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

Overall

IQR

IQR+Freq

IQR+All Ctrls

XSD

XSD+Freq

XSD+All Ctrls

0.129

0.131

0.132

0.159

0.128

0.129

0.160

(0.012)

(0.012)

(0.012)

(0.014)

(0.012)

(0.012)

(0.014)

0.037

0.038

0.027

(0.011)

(0.011)

(0.012)

0.003

0.004

0.004

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

0.015

0.016

0.009

(0.009)

(0.009)

(0.009)

0.003

0.003

0.003

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

IQR×Δe
IQR
XSD×Δe
XSD
Freq×Δe
Freq
All Ctrls
Num obs
R2

No
119816
0.034

No
119816
0.035

0.014

0.024

0.013

0.024

(0.009)

(0.010)

(0.009)

(0.010)

0.004

0.004

0.004

0.004

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

No
119816
0.036

Yes
119816
0.037

No
119816
0.036

Yes
119816
0.037

No
119816
0.035

“All controls” are frequency of adjustment (freq), frequency of product substitutions (subs), freq and subs×∆e, gdp growth,
gdp growth×∆e, SDe, SDe× ∆e, month dummies, month dummies× ∆e, t, t×∆e, ∆ cpi, ∆ us gdp, ∆ uscpi. Regressions
have country×PSL fixed effects and standard errors are clustered by country×PSL. Dispersion and frequency results are
standardized so that coefficients give a one-standard deviation effect. Sample period: Oct 1993-Jan 2015, excluding price
changes from Dec 2007-Jun 2009.

31

Table 3: Sectoral vs. Aggregate Dispersion Effects

(1)
IQRsector
Δe
IQRsector × Δe
IQRsector

(3)
IQRabs_dev

(4)
IQR%_dev

0.184

(2)
IQRsector+
IQRoverall
0.174

0.193

0.187

(5)
IQRsector+
Month dummy × Δe
-0.050

(0.015)

(0.015)

(0.014)

(0.015)

(0.104)

0.038

0.025

0.024

(0.011)

(0.011)

(0.011)

-0.003

-0.002

-0.001

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

IQRoverall × Δe

0.040
(0.009)

IQRoverall

-0.001
(0.001)

IQRabs_dev × Δe

0.026
(0.011)

IQRabs_dev

-0.001
(0.001)

IQR%_dev × Δe

0.030
(0.012)

IQR%_dev

-0.001
(0.001)

Month Dummy

No

No

No

No

Yes

Month Dummy×Δe No

No

No

No

Yes

All Ctrls
Num obs
R2

Yes
129232
0.040

Yes
129232
0.039

Yes
129232
0.039

Yes
129232
0.067

Yes
129232
0.040

“All controls” are frequency of adjustment (freq), frequency of product substitutions (subs), freq and subs× ∆e, gdp growth,
gdp growth × ∆e, SDe, SDe × ∆e, month dummies, month dummies × ∆e, t, t x ∆e, ∆ cpi, ∆ us gdp, ∆ uscpi. IQRsector, t
is the month-level interquartile range of an items 1-digit sector in month t. IQRoverall, t is month-level interquartile range
across all items in month t. IQRdeviation, t = IQRsector, t − mean(IQRsector, t) is the absolute deviation of the IQR in
an item’s sector from the average IQR across all sectors in month t. IQRrelative, t = IQRsector, t/mean(IQRsector, t)
is the percentage deviation of the IQR in an item’s sector from the average IQR across all sectors in month t. See text
for additional description. All regressions have country x PSL fixed effects and robust standard errors are clustered at
the country x PSL level. Dispersion and frequency results are standardized so that coefficients represent a one-standard
deviation effect. Sample period is October 1993-January 2015.

32

Table 4: Robustness to Misspecification

Δe
IQR ×Δe

IQR

(1)
Full
Interaction
0.158

(2)
IQR+
IQR2

(3)
Δe+
Δe2

(4)
Δe+
l. Δe

0.164

0.188

(0.014)

(0.015)

(0.015)

0.026

0.032

(0.009)

(0.011)

0.001
(0.001)

IQR2×Δe

(6)
Δe>0

(7)
Δe<0

(8)
(9)
5+chgs <=5
chgs

(10)
Median
Regs

0.239

(5)
Δe+
l. Δe+
l2. Δe
0.265

0.168

0.178

0.199

0.098

0.163

(0.035)

(0.039)

(0.020)

(0.018)

(0.017)

(0.014)

(0.010)

0.066

0.076

0.073

0.054

0.037

0.060

0.024

0.029

(0.012)

(0.022)

(0.026)

(0.014)

(0.014)

(0.011)

(0.013)

(0.006)

0.001

-0.002

-0.002

-0.002

-0.004

-0.000

-0.003

0.003

0.003

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

0.070

0.074

(0.019)

(0.030)

0.065

0.086

(0.014)

(0.027)

Yes
62551
0.049

Yes
62297
0.057

Yes
114141
0.029

Yes
28014
0.095

Yes
129260

-0.004
(0.005)

IQR2

-0.004

-0.005

(0.000)

(0.000)

IQR×Δe2

0.057
(0.022)

Δe2

-0.012

0.059

(0.022)

(0.023)

IQR×l.Δe
l.Δe
IQR×l2.Δe

0.032
(0.025)

l2.Δe

0.063
(0.018)

All Ctrls
Num obs
R2

Yes
129260
0.044

Yes
129260
0.044

Yes
129260
0.041

Yes
57589
0.025

Yes
42127
0.028

“All controls” are frequency of adjustment (freq), frequency of product substitutions (subs), freq and subs× ∆e, gdp growth,
gdp growth × ∆e, SDe, SDe × ∆e, month dummies, month dummies × ∆e, t, t x ∆e, ∆ cpi, ∆ us gdp, ∆ uscpi. l.∆e
and l2.∆e are the cumulative exchange rate movement in the lagged and twice lagged price spell, respectively. See text
for additional description. All regressions have country × PSL fixed effects and robust standard errors are clustered at
the country × PSL level. Dispersion and frequency results are standardized so that coefficients represent a one-standard
deviation effect. Sample period is October 1993-January 2015.

33

Table 5: Cross-Item Results

Δe
XSDitem×Δe
XSDitem

(1)
XSDitem

(2)
XSDitem+
Freqitem

(3)
XSDitem+
Freqitem+IQR

0.151

0.162

0.152

(4)
XSDitem+Freqitem
+IQR+
all controls
0.197

(0.012)

(0.014)

(0.012)

(0.016)

0.033

0.030

0.026

0.028

(0.013)

(0.013)

(0.012)

(0.011)

0.001

0.001

0.002

0.002

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

0.024

0.025

0.041

(0.011)

(0.010)

(0.009)

-0.001

-0.002

0.004

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

0.069

0.047

(0.009)

(0.009)

-0.002

-0.002

(0.001)

(0.001)

No
129260
0.039

Yes
129260
0.041

Freqitem×Δe
Freqitem
IQR×Δe
IQR
All Ctrls
Num obs
R2

No
129260
0.036

No
129260
0.036

“All controls” are frequency of adjustment (freq), freq× ∆e,frequency of product substitutions (subs), freq and subs × ∆e,
gdp growth, gdp growth×∆e, SDe, SDe×∆e, month dummies, month dummies × ∆e, t, t×∆e, ∆ cpi, ∆ us gdp, ∆ uscpi.
See text for additional description. Regressions have country×PSL fixed effects and robust standard errors clustered at the
country×PSL level. Dispersion and frequency are standardized so that coefficients represent a one-standard deviation effect.
Sample period is October 1993-January 2015.

34

Table 6: Parameter Values
Parameter

Symbol

Menu Cost Model

Source

Discount factor

β

0.961/12

Annualized interest rate of 4%

Fraction of imports

ω/(1 + ω)

14.5%

BEA input-output table

α

0.165

Estimation (see text)

αU S

0

Menu cost

κ

5.0%

Estimation (see text)

Markup elasticity

ε

2.35

Estimation (see text)

Demand elasticity

σ

5

Broda and Weinstein (2006)

Std. dev. exchange rate shock, et

σe

2.5%

Match bilateral RER

Std. dev. of shock

σA

8.6%

Estimation (see text)

Persistence of shock

ρA

0.85

Gopinath and Itshkoki (2010)

Cost sensitivity to ER shock
Foreign firms
U.S. firms

Idiosyncratic productivity process, at

Table 7: Estimated Parameters and Fit
Parameter

Estimate

95% Confidence Interval

σε

0.365

(0.347,0.383)

σσ

0.000

(0.00,.0053)

σκ

0.014

(0.00,.0337)

ρ

0.0845

(0.838,0.852)

Models

Wald-Statistic/Likelihood Ratio

95% Critical Value

99% Critical Value

Unrestricted Model

41.64

19.68

24.72

σε = 0

113.2851

3.84

6.64
 0  0  
b W θb g θb ∼ χ2 (11)
Asymptotic s.e.’s for parameters in parantheses. Unrestricted model Wald-Statistic: g θ

  










0
0
0
0
br W θbu g θbr − g θbr W θbu g θbr ∼ χ2 (1)
Restricted models: 2 g θ

35

.

Online Appendix Materials - Not For Print

36

A

Empirical Appendix: Online Only

A.1

Additional Empirical Results

In this section, we provide a number of robustness checks and extensions of our primary analysis.
Figure A.1 replicates Figure 2 using alternative window lengths and shows that we continue to find
a strong positive relationship between our non-parametric pass-through estimates and dispersion which
arises both including and excluding the Great Recession.
Figure A.1: Dispersion vs. Pass-through: Different Windows

12 month window

PT

0.4
0.2
0
0.06

0.07

0.08

0.09

0.1

0.11

0.12

0.13

0.14

0.12

0.13

0.14

6 month window

PT

0.4
0.2
0
0.06

0.07

0.08

0.09

0.1

0.11

4 month window

PT

0.4
0.2
0
0.06

0.08

0.1

0.12

0.14

0.16

IQR

This figure shows the IQR of all non-zero price changes against our preferred measure of exchange rate pass-through,
described below. Both statistics are computed separately in a series of disjoint windows which span our sample period. Our
primary specification in the text uses 8 month windows, but this figure shows results are similar for 4, 6 and 12 month
windows. Windows which have a majority of months during the Great Recession, as defined by NBER, are shown in blue.
The black regression line includes all observations while the red-dotted line excludes Great Recession observations.

Figure A.2 repeats the binned time-series regression in Figure 3 using a much larger number of bins.
This allows for a more non-parametric relationship between pass-through and dispersion and again shows
that the linearity assumed in most of our empirical regressions is a reasonable approximation of the data.
Unsurprisingly, there is somewhat more noise when performing this exercise, but the basic picture is
unchanged.

37

Figure A.2: Non-Parameteric IQR-pass-through Relationship
0.25

Pass-through

0.2

0.15

0.1

0.05

0
0.08

0.085

0.09

0.095

0.1

0.105

0.11

Interquartile Range

This figure shows separate estimates of regression (1) in each of 80-intervals by months’ IQR. The first point includes
observations from months with IQR in percentiles 1-20, the second observation months in percentiles 2-21, up to the last
observation which includes observations from months in percentiles 80-100. All regressions have country × PSL fixed effects
and robust standard errors are clustered at the country × PSL level. We also include controls for foreign CPI growth, US
gdp growth and US CPI growth. 95% confidence intervals are shown with dotted lines, and the average IQR in each window
is shown on the x-axis.

Figure A.3 repeats the binned time-series regression in Figure 3 instead using cross-item dispersion.
In particular, we sort individual items by their item-level standard deviation into 5 quintiles and then run
regression 1 separately in each bin. This shows that there is a positive relationship between item-level
dispersion and pass-through using a specification that does not impose linearity like in Table 5.
Figure A.3: Item-Level Dispersion-pass-through Relationship
0.4
0.35

Pass-through

0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
0.05

0.1

0.15

0.2

Standard Deviation

This figure shows separate estimates of regression (1) in each of 5-quintiles by the the item-level standard deviation of price
changes. All regressions have country × PSL fixed effects and robust standard errors are clustered at the country × PSL
level. We also include controls for foreign CPI growth, US gdp growth and US CPI growth. 95% confidence intervals are
shown with dotted lines, and the average item-level standard deviation value in each quintile is shown on the x-axis.

In Table 1, Columns (4) and (7), we showed that despite the fact that dispersion is countercyclical,
our patterns indeed reflect a pass-through-dispersion relationship and are not just proxying for a passthrough-business cycle relationship. In that table, we measured the business cycle using real GDP growth,
but one might be concerned that real GDP growth is only a partial proxy for the business cycle. Table
38

A1 shows that our conclusions are robust to instead measuring the business cycle using NBER Recession
indicators or using HP filtered log GDP instead of gdp growth. These results show that pass-through
is indeed countercyclical (at least when measuring cyclicality using real GDP growth or business cycle
dates), but that this does not drive our dispersion effects. The effects of dispersion on pass-through are
very similar after controlling for business cycle effects.
One might also be concerned that our results could be driven by compositional effects as the mix of
product-origin countries and bilateral exchange rates varies across time. Table A2 shows that this is not
the case by redoing our results restricted to particular countries/country groups.60 These compositional
concerns are more of a concern for our cross-item effects than our time-series results since an item’s
country of origin is necessarily fixed across time. Thus, we also repeat our cross-item results for individual
countries in Table A3.
In order to use a comprehensive sample, our baseline results include a broad set of items, described
in Section 2.1. However, many of these products have less product differentiation or pricing power and
so are likely less well described by our theoretical price-setting model. In Table A4 we also show that
our results continue to go through when using a narrower set of manufactured products that map more
naturally to our model.
Finally, as an additional check of misspecification as well as the importance of our sample selection,
Table A5 shows our results using an alternative pass-through specification which does not specifically
condition on adjustment. More specifically, we simply regress ∆p on ∆e plus various additional controls
and interactions over various time-intervals, without conditioning on adjustment. For example, in column
1 we simply regress the one month change in price on the one month change in exchange rates, and items
in this interval may have either zero or 1 price change. In column 4 we regress one-year changes on oneyear changes and item in the regressions may thus have between 0 and 11 price changes in this interval.
This specification is more akin to the long-run pass-through measures in Gopinath and Itskhoki (2010).
It is less useful for identification purposes but is useful for checking the robustness of our sample selection
and for diagnosing misspecification. This is because it can be computed for items with a single price
change, in contrast to our primary pass-through measure which can only be computed for items with at
least two price changes.61 Thus, sample sizes are expanded in this specification and we can include items
with fewer price changes.

A.2

Additional Sample Summary Statistics

This section provides additional detail on the construction of our benchmark empirical sample and various related summary statistics. From our raw data which includes 2,527,619 price observations from
October, 1993 January, 2015, we begin by dropping the 203,562 price observations which are imputed
and so flagged as “unusable” observations by the BLS. Row 1 of Table A6 shows the total number of
price observations and items as well as various summary statistics of the raw data after dropping these
unusable prices. The typical product is in the data set for a little over 3 years and changes prices roughly
60

There are not enough imports from individual countries aside from Mexico and Canada to get precise individual country
estimates.
61
We require at least one price change so that we can correctly measure ∆e. For items with no price changes, exchange
rate movements are left-censored and cannot be accurately measured. Nevertheless, despite the concerns with this measure,
repeating results simply using the cumulated exchange rate change since an item enters the BLS sample allows us to further
expand our sample to include all items and delivers similar results.

39

9 times. The last 3 columns show the 25th, median and 75th percentile of non-zero price changes. From
this raw data, we then exclude commodities, intrafirm transactions and non-dollar prices in our baseline
sample. We exclude non-dollar prices because these items mechanically have pass-through of 1 when not
adjusting prices and so cannot be used to measure responsiveness. This means, they contain no useful
information for our identification purposes. Similarly, commodities exhibit extremely high competition
and are undifferentiated. This means they also exhibit nearly 100% pass-through at all times and so cannot be used to measure variation in pass-through across time. Finally, we exclude intrafirm transactions
and keep only arms-length price transactions. This is because intrafirm transactions are not necessarily
allocative since these transfer prices are often set for tax purposes or other internal purposes and do not
necessarily have any relationship to market values so they have little value for our analysis. In total,
excluding these prices, which are not informative for our analysis, reduces our sample size substantially.
However, of the 1,135,439 observations dropped, the vast majority, 923,978, are intrafirm transactions.
This means that although our sample size drops substantially, this is largely just from dropping prices
which are essentially mismeasured relative to their allocative value. Overall, this sample selection criteria
is identical to the initial sample restriction in Gopinath and Itskhoki (2010), and so makes our results
more comparable to the existing literature.
Furthermore, it is important to note that our goal is not to inform aggregate statistics with our
analysis. So it is not important that our sample be representative of the overall composition of import
price indices. Our goal is to instead use a subset of our data to provide sharp identification, and for these
purposes it makes sense to focus on the subset of data most suited for this purpose, even if it does not
necessarily aggregate up to national statistics as closely as broader data sets might.
The more relevant comparison is between this initial sample cleaning and our final analysis sample,
which includes only observations with at least two price changes. Comparing row 2 and 3 shows that
products in our analysis sample have slightly longer average lives in the data set. This is not surprising
since items which are only in the data set briefly are less likely to have measured price changes. Even less
surprising, the average number of price changes per item is higher in our analysis sample, but this will
mechanically be the case since this is how we are selecting our sample. However, the distribution of price
changes conditional on adjustment is essentially the same. Overall these comparisons reassure us that we
are not performing our analysis on a particularly unusual subset of data. Again, it is worth noting the
relationship between our final sample and that in Gopinath and Itskhoki (2010). Our sample is identical
to theirs except that we require items to have 2+ price changes while they require items to have only 1+
price changes because MRPT can only be measured for items with two completed price spells while their
LRPT measure can be computed for items with only a single price change. However, Appendix Table A5
shows results for alternative specifications that allow us to include items with 1+ price changes. These
specifications are less useful for identification purposes but are useful for checking the robustness of our
sample selection and for diagnosing misspecification, and overall we find similar patterns.

B
B.1

Modeling Appendix: Online Only
Interpretation of Responsiveness Fluctuations

We refer to responsiveness, Γ , as anything that affects the elasticity of a firm’s desired price to a cost shock.
What economic forces generate time-series variation in this responsiveness parameter? In this section,
40

we show that many of the proposed mechanisms put forward independently to explain countercyclical
dispersion, such as ambiguity aversion, customer search, employer learning and experimentation, also
map into this responsiveness parameter in a way that has not previously been noted. Conversely, we
show that the other dominant mechanism (other than Kimball demand) used by the international finance
literature to generate incomplete pass-through – variation in market power, implies a positive relationship
between pass-through and dispersion. As a result, all of these mechanisms have similar implications for
the relationship between pass-through and dispersion that is at the heart of our paper.
B.1.1

Mechanisms Which Have Been Used to Explain Time-Varying Dispersion

Ambiguity Aversion
Ilut et al. (2014) show that concave hiring rules (which they microfound using an information processing framework where agents are ambiguity averse but which could result from asymmetric adjustment
costs) endogenously generate higher cross-sectional (employment) dispersion and shock pass-through during recessions.
It is easy to illustrate the basic mechanism and to see how it naturally maps into responsiveness.
Assume firms receive a signal s about future productivity and that the signal has an aggregate and
idiosyncratic component, s = a + , where the idiosyncratic shock  is mean zero and i.i.d. across firms
and across time. Further assume, as Ilut et al. (2014) do, that all firms follow the same decision rule,
n = f (s), where n is net employment growth and f (s) is strictly increasing and concave. This implies
that firms exhibit asymmetric adjustment to shocks: firms respond more to a signal of a given magnitude
during recessions than during booms because during recessions firms are in the more concave region of
their policy function. As parts 2 and 3 of Proposition 1 in Ilut et al. (2014) prove, this implies that the
dispersion of employment changes is higher in recessions.
Concave policy rules also imply that aggregate employment growth is more responsive to aggregate
shocks (e.g. higher cost pass-through) in recessions than booms. Formally, for any two realizations of
the aggregate shocks with a0 > a,
d
d
E[n|a] > 0 E[n|a0 ],
da
da
which follows directly from the strict concavity of f (s). (The formal proof is given in part 1 of
Proposition 1 in Ilut et al. (2014)). Thus, a positive correlation between higher dispersion and higher
pass-through is a direct implication of concave policy rules. Moreover, there is a mapping between this
mechanism and our responsiveness measure. During booms, firms are in the flat region of their concave
policy function where they have a low responsiveness to shocks of a given size. However, in recessions
firms are in the steep part of their policy functions and endogenously respond more to shock of the same
size.62 Thus, any mechanism that generates concave policy rules as a function of the firms shocks is going
62

Ilut et al. (2014) show empirically that for the U.S. manufacturing data that both employment dispersion and passthrough are higher in recessions. For pass-through, they estimate hiring rules both non-parametrically and parametrically
and find higher pass-through to shocks of the same size in recessions for both rules. In particular, for the non-parametrically
estimated hiring rule (see their Figure 6), the average response in boom to a 2 SD shock was +0.16% while the average
response in recession to a 2 SD shock was -0.55%. These standard deviation values are calculated over the entire sample, so
this shows that the response to a shock of the same size is larger in recessions. For the parametric hiring rule (see Column
(I) in their Table 8), the average response in boom was +0.31% while the average response in recession was -1.05%.

41

to generate countercyclical dispersion and a positive correlation between pass-through and dispersion.

Learning
Baley and Blanco (2016) present a price-setting model with menu costs and imperfect information
about idiosyncratic and aggregate productivity. They use this model analyze how price setting behavior
is shaped by changes in information by analyzing the response to random increases in “uncertainty”, in
which firms become less informed about their underlying costs (but with no actual change in current
idiosyncratic or aggregate productivity and with no changes in their volatility). That is, they study the
response to a pure shock to information in which firms become less informed about their current level of
productivity.
The basic logic of their model is simple to understand. Upon the arrival of a new uncertainty regime,
a firm’s uncertainty increases and then quickly decreases as the firm learns about the shocks they are
facing. These informational shocks in turn lead to an increase in price dispersion, as proved in Baley and
Blanco (2016) Proposition 6.
Is cost pass-through higher after information shocks? In order to gain intuition, it useful to examine
how the level of firm’s uncertainty about costs, Ωt , affects firms incentive to learn about its markup, µt
around a short interval of time ∆:

∆µt+∆ =

γ
Ωt + γ




µt +

Ωt
Ωt + γ


(st− st−∆ )

Firms update their guess of the new markup (which affects the optimal price it would like to set) as a
convex combination of a weight on its previous markup and and a weight on the new information from its
signals, st . Here γ captures the size of the information friction. It is obvious that when information is low
and firms are more uncertain about their costs, they (optimally) put more weight on new information.
This increases the speed of learning about the new monetary shocks hitting the economy and increases
the level of pass-through. Baley and Blanco (2016) show that this implies that pass-through is higher for
monetary shocks.
The intuition is simple. The response to monetary shocks is increasing in firms’ information about the
size of shocks. Since we already established that a decline in information quickens the speed of learning, in
the sense that agents put relatively more weight on new signals, this means that firms put more (Bayesian)
weight on the new, monetary policy shock and pass-through rises. Thus, their model implies a positive
relationship between price change dispersion and pass-through of cost shocks. Baley and Blanco (2016)
in fact devote an entire section of their paper to showing that this mechanism is economically important
in their calibrated model (see Table 4 in Section 6) and induces variation in dispersion and pass-through
that lines up with the empirical facts we document in Section 2.3.
The firm learning mechanism maps precisely into our responsiveness measure: variation in responsiveness corresponds to (endogenous) variation in the speed of firm learning in response to information
shocks. When firms have less information, they respond by learning more quickly about the aggregate
shocks they face, increasing the responsiveness of their prices to aggregate shocks and increasing price
dispersion as they respond more aggressively to idiosyncratic shocks of constant size.

42

Consumer Search
A growing body of research highlights the importance of changing consumer shopping behavior for
business cycle outcomes. For example, Kaplan and Menzio (2016) generate business cycle fluctuations
from changes in “market competitiveness”. Unemployed workers spend less and search more for low prices
than employed workers, so increases in unemployment increase competition. This increased competition
increases incentives for firms to further reduce employment. This feedback between employment and
competition can lead to self-fulfilling fluctuations and so endogenously give rise to recessions.
This mechanism is supported by a growing empirical literature. Aguiar, Hurst, and Karabarbounis
(2013) document that households search more during recessions. Stroebel and Vavra (2016) show that
firms adjust markups in response to changing customer price sensitivity over house price booms and busts.
Munro (2016) uses UPC level panel data to show that, consistent with a changing demand elasticity story,
dispersion of stores’ growth rates increases during recessions and this increase is larger in markets where
the increase in consumer shopping effort is highest.
Time-variation in the elasticity of demand naturally maps into our responsiveness framework. Recall,
that the steady state level of responsiveness in our model is given by Γ =

ε
σ−1 .

Thus as long as there

is any adjustment of markups in response to shocks (ε > 0), then if certain periods of time such as
recessions are characterized by increased competition (because consumers search more), with larger σ
and lower markups, they will also be times of greater responsiveness and thus price change dispersion
and cost pass-through.63
Indeed Munro (2016) explicitly explores the link between changes in the elasticity of demand (coming
from variations in consumer search behavior over the cycle) and countercyclical dispersion. The logic is
simple. If consumers spend more time shopping for lower prices during recessions in order to smooth
consumption, then firms face more elastic demand during recessions. This means that firm sales are
more responsive to a given size cost shock leading to higher dispersion of firm sales and employment
in recessions. Munro (2016) formalizes this mechanism in a simple business cycle model where search
frictions in product markets provide a role for consumer search effort to affect the elasticity of demand
that firms face and shows that it generates quantitatively important fluctuations in dispersion even with
no changes in the volatility of shocks.

Experimentation
Bachmann and Moscarini (2012) was one of the first papers to explore whether the increase in both
macro and micro dispersion was a result of larger shocks or whether causation ran in the opposite
direction. In particular, they explore whether time-varying price experimentation in response to negative
aggregate shocks can explain countercyclical price dispersion dispersion in both the time-series and the
cross-section of individual outcomes.
Bachmann and Moscarini (2012) start by adding imperfect information about demand to an otherwise
standard monopolistically competitive model. The basic idea is that firms are heterogeneous in their
elasticity of demand but face idiosyncratic demand shocks and so only gradually learn from sales about
this elasticity. During booms, price dispersion is low as firms understand the demand curve they face
63

The presence of markup adjustment can be induced by a wide-variety of strategic-complementarities and is a pervasive
assumption. In the pass-through literature this assumption is used explain incomplete pass-through and in the monetary
literature it is used to explain large and persistence responses to monetary shocks.

43

and the cost of deviating from the average price is large in terms of lost profits. However, in recessions,
when the chance of bankruptcy is high, they show that the chance that firms will choose to experiment
increases because the opportunity cost of price mistakes is lower and the chance of going out of business is
higher. Thus, the model delivers countercyclical price dispersion without time-varying volatility shocks.
Their model also implies that pass-through is higher when experimentation is higher. To see this,
consider a recession induced by a negative TFP shock. For the firm, this decrease in TFP is a negative cost
shock that increases the probability of firm exit and incentive to experiment. Bachmann and Moscarini
(2012) show that in this situation the firm will choose to experiment by raising its price, and the size of
the price increase is decreasing in firms expectations of future demand. The logic is simple. If the firm
does not change its price, it is more likely to go out of business soon, because it likely can no longer cover
its costs (this is all probabilistic, based on its beliefs about demand). In principle, it could reduce the
price, hoping that true demand is so elastic that revenues will boom, however, if such a high elasticity
was plausible then it would have already lowered its price during the boom when the firm was confident
demand was high and it could earn large profits.64 So the only possible move is to raise the price. This
generates twin benefits as it increases the chance of survival and also provides information about the
demand curve. While firms can experiment at any time, it is not profitable to do so during booms when
costs are low and revenues are high and becomes profitable when costs rise in recessions. Hit by these
negative cost shocks, firms then choose to experiment in the direction that at least offsets costs. In
addition, more pessimistic firms raise their prices by a larger amount than firms with strong beliefs about
demand (see Figure 3 in Bachmann and Moscarini (2012)). This means that pessimistic firms have higher
pass-through on average than optimistic firms.
Finally, recessions lead to an increase in the mass of pessimistic firms near exit. Since pessimistic firms
experiment more and have higher pass-through, this implies that both pass-through and price dispersion
rise. Thus variation in the incentive to experimentation acts just like time-varying responsiveness in our
baseline framework: both mechanisms generate higher price dispersion and higher pass-through during
recessions.
B.1.2

Mechanisms Which Have Been Used to Explain Incomplete Pass-through

In a recent survey of the pass-through literature (Burstein and Gopinath (2014)), they show that a
number of mechanisms aside from Kimball demand map into our responsiveness parameter, Γ . Variation
in markups arising from variation in firms’ market power is the most common alternative to Kimball
demand in the pass-through literature. Canonical references are Krugman (1986), Helpman and Krugman
(1987), Dornbusch (1987) and more recently Atkeson and Burstein (2008). Since the body of our paper
shows extensive results for Kimball demand, we focus here on this market power alternative and show
that it also implies a positive correlation between pass-through and price dispersion.

Variation in Market Power
In this setting a discrete number of products and strategic complementarity gives rise to variable
markups and markup elasticity, Γ , in the same form as our baseline model. The difference is that Γ is
64
The logic is based on the envelope theorem. The first-order expected revenue gain from reducing the price cannot be
large enough to more than offset the cost increase, because otherwise the previous price could not have been optimal.

44

determined by different parameters: variation in market power and elasticities of demand and whether
there is Betrand or Cournot competition rather than from kinked demand. Otherwise the underlying
structure of the problem is the same. See Section 4.2 of Burstein and Gopinath (2014) for full details. We
now show that this model naturally generates time varying responsiveness: when competitive pressures
are high, responsiveness is higher.
Despite a similar overall structure, since there are a finite number of firms and strategic complementarity, we must check whether the indirect effect of the exchange rate change coming through changes
in other firms’ prices overturns the basic results in Section 4. As in our baseline model, price changes
depend on changes in the exchange rate, idiosyncratic shocks and changes in the industry level price
index:
∆pik =

α∆ei + Γi ∆pk + i
1 + Γi

Assume some common exchange rate variation across firms. Define firm j 0 s common exposure to firm
i0 s exchange rate variation in sector k as ∆ej = θ∆ei + (1 − θ)∆vj with ∆vj ⊥∆ei for all j. If θ = 1 then
firm j is exposed to the same exchange rate variation as firm i and if θ = 0, there is no common exchange
rate variation. The most interesting case is if 0 < θ < 1 where there is some difference in exposure to the
exchange rate between firm i and firm j. This could happen if competing firms within the same industry
source inputs from different countries. In this case we can easily show (after some patient algebra) that
pass-through is decreasing in Γi just as in our baseline case as long as 0 < θ < 1 (and 0 < wik < 1 but
this by construction).65 In particular,
∂



∆pik
∆ei

∂Γi


=



ik
α (1 − θ)(1 + Γi )Γi ∂w
+
(θ
+
(1
−
θ)w
−
1)
ik
∂Γi
(1 + Γi )2

<0

Thus as long as there are least two firms in a industry and the exchange rates relevant for each firm
are not perfectly correlated, pass-through is decreasing in Γi . This is the empirically relevant case since
firms import from a variety of different countries with different exchange rate exposure. How does the
variance of price changes change with Γi ?
∆pik

P
P
Γi j wjk j
i
(α + αθΓi ) ∆ei α(1 − θ)Γi j wjk ∆vj
=
+
+
+
1 + Γi
1 + Γi
1 + Γi
1 + Γi

Assume that the variance of exchange rates are the same across firms:66 var(∆ei ) = var(∆vj ) = σe2 and
the variance of the idiosyncratic shocks be equal to σ2 . Then one can show that
65

∂var(∆pik )
∂Γi

< 0 as long

 s

ik

Here wik ≡

1+Γ

i
P  sik  ,
i

where sik denotes the market share of firm i in sector k. By construction

1+Γi

show that these assumptions imply that

P

i

wik = 1. One can

−sik

∂wik
∂Γi

=

hP s
  s
i
ik
ik
− 1+Γ
1+Γi
i
(1+Γi )2
P s
2
ik
1+Γi

< 0, making the first term in the above expression

negative as well when 0 < θ < 1.
66
This assumption is made for analytical convenience, however, a wide variety of simulations indicate that large deviations from this assumption do not change the relevant parameter bounds. The reason is that empirically the variance of
idiosyncratic shocks is much larger than the variance of exchange rates and thus the terms with idiosyncratic shocks in them
are what matter. Increasing significantly the size of the variance of the idiosyncratic exchange rate shocks, var(∆vj ), or
allowing the variance of these shocks to be correlated with wi has minimal impact.

45


as Γi < min

2−w
1
P 2 ik
1−2θ , 2(
j wjk )−wi



.67 Thus, under reasonable parameter restrictions this model implies a

positive relationship between pass-through and dispersion.

B.2

More General Flexible Price Results

In this section, we show that the intuition from our simple framework in Section 4.1, survives in a more
general framework that allows for general equilibrium effects. Consider the problem of a foreign firm
selling goods to importers in the U.S. The firm has perfectly flexible prices that are set in dollars. The
optimal flexible price of good i at the border (in logs) can be written as the sum of the gross markup
(µi ), the dollar marginal cost (mci ) and an idiosyncratic shock (i ):
pi = µi + mci (ei, ηi )
Taking the total derivative of equation gives:
∆pi = −Γi (∆pi − ∆p) + α∆ei + ∆ηi
which can be rearranged to give:
∆pi =

1
[α∆ei + Γi ∆p + ∆ηi ]
1 + Γi

In Section 4.1 we explored the case when all indirect GE effects were shut off (∆p = 0). Here, we
include them to show that most of the simple intuition about the positive relationship between MRPT
and dispersion survives the introduction of GE effects. The above equation can be rearranged to give
the simple pass-through equation:
∆pi
αi
Γi ∆p
=
+
∆ei
1 + Γi 1 + Γi ∆ei

(10)

We can do some comparative statics to see how parameters affect pass-through
i
∂ ∆p
∆ei

∂α
i
∂ ∆p
∆ei

∂Γi

= −
=

=

1
> 0
1 + Γi

αi
1
∆p
2 +
2 ∆e
(1 + Γi )
(1 + Γi )
i

∆p
∆ei

− αi
2

(1 + Γi )

< 0 if αi >

(11)

∆p
∆ei

As before, an upper bound on the level of pass-through is given by what fraction of marginal costs are
denominated in units of the foreign currency, αi . The higher this share, the higher the potential exchange
67

For the LHS on the min, given the restrictions on θ, the strictest restriction here is Γi < 1. For the RHS, again, this is
Γi < 1 as long as it is well defined (This object is not well defined (it is less than zero) when firm i is very large relative to
the rest of the sector and all other firms are very small). In all other cases, this restriction is satisfied and is typically much
larger than 1. For example, if all firms were the same size and there were N firms in the industry, the restriction would be
Γi < 2N − 1.

46

rate pass-through. General equilibrium effects operating through the domestic price level do affect the
comparative static with respect to the mark-up elasticity. All things equal, if the mark-up elasticity is
higher, then less of the exchange rate shock is passed into prices, which lowers

∆pi
∆ei .

This is the first term

in equation (11). However, this is now an additional effect: a higher Γi means that individual prices
are more sensitive to changes in the aggregate price level because strategic complementarities are higher.
This is the second term in equation (11). This term is positive because

∆p
∆ei

> 0 since increases in foreign

marginal costs also raise the domestic price level. The total effect is ambiguous in general.
for realistic cases (for instance all the parameter values we consider in our model), αi >

However,

∆p
∆ei .

To see

this, remember that αi is the fraction of marginal cost that is denominated in foreign currency. This
gives an upper bound on the level of pass-through to individual prices from exchange rate shocks. It is
hard to see how pass-through to the overall price level can be bigger than that effect since not all goods
domestically are affected by the exchange rate shock and the overall-pass-through rate is affected by the
level of strategic complementarities, Γi , which lowers the level of pass-through.
We now show that changes in parameters that increase pass-through also increase the variance
of price changes. The variance of price changes is given by:

2

2

2
αi
Γi
1
var(∆ei ) +
var(∆p) +
var(∆ηi )
1 + Γi
1 + Γi
1 + Γi
αi Γi
αi
Γi
+
cov(∆p, ∆ηi )
2 cov(∆ei , ∆p) +
2 cov(∆ei , ∆ηi ) +
(1 + Γi )
(1 + Γi )
(1 + Γi )2


var(∆pi ) =

But the last terms are zero by assumption that idiosyncratic shocks are orthogonal to exchange rate
shocks and will wash out in aggregate so that they do not affect the aggregate price level. This implies
that

var(∆pi ) =

αi
1 + Γi

2


var(∆ei ) +

Γi
1 + Γi

2


var(∆p) +

1
1 + Γi

2
var(∆ηi ) +

αi Γi
cov(∆ei , ∆p)
(1 + Γi )2
(12)

Using this expression, we get that
2αi2
2Γi
2
αi (1 − Γi )
∂var(∆pi )
=−
var(∆ei )+
var(∆p)−
var(ηi )+
cov(∆ei , ∆p). (13)
3
3
3
∂Γi
(1 + Γi )
(1 + Γi )
(1 + Γi )
(1 + Γi )3
We now show that under a mild and empirically realistic restriction, the variance of price changes
is declining in Γi . Empirically, we know that the variance of idiosyncratic price changes is an order of
magnitude larger than the variance of aggregate price changes and exchange rate movements. With this
in mind, we impose the restriction that
var(∆pi ) > var(∆ei ) + var(∆p).
We can substitute this restriction into (12) to get that


αi
1 + Γi

2



Γi
var(∆ei )+
1 + Γi

2



1
var(∆p)+
1 + Γi

2

47

var(∆ηi )+

αi Γi
cov(∆ei , ∆p) > var(∆ei )+var(∆p)
(1 + Γi )2

or
h
i
h
i
var(ηi ) > (1 + Γi )2 − Γ2i var(∆p) + (1 + Γi )2 − αi2 var(∆ei ) − αi Γi cov(∆ei , ∆p)

(14)

Using (13) we have

∂var(∆pi )
∂Γi

2αi2
2Γi
2
αi (1 − Γi )
cov(∆ei , ∆p)
var(∆ei ) +
var(∆p) −
var(ηi ) +
3
3
3
(1 + Γi )
(1 + Γi )
(1 + Γi )
(1 + Γi )3
∝ −2αi2 var(∆ei ) + 2Γi var(∆p) − 2var(ηi ) + αi (1 − Γi )cov(∆ei , ∆p)
= −

Substituting the inequality (14) for var(ηi ) gives

∂var(∆pi )
∂Γi

< −2αi2 var(∆ei ) + 2Γi var(∆p) + αi (1 − Γi )cov(∆ei , ∆p)
h
i
h
i
−2 (1 + Γi )2 − Γ2i var(∆p) − 2 (1 + Γi )2 − αi2 var(∆ei ) + 2αi Γi cov(∆ei , ∆p)
h
i
h
i
2
2
2
= −2 (1 + Γi ) − Γi − Γi var(∆p) − 2 (1 + Γi ) var(∆ei ) + αi [Γi + 1] cov(∆ei , ∆p)
h
i
h
i
< −2 (1 + Γi )2 − Γ2i − Γi var(∆p) − 2 (1 + Γi )2 var(∆ei ) + αi [Γi + 1] var(∆ei )
h
i
h
i
< −2 (1 + Γi )2 − Γ2i − Γi var(∆p) − 2 (1 + Γi )2 var(∆ei ) + (1 + Γi )2 var(∆ei )
h
i
h
i
= −2 (1 + Γi )2 − Γ2i − Γi var(∆p) − (1 + Γi )2 var(∆ei )
< 0

The second inequality uses the result that ∆p moves less than one for one with the exchange rate.
In sum, even in the case when indirect GE effects are allowed, our central theoretical prediction
still holds: changes in parameters that increase exchange rate pass-through (αi ↑, Γi ↓) also increase the
variance of price changes.

B.3

Steady-State Calibration

This subsection shows how super-elasticity ε), shock volatility (σ) and import shares (α) are identified
in steady-state. As described in Section 5.1.4, we jointly target average pass-through, the R2 from our
MRPT regression and the mean standard deviation of item level price changes. Figure B.4 shows that
varying each parameter produces a different patterns of movement between these moments. In this
exercise, we hold all parameters at their best-fit calibration and then very one parameter at a time and
show its implications for MRPT, R2 and the standard deviation of price changes. Similar patterns arise
if we fix parameters at other values instead, so these relationship are quite robust.

B.4

Cross-Item Indirect Inference

In this section, we repeat our indirect inference exercise but now allowing for permanent firm heterogeneity
instead of time-series aggregate shocks. In particular, we allow firms to differ by κ, ε and σA . We assume
48

Figure B.4: Identification of Baseline Parameters

MRPT

Super Elasticity (0)

0.22

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.18

0.18

0.18

0.16

0.16

0.16

0.14

0.14

0.14

R2

0

2

4

0.22

0.06

0.08

0.15

0.03

0.03

0.03

0.02

0.02

0.02

0.01

0.01

0.01

0

0
0

XSD

Shock volatility (<) Imports Cost Share (,)

0.22

2

4

0.06

0
0.15

0.08

0.14

0.14

0.14

0.12

0.12

0.12

0.1

0.1

0.08

0.08
0

2

4

0.2

0.2

0.1
0.06

0.08

0.08
0.15

0.2

This figure shows how our three target moments (labeled on the left-hand side) vary with parameters (labeled as the titles
of each column).

that each parameter takes on one of two values uniformly distributed around the steady-state value.68
For example, we assume that for a particular firm, κ is either equal to κh = .043 + κ∆ or κl = .043 − κ∆
where κ∆ is a parameter to be estimated which governs the degree of menu cost differences across firms.
We allow for a similar two point symmetric distribution for each source of heterogeneity so that we have
three parameters which must be estimated: θ = (κ∆ , σ∆ , ε∆ ).
Fixing κ∆ , σ∆ , ε∆ there are then eight different types of firms in our model (taking on high or low
values for each parameter), and we assume an equal number of firms of each type.69 After solving for the
sectoral equilibrium with these eight firm types we simulate a firm panel, which we sample exactly as in
the BLS microdata to account for any small sample issues which might arise in our empirical specification.
From this firm panel we calculate an auxiliary model that consists of fifteen reduced form moments g (θ)
which capture essential features of the data. We then try to match these simulated moments to their
empirical counterparts.
To construct our empirical moments, we first sort firms into five bins by their standard deviation.
We then calculate the relative standard deviation of price changes, the relative MRPT, and the relative
frequency for each standard deviation bin.
Given these 15 moments, we pick our 3 parameters to solve θb = arg minθ g (θ)0 W (θ) g (θ) where
W (θ) is a positive definite weight-matrix.70 Just as in the time-series, this indirect inference estimation
68

When relevant, we bound the value of κl , εl , σl at 0.
While it would be desirable to allow for more than a 2-point distribution of heterogeneity for each parameter, allowing for
a 3-point distribution would require solving the model for 27 different types of firms while allowing for a 4-point distribution
would require 64 firm types, so it is clear that the problem rapidly rises in difficulty. Since we want to estimate the model,
we must resolve it for a large number of κ∆ , σ∆ , ε∆ which rapidly becomes infeasible. Allowing for different numbers of
each firm also greatly increases the parameter space.
70
We pick W (θ) to be the standard efficient weight matrix so that we can apply asymptotic formulas for standard errors
but using an identity weight matrix did not change our qualitative conclusions.
69

49

strongly rejects restricted specifications with no ε variation as well as specifications with any significant
heterogeneity in σ. Figure B.5 displays these results visually, showing the best-fit for all fifteen moments
as well as the fit of restricted models which shut down various sources of heterogeneity.
Figure B.5: Cross-Item Indirect Inference
Relative PT
by XSD bins

Best Fit

2

3

1

1

1
0
1

2

3

4

5

0.5
1

2

3

4

5

3

2

0
1

2

3

4

5

2

2

3

4

5

0
2

3

4

5

2

3

4

5

0
1

2

3

4

5

3

4

5

1

2

3

4

5

1

2

3

4

5

1

1

0

2

1.5

2

1

1

0.5
1

3

2

5

1

1
1

4

1.5

2

0

3

0.5
1

3

1

2

1

1

0

1
1.5

2

1

Relative Freq
by XSD bins

1.5

Data
Model

2

0

No < variation No 5 variation No 0 variation

Relative XSD
by XSD bins

0.5
1

2

3

4

5

This figure shows the model fit to all fifteen moments as well as the fit of restricted models which shut down various sources
of heterogeneity.

The main take-away from this visual inspection is that the fit in the second row is dramatically
worse than the fit in the first row. Turning off heterogeneity in ε means the next-best model fit does
not generate enough heterogeneity in price change dispersion, fails to generate enough of a positive
relationship between price change dispersion and pass-through, and it implies a negative rather than
positive correlation between dispersion and pass-through. In contrast, turning off heterogeneity in menu
costs or in volatility has only negligible effects on the model fit.

B.5

Additional Shocks

In addition to the above aggregate shocks, which we also explore in the cross-section, we study two
additional aggregate shocks which are more applicable to the time-series. First, we allow the volatility of
exchange rates to change across time, since the 2008 recession was also associated with greater exchange
rate volatility.

However, we find that even large increases in exchange rate volatility have only mild

quantitative effects, for the same reason that changes in α have minimal affect on the dispersion of price
changes.
It is also possible that the large degree of pass-through observed during the Great Recession was
driven by the fact that the recession was a large shock which affected many firms. If a shock is common
to more firms, then it might have greater general equilibrium effects and generate more pass-through.
To assess the role of the ”commonness” of shocks, we introduce time-variation in the fraction of firms
that are sensitive to the exchange rate, ω. As ω rises, exchange rate shocks affect more firms and general
50

equilibrium effects increase in importance.

However, the quantitative effect of changes in ω on pass-

through is relatively small and there are no effects of ω on the dispersion of price changes: increasing
ω from 0.2 to 0.9 only increases pass-through from 16% to 23% and has no effect on dispersion. Thus,
general equilibrium effects in our model cannot account for the empirical relationship between month-level
dispersion and exchange rate pass-through.

51

Table A1: Alternative Business Cycle Controls

Δe
IQR×Δe

IQR

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

IQR+Recession
Dummy

IQR+GDP
growth

IQR+HP
filtered GDP

XSD+Recession
Dummy

XSD+GDP
growth

XSD+ HP
filtered GDP

0.128

0.150

0.143

0.122

0.152

0.140

(0.012)

(0.011)

(0.011)

(0.012)

(0.012)

(0.012)

0.049

0.057

0.072

(0.010)

(0.009)

(0.010)

-0.001

-0.002

-0.002

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

0.033

0.043

0.055

(0.009)

(0.008)

(0.010)

-0.001

-0.001

-0.001

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

XSD×Δe

XSD

Recession
Dummy×Δe

0.119

0.164

(0.034)

(0.033)

Recession
Dummy

-0.008

-0.009

(0.002)

(0.002)

GDP
Growth×Δe

-0.028

-0.042

(0.010)

(0.009)

GDP
Growth

0.000

0.001

(0.001)

(0.001)

HP
GDP×Δe

0.002

-0.013

(0.011)

(0.011)

HP GDP

0.002

0.002

(0.001)

Num obs
R2

129260
0.039

129260
0.038

129260
0.038

(0.001)

129260
0.038

129260
0.038

129260
0.037

All regressions control for ∆ cpi, ∆ us gdp, ∆ uscpi and allow for exchange rate pass-through to vary with business cycle
controls. Monthly recession dummies picked to match NBER dates, GDP growth is real chained quarterly GDP growth
and HP filtered GDP is log real GDP level Hodrick-Prescott filtered with a smoothing parameter of 1600. Regressions have
country×PSL fixed effects and robust standard errors clustered at the country×PSL level. Dispersion and frequency are
standardized so that coefficients represent a one-standard deviation effect. Sample period is October 1993-January 2015.

52

Table A2: Time-Series Results by Country

Δe

IQR×Δe

IQR
All Ctls
Num obs
R2

(1)
OECD
0.206

(2)
Asia
0.147

(3)
Eurozone
0.254

(4)
Canada
0.222

(5)
Mexico
0.075

(0.015)

(0.019)

(0.029)

(0.043)

(0.055)

0.058

0.027

0.040

0.141

0.127

(0.012)

(0.012)

(0.026)

(0.034)

(0.035)

-0.001

0.000

0.001

-0.004

0.002

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.002)

(0.026)

(0.001)

Yes
68478
0.047

Yes
43590
0.052

Yes
14591
0.079

Yes
26309
0.030

Yes
8269
0.016

“All controls” are frequency of adjustment (freq), frequency of product substitutions (subs), freq and subs × ∆e, gdp growth,
gdp growth× ∆e, SDe, SDe×∆e, month dummies, month dummies ×∆e, t, t×∆e, ∆ cpi, ∆ us gdp, ∆ uscpi. See text for
additional description. Regressions have country×PSL fixed effects and robust standard errors clustered at the country×PSL
level. Dispersion and frequency are standardized so that coefficients represent a one-standard deviation effect. Sample period
is October 1993-January 2015.

Table A3: Cross-Item Results by Country

Δe

(1)
OECD
0.257

(2)
Asia
0.123

(3)
Eurozone
0.299

(4)
Canada
0.279

(5)
Mexico
0.103

(0.020)

(0.022)

(0.039)

(0.061)

(0.037)

XSDitem×Δe 0.072

XSDitem

0.048

0.099

0.124

0.031

(0.019)

(0.020)

(0.034)

(0.065)

(0.045)

0.002

-0.002

0.004

0.003

0.004

(0.001)

(0.002)

(0.003)

(0.001)

(0.003)

Freqitem×Δe 0.085

Freqitem
Num obs
R2

0.012

0.067

0.178

0.076

(0.016)

(0.014)

(0.030)

(0.055)

(0.035)

-0.001

-0.001

-0.004

-0.001

0.010

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.002)

(0.002)

(0.006)

68478
0.048

43590
0.049

14591
0.084

26309
0.031

8269
0.010

All regressions control for ∆ cpi, ∆ us gdp, ∆ uscpi and have country×PSL fixed effects with robust standard errors clustered
at the country×PSL level. Dispersion and frequency are standardized so that coefficients represent a one-standard deviation
effect. Sample period is October 1993-January 2015.

53

Table A4: Results for Manufactured Goods

Δe

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

Overall

IQR

IQR+Freq

IQR+All Ctrls

XSD

XSD+Freq

XSD+All Ctrls

0.156

0.148

0.147

0.176

0.153

0.152

0.180

(0.012)

(0.011)

(0.011)

(0.015)

(0.012)

(0.012)

(0.015)

0.062

0.061

0.042

(0.010)

(0.010)

(0.010)

-0.002

-0.002

-0.002

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

0.051

0.050

0.030

(0.009)

(0.009)

(0.009)

-0.002

-0.002

-0.002

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

IQR×Δe
IQR
XSD×Δe
XSD
Freq×Δe
Freq
All Ctrls
Num obs
R2

No
129260
0.035

No
129260
0.038

0.011

0.017

0.013

0.021

(0.009)

(0.011)

(0.009)

(0.009)

0.003

0.005

0.004

0.004

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

No
129260
0.039

Yes
129260
0.040

No
129260
0.038

Yes
129260
0.039

No
129260
0.037

“All controls” are frequency of adjustment (freq), frequency of product substitutions (subs), freq and subs × ∆e, gdp growth,
gdp growth× ∆e, SDe, SDe×∆e, month dummies, month dummies ×∆e, t, t×∆e, ∆ cpi, ∆ us gdp, ∆ uscpi. See text for
additional description. Regressions have country×PSL fixed effects and robust standard errors clustered at the country×PSL
level. Dispersion and frequency are standardized so that coefficients represent a one-standard deviation effect. Sample period
is October 1993-January 2015.

Table A5: pass-through at Fixed Horizons

Δe
IQR×Δe
IQR
All Ctrls
Num obs
R2

(1)
1 month
0.037

(2)
3 month
0.078

(3)
6 month
0.118

(4)
12 month
0.125

(0.006)

(0.011)

(0.017)

(0.024)

0.017

0.024

0.032

0.023

(0.005)

(0.008)

(0.010)

(0.011)

-0.000

0.001

0.004

0.011

(0.000)

(0.000)

(0.001)

(0.002)

Yes
354851
0.009

Yes
335848
0.036

Yes
304041
0.082

Yes
249103
0.136

These show the relationship between dispersion and pass-through without conditioning on price adjustment, at various
horizons. This specification allows us to expand our sample to items with 1+ price changes instead of the 2+ in our baseline
sample. See Appendix for additional description. “All controls” are frequency of adjustment (freq), frequency of product
substitutions (subs), freq and subs × ∆e, gdp growth, gdp growth× ∆e, SDe, SDe×∆e, month dummies, month dummies
×∆e, t, t×∆e, ∆ cpi, ∆ us gdp, ∆ uscpi. Regressions have country×PSL fixed effects and robust standard errors clustered
at the country×PSL level. Dispersion and frequency are standardized so that coefficients represent a one-standard deviation
effect. Sample period is October 1993-January 2015.

54

Table A6: Sample Summary Statistics

All nonimputed

Price
Mean
Observations Items
Life
2,324,069
107,549 41.1

Mean #
Changes
per item
8.9

# Items
w/ < 2
changes
36385

Δp 25th
Δp
percentile median
-.03
.002

Δp75th
percentile
.04

Exclude
1,188,630
comm.,
intrafirm,
nondollar

58,567

34.6

5.1

22826

-.04

.005

.054

Exclude
items w/
< 2 price
changes

35,741

38.5

7.1

0

-.041

0.004

0.055

772,341

This table shows summary statistics for our baseline sample. Price observations is the total number of month-item price
observations, items is the total number of items in the sample, mean life is the average number of months between an item’s
first and last observation in the data set, mean changes per item calculates the total number of changes for each item and
then averages across items, items w/ ¡ 2 changes is just a count of the total number of items with 0 or 1 price change, and
the price change percentiles show the 25th, 50th, and 75th percentile of non-zero price changes in each sample. Note that
since items sometimes have missing price observations within their sample llife, the total number of price observations in
column 1 is less than the number of items times the mean item life.

55

