                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             AUSTERITY IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE GREAT RECESSION

                                     Christopher L. House
                                     Christian Proebsting
                                        Linda L. Tesar

                                     Working Paper 23147
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w23147


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   February 2017




We thank Karel Mertens, Bartosz Mackowiak, Thomas Philippon and Efrem Castelnuovo for
excellent feedback and suggestions. We also thank seminar participants at the ASSA 2017
meeting, Brigham Young University, Boston University, Boston College, DIW, the ECB, the
EEA summer meeting, the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, the Graduate Institute of Geneva,
the University of Lausanne, New York University, the NBER summer institute, the RBA
macroeconomic workshop in Sydney, and the University of Michigan. We gratefully
acknowledge financial support from the Michigan Institute for Teaching and Research in
Economics (MITRE). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Christopher L. House, Christian Proebsting, and Linda L. Tesar. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Austerity in the Aftermath of the Great Recession
Christopher L. House, Christian Proebsting, and Linda L. Tesar
NBER Working Paper No. 23147
February 2017
JEL No. E00,E62,F41,F44,F45

                                          ABSTRACT

We examine austerity in advanced economies since the Great Recession. Austerity shocks are
reductions in government purchases that exceed reduced-form forecasts. Austerity shocks are
statistically associated with lower real GDP, lower inflation and higher net exports. We estimate a
cross-sectional multiplier of roughly 2. A multi-country DSGE model calibrated to 29 advanced
economies generates a multiplier consistent with the data. Counterfactuals suggest that
eliminating austerity would have substantially reduced output losses in Europe. Austerity shocks
were sufficiently contractionary that debt-to-GDP ratios in some European countries increased as
a consequence of endogenous reductions in GDP and tax revenue.


Christopher L. House                             Linda L. Tesar
University of Michigan                           Department of Economics
Department of Economics                          University of Michigan
238 Lorch Hall                                   Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220                         and NBER
and NBER                                         ltesar@umich.edu
chouse@umich.edu

Christian Proebsting
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
CH-1015 Lausanne
Switzerland
cproebsting@gmail.com




A appendices is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w23147
1     Introduction
The economies in Europe contracted sharply and almost synchronously during the global
financial crisis. In the aftermath of the crisis, however, economic performance has varied. An
open question is whether differences in rates of recovery are due to differences in the severity
of external shocks, the policy reactions to the shocks, or the economic conditions at the time
of the crisis. The financial press and many economists have attributed at least some of the
slow rate of recovery to austerity policies that cut government expenditures and increased
tax rates at precisely the time when faltering economies required stimulus. This paper shows
that contractions in government purchases can in fact account for much of the divergence in
national economic performance since the Great Recession.
    Figure 1 plots real per capita GDP for 29 countries including the U.S., countries in the
European Union, Switzerland, and Norway. The data is normalized so that per capita GDP
is 100 in 2009:2 for every country. The figure also plots per capita GDP for the European
aggregate. Overall, the aggregate European experience is similar to that of the United States.
This similarity, however, masks a tremendous amount of variation across Europe. At one end
of the spectrum is Greece, for which the “recovery” never began. Greek per capita income at
the end of 2014 is more than 25 percent below its 2009 level. While Greece’s GDP performance
is exceptionally negative, a contraction in GDP over this period is not unique. About a third
of the countries have end-2014 levels of real per capita GDP at or below their 2009 levels.
At the other end of the spectrum is Lithuania. Like Greece, Lithuania experienced a strong
contraction during the Great Recession. However, it then returned to a rapid rate of growth
quickly thereafter.
    Our goal is to document cross-country differences in economic performance since 2010
and to study the extent to which the differences can be explained by macroeconomic pol-
icy. We first construct measures of austerity shocks that occurred during the 2010 to 2014
period. We find that austerity in government purchases - defined as a reduction in govern-
ment purchases that is larger than that implied by reduced-form forecasting regressions -
is statistically associated with below-forecast GDP in the cross-section. The cross-sectional
multiplier on government purchases is greater than one even after controlling for alternative
measures of credit spreads and debt ratios. The negative relationship between austerity in
government purchases and GDP is robust to the method used to forecast both GDP and
government purchases in the 2010 to 2014 period, and holds for countries with fixed exchange


                                               2
rates as well as those with flexible exchange rates. Austerity in government purchases is also
negatively associated with consumption, investment, GDP growth and inflation. In terms of
international variables, a shortfall in government purchases is associated with an increase in
net exports and a depreciation of the trade-weighted nominal exchange rate. In general, these
relationships are robust to the country’s exchange rate regime though, not surprisingly, the
impact on exchange rates is smaller and the impact on net exports larger for countries within
the euro area and those with exchange rates fixed to the euro.
      We develop a multi-country DSGE model to make comparisons between the predictions
from our model and macroeconomic data for 2010-2014. The model features trade in inter-
mediate goods, sticky prices, hand-to-mouth consumers, and financial frictions that drive a
wedge between the marginal product of capital and the user cost of capital. The model is
calibrated to reflect relative country size, trade flows and financial linkages, and the country’s
exchange rate regime. The model incorporates shocks to government purchases, the cost of
credit, and monetary policy. We focus on these three shocks because there is broad agreement
that these factors played an important role in shaping the reaction to the Great Recession.
      The benchmark model generates predictions that are consistent with data. In both the
cross-sectional data and the model, a one percent reduction in government purchases is asso-
ciated with a two percent reduction in GDP. As in the data, the model generates a positive
relationship between austerity and net exports and a strong negative relationship between
austerity and inflation. Among the features that are essential to generate large cross-sectional
spending multipliers are hand-to-mouth consumers, consumption-labor complementarity in
the utility function (Greenwood, Hercowitz and Huffman, 1988) and significant trade link-
ages. The zero lower bound (ZLB) plays an important role in generating a large time-series
multiplier but has virtually no influence on the magnitude of the cross-sectional multiplier.
      We use our model to conduct a number of counterfactual experiments. The model suggests
that had countries not experienced austerity shocks, aggregate output in the EU101 would
have been only roughly equal to its pre-crisis level rather than an output loss of 3 percent.
The output losses in the GIIPS economies (Greece, Ireland, Italy, Portugal and Spain) would
have been cut from nearly 18 percent below trend by the end of 2014 to only 1 percent below
trend.
      Allowing European nations to pursue independent monetary policy in the face of austerity
  1
    Belgium, Germany, Estonia, France, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Austria, Slovenia, Slovak Republic, Fin-
land.



                                                   3
shocks helps limit the drop in GDP. Relative to the benchmark model, allowing countries to
have independent monetary policy would raise output for the GIIPS economies but would
reduce output for the EU10. This is because the nominal exchange rate depreciates in the
GIIPS region, stimulating exports and output. In contrast, under the euro, the EU10 already
enjoys the export advantage of a relatively weak currency.
   Finally, the model also allows us to consider the dynamics of the debt-to-GDP ratio under
different conditions. The main rationale for austerity is to reduce debt and bring debt-to-GDP
ratios back to historical norms. However, according to our model, reductions in government
spending had a sufficiently severe contractionary effect on economic activity that debt-to-GDP
ratios in some countries actually increased as a consequence of austerity.
   Our research relates to a large and growing body of work on the economic consequences of
fiscal austerity and tax and spending multipliers in open economy settings. Alesina, Favero
and Giavazzi (2015) and Alesina et al. (2016) examine the economic consequences of planned,
multi-year, fiscal adjustments in OECD economies. Their identification strategy borrows from
Romer and Romer (2010) by isolating fiscal consolidations motivated by long run budget
concerns and excluding cyclical fiscal adjustments. According to their analysis, spending-
based fiscal consolidations entail relatively small economic costs while tax-based consolidations
are substantially more costly. Our analysis differs from theirs in several dimensions. While
Alesina, Favero and Giavazzi (2015) base their conclusions on data since 1978, our paper
focuses exclusively on the post crisis period 2010-2014. This is important because the 2010-
2014 period was characterized by large contractions in government spending, unusually high
debt, a preexisting currency union with coordinated monetary policy, interest rates that were
essentially at the ZLB, and financial market failures. Another important difference is that
we focus on actual changes in spending and taxes rather than preannounced plans for fiscal
consolidation. To the extent that governments implemented multi-year fiscal consolidation
plans, these would be included in our estimates of fiscal shocks.
   The setup of our model is similar to Blanchard, Erceg and Lindé (2016) who use a two-
country DSGE model (based on Erceg and Lindé, 2013) to study how changes in spending by
the core economies in Europe affect countries on the periphery. They find sizeable spillover
effects when trade flows are large and countries are at the ZLB. We use a multi-country
model that reflects relative country size, trade linkages, heterogeneous fiscal policy and actual
differences in monetary policy regimes. The multi-country setting more precisely capture
cross-country spillovers and produces more realistic counterfactuals. Because trade is widely

                                               4
dispersed throughout Europe, cross-country spillover effects are more muted in our multi-
country framework relative to standard two-country models.
        Martin and Philippon (2016) examine business cycle dynamics in seven euro area countries
around the time of the financial crisis. In their model, fiscal consolidations are a consequence
of the buildup in public debt prior to the crisis and the associated increase in credit spreads.
Our results are similar to the extent that contractions in government spending are associated
with large reductions in economic activity. However, while Martin and Philippon (2016) are
correct to draw attention to the contractionary effects of debt deleveraging, we find negative
effects of fiscal consolidation independent of the level of debt and credit spreads. Indeed, even
if we exclude high-debt countries from the analysis, we still find clear and compelling evidence
of negative consequences of fiscal austerity in the aftermath of the Great Recession.



2         The Empirical Relationship between Austerity and
          Economic Performance
Table 1 lists the countries in our data set together with each country’s relative size, the share
of imports in final demand and the country’s exchange rate regime as of 2010.2 Country size
varies from less than one percent of the European aggregate (e.g. Cyprus and Luxembourg)
to almost 100 percent (the U.S.).3 The import share varies from a low of 13 percent in the
U.S. to very high shares in Ireland and Luxembourg (44 percent and 57 percent, respectively).
The average import share in our sample of European countries is 32 percent. The model in
Section 3 will capture the extent of bilateral trade linkages between country pairs, as well
as the overall openness to trade. Most countries in the sample have a fixed exchange rate
because they are part of the euro area, or they have pegged their exchange rate to the euro.
Nine have floating exchange rates.
    2
     Our primary data sources are Eurostat and the OECD. The dataset includes all countries in the European
Union with the exception of Croatia and Malta (excluded due to data limitations) and with the addition of
Norway and Switzerland (outside of the European Union but members of the European Free Trade Association,
EFTA). Our sample covers the period 1960 to 2014; it is an unbalanced panel due to limitations in data
availability for some countries.
   3
     Country size is measured as the country’s final demand (in nominal US dollars) relative to the sum of all
European countries’ final demand, where final demand is GDP less net exports. The European aggregate is
the sum of all European countries in our sample. The import share is the share of imports in final demand
both averaged over 2005-2010. We construct this share from the OECD Trade in Value Added database.




                                                      5
2.1       Measuring Austerity
There are two conceptual issues in studying the impact of fiscal austerity on economic out-
comes. One is that a policy can only be said to be austere relative to some benchmark. The
second issue is the endogeneity of fiscal policy to the state of the economy – did a cut in gov-
ernment expenditures adversely affect output, or did government expenditures contract along
with the decline in output? A commonly adopted approach is to identify periods of austerity
as episodes when, for example, the primary balance (the general government balance net of
interest payments) decreases by a certain amount. Such data is available from the IMF and
the OECD, often reported as a share of “cyclically-adjusted GDP” as a way of correcting for
the current stage of the business cycle. This approach partially addresses the issue of defining
austerity by picking an arbitrary cut off, but does not address endogeneity. An alternative
is the narrative approach pioneered by Romer and Romer (2004). This method relies on a
subjective assessment of the historical policy record to identify policy shifts that are motivated
by long-run fiscal consolidation rather than the need for short-run temporary fiscal stimulus.
The narrative approach addresses the endogeneity problem, though it requires judgment in
interpreting policy statements by government officials. The identified policy shifts may also
reflect the intent of policymakers and not capture the policies that are ultimately enacted.4
       A third approach, and the one we adopt here, is to examine forecast errors in government
purchases and their relationship with associated forecast errors in economic outcomes.5 We
borrow heavily from Blanchard and Leigh (2013) who take a similar approach. However, rather
than relying on forecasts generated by the IMF or national governments, we produce our own
forecast measures. This gives us the flexibility to consider different methods of detrending
and additional explanatory variables. The constructed forecast errors can be interpreted as
departures from “normal” fiscal policy reactions to economic fluctuations. If government
purchases do not typically increase during economic contractions and this policy reaction
continues in the 2010-2014 period, our procedure will categorize that spending path as “not
austere.” On the other hand, if spending typically increases during recessions but does not do
   4
     Alesina, Favero and Giavazzi (2015) and Alesina et al. (2016) use the Romer-Romer approach to identify
the effect of multi-year fiscal plans on economic activity. Using historical data, they find strong effects of
tax changes on economic activity. Our analysis differs in that we focus on the 2010-2014 period which was
dominated by reductions in government expenditures.
   5
     We also examined austerity in total government outlays, total revenue, and the primary balance. This
analysis suggested that, unlike government purchases, changes in tax revenue and the primary balance have
limited explanatory power for economic performance. The results using these alternative measures of austerity
are included in the Appendix.



                                                      6
so in the aftermath of the crisis, our procedure will categorize that spending path as “austere.”
       We adopt the following forecast specification for real government purchases:
                                                                                   
                            ln Gi,t   = ln Gi,t−1 + g + γ ln YbEU,t−1 − ln Yi,t−1
                                                                                                   (2.1)
                                        + θG ln Yi,t − ln Ybi,t + εG
                                                                   i,t .


Here ln Gi,t is the log of real government purchases in country i at time t, ln Yi,t is the log of
real Gross Domestic Product for country i at time t. The “hat” indicates the predicted value
of the variable. This forecast specification accounts for both cross-sectional average growth in
GDP (the parameter g) and convergence dynamics (through the parameter γ) as well as an
estimated cyclical relationship (through the parameter θG ). This forecast method appeals to
basic growth theory as it assumes that all countries are ultimately converging to a common
growth rate g. Thus, it predicts that growth rates in Central and Eastern European countries
are expected to decline as their per capita GDP approaches Western European levels.
       To implement this equation we first estimate average GDP growth for twelve euro area
              6
economies         for the period 1993-2005 (annual) with an OLS estimate of


                                         ln YEU,t = β EU + g · t + eEU,t .                           (2.2)


The estimated value for g is 0.019 (i.e., 1.9 percent annual growth) with a standard error of
0.0012. To construct the convergence parameter γ we then run the regression
                                                                             
                         ln Yi,t − ln Yi,t−1 − ĝ = γ ln ŶEU,t−1 − ln Ŷi,t−1 + εγi,t .


using a sample which includes all countries in Central and Eastern Europe7 for the same time
period. Note, the variable ln YbEU,t−1 is the fitted value from (2.2). Our estimated value for γ
is 0.023 with a standard error of 0.002. We then estimate the parameter θG by least squares
from (2.1) using all available data up to 2005. The fitted value for ln Ŷi,t−1 comes from our
forecast of GDP which we discuss in detail below. The estimate of the cyclicality parameter
       G
is θ̂ = 0.38 with a standard error of 0.06.
       The parameters in the forecast equations are estimated using data prior to the crisis.
   6
     Belgium, Denmark, Germany, Ireland, Spain, France, Italy, Luxembourg, Austria, Netherlands, Portugal
and Finland.
   7
     Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Estonia, Greece, Cyprus, Latvia, Lithuania, Hungary, Poland, Romania, Slove-
nia and the Slovak Republic.


                                                        7
Specifically, we use only data up to 2005:4 to estimate the parameters of the forecasting
equations. Our period of interest is after the crisis, 2010-2014. The forecast errors for 2010
through 2014 are the difference between predicted values and the actual values. The predicted
values are based on the forecasting parameters as well as information on government purchases
up to 2009. So, for the year 2010, we use the actual realizations of ln Gi,2009 and ln Yi,2009 in
(2.1). Starting from t = 2011, we replace ln Gi,t−1 with its predicted value. Thus, for 2010-
2014, our forecasts use data on government purchases up to 2009, but use observed data
on GDP. The reason for including actual GDP in the forecast is that we want to limit the
endogeneity of government purchases to the current state of the economy.
       The out-of-sample residuals can be interpreted as unusually high or low realizations of
that variable relative to its predicted values taking current economic conditions into account.
Though they are not identified structural shocks from an econometric point of view, we can
still ask whether there is a correlation between the forecast errors of government policy and
various measures of economic performance.8,9


2.2       Measures of Economic Performance
We construct measures of economic performance in a similar manner to the forecasting pro-
cedure for government purchases. We use the following forecast specification for real GDP,
consumption, and investment:
                                                                            
                        ln Yi,t   = ln Yi,t−1 + g + γ ln YEU ,t−1 − ln Yi,t−1 + εYi,t .
                                                         b                                                (2.3)


Equation (2.3) is written for real per capita GDP (Y ). As with the forecasts for government
purchases, this forecast specification accounts for both average GDP growth (the parameter g)
and convergence dynamics (the parameter γ). The parameters g and γ are estimated over the
time period 1993 - 2005 just as they were in Section 2.1 and ln YbEU,t−1 is the fitted value from
(2.2).10 In addition to providing the forecasts for GDP, consumption, and investment, the
   8
      The statistical properties of the forecast errors for government purchases as well as forecast errors for
several other measures of austerity are reported in the Appendix.
    9
      Martin and Philippon (2016) emphasize the relationship between debt and fiscal policy leading up to and
following the global financial crisis. Inclusion of lagged debt in the forecasting equation (2.1) yields a small
coefficient and has a minor influence on the forecast for government purchases with the exception of Greece.
All of our results go through when the GIIPS countries are removed from the sample.
   10
      There is a slight difference in the construction of g and γ for the performance measures because we use
quarterly data for these estimates while we used annual data for the fiscal measures. This difference in the
estimates is negligible. We also re-estimate g and γ for consumption, and investment because their share in


                                                          8
equation above also provides the variables ln Ybi,t−1 used in (2.1). As before, up to t = 2010 : 1,
we use actual GDP data for ln Yi,t−1 in (2.3), and replace it by its forecast ln Ybi,t−1 thereafter.
To construct forecasts for GDP growth, we take the difference in the log-level forecasts. That
is, ∆ ln Ybi,t = ln Ybi,t − ln Ybi,t−1 .
    For the remaining performance indicators (inflation, net exports and the nominal exchange
rate), we impose a random-walk specification. To reduce the sensitivity to the last observation,
for each country we take an average of the variable to be forecast for the two years 2008 and
2009 as the “last observation.” That is, for dates t after 2009 our forecast for inflation is11

                                                          2009:4
                                                       1 X
                                            π̂ i,t   =            π i,s .                                (2.4)
                                                       8 s=2008:1

    Figure 2 shows time series plots for government purchases and real GDP for Germany,
France, Greece and the United States (figures for the other countries are in the Appendix).
The figures show the actual series (the solid line) and the prediction based on our forecasting
regressions (the dashed line). The shaded portion of each figure shows the period of our
analysis, 2010-2014. In Germany, the difference between the forecast for government purchases
and actual government purchases is slight, indicating virtually no austerity, at least relative
to the historical pattern of German fiscal policy. In contrast, government purchases in France
and Greece are well below forecast. The forecasting equation for the United States picks up
the expansion in US fiscal policy in 2008 and 2009, but suggests a significant contraction
thereafter. In terms of economic performance (the graphs on the right), France and Greece
experience output below forecast. German output was above forecast in 2011 and 2012, with
the gap closing in 2013 and 2014. In the United States, the gap between forecasted and actual
GDP is very slight.
GDP is likely affected by growth dynamics.
  11
     We use “core inflation” (all items less energy and food) as reported by Eurostat. The exchange rate is the
nominal effective exchange rate (the trade-weighted sum of bilateral nominal exchange rates). The net export
measure is real exports in date t less real imports in date t divided by 2005:1 nominal GDP. We multiply
real exports and real imports by their respective deflators for 2005:1, so that, for 2005:1, our measure of net
exports equals nominal net exports over nominal GDP.




                                                           9
2.3       Austerity and Economic Performance in the Cross Section
Table 2 reports estimates from cross-sectional OLS regressions of the form


                        X̃i,2010−2014 = α0 + αG̃i,2010−2014 + Γ · controlsi + εi .                     (2.5)


Here X̃i,2010−2014 denotes the average forecast error for any of the measures of economic per-
             1
               P2014:4                 
formance, 20 t=2010:1 ln Xi,t − ln X̂i,t . For consumption and investment, we express this
average forecast error in terms of GDP by pre-multiplying it by the average share of con-
sumption and investment in GDP over the 2000 - 2010 period, Xi /Yi . Similarly, G̃i,2010−2014
is the average forecast error for government purchases expressed as a percent of GDP so that
the coefficient α can be interpreted as a multiplier.12,13 Note that this estimate is based on
cross-sectional variation in the data rather than time-series variation.
       Table 2 reports estimates of the effects of shortfalls in government purchases on real GDP
for eleven different econometric specifications. In addition to the government purchases short-
fall, we consider the effects of changes in total revenue, total factor productivity (TFP), and
four measures of credit market conditions: the household debt-to-GDP ratio, the government
debt-to-GDP ratio, the private credit spread and the government bond spread. We report
the negative of the coefficient to convey the effect of “austerity”, i.e., a government purchases
shortfall, on GDP. The coefficient on government purchases, absent any other variables that
could explain the cross sectional variation in GDP, is −2.55 with a standard error of 0.36.
Taken at face value, this suggests that a shortfall in government purchases of one percent of
GDP is associated with a decline in real GDP of 2.55 percent relative to forecast.
       Columns (2) through (7) show the effects of including additional covariates on the regres-
sion results. Total revenue comes in significantly and slightly decreases the coefficient on the
shortfall in government purchases. Stronger growth in TFP over 2010-2014 is associated with
stronger economic performance. With the exception of the government bond spread, the credit
measures (columns (4)-(6)) have essentially no impact on the multiplier. The inclusion of the
government bond spreads (measured as the change in post-crisis levels vs. pre-crisis levels),
even though not statistically significant, reduces the multiplier to roughly 2. Columns (8)
  12
     This approach follows Hall (2009) and Barro and Redlick (2009). Ramey and Zubairy (2014) discusses
the advantages of directly estimating the multiplier rather than backing it out from an estimated elasticity.
  13
     We repeated this analysis for tax revenue and for statutory tax rates. Tax shocks were much smaller than
the government purchase shocks and had limited association with economic activity. Thus, we exclude tax
shocks from the model though we include controls for tax revenue in the estimates in Table 2.



                                                     10
through (11) each include total revenue and TFP together with each of the credit measures.
Depending on the controls, the estimated multiplier is between roughly −2.55 (specification
1) and −1.69 (specification 10). We take specification (11) and the multiplier of −1.98 as our
benchmark for assessing the performance of the model in Section 3. This specification has the
virtue of producing an estimate roughly in the middle of the range of estimates and includes
controls for productivity, taxes and credit market stress.
       Table 3 reports results of regressions of other measures of economic performance on short-
falls in government purchases. In each regression, we include all of the control variables from
specification (11) of Table 2 though the table reports only the coefficients on government
purchases shortfalls. The table also shows the results for subsamples of fixed and floating ex-
change rates. In particular, we interact the average forecast deviation of government purchases
with a dummy for fixed exchange rate countries and report estimates of the corresponding
coefficients αf ix and αf l .14
       The results in the table indicate that shortfalls in government purchases are associated with
declines in consumption, investment and GDP growth. These estimates are roughly the same
across countries with fixed and floating exchange rates. The decrease in investment is note-
worthy because many textbook models would predict a crowding-out effect where decreases
in government purchases would lead to an increase in investment. Government purchases
shortfalls are also associated with lower inflation. Interestingly, this effect is independent of
the exchange rate regime although the effect is stronger for fixed exchange rate countries.
One possible interpretation of this finding is as evidence for a cross-sectional Phillips Curve
relationship similar to the findings in Beraja, Hurst and Ospina (2014), Beraja, Hurst and
Ospina (2016) and Nakamura and Steinsson (2014). There is also a strong positive association
between net exports and government purchases shortfalls, which, for floating exchange rate
countries, is associated with a depreciation of the nominal effective exchange rate.



3        Model
Next we develop a multi-country business cycle model of the 29 countries in our data set, plus
a rest-of-the-world country. The model will be used to make comparisons with the empirical
patterns in Section 2. We will then be able to use the model to perform counterfactual
  14
    The regression allows for separate intercepts for each exchange rate regime though the coefficients on the
control variables are restricted to be the same for all countries.



                                                     11
policy analysis. The model is calibrated to match both the economic size and bilateral trade
flows of the 30 countries. The model incorporates many features from modern monetary
business cycle models (e.g. Smets and Wouters, 2007; Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans,
2005), international business cycles models (e.g. Backus, Kehoe and Kydland, 1992, 1994;
Chari, Kehoe and McGrattan, 2000; Heathcote and Perri, 2002), and financial accelerator
models (e.g. Bernanke, Gertler and Gilchrist, 1999; Brave et al., 2012; Christiano, Motto and
Rostagno, 2014). The main ingredients of the model are (i) price rigidity (ii) international
trade, (iii) hand-to-mouth consumers, (iv) a net worth channel for business investment and
(v) government purchases shocks, monetary policy shocks and spread shocks.


3.1    Households
The world economy is populated by n = 1...N countries. All variables in the model are in
per capita terms. To convert any variable to a national total, we scale by the population
of country n, Nn . In each period t the economy experiences one event st from a potentially
infinite set of states. We denote by st the history of events up to and including date t. The
probability at date 0 of any particular history st is given by π (st ).
   Every country has a representative household, a single type of intermediate goods produc-
ing firm and a single type of final goods producing firm. As in Heathcote and Perri (2002),
intermediate goods are tradable across countries, but final goods are nontradable. The house-
holds own all of the domestic firms.
   We follow Nakamura and Steinsson (2014) who adopt the specification of Greenwood,
Hercowitz and Huffman (1988) (GHH hereafter) in assuming that consumption and labor are
complements for the household. At date 0, the expected discounted sum of future period
utilities for a household in country n is given by

                              ∞ X
                              X
                                          π st β t U cn st , Ln st
                                                                 
                               t=0   st


We set the flow utility function U (·) as

                                                                          1− σ1
                                                                    1+ 1
                                              1        cn −      Ln η
                            U (cn , Ln ) =        1            κn          
                                             1−   σ
                                                                  1 + η1


where β < 1 is the subjective time discount factor, σ is the intertemporal elasticity of substitu-

                                                      12
tion for consumption, η is the Frisch labor supply elasticity and κn is a country specific weight
on the disutility of labor. Households choose state-contingent consumption sequences cn (st ),
labor sequences Ln (st ), next period’s capital stock Kn (st ) and current investment Xn (st )
to maximize the expected discounted sum of future period utilities subject to a sequence of
budget constraints. Consumption is subject to a time-invariant value-added tax τ cn .
    A key feature of the model is a hand-to-mouth restriction on a fraction χ of the consumers
in the economy. These consumers receive income in proportion to their consumption share of
total income and spend the entire amount on current consumption. That is, hand-to-mouth
                                                             C̄n
consumption each period is given by chtm
                                     n   (st ) ≡                 Y
                                                             Ȳn n
                                                                     (st ) where the bars indicate steady state
values.15 Aggregate consumption is then given by


                                  Cn st = (1 − χ) cn st + χchtm   t
                                                                  
                                                            n   s     .


This specification allows us to introduce hand-to-mouth behavior while leaving the other first-
order conditions unchanged. Households in each country own the capital stock in their country.
They supply labor to the intermediate goods producing firms and capital to the entrepreneurs.
In return, they earn nominal wages net of labor taxes (1 − τ Ln )Wn (st ) Ln (st ) and nominal
payments for capital µn (st ) Kn (st−1 ). Here Wn (st ) is the state-contingent nominal wage, τ Ln
is a constant labor tax rate and µn (st ) is the state-contingent nominal price of capital.16 The
household also receives lump-sum transfers Tn (st ). This transfer includes nominal profits
from intermediate goods firms and entrepreneurs, Πfn (st ) + Πen (st ), nominal lump-sum taxes
or transfers Tn (st ), profits or losses from the financial sector Πfnin (st ) and the nominal amount
consumed by hand-to-mouth consumers, Pn (st ) chtm
                                               n   (st ) where Pn (st ) is the date t nominal
price of the final good.17 Thus,


                Tn st ≡ Πfn st + Πen st + Πfnin st − Tn st − Pn st chtm   t
                                                                      
                                                                    n   s


    In addition to direct factor incomes and transfer payments, the household may receive
  15
     Technically, our specification for the hand-to-mouth consumers assumes that they spend a fixed share of
domestic absorption Yn (st ) rather than a fixed share of nominal national income pn (st ) Qn (st ). Quantitatively
there is only a small difference between these specifications.
  16
     We assume that households sell capital to entrepreneurs and then subsequently repurchase the undepre-
ciated capital. This assumption is convenient when we introduce financial market imperfections later.
  17
     In addition to lending to other countries, households extend domestic loans to financial intermediaries
                                                                                           F
who in turn lend to domestic entrepreneurs at a risky interest rate (1 + in,t )F (λn,t )en,t . Profits or losses on
these loans are returned to the household as a lump sum transfer. We discuss the loans to the entrepreneurs
in greater detail below.

                                                        13
payments from both state-contingent and non-contingent bonds. Let bn (st , st+1 ) be the quan-
tity of state-contingent bonds purchased by the household in country n after history st . These
bonds pay off in units of a reserve currency which we take to be U.S. dollars. Let a (st , st+1 ) be
the nominal price of one unit of the state-contingent bond which pays off in state st+1 . Each
country has non-contingent nominal bonds that can be traded. Let Snj (st ) be the number of
bonds denominated in country j’s currency and held by the representative agent in country
n. The gross nominal interest rate for country n’s bonds is 1 + in (st ). The nominal exchange
rate to convert country n’s currency into the reserve currency is En (st ).
       The nominal budget constraints for the representative household in country n are

                                                                        N
        t    c       t
                                      t
                                                          t
                                                               t−1
                                                                     X    Ej (st ) Snj (st )
 Pn s (1 + τ n )cn s + Xn s + (1 − δ) µn s Kn s                      +
                                                                       j=1
                                                                              En (st )
         "                                                  #
           X a (st , st+1 ) bn (st , st+1 ) bn (st−1 , st )
 + Icomp                                    −
           t+1
                       En (st )               En (st )
                  s
                                                                                 N
              t            t
                                                                                 X Ej (st ) (1 + ij (st−1 )) S j (st−1 )
                                                                                                                  n
                                             τ Ln )Wn      t        t
                                                                                                                           + Tn st
                                                                                                                                 
  = µn s Kn s + (1 −                                    s Ln s +
                                                                                 j=1
                                                                                                    En (st )

and the capital accumulation constraints are

                                                                                             Xn (st )
                                                                                                       
                                    t                t−1
                                                                                                              Xn st
                                                                                                                    
                           Kn s             = Kn s             (1 − δ) + 1 − f
                                                                                            Xn (st−1 )

with f (1) = f 0 (1) = 0 and f 00 (1) ≥ 0. As in Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (2005),
the function f (·) features higher-order adjustment costs on investment if f 00 (1) > 0. The
indicator variable Icomp takes the value 1 if markets are complete and 0 otherwise.18
       The first order conditions for an optimum are as follows. The optimizing household’s Euler
equation for purchases of state contingent bonds bn (st , st+1 ) requires

                                     U1 (cn (st ) , Ln (st ))       t+1 t U1 (cn (s
                                                                                    t+1
                                                                                        ) , Ln (st+1 ))
                      a st , st+1                              = βπ(s   |s )
                                        En (st ) Pn (st )                    En (st+1 ) Pn (st+1 )

where Uj (·) denotes the derivative of the function U (·) with respect to its j th argument. There
  18
    Because models with incomplete markets often have non-stationary equilibria, we impose a small cost of
holding claims on other countries. This cost implies that the equilibria is always stationary. For our purposes,
we set the cost sufficiently low that its effect on the equilibrium is negligible.




                                                                            14
are also Euler equations associated with the uncontingent nominal bonds Snj (st ). These require

U1 (cn (st ) , Ln (st )) Ej (st )                                  Ej (st+1 ) U1 (cn (st+1 ) , Ln (st+1 ))
                                                                                                          
                                               t
                                                  X      t+1 t
                                  = β 1 + ij s          π(s |s )
       Pn (st )          En (st )                   t+1
                                                                   En (st+1 )         Pn (st+1 )
                                                  s


for all j = 1...N. The labor supply condition is

                              U2 (cn (st ) , Ln (st ))         1 − τ Ln       Wn (st )
                                                                         
                            −                          =                               ,
                              U1 (cn (st ) , Ln (st ))         1 + τ cn       Pn (st )

Finally, the optimal choice for investment and capital requires

              µn (st )                 Xn (st )         Xn (st ) 0 Xn (st )
                                                                            
          1 =              1−f                     −             f
              Pn (st )                Xn (st−1 )      Xn (st−1 )     Xn (st−1 )
                                                                         2 
                     U1 (cn (st+1 ) , Ln (st+1 )) µn (st+1 ) Xn (st+1 )         Xn (st+1 )
                                                                                          
                                                                             0
                  +β                                                       f                 .
                       U1 (cn (st ) , Ln (st )) Pn (st+1 )      Xn (st )         Xn (st )

3.2     Firms
There are three groups of firms in the model. First, there are firms that produce the “final
good.” The final good is used for consumption, investment and government purchases within
a country and cannot be traded across countries. The final good producers take intermediate
goods as inputs. Second, intermediate goods firms produce country-specific goods which are
used in production by the final goods firms. Unlike the final good, the intermediate goods are
freely traded across countries. The intermediate goods firms themselves take sub-intermediate
goods or varieties as inputs (the domestic producers of the tradable intermediate in country
n use only sub-intermediates produced in country n as inputs). The sub-intermediate goods
are produced using capital and labor as inputs. Like the final good, neither capital nor labor
can be moved across countries. Below, we describe the production chain of these three groups
of firms. We begin by describing the production of the traded intermediate goods.


3.2.1   Tradable Intermediate Goods

Each country produces a single (country-specific) type of tradable intermediate good. We
employ a two-stage production process to allow us to use a Calvo price setting mechanism.
In the first stage, monopolistically competitive domestic firms produce differentiated “sub-
intermediate” goods which are used as inputs into the assembly of the tradable intermediate
good for country n. In the second stage, competitive intermediate goods firms produce the


                                                      15
tradable intermediate good from a CES combination of the sub-intermediates. These firms
then sell the intermediate good on international markets at the nominal price pn,t . We describe
the production of the intermediate goods in reverse, starting with the second stage.


Second-Stage Producers The second stage producers assemble the tradable intermediate
good from the sub-intermediate varieties. The second stage firms are competitive in both the
global market for intermediate goods and the market for subintermediate goods in their own
country. The second-stage intermediate goods producers solve
                                                                     Z      1                                             
                                          t                 t                                t                     t
                                                                                                                    
                      max             pn s Qn s −                                ϕn ξ, s qn ξ, s dξ
                     qn (ξ,st )                                          0


subject to the CES production function

                                                       Z       1                                     ψψ−1
                                                                                                         q

                                          t
                                                                                   ψq −1
                                                                                  t ψ
                                                                                                       q
                                  Qn s             =                qn ξ, s            q     dξ
                                                            0


where the parameter ψ q > 1. Here Qn (st ) is the real quantity of country n’s tradable in-
termediate good produced at time t. The variable ξ indexes the continuum of differentiated
types of sub-intermediate producers (thus ξ is one of the sub-intermediate types). The pa-
rameter ψ q > 1 governs the degree of substitutability across the sub-intermediate goods.
The date t nominal price of each sub-intermediate good is ϕn (ξ, st ) and the quantity of each
sub-intermediate is qn (ξ, st ). It is straightforward to show that the demand for each sub-
intermediate has an iso-elastic form
                                                                                                 −ψq
                                                                                 ϕn (ξ, st )
                                                                             
                                               t                     t
                                                                        
                                  qn ξ, s              = Qn s                                                  .               (3.1)
                                                                                  pn (st )

The competitive price of the intermediate pn (st ) is then a combination of the prices of the
sub-intermediates. In particular,

                                                                                                     1
                                                       Z   1                  1−ψq
                                                                                                  1−ψ
                                                                                                           q
                                         t
                                                                         ξ, st
                                           
                                  pn s         =                ϕn                   dξ                        .               (3.2)
                                                        0


First-Stage Producers The sub-intermediate goods qn (ξ, st ) which are used to assemble
the tradable intermediate good Qn (st ) are produced in the first stage. The first-stage pro-
ducers hire workers at the nominal wage Wn (st ) and rent capital at the nominal rental price


                                                                     16
Rn (st ). Unlike the firms in the second stage, the first-stage, sub-intermediate goods firms
are monopolistically competitive. They maximize profits taking the demand curve for their
product (3.1) as given. These firms have a Cobb-Douglas production function:

                                                  α          1−α
                        qn ξ, st = Zn st kn ξ, st      ln ξ, st
                                       
                                                                      .


Because the first-stage producers are monopolistically competitive, they typically charge a
markup for their products. The desired price naturally depends on the demand curve (3.1).
Each type of sub-intermediate good producer ξ freely chooses capital and labor each period
but there is a chance that their nominal price ϕn (ξ, st ) is fixed to some exogenous level. In
this case, the first-stage producers choose an input mix to minimize costs taking the date-t
price ϕn (ξ, st ) as given. Cost minimization implies that

                                                       α           −α
                Wn st = M Cn st (1 − α) Zn st kn ξ, st       ln ξ, st
                                           


                                                  α−1          1−α
                  Rn st = M Cn st αZn st kn ξ, st        ln ξ, st
                                      


where M Cn (st ) is the marginal cost of production. The capital-to-labor ratios are identical
across the sub-intermediate firms, in particular

                         kn (ξ, st )     α Wn (st )     un (st ) Kn (st−1 )
                                     =                =
                         ln (ξ, st )   1 − α Rn (st )        Ln (st )

This implies that (within any country n) the nominal marginal cost of production is common
for all the sub-intermediate goods firms. Nominal marginal costs can be equivalently expressed
in terms of the underlying nominal input prices Wn (st ) and Rn (st )

                                               1−α           α             1−α  α
                                       Wn (st )   Rn (st )
                                                                 
                             t
                                                                     1          1
                    M Cn s           =                                               .
                                             Zn (st )                1−α         α

Pricing The nominal prices of the sub-intermediate goods are adjusted only infrequently
according to the standard Calvo mechanism. In particular, for any firm, there is a probability
θ that the firm cannot change its price that period. When a firm can reset its price it chooses
an optimal reset price. Because the production functions have constant returns to scale,
and because the input markets are competitive, all firms that can reset their price at time
t optimally choose the same reset price ϕ∗n (st ). The reset price is chosen to maximize the



                                                     17
discounted value of profits. Firms act in the interest of the representative household in their
country so they apply the household’s stochastic discount factor to all future income streams.
The maximization problem of a firm that can reset its price at date t is

            ∞                                                                                                                               −ψq
                                                U1 (cn (st+j ) , Ln (st+j )) ∗ t                                               ϕ∗n (st )
            X              X                                                                                               
                       j             t+j      t
                                                                             ϕn s − M Cn st+j Qn st+j
                                                                                                    
max                (θβ)           π(s      |s )           c         t+j
ϕ∗n (st )
            j=0
                                                   (1 + τ n )Pn (s )                                                           pn (st+j )
                           st+j


The solution to this optimization problem requires

                              P∞           j                         U1 (cn (st+j ),Ln (st+j ))                ψ
                                                        π(st+j |st )                              pn (st+j ) q M Cn (st+j ) Qn (st+j )
                                                   P
                      ψq           j=0 (θβ)          st+j                    Pn (st+j )
ϕ∗n s       t
              
                  =                     P∞                                               t+j ),L (st+j ))                              .
                    ψq − 1                         (θβ)jP
                                                             t+j π(s t+j |st ) U1 (cn (s        n
                                                                                                          p n (s t+j )ψ q Q (st+j )
                                                                                                                           n
                                               j=0         s                           Pn (st+j )


        Because the sub-intermediate goods firms adjust their prices infrequently, the nominal
price of the tradable intermediate goods is sticky. In particular, using (3.2), the nominal price
of the tradable intermediate good evolves according to
                                                                                     1
                                         h         1−ψq                  1−ψq i 1−ψ
                                   pn st = θpn st−1       + (1 − θ) ϕ∗n st             q
                                                                                         .                                      (3.3)


        Our specification of price setting entails firms setting prices in their own currency. As
a result, when exchange rates move, the implied import price moves automatically (there is
complete pass-through). This is somewhat at odds with the data, which suggest that many
exporting firms fix prices in the currency of the country to which they are exporting.19


3.2.2             Nontradable Final Goods

The final goods are assembled from a (country-specific) CES combination of tradable interme-
diates produced by the various countries in the model. The final goods firms are competitive
in both the global input markets and the final goods market. The final goods producers solve
                                               (                     N
                                                                                                       )
                                                        t
                                                                t
                                                                    X  Ej (st )       t
                                                                                          j t
                                        max        Pn s Y n     s −              p j s    yn s
                                      j t
                                     yn (s )                        j=1
                                                                        En (st )
   19
    See Gopinath and Itskhoki (2011) and Burstein and Gopinath (2014) for a full treatment of pass-through,
price rigidity and exchange rate movements.




                                                                         18
subject to the CES production function

                                                       N
                                                                                            ! ψψ−1
                                                                                                y
                                                       X              1            ψ y −1      y
                                                                     ψy
                                Yn st =                         ω n,j ynj st
                                                                                  ψy
                                                                                                          (3.4)
                                                       j=1


Here, ynj (st ) is the amount of country-j intermediate good used in production by country
n at time t. The parameter ψ y governs the degree of substitutability across the tradable
intermediate goods and the preference weights satisfy ω n,j ≥ 0 with N
                                                                    P
                                                                     j=1 ω n,j = 1 for each

country n. Notice that the weights ω n,j are country-specific so each country n requires a
different mix of the various country-specific intermediate goods as inputs. We later calibrate
the ω n,j parameters to match data on bilateral import shares.
   Demand for country-specific intermediate goods is isoelastic:
                                                                                                   −ψy
                                                                          Ej (st ) pj (st )
                                                                      
                          ynj         t                 t
                                                           
                                 s            = Yn s ω n,j
                                                                          En (st ) Pn (st )

The implied nominal price of the final good is

                                                                                                  1
                                               N                                        1−ψy ! 1−ψ
                                                                    Ej (st )                        y
                                               X                
                                t
                                                                             p j st
                                                                                   
                        Pn s          =               ω n,j              t
                                                j=1
                                                                    En (s )

   Unlike the intermediate goods, the final good cannot be traded and must be used for
either investment, consumption or government purchases in the period in which it is produced.
Because the final goods firms have constant returns to scale production functions and behave
competitively profits are zero in equilibrium.


3.3    Financial Market Imperfections and the Supply of Capital
The model incorporates a financial accelerator mechanism similar to Carlstrom and Fuerst
(1997) and Bernanke, Gertler and Gilchrist (1999). Entrepreneurs buy capital goods from
households using a mix of internal and external funds (borrowing). The entrepreneurs rent
out the purchased capital to the first-stage sub-intermediate goods producers in their own
country and then sell it back to the household the following period. The interest rate that
entrepreneurs face for borrowed funds is a function of their financial leverage ratio. As a
consequence, fluctuations in net worth cause changes in the effective rate of return on capital



                                                                    19
and thus directly affect real economic activity.20
       Formally, at the end of period t, entrepreneurs purchase capital Kn (st ) from the households
at the nominal price µn (st ) per unit. Entrepreneurs finance these purchases with their own in-
ternal funds (net worth) and intermediated borrowing. Let end-of-period nominal net worth be
N Wn (st ), denominated in country n’s currency. Then, to purchase capital, the entrepreneur
borrows Bn (st ) = µn (st ) Kn (st ) − N Wn (st ) units from the households in their country. The
nominal interest rate on business loans equals the nominal interest rate on safe bonds times
                                                                                       µ (st )Kn (st )
an external finance premium F (λn (st )) with F 0 and F 00 > 0. Here, λn (st ) = n N Wn (st ) is
the leverage ratio.21 The interest rate is then (1 + i (st )) F (λ (st ))en (s ) , where F (st ) is a
                                                                           F   t
                                                              n           n                         n

shock to the interest rate spread. The function F (·) implies that entrepreneurs who are more
highly leveraged pay a higher interest rate.
       At the beginning of period t + 1, entrepreneurs earn a utilization-adjusted rental price of
capital net of capital taxes (1 − τ K
                                    n )un (s
                                            t+1
                                                ) Rn (st+1 ) and then sell the undepreciated capital
back to the households at the capital price µn (st+1 ). Depreciation costs are tax deductible.
Varying the utilization of capital requires Kn (st ) a (un (st+1 )) units of the final good. Each
period, a fraction (1 − γ n ) of the entrepreneurs’ net worth is transferred to the households.22
       Each period, entrepreneurs choose Kn (st+1 ) and utilization un (st+1 ) to maximize expected
net worth N Wn (st+1 ) . Net worth evolves over time according to

N Wn st+1
              
                  = Kn st       (1 − τ K      t+1
                                                    Rn st+1 + µn st+1 (1 − δ(1 − τ K         t+1
                                                                                                   a un st+1
                                                                                                       
                                       n )un s                                     n )) − P s
   γn
                                              F t
                        −(1 + in st )F (λn st )en (s ) Bn st .
                                                            



We assume that the entrepreneurs can set utilization freely depending on the date t realization
of the state. The utilization choice requires the first order condition


                                  (1 − τ K       t
                                                     = Pn st a0 un st .
                                                                   
                                         n )Rn s



Following Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (2005) we assume that the utilization cost func-
                   R̄
tion is a (u) =    P
                        [exp {h (u − 1)} − 1] h1 where the curvature parameter h governs how costly
it is to increase or decrease utilization from its steady state value of u = 1. Note that in
  20
     See Brave et al. (2012) for the same approach.
  21
     We assume that F (1) = 1. Technically, we also assume that for any λ < 1, F (λ) = 1 so there is no interest
rate premium or discount for an entrepreneur who chooses to have positive net saving. Since the return on
capital exceeds the safe rate in equilibrium, all entrepreneurs are net borrowers.
  22
     We set γ n = Fβn so that net worth is constant in a stationary equilibrium.


                                                      20
steady state a (u) = 0.
   The first order condition for the choice of Kn (st ) requires


    µn st+1 (1 + in st )F (λn st )en (s )
                                    F t
    X
       π(st+1 |st ) (1 − τ K       t+1
                                         Rn st+1 + µn st+1 1 − δ(1 − τ K       t+1
                                                                                     a un st+1
                                                                                         
  =                        n )un s                                     n) −P s                     .
      st+1


   As is standard in financial accelerator models, the external finance premium F (λn (st ))
drives a wedge between the nominal interest rate on bonds and the expected nominal return
on capital. Notice that if F (λn (st )) = 1 then we obtain the standard efficient outcome in
which the market price of capital is the discounted stream of rental prices.


3.4    Government Policy
The model includes both fiscal and monetary policy variables. We assume that government
purchases are exogenous and financed by lump sum taxes on the representative households.
Consumption, labor and capital tax rates are kept constant. Government purchases in country
n are governed by an auto-regressive process


                          Gn st = (1 − ρG ) Ḡn + ρG Gn st−1 + εG  t
                                                                   
                                                                n s ,



where Ḡn indicates the steady-state ratio of government purchases to GDP.
   Monetary policy is conducted through a Taylor Rule which stipulates that in each country,
a monetary authority conducts open market operations in its own currency to target the
nominal interest rate. The Taylor Rule we use has the form


       in st = ı̄n + φi in st−1 + (1 − φi ) φGDP GDPn st + φπ π n st + εin st
                                                                         
                                                                                              (3.5)


For simplicity we assume that the reaction parameters φGDP , φπ and φi are common across
                                                                 φπ
countries. In all of our numerical exercises, we require that   1−φi
                                                                       > 1 for local determinacy of
the equilibrium (see e.g., Woodford and Walsh (2005)).
   Countries in the euro area have a fixed nominal exchange rate for every country in the
union and a common nominal interest rate. Monetary policy for the countries within the euro
area is set by a single monetary authority (the ECB) that has a Taylor Rule similar to (3.5)
with the exception that it reacts to the weighted average of innovations in GDP and inflation


                                               21
for the countries in the union. The weights are proportional to GDP relative to the total GDP
in the euro area.


3.5     Aggregation and Market Clearing
For each country n, aggregate production of the tradable intermediate goods is (up to a
first-order approximation23 ) given by

                                                             α       1−α
                                 Qn st = Zn st un st Kn st−1     Ln st
                                                  
                                                                            .


Final goods production is given by (3.4) and, since the final good is nontradable, the market
clearing condition for the final good is


                      Yn st = Cn st + Xn st + Gn st + a un st Kn st−1 .
                                                               


The market clearing for the intermediate goods produced by country n is

                                                                             N
                                                                  t
                                                                           X   Nj n t 
                                                         Qn s             =       y s .
                                                                            j=1
                                                                                Nn j

Finally, the bond market clearing conditions require

                                 N
                                 X                               N
                                                                 X
                                       Nn Snj        t
                                                                          Nn bn (st , st+1 ) = 0
                                                         
                                                 s           =                                     ∀j, st+1
                                 n=1                             n=1


Since no final goods are traded, net exports are comprised entirely of intermediate goods. For
each country n, define nominal net exports as

                                             n
            t            t               t
                                            X   Ej (st )
                                                         pj st ynj st = pn st Qn st − Pn st Yn st
                                                                                          
   N Xn s           = pn s Q n          s −          t
                                            j=1
                                                En (s )

where the second equality follows from the zero profit condition for the final goods producers.
We can use this expression to write nominal GDP as


       N GDPn st = pn st Qn st = N Xn st + Pn st Cn st + Xn st + Gn st
                                                               

  23
    As is well known in the sticky price literature, actual output includes losses associated with equilibrium
price dispersion. In a neighborhood of the steady state, these losses are zero to a first order approximation.
Since our solution technique is only accurate to first order, these terms drop out.

                                                                              22
Real GDP is RGDPn (st ) = pn Qn (st ) (this is the real GDP calculation associated with a fixed
price deflator in which the base year prices are chosen as corresponding to the steady state).


3.6    Steady state
We solve the model in a neighborhood of a non-stochastic steady state with zero inflation.
Because inflation is zero, the Euler equations associated with the uncontingent nominal bonds
                                                          1
imply that the nominal interest rate is 1 + ı̄n =         β
                                                              for all n. We use the notation X̄n to denote
the steady state value of the variable X for country n. In the steady state, the nominal price
of capital and the nominal price of the final consumption good are equal. The entrepreneurs’
optimal choice for capital implies that

                           1                R̄n
                             F̄n = 1 − τ K       + 1 − δ 1 − τK
                                                                
                                         n                    n    ,
                           β                 P̄n
                                                                         
where we have defined the steady state interest rate spreads F̄n ≡ Fn λ̄n . Below we calibrate
these spreads to match their observable counterparts. Once we have calibrated F̄n , the equa-
tion above determines the real rental price of capital R̄n /P̄n in each country. The utilization
cost function a (u) is chosen to ensure that ūn = 1 and a (ūn ) = 0. With zero inflation, the
                                                                                                  ψq
price of intermediates is a constant markup over nominal marginal cost, p̄n =                    ψ q −1
                                                                                                        M C n.
                                                                                       Ēj p̄j
   We choose parameters to ensure that all real exchange rates ēj,n ≡                 Ēn p̄n
                                                                                                 are 1 in steady
state. With ēj,n = 1 for all j, n it is straightforward to show that the price of the final
consumption good and the price of the tradeable intermediate good are equal, P̄n = p̄n .
                                                                 j
                                                               ȳn
Moreover, the bilateral import ratios will satisfy             Ȳn
                                                                     = ω n,j , which we will use to calibrate
ω n,j . In addition to matching the import ratios, we also calibrate the model to match the
                                   Nj Ȳj
observed relative country sizes,   Nn Ȳn
                                          ,   which ensures that we match the shares of net exports
relative to domestic absorbtion N X n /Ȳn where N X n = Q̄n − Ȳn . Finally, we also calibrate
our model to match the observed shares of government purchases.


3.7    Calibration
Our benchmark calibration is summarized in Table 4.


Preferences We set the subjective time discount factor β to imply a long run real annual
interest rate of four percent. We set the intertemporal elasticity of substitution σ to 0.50


                                                     23
and the Frisch elasticity of labor supply η to 1. These values are comparable to findings in
the microeconomic literature on preference parameters (e.g. Barsky et al., 1997) and fairly
standard in the macroeconomic literature (e.g. Nakamura and Steinsson, 2014; Hall, 2009).
We set the share of hand-to-mouth consumers to χ = 0.5. This is the value proposed by
the original study by Campbell and Mankiw (1989) and is consistent with the calibration in
Martin and Philippon (2016).


Trade and Country Size The preference parameters ω n,j are calibrated to the share of
imports ynj in the production of the final good, Yn , in the data. Standard import data cannot
be used for this purpose because it is measured in gross terms, wheras our model requires data
in value added terms. We therefore use data from the OECD on trade in value added (TiVA).
The dataset is derived from input-output tables, which themselves are based on national
account data. The definition of imports and exports in TiVA correspond to those used in
national account data and therefore captures trade in both goods and services. The data
series FD VA (’Value added content of final demand’) has information on the value added
content (in US dollars) of final demand by source country for all country pairs in our data
sample. We directly use these values for ynj and the implied final demand value for Yn to
calculate ω n,j . TiVA also has data for a ’rest of the world’ aggregate. We lump together that
data and data for countries that are not in our sample to construct the preference parameters
ω RoW,j for the rest of the world in our sample. TiVA is available for 1995, 2000, 2005, and
2008 through 2011. We take an average of 2005 and 2010 to calibrate ω n,j . Similarly, we
choose the relative country sizes to match relative final demand observed in the TiVA tables.
       The trade elasticity ψ y is set to 0.5. This is comparable to parameter values used in
international business cycle models with trade. In their original paper, Heathcote and Perri
(2002) estimated ψ y = 0.90. Using firm-level data, Cravino (2014) and Proebsting (2015)
find elasticities close to 1.5.24 We consider higher trade elasticities in the sensitivity analysis
below.


Technology The capital share parameter α is set to 0.38, as in Trabandt and Uhlig (2011)
who match data for 14 European countries and the US. The quarterly depreciation rate is
set to 2.8% to match the share of private investment in final demand, Xn /Yn , whose average
  24
    The literature on international trade outside of business cycle analysis typically adopts higher elasticities.
For instance Broda, Greenfield and Weinstein (2006) find a long-run trade elasticity of 6.8.



                                                       24
value was 19.7% across all countries in our sample for the years 2000 - 2010.
       The form of the investment adjustment cost f (·) implies a relationship between invest-
ment growth and Tobin’s Q. In particular, if vn,t is the Lagrange multiplier in the capital
accumulation constraint then Tobin’s Q can be defined as Qn (st ) = vn (st )/U1,n (st ). It is
straightforward to show that the change in investment growth over time obeys the equation
                       h                      i 1         h               i
                                t         t−1       t           t+1
                           Xn (s ) − Xn (s ) = Qn (s ) + β Xn (s ) − Xn,t
                           e         e            e         e        e
                                                ϑ

where X̃ denotes the percent deviation of X from its steady state value. Thus the parameter
ϑ is similar to a traditional inverse Q-elasticity. We adopt the value ϑ = 2.48 from Chris-
tiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (2005) which implies that a one percent increase in Q causes
investment to increase by roughly 0.4 percent.
                                                   R̄
       For the utilization cost function a (u) =   P
                                                        [exp {h (u − 1)} − 1] h1 , the elasticity of utiliza-
                                                                                                   a00 (1)
tion with respect to the real rental price of capital is governed by the parameter h =             a0 (1)
                                                                                                           .   We
follow Del Negro et al. (2013) by setting h = 0.286. This implies that a one percent increase in
the real rental price Rn /Pn causes an increase in the capital utilization rate of 0.286 percent.


Price Rigidity We calibrate the Calvo price setting hazard to roughly match observed
frequencies of price adjustment in the micro data. Nakamura and Steinsson (2008) report
that prices change roughly once every 8 to 11 months; Klenow and Kryvtsov (2008) report
that prices change roughly once every 4 to 7 months. Evidence on price adjustment in Europe
suggests somewhat slower adjustment. Alvarez et al. (2006) find that the average duration
of prices is 13 months (for a quarterly model this corresponds to θ = 0.77). Our baseline
calibration takes θ = 0.80. This is somewhat higher than the empirical findings for U.S. price
adjustment. Our main reason for adopting this calibration is to match the data indicating
slightly more sluggish price adjustment in European countries compared to the U.S.25


Financial Market Imperfections The steady state external finance premia, Fn (λ̄n ), are
calculated as the average spread between lending rates (to non-financial corporations) and
central bank interest rates. For every country, we calculate an average for 2005. The data
source for the spread data is the ECB for euro area countries, the Global Financial Database
and national central banks for the remaining countries. See the Data Appendix for more
  25
    For purposes of comparison, Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (2005) use θ = 0.6, Del Negro et al.
(2013) have θ = 0.88 and Brave et al. (2012) have θ = 0.97.


                                                    25
details on the data sources.
    For the two remaining parameters we adopt the calibration from Brave et al. (2012). The
elasticity of the external finance premium with respect to leverage F is 0.20 and the quarterly
persistence of the shocks to the external finance premium is set to 0.99.


Fiscal and Monetary Policy For each country, we set the steady state ratio of government
purchases to GDP, Ḡn , to match the average ratio from 2000 - 2010 in the data provided. The
persistence of the government purchase shock is set to 0.93 as in Del Negro et al. (2013). We
choose our Taylor rule parameters to be φπ = 1.5, φGDP = 0.5 and φi = 0.75.


Tax Rates We use implicit tax rates to calibrate the values for τ C     L       K
                                                                  n , τ n and τ n . Calculation

of tax rates for consumption, labor and capital builds on Mendoza, Razin and Tesar (1994)
and Eurostat (2014). The principal idea is to classify tax revenue by economic function using
data from the National Tax Lists and then approximate the base with data from the national
sector accounts. Compared to statutory tax rates, the advantages of these rates are that they
take into account the net effect of existing rules regarding exemptions and deductions, and
also incorporate social security contributions in labor taxes. We use the average over 2000
through 2009. The Appendix includes a list of all countries and steady-state implicit tax rates.



4     Model and Data Comparison
We next simulate the calibrated model’s reaction to shocks and compare the simulated data
to the actual data. Our approach is to treat the austerity forecast deviations calculated in
Section 2 as structural shocks. In addition to the austerity shocks, we also include shocks to
monetary policy and shocks to financial markets. Including other shocks is important because
it is likely that some of the observed differences in economic performance can be traced to
shocks other than austerity.


4.1    Forcing Variables
Austerity Shocks Government purchase shocks are based on our forecast errors from equa-
tion (2.1). To convert the annual forecast errors to a quarterly series to feed into the model
we interpolate them using the Chow-Lin method (Chow and Lin, 1971).



                                              26
Monetary Policy Shocks To measure monetary policy shocks we estimate a generalized
Taylor rule of the form suggested by Clarida, Gali and Gertler (1997):


  in,t = ρi it−1 + (1 − ρi ) π n,t + rn + φπ (π n,t − π ∗n ) + φGDP ln GDPn,t − ln GDP n,t + εin,t
                                                                                         


where in,t is the nominal interest rate, rn is the long-run interest rate, π n,t is inflation, π ∗n is the
inflation target, ln GDPn,t − ln GDP n,t is the percent deviations of real GDP from its trend,
and εin,t is a structural shock. Inflation is measured using the GDP deflator. The interest rate
and the inflation rate are measured in annual percent. We impose a value for ρi = 0.79 (see
Clarida, Gali and Gertler, 1997) and estimate φπ and φGDP for the U.S. over the period 1980:1
- 2005:4. This estimation implicitly assumes that the U.S. has been adhering to a fairly stable
monetary rule since the early 1980’s.
   We then impose the estimated coefficients φπ , φGDP and the constrained coefficient ρi for
each of the countries in Europe that have an independent monetary policy. We do not estimate
separate Taylor rules for each central bank primarily because of data limitations. For the euro
area, we assume that the ECB reacts to the weighted average of inflation and output over
all countries in the euro. With these coefficients we then estimate country-specific intercepts
(corresponding to the parameters rn − φπ π ∗n in the Taylor rule). We can then recover the
monetary policy shocks for each country n as ε̂in,t = in,t − ı̂n,t .


Financial Shocks We take our measure of financial shocks from data on spreads between
lending rates and central bank interest rates. For the U.S., data on lending rates comes from
the Federal Reserve Survey of Terms of Business Lending. For European countries, we use a
dataset provided by the ECB, which we supplement with data from national central banks
and the Global Financial Database.


4.2     Benchmark Model Performance
We feed the estimated structural shocks for the 2005-2014 period into the model and compare
the simulated data with actual data. Throughout, we treat the simulated data (in terms of
detrending, scaling and definitions of variables, etc.) in the same way as we treat the empirical
data. The benchmark model includes all three structural shocks (austerity shocks, monetary
policy shocks and financial shocks) and the baseline calibration given in Table 4.
   Table 3 shows a comparison of the cross-sectional multipliers generated by the model and

                                                   27
the data. The first three columns of the table reproduce the empirical coefficients from Table 2,
broken down into the total sample, the sample of fixed exchange rate countries and the sample
of floating exchange rate countries. The corresponding coefficients from the simulated data
of the benchmark model are in the last three columns. Several points are worth emphasizing.
First, the estimated coefficients from the model are consistent with the estimates from the
data in terms of magnitude and sign. Empirically, the government purchases multiplier is 1.98;
the corresponding multiplier in the model is 1.95. The response of inflation to government
purchases is 0.41 in the data and 0.26 in the model (that is, a shortfall in spending is associated
with deflation). The inflation response is somewhat greater for fixed exchange rate countries
and weaker for floating exchange rate countries in both the data and the model.
   The model does a better job of explaining consumption than investment. While the signs
of the responses of consumption and investment are consistent across the model and the
data, the magnitudes in the model fall short of the empirical estimates. The hand-to-mouth
restriction is critical for generating the large drop in consumption, while the financial shocks
are not as successful in generating a sufficiently negative reduction in investment.
   In both the model and the data, austerity shocks generate a positive response of net
exports. The decrease in government purchases results in a drop in demand for the home
good. The decline in demand causes firms to reduce their demand for labor, putting downward
pressure on wages and employment. This drop in income causes hand-to-mouth consumers to
reduce consumption one-for-one with the drop in GDP. Overall, and despite the positive wealth
effect that stimulates consumption of unconstrained households, demand for intermediate
goods falls more than supply. Note also that GHH preferences accentuate this effect. Since
consumption and labor are complements, households reduce their consumption as they work
less, which further stifles demand.
   Figures 3a - 3c compare scatterplots of actual data (the left panels) with scatterplots of
simulated data (the right panels). Note, the plot of the actual data conditions on the full set of
                                                                                                 
control variables (i.e., specification 11 in Table 2). That is, we plot G̃n , X̃n − Γ̂ · controlsn .
In each panel, the austerity shocks (i.e., forecast errors) are on the horizontal axis. The units
of both axes are log points times 100. The panels show the regression lines for countries with
fixed exchange rates (solid dots) and the floating exchange rates (open dots).
   The scatterplots reveal several differences between the actual data and the simulated data.
First, and most importantly, the actual data has substantially more noise than the simulated
data. This is not surprising since the model includes only a limited number of shocks. Second,

                                                28
the inflation data exhibits substantially more variation across countries within the euro area
than the model permits. In the model, even though there are sharp differences in government
purchases across countries, there is a strong tendency for countries in the currency union
to have inflation rates that are nearly the same. On the other hand, the model displays
substantial differences in inflation for countries that are not in the euro area, while in the
data, inflation for these countries does not differ radically from inflation in the euro area.
This may be due to the fact that even though the non-euro countries technically have floating
exchange rates and independent monetary policy, the monetary authorities in these countries
do not depart much from the policies enacted by the ECB.
   To get a better sense of the relative importance of the different shocks, Table 5 reports
the cross-sectional multipliers for GDP, inflation and net exports for different combinations of
the forcing variables. The first column reports the cross-sectional multiplier estimated in the
data and the second column reports the corresponding multipliers for the benchmark model.
Columns 3 - 5 show what happens as we remove the credit shocks (column 3), the money shocks
(column 4) or remove both credit and money leaving the government shock by itself (column
5). This exercise makes clear that the negative relationship between austerity and economic
performance in the model is driven primarily by government purchases shocks. When only
government purchases shocks are fed into the model, the coefficient on GDP is 1.79, compared
to 1.95 in the benchmark model. Because monetary policy was generally contractionary and
credit conditions were tight, the other shocks reinforce the impact of austerity. The last two
rows of the table report the correlation and the standard deviation of simulated GDP relative
to actual GDP. The simulated GDP is always highly correlated with observed GDP even as
the other shocks are removed. The correlations and the relative standard deviations indicate
that austerity accounts for most of the cross-sectional variation in the data.
   The one statistic that does depend heavily on shocks other than austerity is the cross-
sectional response of inflation in countries with floating exchange rates. For these countries,
the coefficient on inflation is −0.18 in the data (indicating a decrease in inflation following
a contraction in government purchases) but is 0.32 in the model with only austerity shocks.
To understand the dynamics of inflation, consider a decline in government purchases in a
closed-economy New Keynesian model. Under fairly standard parameter values, the fall in
government purchases reduces labor demand by more than the fall in labor supply, and there-
fore wages fall. The decline in government purchases is thus associated with falling costs and
is deflationary. In our open economy setting, however, reductions in government purchases

                                              29
are associated with inflation for countries with floating exchange rates due to a depreciation
of the currency. The currency depreciation raises the price of imports and stimulates demand
for exports, increasing the price level and inflation.
   Adding monetary policy shocks helps bring the model’s implications for inflation back into
line with the data. During the 2010-2014 period, austere countries tended to have interest rates
above the level suggested by the Taylor rule. These high interest rates reduce consumption
and output, push down inflation and result in an appreciation of the nominal exchange rate.
Thus, for our sample of economies with floating exchange rates, the combination of government
spending shocks and contractionary monetary policy shocks results in deflation.


4.3    Variations on the Benchmark Model
Table 6 reports the results of simulations under alternative parameterizations of the model,
holding the shock processes the same as in the benchmark case. For each simulation, we report
the cross-sectional multiplier for GDP and inflation as well as the correlation and standard
deviation of simulated GDP relative to the GDP in the data.
   We consider the following alternative cases:

(i.) No hand-to-mouth consumers. This specification is the benchmark specification but with
the share of hand-to-mouth consumers to χ = 0.

(ii.) Separable preferences. Instead of GHH preferences used in the benchmark model, we
switch the household’s utility function to
                                                     1              1
                                             (cn )1− σ      (Ln )1+ η
                              U (cn , Ln ) =           − κn
                                              1 − σ1         1 + η1

Unlike GHH, this specification implies that consumption and labor are not complements.

(iii.) Low Price Rigidities. We reset the price rigidity Calvo parameter to θ = 0.25 (quarterly).
This implies an average duration of prices of roughly 4 months.

(iv.) Wage Rigidities. We introduce sticky wages as in Erceg, Henderson and Levin (2000)
(see the Appendix for additional details). We set the wage Calvo parameter to θw = 0.80
(quarterly). This implies an average duration of wages of roughly 15 months.

(v.) Passive Monetary Policy. The monetary authority for each country adopts a more ac-
commodative stance. In particular, we set the Taylor rule coefficients for each country to

                                                30
φGDP = φπ − 1 = 0.1 compared to the benchmark settings of φGDP = φπ − 1 = 0.5.

(vi.) ZLB. The ECB policy rate is fixed at zero while the other countries are away from the
bound. We introduce the ZLB into the model by adding a (large) fictional country to the
euro area that sets interest rates for the euro area but doesn’t trade with any country. This
fictional country is sufficiently large to ensure that changes in inflation and economic activity
within Europe do not have a perceptable feedback on the interest rate. The ZLB is assumed
to persist indefinitely in this policy experiment.

(vii.) Strong Financial Accelerator. We set the elasticity of the external finance premium to
Fε = 0.8. Thus, holding the value of capital fixed, a one percent increase in net worth entails
a reduction in the external finance premium of 80 basis points.

(viii.) No Euro. This specification allows the countries in the euro area to have floating
exchange rates with independent monetary policy and thus to react to local shocks.

(ix.) No Trade. This setting eliminates all trade across countries and thus, the countries
interact only because of common monetary policies and correlated shocks.

(x.) High Trade Elasticity. The high trade elasticity sets the parameter ψ y = 5 relative to
the benchmark setting of 0.5. Setting the trade elasticity higher makes foreign and domestic
intermediate goods closer substitutes.

   A comparison of the multipliers on GDP and inflation across the different cases gives a
sense of which features of the model are critical for generating relationships between austerity,
output and inflation that match the data. Increased wage rigidity, passive monetary policy
and a stronger financial accelerator have little impact on the magnitude of the cross-sectional
multipliers. Imposing incomplete markets (not reported) also has little impact on the bench-
mark results. However, a large fraction of hand-to-mouth consumers and GHH preferences are
critical for generating a large multiplier. Trade also plays an important role. Greater substi-
tutability between home and foreign goods weakens the impact of a home austerity shock on
output, and increases the spillover to its trading partners. In the extreme case of autarky (the
“no trade” case in the last column), the multiplier on GDP increases from 1.95 to 3.85 (thanks
to the higher multiplier for fixed exchange rate countries, and despite the lower multiplier for
floating exchange rate countries), and the inflation multiplier increases by a factor of 10.
   The addition of the ZLB to the model actually decreases the cross-sectional multiplier on
GDP relative to the benchmark. At first pass, this is somewhat surprising. A number of


                                               31
studies find that there is a larger response of output to government spending shocks at the
ZLB because monetary policy cannot be used to offset the impact of the fiscal shock (see e.g.
Blanchard, Erceg and Lindé, 2016; Kilponen et al., 2015). Figure 4 shows the cross-sectional
relationship between shortfalls in government purchases and GDP in both our benchmark
model (solid dots) and the benchmark specification with the ZLB (open dots). The response of
GDP to government spending is indeed greater under the ZLB. For instance, Italy experienced
a reduction in government spending of roughly 3 percent of GDP. Away from the ZLB, Italy’s
GDP falls by roughly 6 percent (a multiplier of approximately 2). At the ZLB, the decline
is more than 10 percent (a multiplier of approximately 3). However, while the time-series
multipliers are greater at the ZLB, the cross-sectional multipliers are essentially unchanged –
i.e., the slope of the regression lines in the figure are essentially identical. As emphasized by
Nakamura and Steinsson (2014), in a monetary union, the monetary policy reaction is governed
by the average GDP and inflation paths for the union as a whole, not by the experiences of
individual countries. In our model, if the nominal interest rate is away from the ZLB, then
the ECB will respond to aggregate output and inflation for the union as a whole. From the
perspective of the simulated scatter plot, the offsetting monetary policy limits the drop in
output for all of the solid dots but this policy has no effect on the cross-sectional variation in
economic performance.



5    Counterfactual Policy Simulations
We next use the model as a laboratory for analyzing three counterfactual scenarios: the elim-
ination of austerity, floating exchange rates, and the dynamics of debt-to-GDP with and
without austerity. Figure 5 shows the results of the three scenarios. The top row shows the
impact on the EU10 and the bottom row shows the impact on the GIIPS economies.


A World Without Austerity The first counterfactual experiment (the leftmost panels
in Figure 5) shows the effect of eliminating spending-based austerity throughout Europe.
Specifically, this “No Austerity” experiment removes all negative government spending shocks
from the benchmark model but retains any positive shocks. During the 2010 to 2014 period,
with the exception of Switzerland, there was virtually no positive fiscal stimulus in Europe.
In this experiment, both the benchmark model and the counterfactual simulation without
austerity impose the ZLB. We do this because, while the ZLB has only a minimal impact on


                                               32
the cross-sectional performance of the model, it has a much larger impact on the time series
paths produced by the model. Notice that in the figure, the data display a sharp downturn in
GDP in 2008-2009 while the model predicts an expansion. The expansion in the model is due
to stimulative monetary and fiscal policy shocks which are reflected in the forcing variables we
feed in. The model does not include the collapse in house prices, and credit market failures
that led to the Great Recession. Our focus is on the post crisis period starting in 2010.
       The figures underscore our main result which is that fiscal austerity has large contrac-
tionary effects on output. The benchmark model under the ZLB tracks the data reasonably
well, particularly for the GIIPS economies. Actual GDP falls by almost 18 percent in the
GIIPS economies and by 15 percent in the benchmark model. When all negative fiscal shocks
are eliminated from the model, output in the EU10 is greater than the benchmark by roughly
5 percent. Output for the GIIPS economies would have declined by only one percent rather
than the 18 percent that actually occurred.26


A World Without the Euro The middle panels in Figure 5 show output trajectories for a
“No Euro” experiment. In this counterfactual, the countries experienced austerity shocks but
were free to pursue independent monetary policy and allow their currencies to float.27 While
there are many ramifications of such an “exit strategy” from the euro that are not captured
in our model, the experiment does provide some insight into the opportunity cost of a shared
monetary policy. Although the effects of allowing countries to pursue independent monetary
policy are more modest than eliminating austerity, they do suggest that the GIIPS economies
would benefit from moving to independent monetary policy while the EU10 economies would
not. This is because the nominal exchange rate depreciates in the GIIPS region, stimulating
exports and output. In contrast, under the euro, the EU10 already enjoys the export advantage
of a relatively weak currency (at least relative to the non-euro markets) due to the poor
performance in the rest of the euro area.


Austerity and the Debt-to-GDP Ratio A significant motivation for austerity policies
was to slow the escalation of debt-to-GDP ratios that occurred across the euro area (reaching
close to 80 percent in the EU10 and 95 percent in the GIIPS countries in 2010). While
reductions in government expenditures should, all else equal, reduce deficits and debt levels
  26
     While we do not include an explicit sovereign risk premium in the model, the financial shocks in the model
are correlated with observed sovereign default spreads.
  27
     Unlike the previous counterfactual, we do not impose the ZLB for this experiment.


                                                      33
over time, the impact on the debt-to-GDP ratio is not obvious. As our previous analysis shows,
reductions in government expenditures may have a negative impact on economic activity, and
this will in turn reduce tax revenues. Further, trade linkages and shared monetary policy
in Europe mean that fiscal actions in one country will be readily transmitted to neighboring
countries, affecting their fiscal positions.
       The rightmost panels in Figure 5 compares the trajectories of debt-to-GDP ratios for the
EU10 and GIIPS under different assumptions. The grey line shows the actual data. The light
dotted line is a “static” estimate that assumes that GDP and tax revenue are unaffected by
changes in government purchases (i.e. reductions in government spending reduce debt but have
no impact on the rest of the economy). According to this measure, austerity undertaken by
the GIIPS countries should have resulted in a decline in the debt-to-GDP ratios by more than
20 percentage points from 2008 to 2014. In reality, debt-to-GDP ratios rose by 20 percentage
points. This static view misses three endogenous responses captured by our model: First,
reductions in government purchases cause reductions in GDP. Second, reductions in GDP
lead to reductions in tax revenue. Both of these effects lead to an increase in the debt-to-
GDP ratio. Third, some of the fiscal austerity will spillover into other countries.28 Taking
these channels into account (the “benchmark” series), our model actually predicts an increase
in the debt-to-GDP ratio in the GIIPS region, of a magnitude similar to that observed in the
data. The fit of our model is surprisingly good given that our model assumes that tax rates
did not change over time.
       Our final experiment considers how debt-to-GDP ratios would have evolved if no austerity
measures had been implemented. To answer this question, we simulate our model under the
assumption that there were no negative shocks to government purchases. The model predicts
a more modest increase in the debt-to-GDP ratio for GIIPS countries. Interestingly, the EU10
countries would have also seen their debt-to-GDP ratios rise, although under the benchmark,
their debt-to-GDP ratios went down. The decrease in the debt-to-GDP for the GIIPS countries
stems from a strong increase in GDP in the absence of negative fiscal shocks. This effect is
weaker for the EU10 countries because their baseline government purchases shocks were not
as severe as those experienced by the GIIPS countries. The improved performance of the
GIIPS countries leads to a contractionary monetary policy response for the euro area overall,
  28
     Another channel through which austerity might affect the debt-to-GDP ratio is its effect on sovereign
risk premia. Our model ignores this channel. Consequently, the data and simulated data in Figure 5 refer
to changes in the cumulative sum of the primary balance, that is the evolution of debt excluding interest
payments.


                                                   34
depressing GDP across the region. This effect is sufficiently strong for the EU10 countries
that their debt-to-GDP ratio increases. While we do not take the results of the model literally
as a prescription for the European debt crisis, the model suggests that efforts to reduce debt
through austerity in the depths of an economic recession were counterproductive.



6     Conclusion
Since the end of the Great Recession in 2009, advanced economies have experienced radically
different recoveries. Some enjoyed a return to normal economic growth following the finan-
cial crisis while others have suffered through prolonged periods of low employment and low
growth. We have attempted to make sense of this diversity of experiences by examining cross-
country variation in economic activity empirically and through the lens of a dynamic general
equilibrium model. Despite substantial noise in the data, there are clear patterns that suggest
that an important fraction of the differences in economic performance can be attributed to
fiscal austerity. In particular, the evidence suggests that contractions in government purchases
played a surprisingly large role in reducing output in many countries.
    We use a multi-country DSGE model to see whether standard macroeconomic theory can
explain the observed changes in economic activity. The model features government purchases
shocks, monetary shocks, and shocks to financial markets and allows us to make direct com-
parisons between the observed empirical relationships in the data and the model’s predictions.
The model is calibrated to match the main features of the European countries in our dataset
including country size, trade flows and exchange rate regimes. The model output broadly
matches the patterns observed in the data. In particular, the model successfully reproduces a
large cross-sectional multiplier of government austerity shocks on output.
    We use the model to conduct a number of counterfactual experiments. Our analysis
suggests that austerity was a substantial drag on GDP, especially for the GIIPS countries.
Economic integration shaped the GDP response to austerity in opposite ways: on the one
hand, trade integration redistributed its negative consequences across euro area countries, on
the other hand, the single monetary policy accentuated the impact of different fiscal policies.
Our analysis also suggests that had countries in the euro area abstained from negative fiscal
shocks, output would have been substantially higher and may have resulted in lower debt-to-
GDP ratios across European nations.



                                              35
References
Alesina, Alberto, Carlo Favero, and Francesco Giavazzi. 2015. “The Output Effect of
  Fiscal Consolidation Plans.” Journal of International Economics, 96: S19–S42.

Alesina, Alberto, Gualtiero Azzalini, Carlo Favero, Francesco Giavazzi, and Ar-
  mando Miano. 2016. “Is it the ”How” or the ”When” that Matters in Fiscal Adjustments?”
  National Bureau of Economic Research.

Alvarez, Luis J., Emmanuel Dhyne, Marco Hoeberichts, Claudia Kwapil, Hervé
  Bihan, Patrick Lünnemann, Fernando Martins, Roberto Sabbatini, Harald
  Stahl, Philip Vermeulen, et al. 2006. “Sticky Prices in the Euro Area: A Summary
  of New Micro Evidence.” Journal of the European Economic Association, 4(2-3): 575–584.

Backus, David K., Patrick J. Kehoe, and Finn E. Kydland. 1992. “International Real
  Business Cycles.” Journal of Political Economy, 100(4): 745–775.

Backus, David K., Patrick J. Kehoe, and Finn E. Kydland. 1994. “Dynamics of
  the Trade Balance and the Terms of Trade: The J-Curve?” American Economic Review,
  84(1): 84–103.

Barro, Robert J., and Charles J. Redlick. 2009. “Macroeconomic Effects From Govern-
  ment Purchases and Taxes.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(1): 51–102.

Barsky, Robert B., F. Thomas Juster, Miles S. Kimball, and Matthew D. Shapiro.
  1997. “Preference Parameters and Behavioral Heterogeneity: An Experimental Approach
  in the Health and Retirement Study.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(2): 537–579.

Beraja, Martin, Erik Hurst, and Juan Ospina. 2014. “The Regional Evolution of Prices
  and Wages During the Great Recession.”

Beraja, Martin, Erik Hurst, and Juan Ospina. 2016. “The Aggregate Implications of
  Regional Business Cycles.” NBER Working Paper, No.21956.

Bernanke, Ben S., Mark Gertler, and Simon Gilchrist. 1999. “The Financial Acceler-
  ator in a Quantitative Business Cycle Framework.” In Handbook of Macroeconomics. Vol. 1,
  , ed. John B. Taylor and Michael Woodford, 1341–1393. Elsevier.



                                            36
Blanchard, Oliver, and David Leigh. 2013. “Growth Forecast Errors and Fiscal Multi-
  pliers.” American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings, 103(3): 117–120.

Blanchard, Olivier, Christopher Erceg, and Jesper Lindé. 2016. “Jump-Starting the
  Euro Area Recovery: Would a Rise in Core Fiscal Spending Help the Periphery?” In NBER
  Macroeconomics Annual 2016, Volume 31. University of Chicago Press.

Brave, Scott A., Jeffrey R. Campbell, Jonas D. M. Fisher, and Alejandro Justini-
  ano. 2012. “The Chicago Fed DSGE Model.” Working Paper.

Broda, Christian, Joshua Greenfield, and David Weinstein. 2006. “From Groundnuts
  to Globalization: A Structural Estimate of Trade and Growth.” NBER Working Paper, No.
  12512.

Burstein, Ariel, and Gita Gopinath. 2014. “International Prices and Exchange Rates.”
  In Handbook of International Economics. Vol. 4. Elsevier.

Campbell, John Y., and N. Gregory Mankiw. 1989. “Consumption, Income and Interest
  Rates: Reinterpreting the Time Series Evidence.” In NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1989,
  Volume 4. 185–246. MIT Press.

Carlstrom, Charles T., and Timothy Fuerst. 1997. “Agency Costs, Net Worth, and
  Business Fluctuations: A Computable General Equilibrium Analysis.” American Economic
  Review, 87(5): 893–910.

Chari, V.V., Patrick J. Kehoe, and Ellen R. McGrattan. 2000. “Sticky Price Mod-
  els of the Business Cycle: Can the Contract Multiplier Solve the Persistence Problem?”
  Econometrica, 68(5): 1151–1179.

Chow, Gregory C., and Anloh Lin. 1971. “Best Linear Unbiased Interpolation, Distri-
  bution, and Extrapolation of Time Series by Related Series.” Review of Economics and
  Statistics, 372–375.

Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles L. Evans. 2005. “Nominal
  Rigidities and the Dynamic Effects of a Shock to Monetary Policy.” Journal of Political
  Economy, 113(1): 1–45.

Christiano, Lawrence J., Roberto Motto, and Massimo Rostagno. 2014. “Risk
  Shocks.” American Economic Review, 104(1): 27–65.

                                            37
Clarida, Richard, Jordi Gali, and Mark Gertler. 1997. “The Science of Monetary Policy:
  A New Keynesian Perspective.” Journal of Economic Literature, 37: 1667–1707.

Cravino, Javier. 2014. “Exchange Rates, Aggregate Productivity and the Currency of In-
  voicing of International Trade.” Working Paper.

Del Negro, Marco, Stefano Eusepi, Marc Giannoni, Argia Sbordone, Andrea Tam-
  balotti, Matthew Cocci, Raiden Hasegawa, and M. Henry Linder. 2013. “The
  FRBNY DSGE Model.” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report No. 647.

Erceg, Christopher J., and Jesper Lindé. 2013. “Fiscal Consolidation in a Currency
  Union: Spending Cuts vs. Tax Hikes.” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control,
  37(2): 422–445.

Erceg, Christopher J., Dale W. Henderson, and Andrew T. Levin. 2000. “Optimal
  Monetary Policy with Staggered Wage and Price Contracts.” Journal of Monetary Eco-
  nomics, 46(2): 281–313.

Eurostat. 2014. “Taxation Trends in the European Union - Data for the EU Member States,
  Iceland and Norway.”

Gopinath, Gita, and Oleg Itskhoki. 2011. “In Search of Real Rigidities.” In NBER
  Macroeconomics Annual 2010. Vol. 25. Chicago:University of Chicago Press.

Greenwood, Jeremy, Zvi Hercowitz, and Gregory W. Huffman. 1988. “Investment,
  Capacity Utilization, and the Real Business Cycle.” American Economic Review, 402–417.

Hall, Robert E. 2009. “By How Much Does GDP Rise If the Government Buys More
  Output?” Borrkings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall: 183–236.

Heathcote, Jonathan, and Fabrizio Perri. 2002. “Financial Autarky and International
  Real Business Cycles.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 49(3): 601–627.

Itzetzki, Ethan O., Carmen M. Reinhart, and Kenneth Rogoff. 2004. “Exchange
  Rate Arrangenents until the 21st Century: Will the Anchor Currency Hold?” Working
  Paper.

Kilponen, Juha, Massimiliano Pisani, Sebastian Schmidt, Vesna Corbo, Ti-
  bor Hlédik, Josef Hollmayr, Samuel Hurtado, Paulo Júlio, Dmitry Kulikov,

                                           38
  Matthieu Lemoine, et al. 2015. “Comparing Fiscal Multipliers Across Models and Coun-
  tries in Europe.” European Central Bank.

Klenow, Peter J., and Oleksiy Kryvtsov. 2008. “State-Dependent or Time-Dependent
  Pricing: Does It Matter for Recent US Inflation?”       Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  123(3): 863–904.

Martin, Philippe, and Thomas Philippon. 2016. “Inspecting the Mechanism: Leverage
  and the Great Recession in the Eurozone.” NBER Working Paper, No. 20572.

Mendoza, Enrique G., Assaf Razin, and Linda L. Tesar. 1994. “Effective Tax Rates in
  Macroeconomics: Cross-Country Estimates of Tax Rates on Factor Incomes and Consump-
  tion.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 34(3): 297–323.

Nakamura, Emi, and Jón Steinsson. 2008. “Five Facts About Prices: A Reevaluation of
  Menu Cost Models.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(4): 1415–1464.

Nakamura, Emi, and Jon Steinsson. 2014. “Fiscal Stimulus in a Monetary Union: Evi-
  dence from US Regions.” American Economic Review, 104(3): 753–792.

Proebsting, Christian. 2015. “Are Devaluations Expansionary? - Firm-Level Evidence
  from Estonia.” Working Paper.

Ramey, Valerie A., and Sarah Zubairy. 2014. “Government Spending Multipliers in Good
  Times and in Bad: Evidence from US Historical Data.” NBER Working Paper, No. 20719.

Romer, Christina D., and David H. Romer. 2004. “A New Measure of Monetary Shocks:
  Derivation and Implications.” American Economic Review, 94(4): 1055–1084.

Romer, Christina D., and David H. Romer. 2010. “The Macroeconomic Effects of
  Tax Changes: Estimates Based on a New Measure of Fiscal Shocks.” American Economic
  Review, 100(3): 763–801.

Smets, Frank, and Rafael Wouters. 2007. “Shocks and Frictions in US Business Cycles:
  A Bayesian DSGE Approach.” American Economic Review, 97(3): 586–606.

Trabandt, Mathias, and Harald Uhlig. 2011. “The Laffer Curve Revisited.” Journal of
  Monetary Economics, 58(4): 305–327.


                                             39
Woodford, Michael, and Carl E. Walsh. 2005. Interest and Prices: Foundations of a
 Theory of Monetary Policy. Cambridge University Press.




                                         40
                 Table 1: Country Size, Import Shares and Exchange Rate Regimes

                                     Import      XRT                                          Import          XRT
     Country                  Size    share     regime        Country                    Size share          regime
     Belgium          2.6 %          31.3   %    Euro         Bulgaria                0.3   %    40.3   %     Peg
     Germany         18.3 %          24.3   %    Euro         Denmark                 1.7   %    26.9   %     Peg
     Ireland          1.1 %          44.2   %    Euro         Estonia                 0.1   %    42.2   %     Peg
     Greece           1.9 %          25.5   %    Euro         Latvia                  0.1   %    36.8   %     Peg
     Spain            8.4 %          24.1   %    Euro         Lithuania               0.2   %    32.2   %     Peg
     France          15.3 %          21.2   %    Euro         Czech Republic          1.0   %    37.1   %   Floating
     Italy           12.5 %          22.0   %    Euro         Hungary                 0.7   %    38.9   %   Floating
     Cyprus           0.1 %          39.5   %    Euro         Poland                  2.5   %    28.8   %   Floating
     Luxembourg       0.2 %          56.9   %    Euro         Romania                 0.9   %    28.2   %   Floating
     Netherlands      4.1 %          21.0   %    Euro         Sweden                  2.4   %    28.8   %   Floating




41
     Austria          2.1 %          30.3   %    Euro         United Kingdom         15.4   %    23.9   %   Floating
     Portugal         1.4 %          28.3   %    Euro         Norway                  1.9   %    25.3   %   Floating
     Slovenia         0.3 %          38.1   %    Euro         Switzerland             2.8   %    31.7   %   Floating
     Slovak Republic 0.4 %           41.5   %    Euro         United States          91.5   %    13.3   %   Floating
     Finland          1.3 %          27.5   %    Euro         RoW                   162.9   %     8.4   %   Floating

      Notes: Table displays the 29 countries plus the Rest of the World in our sample. Size is measured as the
     country’s final demand relative to the sum of all European countries’ final demand. Final demand is measured
     as GDP less net exports. Shares are averaged over 2005 and 2010. The import share is measured as the share of
     (value added) imports in final demand using the OECD TiVA database. The exchange rate regime is as of 2010.
     Countries with a peg have their currencies pegged to the Euro. Countries with a floating currency are either
     free or managed floaters or countries with a wide crawling peg. The classification follows Itzetzki, Reinhart and
     Rogoff (2004), http : //www.carmenreinhart.com/data/browse − by − topic/topics/11/..
                                                    Table 2: Austerity and GDP

                                        (1)      (2)       (3)      (4)      (5)      (6)      (7)       (8)      (9)     (10)     (11)
      Gov’t. Purchases        −2.55 −2.48 −1.99 −2.52 −2.42 −1.97 −2.40 −1.86 −1.98 −1.69 −1.98
                               (0.36) (0.34) (0.32) (0.36) (0.35) (0.60) (0.34) (0.28) (0.31) (0.50) (0.31)
      Total Revenue                  −1.13                                         −0.96 −0.82 −0.60 −0.82
                                      (0.56)                                        (0.42) (0.47) (0.51) (0.53)
      TFP                                     0.49                                   0.50 0.45 0.43 0.45
                                             (0.12)                                 (0.11) (0.13) (0.12) (0.13)
      HH Debt to GDP                                 0.02                            0.04
                                                    (0.02)                          (0.02)
      Credit Spread 2010-2014                              −0.91                           −0.04
                                                            (0.51)                          (0.47)
      Gov’t. Bond Rate                                             −0.66                           −0.37




42
                                                                    (0.58)                          (0.48)
      Gov’t Debt to GDP                                                    −0.05                           −0.00
                                                                            (0.02)                          (0.02)
      R2                                0.66     0.70      0.79     0.67     0.69     0.69     0.71      0.85     0.81     0.81     0.81

      Notes: Table displays the regression coefficients α and Γ of the multivariate regressions (2.5). Each column represents a separate
     regression. The dependent variable is the average deviation of real GDP per capita from its forecast over 2010 - 2014. For the
     independent variables: ’Gov’t Purchases’ is the average deviation of real government purchases per capita (deflated by the GDP
     deflator) from their forecast over 2010 - 2014, ’Total Revenue’ is the average deviation of real government revenue per capita
     (deflated by the GDP deflator) from its forecast over 2010 - 2014, ’TFP’ is the change in TFP between 2009 and 2014, ’HH Debt
     to GDP’ is the level of nominal household debt at the end of 2007 over 2005 nominal GDP, ’Credit Spread’ is the spread of lending
     rates to non-financial corporations and the central bank interest rates, averaged over 2010 - 2014, less its average over 2000 - 2005,
     ’Gov’t Bond Rate’ is the nominal interest rate on 10-year government bonds, averaged over 2010 - 2014, less its average over 2000
     - 2005 (no data for Estonia), and ’Gov’t Debt’ is the end-of-2009 nominal government debt level (normalized by 2005 nominal
     GDP). All variables are expressed in percent. Untreated OLS standard errors in parentheses.
  Table 3: Comparison of Model and Data: Benchmark Calibration

                                          Data                        Benchmark
                                     α      αF ix      αF l          α    αF ix     αF l
 GDP                   -1.98               -2.02     -1.78       -1.95   -2.01    -1.74
                      (0.26)              (0.32)    (0.51)
 Inflation             -0.43               -0.55     -0.18       -0.26   -0.29    -0.13
                      (0.13)              (0.15)    (0.24)
 Consumption           -1.31               -1.36     -1.11       -1.06   -1.15    -0.77
                      (0.23)              (0.27)    (0.44)
 Investment            -1.54               -1.64     -1.21       -0.59   -0.65    -0.39
                      (0.19)              (0.23)    (0.37)
 Net Exports over GDP   1.42                1.52      1.02        1.29    1.31     1.24
                      (0.24)              (0.27)    (0.44)
 Exchange Rate         -0.91                0.47     -3.36       -0.17   -0.10    -0.53
                      (0.42)              (0.35)    (0.57)
 GDP Growth            -0.58               -0.55     -0.54       -0.29   -0.33    -0.20
                      (0.11)              (0.13)    (0.20)

 Notes: Table displays the regression coefficients on government purchases (α in re-
gression (2.5) and for the multipliers αF ix and αF l for the regression with separate
coefficients for fixed and floating exchange rate countries, after controlling for govern-
ment revenue, government debt and TFP as is done in specification (11) of Table 2.
Each row represents a separate regression. The dependent variables are average fore-
cast errors in real GDP per capita, the inflation rate based on the Harmonized Index
for Consumer Prices excluding Food and Energy, real consumption per capita, real in-
vestment per capita, real net exports over nominal 2005Q1 GDP, the nominal effective
exchange rate and real GDP per capita growth.




                                           43
                                                                          Table 4: Calibration

     Description                                         Parameter          Value   Source
     Preferences
     Discount factor (quarterly)                         β                  0.99    Standard value
                                                          1
     Coefficient of relative risk aversion                σ
                                                                            2       Standard value
     Frisch elasticity of labor supply                   η                  1       Barsky et al. (1997)
     Share of hand-to-mouth consumers                    χ                  0.5     Campbell and Mankiw (1989), Martin and Philippon (2016)
     Trade and Country Size
     Trade preference weights                            ω jn               x       OECD Trade in Value Added Dataset
     Trade demand elasticity                             ψy                 0.5     e.g. Heathcote and Perri (2002), Cravino (2014), Proebsting (2015)
     Country size                                        Nn Y n             x       OECD Input-Output Tables
     Technology
     Capital share                                       α                  0.38    Trabandt and Uhlig (2011)
     Depreciation (quarterly)                            δ                  0.028   Average private investment share, X/Y = 0.197, 2000 - 2010
     Utilization cost                                    a00                0.286   Del Negro et al. (2013)
     Investment adjustment cost                          f 00               2.48    Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (2005)




44
     Elasticity of substitution between varieties        ψq                 10      Standard value
     Price Rigidity
     Sticky price probability                            θ                  0.80    Alvarez et al. (2006)
     Financial Market Imperfections
     SS External finance premium                         Fn (λss )          x       ECB, Global Financial Database and national sources
     Elasitcity external finance premium                 F                 0.20    Brave et al. (2012)
     Persistence spread shock                            ρF                 0.99    Brave et al. (2012)
     Fiscal and Monetary Policy
                                                          Gn
     Gov’t purchases over final demand                    Yn
                                                                            x       OECD and Eurostat
     Persistence government spending shock               ρG                 0.93    Del Negro et al. (2013)
     Consumption, Labor, Capital tax rates               τ C , τ L, τ K     x       Own calculations based on National Tax Lists
     Taylor rule persistence                             φi                 0.75
     Taylor rule GDP coefficient                         φGDP               0.5
     Taylor rule inflation coefficient                   φπ                 1.5

     Notes: Values marked with x are country- or country-pair specific.
Table 5: Comparison of Model and Data: Individual Shocks
                                           Bench-  No    No                 Only
                                  Data      mark Spread Money               Govt
 All
   GDP                           −1.98     −1.95      −1.90      −1.85     −1.79
   Inflation                     −0.43     −0.26      −0.31      −0.12     −0.17
   Net Exports to GDP             1.42      1.29       1.25       1.26      1.22

 Fixed
   GDP                           −2.02     −2.01      −1.88      −2.04     −1.91
   Inflation                     −0.55     −0.29      −0.34      −0.30     −0.35
   Net Exports to GDP             1.52      1.31       1.23       1.30      1.22

 Floaters
   GDP                           −1.78     −1.74      −1.90      −1.34     −1.50
   Inflation                     −0.18     −0.13      −0.17       0.35      0.32
   Net Exports to GDP             1.02      1.24       1.31       1.15      1.22

 Simulated GDP
   Correlation with Data           1.00        0.79     0.81       0.79      0.81
   Rel. Std. Dev.                  1.00        0.85     0.81       0.80      0.76

 Notes: Table displays multiplier, which is the estimated α in regression (2.5) with
regressors being fiscal shocks observed in the data. The correlation for simulated
GDP is the simple correlation of simulated GDP data averaged over 2010 - 2014
compared to the actual GDP data averaged over 2010 - 2014. Similarly, the relative
standard deviation is the standard deviation of simulated GDP averaged over 2010
- 2014 relative to the standard deviation observed in the data for that time period.




                                          45
                                                          Table 6: Robustness
                                       Bench-    No     Separ   Low pri    Wage      Pass mon           Strong     No      No     Hi trade
                               Data     mark    RoTh     pref    rigid    rigidity    policy    ZLB     fin acc   Euro    Trade    elast
     All
        GDP                    −1.98   −1.95    −1.32   −1.29   −1.35     −1.96       −1.94     −1.83   −2.08     −1.51   −3.85   −0.78
        Inflation              −0.43   −0.26    −0.20   −0.11   −0.48     −0.18       −0.65     −0.27   −0.27      0.08   −2.16   −0.11
        Net Exports to GDP      1.42    1.29     0.87    0.84    1.13      1.22        1.39      1.37    1.35      1.19            1.49

     Fixed
        GDP                    −2.02   −2.01    −1.32   −1.30   −1.36     −2.03       −1.78     −1.74   −2.09     −1.40   −4.89   −0.61
        Inflation              −0.55   −0.29    −0.15   −0.13   −0.45     −0.23       −0.22     −0.23   −0.24      0.19   −2.02   −0.06




46
        Net Exports to GDP      1.52    1.31     0.88    0.86    1.13      1.25        1.36      1.41    1.35      1.18            1.49

     Floaters
        GDP                    −1.78   −1.74    −1.24   −1.24   −1.32     −1.70       −2.27     −1.74   −2.00     −1.73   −0.86   −1.05
        Inflation              −0.18   −0.13    −0.27   −0.03   −0.47     −0.00       −1.68     −0.14   −0.26     −0.14   −2.56   −0.27
        Net Exports to GDP      1.02    1.24     0.83    0.80    1.13      1.17        1.47      1.25    1.36      1.24            1.52

     Simulated GDP
       Correlation with Data    1.00    0.79     0.73    0.80     0.82      0.79       0.72      0.68    0.78      0.79    0.73     0.66
       Rel. Std. Dev.           1.00    0.85     0.60    0.55     0.57      0.85       0.89      0.93    0.90      0.66    1.86     0.45

     Notes: See Table 5.
      Figure 1: Real per Capita GDP Before, During and After the Crisis

 Note: The figure plots the time paths of real per capita GDP for the period 2006:1-2014:4 for the countries
in our data set. The paths are indexed to 100 in 2009:2. The two shaded regions indicate recession dates
according to the NBER and CEPR.




                                                    47
                         Figure 2: Government Purchases and GDP

 Note: Left column panels display real government purchases for various countries on a log scale (normalized
to 2009=100), together with their predicted values. Right column panels display the corresponding series for
real GDP per capita.



                                                    48
49
                                                 Figure 3a: GDP and Austerity: Data vs. Model

      Note: Figure displays a scatter plot of the average forecast residual of GDP over 2010 - 2014, in log points, versus the average forecast residual for the
     shortfall in government purchases, also in log points. Countries are classified by their exchange rate regime (red: euro / pegged to euro; black: floating
     currency). Regression lines are based on data points from each exchange rate regime. Left panel is based on actually observed data and displays the
     GDP residual after controlling for government revenue, government debt and TFP as is done in specification (11) of Table 2; right panel refers to data
     from the simulated model. See text for details on the forecast specification.
50
                            Figure 3b: Inflation and Austerity: Data vs. Model

     Note: See Figure 3a.
51
                            Figure 3c: Net Exports and Austerity: Data vs. Model

     Note: See Figure 3a.
      Figure 4: GDP and Government Purchases: Without and With a ZLB

 Note: Figure displays a scatter plot of the average forecast residual of GDP over 2010 - 2014, in log points,
versus the average forecast residual for the shortfall in government purchases, also in log points. Sample
only includes countries with fixed exchange rates. Red dots refer to simulated data under the benchmark
calibration; blue dots refer to simulated data under the benchmark calibration with a ZLB for the ECB.




                                                     52
53
                                                 Figure 5: Counterfactual Policy Simulations

      Note: Figures display actual and simulated data for GDP (columns 1 and 2) and the debt-to-GDP ratio (column 3) for the EU10 (row 1) and the
     GIIPS countries (row 2). The debt-to-GDP ratio is calculated as the cumulative primary balance, i.e. excluding interest payments. ’Data’ refers to
     forecast errors from regression (2.3) for GDP and regression (2.4) for the debt-to-GDP ratio. Simulated data is expressed in percent deviations from the
     stationary equilibrium for GDP and in percentage point deviations from the stationary equilibrium for the debt-to-GDP ratio.
