                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              ESTIMATING GLOBAL BANK NETWORK CONNECTEDNESS

                                        Mert Demirer
                                      Francis X. Diebold
                                          Laura Liu
                                        Kamil <ÕOPD]

                                     Working Paper 23140
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23140


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2017


For helpful discussion we thank seminar participants at CORE, National Bank of Belgium, Duke
University,the European University Institute, the International Monetary Fund, the PIER Policy
Tools Workshop,Université Catholique de Louvain, the University of York, Koç University, the
University of Pennsylvania, the University of Minho, Bogazici University, the University of
Bologna, the University of Delaware, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond. We are
similarly grateful to participants at the Universityof Chicago Conference on Machine Learning
and Economics, ECB-CBRT Conference on Assessing the Macroeconomic Implications of
Financial and Production Networks, the (EC)2 Annual Conference, the Econometric Society
North American Winter Meetings, the Vienna Workshop on High Dimensional Time Series in
Macroeconomics and Finance, and the FRB San Francisco Conference in Honor of James
Hamilton. We are especially grateful to Turan Bali, Gorkem Bostanci, Christian Brownlees,
Fabio Canova, Umut Gokcen, Laura Kaufmann, Serena Ng, Han Ozsoylev, Minchul Shin, David
Veredas, and Tanju Yorulmazer. Demirer and <ÕOPD] thank the Turkish Scientific and
Technological ResearchCouncil (TUBITAK) for financial support through Grant No. 111K500.
The usual disclaimer applies.Demirer and <ÕOPD]thank the Turkish Scientific and Technological
Research Council (TUBITAK) for financial support through Grant No. 111K500. The views
expressed herein are those of the authorsand do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
officialNBER publications.

© 2017 by Mert Demirer, Francis X. Diebold, Laura Liu, and Kamil <ÕOPD]. All rights reserved.
Shortsections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
providedthat full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Estimating Global Bank Network Connectedness
Mert Demirer, Francis X. Diebold, Laura Liu, and Kamil <ÕOPD]
NBER Working Paper No. 23140
February 2017
JEL No. C01,C32,G21

                                        ABSTRACT

We use LASSO methods to shrink, select and estimate the high-dimensional network linking the
publicly-tradedsubset of the world's top 150 banks, 2003-2014. We characterize static network
connectedness using full-sample estimation and dynamic network connectedness using rolling-
window estimation. Statically, we find that global bank equity connectedness has a strong
geographic component, whereas country sovereign bond connectedness does not. Dynamically,
we find that equity connectedness increases during crises, with clear peaks during the Great
Financial Crisis and each wave of the subsequent European Debt Crisis, and with movements
coming mostly from changes in cross-country as opposed to within-countrybank linkages.


Mert Demirer                                  Laura Liu
Department of Economics                       Department of Economics
Massachusetts Institute of Technology         University of Pennsylvania
77 Massachusetts Avenue E52-300               3718 Locust Walk
Cambridge, Mass. 02139                        Philadelphia, PA 19104
mdemirer@mit.edu                              yuliu4@sas.upenn.edu

Francis X. Diebold                            Kamil <ÕOPD]
Department of Economics                       Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania                    Koc University
3718 Locust Walk                              Rumelifeneri Yolu, Sariyer
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6297                   Istanbul 34450
and NBER                                      kyilmaz@ku.edu.tr
fdiebold@sas.upenn.edu
1       Introduction
Connectedness is central to modern financial risk measurement and management. It features
prominently in key aspects of market risk (return connectedness and portfolio concentration),
credit risk (default connectedness), counter-party and gridlock risk (bilateral and multilateral
contractual connectedness), and not least, systemic risk (systemwide connectedness). It is
also central to understanding underlying fundamental macroeconomic risks, in particular
business cycle risk (e.g., intra- and inter-country real activity connectedness).
    Recent theoretical work has therefore emphasized network connectedness in financial and
industry contexts, as in Jackson (2008), Easley and Kleinberg (2010), Acemoglu et al. (2012),
and Babus (2013). Related empirical work, which sometimes includes banking contexts, has
begun to appear; see for example, Diebold and Yilmaz (2009), Acharya et al. (2010), Billio
et al. (2012), Allen et al. (2012), Acharya et al. (2012), Barigozzi and Brownlees (2013),
Diebold and Yilmaz (2014), Brownlees and Engle (2015), Bianchi et al. (2015), Giglio et al.
(2016), and Adrian and Brunnermeier (2016).
    There is, however, little empirical research on global bank connectedness. This is par-
ticularly unfortunate given the role of financial institutions in the Great Recession of 2007-
2009, and given the many channels that potentially produce linkages among banks, such as
counter-party relationships associated with asset/liability positions, contractual relationships
associated with services provided to clients and other institutions, and correlated exposures,
as well linkages via asset-price and liquidity channels.1
    A key reason for the lack of empirical work on global bank connectedness is the high
dimensionality of bank networks. There are simply very many important banks globally,
which renders unrestricted vector-autoregressive (VAR) and related analyses intractable.
Hence, for example, Diebold and Yilmaz (2014) were forced to limit their analysis to a small
number of purely-U.S. institutions. Although a useful first step, such an analysis is clearly
incomplete, given the global nature of the financial services industry.
    In this paper we progress on both the methodological and substantive fronts. On the
methodological side, we confront the dimensionality problem while nevertheless remaining
squarely in the Diebold-Yilmaz connectedness measurement tradition, which is intimately re-
lated to the key summary of network structure, the degree distribution, and the key measure
of network centrality, the mean degree. We do so by estimating the network using LASSO
methods, which facilitates high dimensionality by selecting and shrinking in optimal ways.
    1
    See, among others, the classic work of Shleifer and Vishny (1992), Allen and Gale (1994), Allen and
Gale (2000), Cifuentes and Shin (2005), Acharya and Yorulmazer (2007), and Gorton (2015).
We also maintain our intentionally reduced-form approach: Our goal is to provide a credible
framework for “getting the facts straight”, regardless of the underlying structural mecha-
nism(s), particularly given the many mechanisms that may be operative, per the discussion
above.
    On the substantive side, no longer constrained by the dimensionality problem, we perform
a truly global bank connectedness analysis. In particular, we characterize the static and
dynamic high-frequency stock-return volatility connectedness of all publicly-traded banks
among the world’s top 150, 2004-2014.
    We proceed as follows. In section 2, we briefly summarize the Diebold-Yilmaz connectedness-
measurement framework. In section 3, we introduce “LASSOed” large VAR’s as empirical
approximating models in the Diebold-Yilmaz framework. In sections 4 and 5, respectively,
we provide static and dynamic characterizations of the global bank network, and we conclude
in section 6.


2     Population Network Connectedness
Here we discuss our connectedness framework and measures, in population. (We discuss
estimation later, in section 3.) The discussion is brief, as we use connectedness measures
based on variance decompositions, as proposed and developed in a series of earlier papers
that includes Diebold and Yilmaz (2009), Diebold and Yilmaz (2012), and Diebold and
Yilmaz (2014).


2.1    Variance Decompositions for Connectedness Measurement
Connectedness measures based on variance decompositions are appealing for several reasons.
First, they make obvious intuitive sense, answering a key question, which at the most granular
pairwise level is “How much of entity i’s future uncertainty (at horizon H) is due to shocks
arising not with entity i, but rather with entity j?”
    Second, they allow for different connectedness at different horizons, facilitating examina-
tion of a variety of horizons and selection of a preferred horizon if desired. This is important
because, for example, 1-day connectedness may be very different from 10- or 30-day connect-
edness.
    Finally, they are closely linked to modern network theory, in particular the degree dis-
tribution and mean degree, and they are also closely linked to recently-proposed measures



                                               2
of various types of systemic risk, such as marginal expected shortfall (Acharya et al. (2010))
and CoVaR (Adrian and Brunnermeier (2016)).2


2.2       Vector Autoregressive Approximating Models
                                                                             Pp
We base our variance decomposition on an N -variable VAR(p), xt =               i=1 Φi xt−i + εt ,
                                                                P∞
where εt ∼ (0, Σ). The moving average representation is xt = i=0 Ai εt−i , where the N xN
coefficient matrices Ai obey the recursion Ai = Φ1 Ai−1 + Φ2 Ai−2 + . . . + Φp Ai−p , with A0 an
N xN identity matrix and Ai = 0 for i < 0.
   The high-dimensional situations that will concern us require mechanical identification
schemes, but standard approaches such as Cholesky factorization depend on the ordering of
the variables, which raises significant complications. Hence we follow Diebold and Yilmaz
(2012) in using the “generalized identification” framework of Koop et al. (1996) and Pesaran
and Shin (1998), which produces variance decompositions invariant to ordering. Instead of
attempting to orthogonalize shocks, the generalized approach allows for correlated shocks
but accounts appropriately for the correlation.


2.3       Connectedness Measures
We now introduce our connectedness measures. We proceed from highly-granular (pairwise)
through highly-aggregative (systemwide).

2.3.1      Pairwise Directional Connectedness
                                                                                        g
Firm j ’s contribution to firm i ’s H -step-ahead generalized forecast error variance, θij (H), is

                                        −1
                                           PH−1 0
                                       σjj         (ei Ah Σej )2
                             g
                            θij (H)   = PH−1h=00          0
                                                                 ,   H = 1, 2, ...,           (1)
                                           h=0 (ei Ah ΣAh ei )


where Σ is the covariance matrix of the disturbance vector ε, σjj is the standard deviation of
the disturbance of the j th equation, and ei is the selection vector with one as the ith element
and zeros otherwise.
   Because we work in the Koop-Pesaran-Potter-Shin generalized VAR framework, the vari-
                                                                    PN g
ance shares do not necessarily add to 1; that is, in general          j=1 θij (H)6=1. Hence we
normalize each entry of the generalized variance decomposition matrix (1) by the row sum:
  2
      See Diebold and Yilmaz (2014) for a detailed discussion.



                                                       3
                                                g
                                   g           θij (H)
                                 θ̃ij (H) = PN g           .                              (2)
                                                   θ
                                              j=1 ij   (H)
                       PN g                PN        g
Now by construction j=1 θ̃ij (H) = 1 and i,j=1 θ̃ij    (H) = N .
                                                    g         H
   As a matter of notation, we now convert from θ̃ij (H) to Ci←j (C is of course for connect-
edness), which is less cumbersome and more directly informative.

2.3.2    Total Directional Connectedness, “To” and “From”

Now we get less granular, moving from pairwise directional connectedness to total directional
connectedness. Total directional connectedness to firm i from all other firms j is:
                                    PN      g             PN     g
                                      j=1 θ̃ij (H)         j=1 θ̃ij (H)
                            H         j6=i                 j6=i
                           Ci←• =   PN       g
                                                      =                   .               (3)
                                     i,j=1 θ̃ij (H)
                                                               N

Similarly, total directional connectedness from firm i to all other firms j is
                                    PN      g             PN     g
                                      j=1 θ̃ji (H)         j=1 θ̃ji (H)
                            H         j6=i                 j6=i
                           C•←i =   PN       g
                                                      =                   .               (4)
                                     i,j=1 θ̃ji (H)
                                                               N

2.3.3    Systemwide Connectedness

Now we get still less granular, proceeding to a systemwide level. Using the normalized
entries of the generalized variance decomposition matrix (2), we measure total directional
connectedness as                  PN                  PN
                                              g                g
                                     i,j=1 θ̃ij (H)    i,j=1 θ̃ij (H)
                                      i6=j              i6=j
                            C H = PN          g
                                                    =                 .                (5)
                                           θ̃
                                     i,j=1 ij   (H)         N

We call this total connectedness systemwide connectedness. It is simply the sum of total
directional connectedness whether “to” or “from.” (It doesn’t matter which way, because
“exports” must equal “imports” at the “global” level.)


3       Sample Bank Network Connectedness
Thus far we have discussed population network connectedness measurement. Now we discuss
sample connectedness measurement, specialized, moreover, to the context of global banking,
which we study in detail in sections 4 and 5. In section 3.1 we introduce our banks, sample

                                               4
period, and object of study (realized range-based stock return volatility). In section 3.2 we
discuss LASSO estimation of the high-dimensional VAR approximating model. In section
3.3 we discuss our approach to network visualization of variance decomposition matrices.


3.1     Banks, Sample Period, and Stock Return Volatilities
We study 96 banks from 29 developed and emerging economies, downloaded from Thomson-
Reuters, from September 12, 2003 through February 7, 2014. Our 96 banks are those in
the world’s top 150 (by assets) that were publicly traded throughout our sample. They
are largely banks from developed countries: 82 are from 23 developed economies, and the
remaining 14 are from 6 emerging economies.3 They include all those designated as “globally
systemically important banks” (“GSIB’s”, as designated by the Basel Committee on Banking
Supervision), except for three Chinese banks (Agricultural Bank of China, Bank of China,
and Industrial and Commercial Bank of China) and one French bank (Group BCPE), which
we exclude because they were not publicly traded as of September 2003.
    We focus on connectedness in the global bank stock return volatility network, which does
not require high-frequency balance sheet and related information, which is unavailable in real
time. Instead we need only high-frequency stock return data, which are readily available.
Stock market valuations are of course imperfect – like all valuations – but equity analysts
devote massive time and resources to uncovering and interpreting connectedness information
as relevant for valuation.
    Volatility connectedness is of direct interest in financial markets. If volatility tracks
investor fear (e.g., the VIX is often touted as an “investor fear gauge”), then volatility
connectedness is fear connectedness. Hence volatility connectedness is of special interest from
the perspective of real-time crisis monitoring, as volatilities tend to lurch and move together
only in crises, whereas returns often move closely together in both crises and upswings.
    Volatility is latent and must therefore be estimated. Many approaches to volatility esti-
mation have received attention, including GARCH, stochastic volatility, realized volatility,
and implied volatility.4 We use daily range-based realized volatility. That is, following
   3
      See the appendices for details regarding market capitalization, bank code, and Reuters ticker, by bank
assets (Appendix A) and by country (Appendix B). Our bank codes are easier to interpret than the Reuters
tickers, particularly as regards identifying banks’ countries, so we use them in our subsequent empirical work.
    4
      For a survey see Andersen et al. (2013).




                                                      5
Garman and Klass (1980), we estimate daily bank stock return volatility as

                 σ̃it2 = 0.511(Hit − Lit )2 − 0.019[(Cit − Oit )(Hit + Lit − 2Oit )
                          −2(Hit − Oit )(Lit − Oit )] − 0.383(Cit − Oit )2 ,                           (6)

where Hit , Lit , Oit and Cit are, respectively, the logs of daily high, low, opening and clos-
ing prices for bank stock i on day t. Range-based realized volatility is nearly as efficient
as realized volatility based on high-frequency intra-day sampling, yet it requires only four
readily-available inputs per day, and it is robust to certain forms of microstructure noise
(Alizadeh et al. (2002)).
    Finally, we note that our bank stock price data come from markets located in different
time zones. Although this could potentially influence the empirical results, the use of return
volatilities rather than returns, and the use of a VAR approximating model, are likely to
minimize the potential impact. In particular, our use of volatility in the connectedness
analysis helps to identify the origins of shocks, as volatility jumps more during crises, as
does our use of a vector autoregressive approximating model, to which we now turn.


3.2     Estimation of High-Dimensionsal VAR’s
In applications we base connectedness assessment on an estimated VAR approximating
model. For compelling applications, we need the VAR to be estimable in very high di-
mensions, somehow recovering degrees of freedom.5 One can do so by pure shrinkage (as
with traditional informative-prior Bayesian analyses, or ridge regression) or pure selection
(as with traditional criteria like AIC and SIC), but blending shrinkage and selection, using
variants of the LASSO, proves particularly appealing.

3.2.1    LASSO

To understand the LASSO, consider least-squares estimation,6

                                                T
                                                                              !2
                                                X                X
                                 β̂ = arg min             yt −       βi xit        ,                   (7)
                                            β
                                                t=1              i

   5
     In what follows we refer to estimators that achieve this as “regularized,” and associated environments
as involving “regularization.”
   6
     We present LASSO for a generic regression equation y → X, to maximize notational transparency. In
our subsequent equation-by-equation VAR estimation, the right-hand-side variables in each equation are of
course p lags of each of the N variables.


                                                      6
subject to the constraint:
                                                    K
                                                    X
                                                          |βi |q ≤ c.
                                                    i=1

Equivalently, consider the penalized estimation problem:
                                                      !2            
                                       XT      X            K
                                                            X
                         β̂ = arg min    yt −   βi xit + λ   |βi |q  .                                         (8)
                                     β
                                              t=1               i                   i=1


Concave penalty functions non-differentiable at the origin produce selection, whereas smooth
convex penalties (e.g., q = 2, the ridge regression estimator) produce shrinkage. Hence pe-
nalized estimation nests and can blend selection and shrinkage. The LASSO (short for “least
absolute shrinkage and selection operator”), introduced in the seminal work of Tibshirani
(1996), solves the penalized regression problem with q = 1. Hence it shrinks and selects.
Moreover it requires only one minimization, and it uses the smallest q for which the mini-
mization problem is convex.

3.2.2      Adaptive Elastic Net

A simple extension of the LASSO, the so-called adaptive elastic net (Zou and Zhang (2009)),
not only shrinks and selects, but also has the oracle property, meaning (roughly) that the
selected model is consistent for the best Kullback-Liebler approximation to the true DGP.
In our implementation of the adaptive elastic net, we solve
                                                                   !2                                      
                                        T                                     K                        
                                        X             X                       X              1        1
              β̂AEnet = arg min               yt −        βi xit        +λ         wi         |βi | + βi2  ,   (9)
                                β
                                        t=1           i                       i=1
                                                                                             2        2


where wi = 1/|β̂i,OLS | and λ is selected equation-by-equation by 10-fold cross validation.
Note that the adaptive elastic net penalty averages the “LASSO penalty” with a “ridge
penalty”, and moreover that it weights the average by inverse OLS parameter estimates,
thereby shrinking the “smallest” OLS-estimated coefficients most heavily toward zero.7

3.2.3      Additional Remarks

(a) We want to encourage sparsity in our approximating model, but we do not necessarily
want to impose sparsity in the implied bank network. Our approach of shrinking and se-
  7
      The weighting by inverse estimates is responsible for the oracle property.

                                                            7
lecting on the approximating VAR, as opposed to shrinking and selecting on the variance
decomposition network directly, achieves that goal. The approximating VAR is intention-
ally shrunken and made sparse by the LASSO, but the variance decomposition matrix that
drives our connectedness measures is a non-linear transformation of the VAR coefficients and
is therefore generally not sparse.8
(b) We regularize the estimated VAR autoregressive coefficient matrices, but presently we
do not pursue regularization of the shock covariance matrix, in large part because we are
not necessarily comfortable with the standard “statistical” shrinkage directions (e.g., toward
zero). Instead one might want to shrink and select in other directions, such as toward
equicorrelation or reduced-rank structure, but we leave covariance matrix regularization to
future research.


3.3     Network Visualization of High-Dimensional Variance Decom-
        positions
The issue of how best to display results takes on great importance in high-dimensional net-
work modeling. In our subsequent empirical work, for example, we will estimate networks
with approximately 100 nodes, and presenting and examining 100 × 100 = 10, 000 estimated
pairwise variance decompositions would be thoroughly uninformative. Hence we characterize
the estimated networks graphically using five devices: node naming convention, node size,
node color, node location, and link arrow sizes (two per link, because the network is di-
rected). Throughout, we use the open-source Gephi software (https://gephi.github.io/)
for network visualization.

Node Naming Convention Indicates Bank and Country
The node naming convention is bank.country, where “bank” is our bank code and “country”
is our country code. For example, JP Morgan is jpm.us.9

Node Size Indicates Asset Size
   8
     Alternative frameworks that attempt to characterize network connectedness directly from a fitted sparse
VAR(1) coefficient matrix (e.g., Bonaldi et al. (2013)) force sparse networks, by construction. Moreover,
they also provide incomplete connectedness characterizations, because VAR connectedness arises not only
through cross-lag linkages, but also through the disturbance covariance matrix. Network connectedness
measures based on Granger-causal patterns (e.g. Billio et al. (2012)) also ignore the disturbance covariance
matrix and hence are similarly incomplete.
   9
     The other bank and country codes are similarly self-evident; see the appendices for a complete listing.




                                                     8
We make node size a linear function of bank asset size.10 We assign the sizes of the largest and
smallest nodes, and then assign the rest linearly. We emphasize assets rather than market
capitalization for two reasons. First, market capitalization is subject to abrupt changes
due to fluctuations in stock price. Second, cross-country differences in financial system
characteristics and ownership structure of publicly traded companies have direct effects on
market capitalization levels, thereby producing persistent differences in cross-country market
capitalizations.

Node color Indicates Total Directional Connectedness “To Others”
The node color indicates total directional connectedness to others, ranging from 3DFA02
(bright green, the weakest), to E6DF22 (luminous vivid yellow), to CF9C5B (whiskey sour),
to FC1C0D (bright red), to B81113 (dark red, the strongest). We show the color range in
Figure 1.



                            Figure 1: Network Graph Color Spectrum


Node Location Indicates Average Pairwise Directional Connectedness 11
We determine node location using the ForceAtlas2 algorithm of Jacomy et al. (2014) as
implemented in Gephi. The algorithm finds a steady state in which repelling and attracting
forces exactly balance, where (1) nodes repel each other, but (2) links attract the nodes
they connect according to average pairwise directional connectedness “to” and “from.” The
steady state node locations depend on initial node locations and hence are not unique. This
is largely irrelevant, however, as we are interested in relative, not absolute, node locations
in equilibrium.

Link Arrow Sizes Indicate Pairwise Directional Connectedness “To” and “From”
Note that because the full set of link arrow sizes reveals the full set of pairwise directional
connectednesses, from which all else can be derived, most of the additional graphical devices
employed (in particular, node shading and location) are in principle redundant and therefore
unnecessary. In practice, however, those additional devices prove invaluable for describing
large network topologies.
  10
     Note well that we make node size and asset size linearly related, but not directly proportional. Huge
asset-size differences between the largest and smallest banks in our sample make directly-proportional rep-
resentation impossible.
  11
     Link thickness also indicates average pairwise directional connectedness.

                                                    9
                      Figure 2: Individual Bank Network Graph, 2003-2014

4      Static Estimation of the Global Bank Network
We estimate logarithmic volatility VAR’s using the adaptive elastic net as described above.
Then we compute variance decompositions and corresponding connectedness measures at
horizon H = 10, using the estimated VAR parameters.


4.1     The Individual Bank Network
We show the full-sample global bank network graph in Figure 2. The main result is the
strong clustering, both within and across countries.12 The within-country bank clustering
  12
    A second interesting result is the high coherence between banks designated as GSIB’s and those that we
                                                                                              H      H
estimate and display as having high net total directional connectedness (“to” minus “from”, C•←i − Ci←•  ).
When we sort banks by net connectedness, all of our top 15 banks are included in the GSIB list, as are 20
of our top 25.



                                                    10
Table 1: Individual Bank Network Connectedness Table, Six-Group Aggregation, 2003-2014
               Africa   Asia Europe N. America Oceania S. America From Others
 Africa          0.00    8.51   18.78       13.84       1.77        2.14          45.05
 Asia            4.08    0.00 205.03       157.42      30.22       21.90        418.64
 Europe          6.62 93.44      0.00      431.31      20.57       29.31        581.25
 N. America      3.14 58.72 417.83           0.00      20.63       26.91        527.24
 Oceania         2.00 39.67     68.08       74.44       0.00        5.27        189.46
 S. America      1.38 14.29     48.41       48.34       2.63        0.00        115.06
 To Others      17.20 214.65 758.13        725.35      75.84       85.53        312.78


is ubiquitous, ranging from countries with many banks in our sample (e.g., U.S., Canada,
Australia, China, Japan) to those with only two or three (e.g., Korea, Singapore, India,
Malaysia). The cross-country clustering is also obvious throughout the graph, whose left
side clearly tends to contain banks of eastern countries, and whose right side clearly tends
to contain banks of western countries. Moreover, the western side clearly breaks into a large
Anglo / European bank cluster and a smaller American / Canadian cluster, each of which
contains sub-clusters.
    It is not obvious that region of origin would be the dominant factor driving network
connectedness. One might have thought, for example, that other factors, such as bank size,
might dominate, but such is not the case. Japan illustrates this clearly. Although the
majority of very large banks are located in the Anglo / American / European cluster, the
three very large Japanese banks (Mitsubishi UFJ, Mizuho Financial, and Sumitomo Mitsui
Financial) are located not in the Anglo / American / European cluster, but rather in the
Japanese cluster.
    Given the clear regional clustering in the network graph, we show in Table 1 a six-region
network connectedness table. The main elements are the pairwise directional connected-
nesses defined in equation (2), the row sums labeled “from others” are the total directional
connectednesses from others defined in equation (3), the column sums labeled “to others” are
the total directional connectednesses to others defined in equation (4), and the lower right
element is the systemwide connectedness defined in equation (5). The table’s message is
clear: North America and Europe are large (and indeed the only) net transmitters of future
volatility uncertainty (“to others” - “from others”) to the rest of the world. Asia also has
noticeably large total directional connectedness – both large transmissions and large receipts
(i.e., total directional connectedness “to” and “from”) – but at this point it remains a clear
net receiver.


                                             11
             Figure 3: Individual Bank / Sovereign Bond Network, 2003-2014

4.1.1   Including Sovereign Bonds

Thus far we analyzed the global network of bank equity return volatilities, but we can also
include other important financial asset volatilities. This is potentially interesting because,
although the U.S. financial crisis did not have a sovereign debt component, the ensuing
European crisis did.
    Against this background, we now briefly include sovereign bond yield volatilities in the
analysis, in addition to bank stock volatilities. We include 10-year G-7 sovereigns (United
States, Germany, France, Japan, United Kingdom, Canada, and Italy), as well as those of
Spain, Greece and Australia. We start with government bond prices, and then we convert to
approximate yields using Pt = 1/(1 + rt )10 , where Pt is price and rt is 10-year yield. Then we
calculate daily range-based return volatilities using the Parkinson (1980) approach, which
requires only the daily highs and lows (as opposed to high, low, open, and close). That is,


                                              12
we use σ̃it2 = 0.361(Hit − Lit )2 , where Hit and Lit are, respectively, the logs of daily high and
low prices for bank stock i on day t.
    We plot the estimated individual bank / sovereign bond network in Figure 3. Several
observations are in order. First, the sovereigns cluster strongly. They appear in the upper
right of the graph, which is otherwise similar to Figure 2.13 Second, European bond nodes
are nevertheless closer to European bank nodes, U.S. and Canadian bond nodes are closer
to U.S. and Canadian bank nodes, and Japanese and Australian bond nodes are closer
to Japanese and Australian bank nodes. Third, although the bond nodes are pulled toward
their respective country bank nodes, they remain completely distinct and never appear inside
their national/regional banking clusters: bank stocks form regional/national clusters, and
sovereign bonds are not part of those clusters.


4.2    The Country Bank Network
In Figures 4 and 5 (without and with sovereign bonds included, respectively) we show the
country bank network obtained by aggregating the earlier-discussed individual bank net-
work.14 This serves two useful and distinct purposes.
    First, examination of the country bank network is intrinsically interesting and a logical
next step. Our individual-bank analysis showed strong connectedness of banks both within
and across countries, so we now proceed to dig more deeply into the cross-country links.
Examination of the country bank network allows us to distinguish the relative strengths of
directional “to” and “from” connectedness of the most-connected country banking systems.
    Second, the smaller number of links in the country bank network makes visual interpreta-
tion of connectedness simpler and more revealing. (29 countries produce only 292 = 841 links
in the country network, whereas 96 banks produce 962 = 9216 links in the bank network.)
    The equity volatility network of Figure 4 reveals that the U.S. is massively connected.
The strongest U.S. links are with Canada, Great Britain, and Australia. It is not always
visible, but the arrows indicate greater connectedness from the U.S. to Canada, Australia
and Great Britain than conversely. The Anglo / European countries form a cluster just above
the U.S. Of the Anglo / European countries, Britain has the strongest links to and from the
U.S. The northern European countries are to the south-east of the cluster; Sweden has the
strongest connectedness with the U.S. Ireland, Portugal, Greece, Finland and Austria are
  13
     The country bond node naming convention is COUNTRY_b, where “COUNTRY” is our country code
(capitalized) and “b” denotes bond. For example, the U.S. government bond is USA_b. The other country
codes are generally similarly self-evident; see the appendices for a complete listing.
  14
     We place country nodes at the centers of gravity of the corresponding country banks.


                                                 13
                           Figure 4: Country Bank Network, 2003-2014

located on the perimeter of the cluster. Other countries are scattered farther away from the
European cluster. As noted previously for individual banks, moving leftward on the graph
generally takes one from western to eastern countries. Finally, the equity/bond volatility
network of Figure 5 reveals that, as in the individual bank analysis, the bonds cluster tightly,
regardless of geography.


5      Dynamic Estimation of the Global Bank Network
We now characterize the global banking network dynamically. We use rolling estimation
with a 150-day window, with repeated cross validation of the penalty parameter λ in each
window.15 We start with comparisons of estimated network graphs “before and after” ma-
  15
    For rolling estimation we switch from adaptive elastic net to elastic net, meaning that we use wi = 1
rather than wi = 1/|β̂i,OLS | in the estimator (9), because we found that the elastic net produces less noisy


                                                     14
                Figure 5: Country Bank / Sovereign Bond Network, 2003-2014

jor crisis episodes, and then we proceed to examine the continuous real-time evolution of
systemwide connectedness.


5.1     Banks Pre- and Post-Lehman
The critical point in the financial crisis was Lehman’s bankruptcy, which was announced on
September 15, 2008. In Figure 6 we show the 96-bank network graphs on September 1, 2008
and on November 21, 2008. There is a clear difference between the individual bank network
graphs on the two dates.
    In particular, connectedness of U.S. banks with others increased sharply after Lehman’s
collapse and the transformation of the U.S. financial crisis into a global one. Before the
Lehman collapse, the U.S. and European banks stood far apart around the Anglo / American
estimates under rolling estimation.


                                            15
                  (a) September 1, 2008




                  (b) November 21, 2008

Figure 6: Individual Bank Network Pre- and Post-Lehman


                           16
/ European cluster, with a visible gap in the network graph between the U.S. and European
banks. The Japanese and Chinese banks also stood apart. Once the Lehman shock hit global
markets, the entire individual bank network, perhaps with the exception of Chinese banks,
moved closer together, indicating the spread of volatility across bank stocks and countries.
It is important to stress that volatility data coming from stock markets operating in different
time zones does not prevent our framework from capturing the sharp increase in pairwise
directional connectedness after the collapse of Lehman Brothers.
     A similar picture arises when we analyze the country bank network before and after
Lehman’s collapse. We show the country bank network graphs in Figure 7. Connectedness
was comparatively weak before the collapse, and much stronger afterward. Moreover, the
directional volatility connectedness from the U.S. to others increased substantially.


5.2     Banks, Bonds, and the European Debt Crisis
To see how the individual bank / sovereign bond network was transformed following the
European banking and sovereign bond crisis, we analyze the network graph once the Euro-
pean sovereign debt and banking crisis spread throughout the continent, affecting mostly the
periphery countries such as Greece, Portugal, Ireland, Italy and Spain. However, sovereign
bonds of the center countries such as Germany, France and the Great Britain could not
be isolated from the events unfolding in the periphery. As a result, on October 7, 2011
connectedness reached its highest level since the global financial crisis of late 2008.16
    In Figure 8(a) we show the October 2011 individual bank / sovereign bond network, and
in Figure 8(b) we once again show the full-sample network for comparison. The graphs are
quite different. The October 2011 bond yield volatilities are no longer on the outskirts of
the regional / national banking clusters. Indeed, bond yield volatilities for the U.S., the UK,
Germany and France moved toward the center of the European / North American banking
cluster. Italy and Spain did not move to the center of the cluster, but they are still closer to
the center of Anglo / American / European cluster than they were in the full sample. Greek
bonds, on the other hand, are separated from other sovereign bonds (including the European
bonds) as well as individual banks.17 Australian bonds moved closer to the Japanese bonds.
Furthermore, the nodes for the Japanese and Chinese banks, as well as the ones from other
countries, moved closer to the Anglo / American / European cluster, indicating stronger
  16
    More precisely, systemwide connectedness peaked on October 7, 2011, as shown in Figure 9.
  17
    We believe that this is a reflection of the declining exposure of the European banks to Greek sovereign
bonds from EUR 189 bn in the beginning of 2010 to EUR 104 bn at the end of 2011. (Sources: BIS Quarterly
Review, June 2010 and June 2012, Table 9B).

                                                    17
                 (a) September 1, 2008




                (b) November 21, 2008

Figure 7: Country Bank Network Pre- and Post-Lehman


                          18
                (a) Rolling Estimation, 150-Day Window Ending October 7, 2011




                                 (b) Full-Sample Estimation

Figure 8: Individual Bank / Sovereign Bond Network, Full-Sample vs. After the European
Crisis

                                             19
volatility connectedness in October 2011 compared to the full sample.
    All told, Figure 8 clearly shows that the European banking and sovereign debt crises had
become intertwined as of October 2011. The U.S. banks are farther away from the center of
the Anglo / American / European cluster, and the European banks are at the center, close
to the government bond markets of the U.S., France, Germany, and the U.K.


5.3     Systemwide Connectedness
Now we consider systemwide connectedness. There are two interesting ways to display and
decompose it: trend vs. cycle and cross-country vs. within-country. We consider them in
turn.

5.3.1   Trend and Cycle

We first display and decompose dynamic systemwide connectedness into secular (trend) and
cyclical variation, as shown in Figure 9. As indicated by the superimposed piecewise linear
trend, systemwide connectedness broadly increased for roughly the first half of our sample,
peaking with the Lehman bankruptcy. It then decreased gradually, albeit with some major
bumps associated with the two waves of the European debt crisis, falling by almost twenty
percentage points relative to its peak by the end of the sample.
    Let us first discuss aspects of the pre-Lehman episode. First, the connectedness of major
global bank stocks increased following the Fed’s unexpected decision to tighten monetary
policy in May and June 2006. However, there was no other major volatility shock across the
global banking system in 2006, so that estimated connectedness subsides as the observations
for May-June 2006 vanish from the rolling-window. Volatility connectedness was low in
early 2007. However, following the collapse of several mortgage originators in the U.S.,
connectedness increased sharply. This jump was followed by an even greater jump during
the liquidity crisis of August 2007, when it became apparent that along with the U.S. banks
the European banks also had to write off billions of dollars of losses due to their investments
in mortgage backed securities. By the end of 2007, it became apparent that the major U.S.
banks would end up writing of tens of billions of dollars in losses. Then in March 2008,
Bear Stearns, one of the top U.S. investment banks, was acquired by J.P. Morgan to avoid
bankruptcy.
    Now consider the post-Lehman episode. Systemwide connectedness reached its peak
following the Lehman bankruptcy on September 15, 2008, at which time the U.S. govern-


                                              20
             Figure 9: Systemwide Connectedness, With Superimposed Trend

ment introduced a huge package of direct capital injection in major U.S. banks. As months
passed, the U.S. markets calmed, and systemwide connectedness started to trend downward.
However, in 2009 and 2010 the EU member countries were shocked by developments in the
banking and sovereign debt markets of some of its peripheral member countries, including
Greece, Ireland and Portugal. Then in 2011, Italy and Spain joined the countries with
stressed banking systems and sovereign bond markets. As a result, systemwide connected-
ness experienced two more significant jumps in May 2010 (due to delay in the rescue package
for Greece) and in July-August 2011 (due to spread of sovereign debt and banking sector
worries to Spain and Italy).
    In closing this section, it may be useful to offer conjectures regarding not only aspects
of the connecteness increase during the 2007-2008 crisis, but also regarding the subsequent
connectedness decrease, and similarly for the various European debt crises. Connectedness
could have increased more in the weeks after the Lehman collapse, had the U.S. government
decided not to rescue AIG. Moreover, connectedness decreased more quickly in the months
after Lehman’s collapse as the U.S. government used the USD 700 bn Troubled Asset Relief


                                             21
        Figure 10: Systemwide Connectedness, Cross-Country and Within-Country

Program (TARP) to inject capital into the major U.S. banks. That decision helped increase
confidence in the U.S. banking system and hence prevented a potential breakdown of the
global financial system. Finally, stress test results also indicated that U.S. banks were sound
and led to a significant decline in systemwide connectedness in 2009. As for subsequent crises,
in the Greek debt crisis of 2009-2010, the ECB/IMF/EC rescue package proved effective,
and in the European banking and sovereign debt crisis of 2011, the intervention of ECB
under the new president Mario Draghi eventually brought down systemwide connectedness,
as the ECB announced a three-year EUR 1 tr Long-term Refinancing Operation (LTRO)
package that provided liquidity to many of the banks that had difficulty in borrowing in the
overnight market.

5.3.2   Cross-Country and Within-Country

A second way to display and decompose dynamic systemwide connectedness involves cross-
country and within-country parts, as in Figure 10. Cross-country systemwide connectedness
is the sum of all pairwise connectedness across banks located in different countries. Within-
country systemwide connectedness is the sum of pairwise connectedness across banks in the


                                              22
same country. By construction cross-country and within-country systemwide connectedness
must sum to systemwide connectedness. The decomposition is of interest because exploring
the country origins of volatility shocks and their temporal evolution may help us better
understand the dynamics of global bank connectedness.
    The decomposition shows that most movements in systemwide connectedness are due
to movements in cross-country systemwide connectedness. Cross-country systemwide con-
nectedness is around 40% from 2004 to May 2006, but it then begins to fluctuate signif-
icantly. Following the Fed’s unexpected decision to further tighten U.S. monetary policy,
cross-country systemwide connectedness increases by around 15% in May-December 2006.
Following this episode, cross-country connectedness continues to vary throughout the sample.
    It is interesting to note the decline in within-country connectedness in 2008 Q4.18 We
conjecture that there are at least two reasons. First, U.S. intervention following the Lehman
collapse likely increased confidence in the U.S. financial system and reduced within-U.S.
connectedness in 2008 Q4. As there are sixteen U.S. banks in our analysis, the decline in
within-U.S. connectedness induces a decline in the overall within-country connectedness. The
second reason follows from the simple aritmhmetic of connectedness. Systemwide connected-
ness is equal to the sum of cross-country and within-country connectedness. Once the U.S.
financial crisis was transformed into a global one in the last quarter of 2008, cross-country
connectedness increased sharply, with U.S. banks spreading shocks to European banks. At
that point the systemwide connectedness was already 88%, and we know that it bounded
above by 100. As it approaches 100 it takes smaller steps. Therefore, as the cross-country
connectedness increases sharply, the within-country connectedness becomes less important
and hence declines. A similar dynamic appears in 2010 and 2011 during the European
sovereign debt and banking crises.


5.4       Size and Eigenvalue Centrality
One of the primary goals of network analysis is evaluating the relative importance of indi-
vidual network members. This is highly relevant for our global banking network, because,
as shown during the recent global financial crisis, an individual bank may be the source
of financial stress that can be transmitted to the whole system. Furthermore, from a pol-
icy viewpoint, detecting such systemically important financial institutions carries enormous
importance in preventing future crises.
    In Diebold and Yilmaz (2014) and thus far in this paper, we emphasized total directional
 18
      We thank a referee for pointing this out.

                                                  23
       Figure 11: Rank Regression of Eigenvalue Centrality on Market Capitalization

connectedness to others for ranking systemically important institutions.19 But that captures
only 1-step links, whereas there may be multi-step links as well.20 To explore this, we
calculate the eigenvalue centrality St , which incorporates connectedness at all numbers of
steps, for each bank in our sample. St satisfies

                                             St = Ct St                                           (10)

where St is the Nx1 vector of bank eigenvector centralities and Ct is the NxN network
connectedness (adjacency) matrix. The solution for St in equation (10) corresponds to
eigenvector associated with the largest eigenvalue of Ct . More intuitively, note that equation
(10) makes clear that the eigenvalue centrality for a given bank is equal to the sum of the
centralities of the connected banks weighted by the sizes of the respective links.
    From our earlier-estimated time series of Ct , we can calculate the corresponding series
  19
     In Diebold and Yilmaz (2014) we also noted the close relationship between CoVaR (Adrian and Brun-
nermeier (2016))and total directional connectedness to others.
  20
     For example, banks A and C may not be directly (1-step) linked, but A may be linked to B, and B to
C, so that A and C are indirectly linked (in this eample, 2-step linked).


                                                  24
of estimated St , which then allows us to investigate the dynamic interaction between bank
market capitalization and centrality. Toward that objective, we estimate the cross-section
rank regression of bank centrality on market capitalization for each sub-sample window.21
Figure 11 presents the rank regression coefficient and its p-value over the rolling windows. In
line with expectations, bank eigenvalue centrality is highly correlated with bank size, with the
regression coefficient fluctuating between 0.4 and 0.6 in 2004 and 2005. More importantly,
however, the relationship between centrality rank and size rank weakens during the global
financial crisis of 2008-2009. It even disappears completely during the second phase of the
European debt crisis in summer 2011 and late 2012, when the coefficient p-value moves well
above the 5% level.
    On the basis of this evidence we can conclude that, whereas the largest banks are more
likely to be central in the global financial system in good times, smaller banks can also be-
come central during bad times and generate volatility connectedness that will have systemic
implications.
    So far in this section we focused on the relationship between banks’ market capitalization
and eigenvalue centrality in the volatility network. Alternatively, we can focus on the rela-
tionship between banks’ GSIB status and eigenvalue centrality. Towards that end, we regress
the eigenvalue centrality rank of banks on a constant term along with a dummy that indi-
cates whether the bank is included in the GSIB list at the beginning of that year. Figure 12
reports the evolution of the estimated coefficient and its p-value. The negative coefficient
estimate on the GSIB dummy indicates that GSIB’s are likely to be more central (higher
eigenvalue centrality measure) than non-GSIB’s. Except for a short time in the pre-crisis
period (2004-2006), the central position of GSIB’s in the network tends to be statistically
significant. An average of -26 for the coefficient estimate from mid-2006 onward indicates
that, everything else equal, a GSIB is likely to be ranked 25 banks ahead of a non-GSIB
when ranked according to the eigenvalue centrality measure.


6      Conclusion
We have used LASSO methods to shrink, select and estimate the high-dimensional network
linking the publicly-traded subset of the world’s top 150 banks, 2003-2014. We characterized
static network connectedness using full-sample estimation and dynamic network connected-
  21
    The series we use in our rank regression analysis is measured at weekly frequency, rather than the
daily frequency used throughout the rest of the paper. For conversion we use end-of-week centralities and
capitalizations.


                                                   25
          Figure 12: Regression of Eigenvalue Centrality Rank on GSIB Dummy

ness using rolling-window estimation. Statically, we found that global bank equity connect-
edness has a strong geographic component, whereas country sovereign bond connectedness
does not. Dynamically, we found that equity connectedness increases during crises, with
clear peaks during the Great Financial Crisis and each wave of the subsequent European
Debt Crisis, and with movements coming mostly from changes in cross-country as opposed
to within-country bank linkages.




Appendices
A     Global Bank Detail, by Assets
Here we provide detail on our sample of all 96 publicly-traded banks in the world’s top
150 (by assets). In Table 2 we show the banks ordered by assets, and we provide market


                                            26
capitalizations and assets (both in billions of U.S. dollars), our bank codes (which shows
country), and Reuters tickers. The bank codes are easier to understand than the Reuters
ticker, particularly as regards identifying banks’ countries, so we use them in our empirical
work.



                         Table 2: Global Bank Detail (Ordered by Assets)

 Bank                                       Country      Mcap     Asset      Bank      Reuters
 Name                                                                        Code       Ticker
 HSBC Holdings                                  UK        2010    2.671    hsba.gb      hsba.ln
 Mitsubishi UFJ Financial Group               Japan        822    2.504    mtbh.jp     X8306.to
 BNP Paribas                                 France       1000    2.482      bnp.fr      bnp.fr
 JPMorgan Chase & Co                            US        2180    2.416     jpm.us          jpm
 Deutsche Bank                              Germany        498    2.224     dbk.de       dbk.xe
 Barclays                                       UK         682    2.174    barc.gb       barc.ln
 Credit Agricole                             France        367    2.119      aca.fr       aca.fr
 Bank of America                                US        1770    2.102     bac.us          bac
 Citigroup                                      US        1500    1.880        c.us           c
 Mizuho Financial Group                       Japan        497    1.706     mzh.jp      8411.to
 Societe Generale                            France        516    1.703       gle.fr       gle.fr
 Royal Bank of Scotland Group                   UK         356    1.703      rbs.gb       rbs.ln
 Sumitomo Mitsui Financial Group              Japan        643    1.567    smtm.jp      8316.to
 Banco Santander                              Spain       1030    1.538      san.es      san.mc
 Wells Fargo                                    US        2430    1.527     wfc.us          wfc
 ING Groep                                 Netherland      557    1.490     inga.nl     inga.ae
 Lloyds Banking Group                           UK         961    1.403     lloy.gb       lloy.ln
 Unicredit                                     Italy       477    1.166      ucg.it      ucg.mi
 UBS                                       Switzerland     802    1.138    ubsn.ch      ubsn.vx
 Credit Suisse Group                       Switzerland     503      983     csgn.ch     csgn.vx
 Goldman Sachs Group                            US         742      912       gs.us          gs
 Nordea Bank                                 Sweden        556      870      nor.se    ndasek.sk
 Intesa Sanpaolo                               Italy       458      864       isp.it     isp.mi
 Morgan Stanley                                 US         577      833      ms.us           ms
 Toronto-Dominion Bank                      Canada         827      827       td.ca         td.t
 Royal Bank of Canada                       Canada         935      825       ry.ca         ry.t
 Banco Bilbao Vizcaya Argentaria              Spain        708      803    bbva.es      bbva.mc
 Commerzbank                                Germany        206      759     cbk.de       cbk.xe
 National Australia Bank                    Australia      724      755     nab.au       nab.au
 Bank of Nova Scotia                        Canada         698      713     bns.ca         bns.t
 Commonwealth Bank of Australia             Australia     1100      688     cba.au       cba.au
 Standard Chartered                             UK         524      674    stan.gb       stan.ln
 China Merchants Bank                         China        358      664     cmb.cn     600036.sh
 Australia and New Zealand Banking Group    Australia      776      656     anz.au       anz.au
 Westpac Banking                            Australia      918      650     wbc.au      wbc.au
 Shanghai Pudong Development Bank             China        295      608    shgp.cn     600000.sh
 Danske Bank                                Denmark        256      597     dan.dk     danske.ko
 Sberbank Rossii                             Russia        594      552     sber.ru     sber.mz
                                                  Continued on next page

                                              27
                   Table 2 – Continued from previous page
Bank                                           Country      Mcap Asset          Bank       Reuters
Name                                                                            Code         Ticker
China Minsheng Banking Corp                      China        297      533     cmb.cn      600016.sh
Bank of Montreal                                Canada        419      515     bmo.ca         bmo.t
Itau Unibanco Holding                            Brazil       332      435    itub4.br      itub4.br
Resona Holdings                                  Japan        122      434     rsnh.jp       8308.to
Nomura Holdings                                  Japan        256      422    nmrh.jp        8604.to
Sumitomo Mitsui Trust Holdings                   Japan        184      406    smtm.jp        8309.to
State Bank of India                              India        165      400     sbin.in       sbin.in
DNB ASA                                         Norway        289      396     dnb.no        dnb.os
Svenska Handelsbanken                           Sweden        309      388     shba.se       shba.sk
Skandinaviska Enskilda Banken                   Sweden        291      387     seba.se       seba.sk
Canadian Bank of Commerce                       Canada        324      382      cm.ca           cm.t
Bank of New York Mellon                            US         363      374       bk.us         bk.us
U.S. Bancorp                                       US         745      364     usb.us            usb
Banco Bradesco                                   Brazil       235      355    bbdc4.br     bbdc4.br
KBC Groupe                                      Belgium       260      333     kbc.be         kbc.bt
PNC Financial Services Group                       US         435      320     pnc.us        pnc.us
DBS Group Holdings                             Singapore      320      318      d05.sg        d05.sg
Ping An Bank                                     China        190      313     pab.cn      000001.sz
Woori Finance Holdings                           Korea         84      309     wrfh.kr     053000.se
Dexia                                           Belgium         1      307    dexb.be       dexb.bt
Capital One Financial                              US         415      297      cof.us           cof
Shinhan Financial Group                          Korea        188      295      shf.kr     055550.se
Swedbank                                        Sweden        308      284      swe.se     sweda.sk
Hua Xia Bank                                     China        124      276     hxb.cn      600015.sh
Erste Group Bank                                Austria       168      276      ebs.at        ebs.vi
Banca Monte dei Paschi di Siena                   Italy       29       275     bmps.it     bmps.mi
State Street Corporation                           US          30      243       stt.us        stt.us
Banco de Sabadell                                Spain        131      225      sab.es       sab.mc
United Overseas Bank                           Singapore      251      225     uob.sg         u11.sg
Banco Popular Espanol                            Spain         13      204     pop.es        pop.mc
Industrial Bank of Korea                         Korea         66      193      ibk.kr     024110.se
BB&T Corp                                          US         266      183      bbt.us           bbt
Bank of Ireland                                 Ireland       146      182       bir.ie       bir.db
National Bank of Canada                         Canada        131      180       na.ca          na.t
SunTrust Banks                                     US         203      175       sti.us        sti.us
Banco Popolare                                    Italy        36      174       bp.it        bp.mi
Malayan Banking Berhad                         Malaysia       263      171    may.my      maybank.ku
Allied Irish Banks                              Ireland       999      162       aib.ie       aib.db
Standard Bank Group                          South Africa     177      161      sbk.za        sbk.jo
American Express                                   US         947      153        axp           axp
National Bank of Greece                         Greece        121      153       ete.gr        ete.at
Macquarie Group                                Australia      160      143     mqg.au        mqg.au
Fukuoka Financial Group                          Japan         33      137       ffg.jp      8354.to
Bank Of Yokohama                                 Japan         63      134      boy.jp       8332.to
Pohjola Bank                                    Finland        58      132      poh.fi     poh1s.he
Fifth Third Bancorp                                US         185      130      fitb.us       fitb.us
Regions Financial                                  US         143      117        rf.us         rf.us
                                                     Continued on next page


                                                 28
                   Table 2 – Continued from previous page
 Bank                                          Country      Mcap   Asset       Bank        Reuters
 Name                                                                          Code         Ticker
 Chiba Bank                                      Japan       52     117       cbb.jp        8331.to
 Unipol Gruppo Finanziario                        Italy      28     116        uni.it        uni.mi
 Banco Comercial Portugues                     Portugal      51     113       bcp.pr         bcp.lb
 CIMB Group Holdings                           Malaysia     163     113      cimb.my        cimb.ku
 Bank of Baroda                                  India       37     113       bob.in     bankbaroda.in
 Turkiye Is Bankasi                             Turkey       89     112       isctr.tr       isctr.is
 Banco Espirito Santo                          Portugal     71      111        bes.pr         bes.lb
 Hokuhoku Financial Group                        Japan      25      108        hkf.jp       8377.to
 Shizuoka Bank                                   Japan       61     104       shzb.jp       8355.to
 Mediobanca Banca di Credito Finanziario          Italy      85      95        mb.it         mb.mi
 Yamaguchi Financial Group                       Japan      23       93        yfg.jp       8418.to




B     Global Bank Detail, by Country
In Table 3 we show the same banks by country, starting with those countries with the most
banks, and proceeding through those countries with fewer banks.



                          Table 3: Global Bank Detail (Ordered by Country)

 Bank                                         Country       Mcap   Asset       Bank        Reuters
 Name                                                                          Code         Ticker
 JPMorgan Chase & Co                             US        2180    2.416      jpm.us          jpm
 Bank of America                                 US        1770    2.102      bac.us           bac
 Citigroup                                       US        1500    1.880        c.us            c
 Wells Fargo                                     US        2430    1.527      wfc.us           wfc
 Goldman Sachs Group                             US         742      912       gs.us            gs
 Morgan Stanley                                  US         577      833       ms.us           ms
 Bank of New York Mellon                         US         363      374       bk.us         bk.us
 U.S. Bancorp                                    US         745      364      usb.us           usb
 PNC Financial Services Group                    US         435      320      pnc.us        pnc.us
 Capital One Financial                           US         415      297       cof.us          cof
 State Street Corporation                        US          30      243       stt.us        stt.us
 BB&T Corp                                       US         266      183      bbt.us         BBT
 SunTrust Banks                                  US         203      175       sti.us        sti.us
 American Express                                US         947      153        axp           axp
 Fifth Third Bancorp                             US         185      130      fitb.us       fitb.us
 Regions Financial                               US         143      117        rf.us         rf.us
 Mitsubishi UFJ Financial Group                 Japan       822    2.504     mtbh.jp       X8306.to
 Mizuho Financial Group                         Japan       497    1.706      mzh.jp        8411.to
 Sumitomo Mitsui Financial Group                Japan       643    1.567     smtm.jp        8316.to
 Resona Holdings                                Japan       122      434      rsnh.jp       8308.to
                                                   Continued on next page


                                                 29
                  Table 3 – Continued from previous page
Bank                                          Country      Mcap Asset          Bank      Reuters
Name                                                                           Code       Ticker
Nomura Holdings                                 Japan        256      422    nmrh.jp      8604.to
Sumitomo Mitsui Trust Holdings                  Japan        184      406    smtm.jp      8309.to
Fukuoka Financial Group                         Japan         33      137       ffg.jp    8354.to
Bank Of Yokohama                                Japan         63      134      boy.jp     8332.to
Chiba Bank                                      Japan         52      117      cbb.jp     8331.to
Hokuhoku Financial Group                        Japan         25      108      hkf.jp     8377.to
Shizuoka Bank                                   Japan         61      104     shzb.jp     8355.to
Yamaguchi Financial Group                       Japan         23       93      yfg.jp     8418.to
Toronto-Dominion Bank                          Canada        827      827       td.ca         td.t
Royal Bank of Canada                           Canada        935      825       ry.ca         ry.t
Bank of Nova Scotia                            Canada        698      713     bns.ca         bns.t
Bank of Montreal                               Canada        419      515     bmo.ca        bmo.t
Canadian Bank of Commerce                      Canada        324      382      cm.ca         cm.t
National Bank of Canada                        Canada        131      180       na.ca         na.t
Unicredit                                        Italy       477    1.166      ucg.it      ucg.mi
Intesa Sanpaolo                                  Italy       458      864       isp.it     isp.mi
Banca Monte dei Paschi di Siena                  Italy       29       275    bmps.it     bmps.mi
Banco Popolare                                   Italy        36      174       bp.it       bp.mi
Unipol Gruppo Finanziario                        Italy        28      116      uni.it      uni.mi
Mediobanca Banca di Credito Finanziario          Italy        85       95      mb.it       mb.mi
National Australia Bank                       Australia      724      755     nab.au       nab.au
Commonwealth Bank of Australia                Australia     1100      688     cba.au       cba.au
Australia and New Zealand Banking Group       Australia      776      656     anz.au       anz.au
Westpac Banking                               Australia      918      650     wbc.au      wbc.au
Macquarie Group                               Australia      160      143    mqg.au       mqg.au
China Merchants Bank                            China        358      664     cmb.cn     600036.sh
Shanghai Pudong Development Bank                China        295      608    shgp.cn     600000.sh
China Minsheng Banking Corp                     China        297      533     cmb.cn     600016.sh
Ping An Bank                                    China        190      313     pab.cn     000001.sz
Hua Xia Bank                                    China        124      276     hxb.cn     600015.sh
HSBC Holdings                                     UK        2010    2.671    hsba.gb      hsba.ln
Barclays                                          UK         682    2.174    barc.gb       barc.ln
Royal Bank of Scotland Group                      UK         356    1.703      rbs.gb       rbs.ln
Lloyds Banking Group                              UK         961    1.403     lloy.gb       lloy.ln
Standard Chartered                                UK         524      674    stan.gb       stan.ln
Banco Santander                                 Spain       1030    1.538      san.es      san.mc
Banco Bilbao Vizcaya Argentaria                 Spain        708      803    bbva.es      bbva.mc
Banco de Sabadell                               Spain        131      225      sab.es      sab.mc
Banco Popular Espanol                           Spain         13      204     pop.es      pop.mc
Nordea Bank                                    Sweden        556      870      nor.se    ndasek.sk
Svenska Handelsbanken                          Sweden        309      388     shba.se     shba.sk
Skandinaviska Enskilda Banken                  Sweden        291      387     seba.se     seba.sk
Swedbank                                       Sweden        308      284      swe.se    sweda.sk
BNP Paribas                                    France       1000    2.482      bnp.fr      bnp.fr
Credit Agricole                                France        367    2.119      aca.fr       aca.fr
Societe Generale                               France        516    1.703       gle.fr       gle.fr
Woori Finance Holdings                          Korea         84      309    wrfh.kr     053000.se
                                                    Continued on next page


                                                30
                    Table 3 – Continued from previous page
 Bank                                           Country      Mcap   Asset     Bank        Reuters
 Name                                                                         Code          Ticker
 Shinhan Financial Group                          Korea      188     295      shf.kr      055550.se
 Industrial Bank of Korea                         Korea       66     193      ibk.kr      024110.se
 UBS                                           Switzerland   802    1.138   ubsn.ch        ubsn.vx
 Credit Suisse Group                           Switzerland   503     983     csgn.ch       csgn.vx
 KBC Groupe                                      Belgium     260     333     kbc.be          kbc.bt
 Dexia                                           Belgium       1     307    dexb.be        dexb.bt
 Itau Unibanco Holding                            Brazil     332     435    itub4.br       itub4.br
 Banco Bradesco                                   Brazil     235     355    bbdc4.br      bbdc4.br
 Deutsche Bank                                  Germany      498    2.224    dbk.de         dbk.xe
 Commerzbank                                    Germany      206     759     cbk.de          cbk.xe
 Bank of Ireland                                 Ireland     146     182       bir.ie        bir.db
 Allied Irish Banks                              Ireland     999     162      aib.ie         aib.db
 State Bank of India                              India      165     400     sbin.in        sbin.in
 Bank of Baroda                                   India       37     113     bob.in     bankbaroda.in
 Malayan Banking Berhad                         Malaysia     263     171    may.my       maybank.ku
 CIMB Group Holdings                            Malaysia     163     113    cimb.my        cimb.ku
 Banco Comercial Portugues                      Portugal      51     113     bcp.pr          bcp.lb
 Banco Espirito Santo                           Portugal     71      111      bes.pr         bes.lb
 DBS Group Holdings                             Singapore    320     318     d05.sg          d05.sg
 United Overseas Bank                           Singapore    251     225     uob.sg          u11.sg
 Erste Group Bank                                Austria     168     276      ebs.at         ebs.vi
 Danske Bank                                    Denmark      256     597     dan.dk       danske.ko
 Pohjola Bank                                    Finland      58     132      poh.fi      poh1s.he
 National Bank of Greece                         Greece      121     153      ete.gr         ete.at
 ING Groep                                    Netherlands    557    1.490    inga.nl        inga.ae
 DNB ASA                                         Norway      289     396     dnb.no         dnb.os
 Sberbank Rossii                                  Russia     594     552     sber.ru       sber.mz
 Turkiye Is Bankasi                              Turkey       89     112     isctr.tr       isctr.is
 Standard Bank Group                          South Africa   177     161     sbk.za         sbk.jo




References
Acemoglu, D., V.M. Carvalho, A. Ozdaglar, and A. Tahbaz-Salehi (2012), “The Network
  Origins of Aggregate Fluctuations,” Econometrica, 80, 1977–2016.

Acharya, V. and T. Yorulmazer (2007), “Too Many to Fail: An Analysis of Time-
  inconsistency in Bank Closure Policies,” Journal of Financial Intermediation, 16, 1–31.

Acharya, V.V., R.F. Engle, and M. Richardson (2012), “Capital Shortfall: A New Approach
  to Ranking and Regulating Systemic Risks,” American Economic Review , 102, 59–64.

Acharya, V.V., L. Pedersen, T. Philippon, and M. Richardson (2010), “Measuring Systemic
  Risk,” Manuscript, New York University.

                                                  31
Adrian, T. and M. Brunnermeier (2016), “CoVaR,” American Economic Review , 106, 1705–
 1741.

Alizadeh, S., M.W. Brandt, and F.X. Diebold (2002), “Range-Based Estimation of Stochastic
  Volatility Models,” Journal of Finance, 57, 1047–1091.

Allen, F. and D. Gale (1994), “Limited Market Participation and the Volatility of Asset
  Prices,” American Economic Review , 84, 933–955.

Allen, F. and D. Gale (2000), “Financial Contagion,” Journal of Political Economy, 108,
  1–33.

Allen, L., T.G. Bali, and Y. Tang (2012), “Does Systemic Risk in the Financial Sector
  Predict Future Economic Downturns?” Review of Financial Studies, 25, 3000–3036.

Andersen, T.G., T. Bollerslev, P.F. Christoffersen, and F.X. Diebold (2013), “Financial Risk
 Measurement for Financial Risk Management,” In M. Harris, G. Constantinedes and R.
 Stulz (eds.), Handbook of the Economics of Finance, Volume 2, Part B, Elsevier, 1127-
 1220.

Babus, A. (2013), “The Formation of Financial Networks,” Manuscript, Imperial College
  London.

Barigozzi, M. and C. Brownlees (2013), “NETS: Network Estimation for Time Series,”
  Manuscript, LSE and UPF.

Bianchi, D., M. Billio, R. Casarin, and M. Guidolin (2015), “Modeling Contagion and Sys-
  temic Risk,” Manuscript, University Warwick, University of Venice and Bocconi Univer-
  sity.

Billio, M., M. Getmansky, A.W. Lo, and L. Pelizzon (2012), “Econometric Measures of Con-
  nectedness and Systemic Risk in the Finance and Insurance Sectors,” Journal of Financial
  Economics, 104, 535–559.

Bonaldi, P., A. Hortaçsu, and J. Kastl (2013), “An Empirical Analysis of Systemic Risk in
  the EURO-zone,” Manuscript, University of Chicago.

Brownlees, C. and R.F. Engle (2015), “SRISK: A Conditional Capital Shortfall Index for
  Systemic Risk Measurement,” Manuscript, Pompeu Fabra University and New York Uni-
  versity.

Cifuentes, G., R. Ferrucci and H.S. Shin (2005), “Liquidity Risk and Contagion,” Journal
  of the European Economic Association, 3, 556–566.

Diebold, F.X. and K. Yilmaz (2009), “Measuring Financial Asset Return and Volatility
  Spillovers, with Application to Global Equity Markets,” Economic Journal , 119, 158–
  171.

                                            32
Diebold, F.X. and K. Yilmaz (2012), “Better to Give than to Receive: Predictive Measure-
  ment of Volatility Spillovers (with discussion),” International Journal of Forecasting, 28,
  57–66.

Diebold, F.X. and K. Yilmaz (2014), “On the Network Topology of Variance Decompositions:
  Measuring the Connectedness of Financial Firms,” Journal of Econometrics, 182, 119–
  134.

Easley, D. and J. Kleinberg (2010), Networks, Crowds and Markets, Cambridge University
  Press.

Garman, M. B. and M. J. Klass (1980), “On the Estimation of Security Price Volatilities
 From Historical Data,” Journal of Business, 53, 67–78.

Giglio, S.W., B.T. Kelly, and S. Pruitt (2016), “Systemic Risk and the Macroeconomy: An
  Empirical Evaluation,” Journal of Financial Economics, 119, 457–471.

Gorton, G. (2015), The Maze of Banking: History, Theory, Crisis, Oxford University Press.

Jackson, M.O. (2008), Social and Economic Networks, Princeton University Press.

Jacomy, M., S. Heymann, T. Venturini, and M. Bastian (2014), “ForceAtlas2, A Continu-
  ous Graph Layout Algorithm for Handy Network Visualization Designed for the Gephi
  Software,” PLoS ONE , 9, www.plosone.org.

Koop, G., M.H. Pesaran, and S.M. Potter (1996), “Impulse Response Analysis in Nonlinear
 Multivariate Models,” Journal of Econometrics, 74, 119–147.

Pesaran, H.H. and Y. Shin (1998), “Generalized Impulse Response Analysis in Linear Mul-
  tivariate Models,” Economics Letters, 58, 17–29.

Shleifer, A. and R.W. Vishny (1992), “Liquidity Values and Debt Capacity: A Market
  Equilibrium Approach,” Journal of Finance, 47, 1343–1366.

Tibshirani, R. (1996), “Regression Shrinkage and Selection via the Lasso,” Journal of the
  Royal Statistical Society, Series B (Methodological), 267–288.

Zou, H. and H. Zhang (2009), “On the Adaptive Elastic Net with a Diverging Number of
  Parameters,” Annals of Statistics, 37, 1733.




                                             33
