                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     MONETARY POLICY AND THE PREDICTABILITY OF NOMINAL EXCHANGE
                               RATES

                                      Martin Eichenbaum
                                     Benjamin K. Johannsen
                                         Sergio Rebelo

                                       Working Paper 23158
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w23158


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2017




The views expressed here are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the view of the
Board of Governors, the FOMC, anyone else associated with the Federal Reserve System, or the
National Bureau of Economic Research. We thank Adrien Auclert, Luigi Bocola, Ariel Burstein,
Giancarlo Corsetti, Geoffrey Dunbar, Charles Engel, Gaetano Gaballo, Zvi Hercovitz, Ida
Hjortsø, Oleg Itskhoki, Dmitry Mukhin, Paulo Rodrigues, Christopher Sims, and Oreste Tristani
for their comments and Martin Bodenstein for helpful discussions.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w23158.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Martin Eichenbaum, Benjamin K. Johannsen, and Sergio Rebelo. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Monetary Policy and the Predictability of Nominal Exchange Rates
Martin Eichenbaum, Benjamin K. Johannsen, and Sergio Rebelo
NBER Working Paper No. 23158
February 2017
JEL No. E52,F31,F41

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper studies how the monetary policy regime affects the relative importance of nominal
exchange rates and inflation rates in shaping the response of real exchange rates to shocks. We
document two facts about inflation-targeting countries. First, the current real exchange rate
predicts future changes in the nominal exchange rate. Second, the real exchange rate is a poor
predictor of future inflation rates. We estimate a medium-size DSGE open-economy model that
accounts quantitatively for these facts as well as other empirical properties of real and nominal
exchange rates. The key estimated shocks that accounts for the dynamics of exchange rates and
their covariance with inflation are disturbances to the foreign demand for dollar-denominated
bonds.

Martin Eichenbaum                                       Sergio Rebelo
Department of Economics                                 Northwestern University
Northwestern University                                 Kellogg School of Management
2003 Sheridan Road                                      Department of Finance
Evanston, IL 60208                                      Leverone Hall
and NBER                                                Evanston, IL 60208-2001
eich@northwestern.edu                                   and CEPR
                                                        and also NBER
Benjamin K. Johannsen                                   s-rebelo@northwestern.edu
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
20th and C Streets, N.W.
Washington, DC 20551
benjamin.k.johannsen@frb.gov
1     Introduction

This paper studies how monetary policy affects the relative importance of nominal exchange rates
(N ERs) and inflation rates in shaping the response of real exchange rates (RERs) to shocks.
Our analysis has four components. First, we document key empirical regularities that govern the
relation between the current RER and future values of inflation and the N ER. We then show that
these regularities depend critically on the monetary policy regime in effect. Second, we provide a
simple theory that explains these regularities. Third, we identify the key shocks that have driven
the U.S. RER, N ER and their relation to inflation under an inflation-targeting regime. We do so
using an estimated three-country DSGE model of the World economy. Finally, we show how the
adjustment to these shocks would have occurred under alternative monetary policy regimes.
    Building on a long empirical literature discussed below, we document two facts about RERs
and N ERs for a set of inflation-targeting, benchmark countries. To describe our results, it is useful
to define the RER as the price of the foreign-consumption basket in units of the home-consumption
basket and the N ER as the price of the foreign currency in units of the home currency. Our first
fact is that the current RER is highly negatively correlated with future changes in the N ER
at horizons greater than two years. This correlation is stronger the longer is the horizon. Our
second fact is that the RER is virtually uncorrelated with future inflation rates at all horizons.
Taken together, these facts imply that the RER adjusts to shocks in the medium and long run
overwhelmingly through changes in the N ER, not through differential inflation rates.
    Critically, these facts depend on the monetary policy regime in effect. To show this dependency,
we re-do our analysis for China which is on a quasi-fixed exchange rate regime versus the U.S.
dollar; for Hong Kong which has a fixed exchange rate versus the U.S. dollar; and for the euro-area
countries, which have fixed exchange rates with each other. In all of these cases, the current RER
is highly negatively correlated with future relative inflation rates. In contrast to our benchmark
countries, the RER adjusts overwhelmingly through predictable inflation differentials.
    We also redo our analysis for a set of countries that adopted inflation targeting after our bench-
mark countries (around the year 2000). This set of countries consists of Brazil, Chile, Colombia,
Indonesia, Israel, Mexico, South Korea, and Thailand. We show that when these countries adopted


                                                  1
floating exchange rates and inflation targeting, the dynamic co-movements of the N ER, the RER,
and inflation became qualitatively and quantitatively similar to those in our benchmark countries.
This type of sensitivity to the monetary policy regime is precisely what we would expect given the
Lucas (1976) critique.
   A natural question is whether our findings are spurious in the sense that they might primarily
reflect small sample sizes and persistent RERs.1 To address these concerns, we show that out-
of-sample forecasts of the N ER based on the RER beat a random-walk forecast at medium and
long horizons. We argue that this finding is extremely unlikely if the N ER is not predictable,
regardless of whether the RER is stationary or not. This result strongly supports the view that
our empirical findings are not spurious.
   Having established our key facts, we turn to the underlying economics. We begin with a simple
two-country endowment model to highlight the core qualitative explanation of our results for the
benchmark countries. This explanation relies on two key assumptions: the monetary authority
follows an inflation-targeting policy like a Taylor rule and there is home bias in consumption.
   The intuition for why these two assumptions generate the relevant empirical regularities is
as follows. Consider a persistent fall in the domestic endowment. This shock leads to a rise in
the price of the domestic good. Consumers combine a domestic and foreign good into a final
consumption good. Because of home bias, the domestic good has a higher weight than the foreign
good in the domestic consumer basket. So, after the shock, the price of the foreign consumption
basket in units of the home consumption basket falls, i.e. the RER falls. Since the home and
foreign monetary authorities follow a Taylor rule that keeps inflation relatively stable, the RER
must adjust through movements in the N ER. This result holds, even though prices are perfectly
flexible in our simple model.
   We next turn to the question: what shocks and frictions account quantitatively for the move-
ments in the RER and the N ER as well as their covariance with inflation? To answer this ques-
tion, we construct and estimate a medium-scale three-country (U.S., Germany, and the rest of the
World) DSGE model. Consistent with our simple model, we assume that all three countries follow
   1
     Similar concerns lie at the heart of ongoing debates about the predictability of the equity premium based on
variables like the price–dividend ratio (see Stambaugh (1999), Boudoukh, Richardson and Whitelaw (2006), and
Cochrane (2008)).

                                                       2
a Taylor rule and have home bias in consumption. Production requires labor and capital services.
Nominal prices and wages are set subject to Calvo-style frictions. There is local currency pricing
and assets are incomplete: the only internationally trade asset is a dollar-denominated bond.2 We
allow for many different types of shocks to affect economic agents and economic activity. In this
way we can estimate which shocks are important in practice.
    According to our estimated model, the key shock that drives the correlation between the current
RER and future changes in the N ER are shocks to the foreign demand for dollar-denominated
bonds. In particular, over two-thirds of the relevant covariances are driven by this shock. The
same shock accounts for over 70 percent of the unconditional variance of the RER at business-cycle
frequencies. Significantly, this shock is not an important driver of either U.S. or German output
fluctuations at business-cycle frequencies.
    These results are interesting to the extent that our model is a credible representation of the
data. Our estimated model has a number quantitative of properties that lend support to its
credibility. First, it accounts quantitatively for the correlations between the current RER, future
inflation rates and changes in the N ER. Second, it accounts quantitatively for the volatility of the
RER and changes in the N ER, the persistence of the RER and the high correlation between the
RER and the N ER. Third, it accounts quantitatively for the failure of uncovered interest parity
(UIP) as measured by the estimated slope coefficient in a regression of the change in the N ER
on the interest-rate differential (see Fama (1984)). The model is also consistent with Backus and
Smith (1993)’s finding of a disconnect between relative consumption and the RER, a fact that is
inconsistent with a wide class of models.
    Finally, we use our estimated model to ask the counterfactual question: given the estimated
distribution of the shocks that occurred in our sample period, how would the economy have reacted
under alternative monetary-policy regimes? To this end, we consider an exchange-rate-targeting
regime as well as a regime with capital controls. The latter are modeled as a large cost of holding
foreign bonds. Under an exchange-rate-targeting regime, the N ER plays a substantially smaller
role and differential inflation a larger role in re-establishing long-run PPP. Additionally, the RER is

   2
     Maggiori et al. (2018) document that almost all bonds that are internationally traded are denominated in U.S.
dollars.

                                                        3
more persistent than under nominal exchange rate targeting. In contrast, modest capital controls,
as we model them, have little impact on the equilibrium of the economy.
    Our paper is organized as follows. Section 2 briefly discusses how our paper relates to the
literature. Section 3 contains our empirical results. Section 4 offers intuition for the drivers of
our empirical results using a simple model. In Section 5, we build a medium-scale DSGE that
we estimate with full-information Bayesian methods. In Section 6, we show that the estimated
medium-scale DSGE model can explain our correlation estimates reported in Section 3. We discuss
which estimated shocks explain those correlations and the movements in the RER. In addition we
explore how the RER would have adjusted to shocks under alternative monetary policy regimes.
Section 7 concludes.



2     Relation to the literature

Our work is related to fourth strands of the literature. The first strand studies the medium- and
long-run predictability of N ERs. For example, Mark (1995) and Engel et al. (2007) find evidence of
predictability at medium and long horizons. See Rossi (2013) for a recent survey. There is a closely
associated body of work demonstrating that relative purchasing power parity (PPP) holds in the
long run so that RERs are mean reverting and therefore predictable (see Rogoff (1996) and Taylor
and Taylor (2004) for a review). In general, the predictability of the RER or the fact that relative
PPP holds in the long run, does not imply that the N ER is predictable. For example, if monetary
policy seeks to limit the volatility of the N ER, the RER converges to its unconditional mean
primarily via inflation differentials rather than sustained, predictable movements in the N ER.
    Our contribution to this literature is to draw a tight connection between the usefulness of the
current RER in predicting the future N ER (in and out of sample) and the monetary-policy regime
in effect. We also document that our predictability results are robust to the possibility that the
RER is not stationary. Finally, we construct and estimate a medium-scale, open-economy DSGE
model which is quantitatively consistent with the dynamic correlations that drive the predictability
of the N ER in inflation-targeting regimes.
    Our empirical predictability results pertain to medium- and long-run horizons and are dis-

                                                 4
tinct from the voluminous literature started by Meese and Rogoff (1983) on the out-of-sample
predictability of the N ER at short horizons (up to one year). Our predictability results are also
distinct from Mussa (1986)’s famous demonstration that contemporaneous changes in the N ER
and the RER are highly correlated.
   The second relevant strand of the literature discusses the importance of the monetary regime
for the behavior of the RER. See, for example, Mussa (1986), Baxter and Stockman (1989),
Henderson and McKibbin (1993), Sarno and Valente (2006), Engel et al. (2007), and Engel (2018).
Our contribution is to focus on the behavior of the RER under an inflation targeting regime per se
and to use our estimated DSGE model to study how the N ER, the RER, and the real economy
would have evolved under alternative monetary regimes.
   The third relevant strand of the literature studies a myriad of failures of standard open-economy
macro models, including the failure of UIP, the disconnect between the RER and relative con-
sumption across countries. In contemporaneous work, Itskhoki and Mukhin (2017) argue that
financial shocks, like shocks to the global demand for dollar-denominated bonds, can explain these
and other failures. Jiang et al. (2018) also stress the importance of these types of shocks as drivers
of U.S. N ERs. Our contribution relative to this literature is to formally estimate which shocks
are the key drivers of the RER and the N ER under an inflation-targeting regime. Because we
formally estimate our model, we can use it to investigate how exchange rates and inflation would
have behaved given the same shock distribution as in our sample period but under alternative
monetary policy regimes.
   The fourth strand of related literature pertains to estimated open-economy DSGE models.
Lubik and Schorfheide (2006) estimated a small-scale two-country DSGE model with Bayesian
methods for the U.S. and the euro area. These authors focus on the challenges to estimation,
including model specification and identification problems. Kollmann et al. (2016) estimate a large-
scale three-region model for the U.S., the euro area, and the rest of the World. Those authors
focus on the post-crisis divergence in real output growth between the U.S. and the euro area. We
estimate a medium-scale, three-region DSGE model and focus on identifying which shocks are the
important drivers of RERs and N ERs.



                                                  5
3       Some empirical properties of exchange rates

In this section, we present our empirical results regarding N ERs, RERs, and relative inflation
rates. We use consumer price indexes for all items and average quarterly N ERs versus the U.S.
dollar.3


3.1        Data

We initially focus on a benchmark group of advanced economies — Australia, Canada, Germany,
New Zealand, Sweden, and the UK. Ilzetzki et al. (2017a,b) characterize these countries, except for
Germany, as having adopted inflation targeting before 1997. We limit the set of countries to those
that adopted inflation targeting before 1997 because we need to have sufficient data to perform
our statistical analyses.
    Ilzetzki et al. (2017a,b) characterize Germany as following a freely-floating exchange regime in
the post Bretton Woods era. However, Bernanke and Mihov (1997) argue that, even though Ger-
many never explicitly adopted an inflation-targeting regime, the Bundesbank was in fact targeting
inflation. For this reason, we include Germany in our benchmark group.4 For Germany, we start
the sample period in 1982:Q4, which is the beginning of the period for which, according to Clarida
et al. (1998), U.S. monetary policy is best characterized as a stable Taylor rule.5
    We exclude from our benchmark sample period data from 2008:Q4 to the present because short-
term U.S. nominal interest rates were at or near their effective lower bound.6 Table 16 summarizes
the start and end dates of the sample period for our benchmark countries. Appendix A reports
results obtained starting the sample period in 1973 and extending the sample period after 2008.
    We compare results for the benchmark inflation targeters with those for China (from 1994
through 2008), which has been on a quasi-fixed exchange rate vis-à-vis the U.S. dollar, and for
Hong Kong (from 1982 through 2008), which has a fixed exchange rate vis-à-vis the U.S. dollar.

    3
     For bilateral exchange rate data between the U.S. and other countries, as well as for consumer price indexes,
we use data from from the International Monetary Fund’s International Financial Statistics database.
   4
     As in Engel et al. (2007), we merge exchange rate data for the German Mark and the euro post 1999.
   5
     The beginning of the sample period for Australia, Canada, Germany, New Zealand, Sweden, and the U.K. is
1993:Q3, 1991:Q2, 1982:Q4, 1990:Q1, 1996:Q1, 1992:Q4, respectively.
   6
     See Amador et al. (2017) for a discussion of the effect of the zero lower bound on exchange-rate policies.

                                                        6
We also analyze data starting in 1999 for France, Ireland, Italy, Portugal, and Spain where the
RER and relative inflation rates are defined relative to Germany.
    In addition, we report results for a subset of our statistical analyses for counties that Ilzetzki
et al. (2017a,b) characterize as becoming inflation targeters between 1997 and 2002. This set of
countries consists of Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Israel, Mexico, Norway, Peru, Philippines, South
Africa, South Korea, and Thailand.7 We refer to this set of countries as the recent inflation
targeters. We summarize the dates at which the benchmark countries and the recent inflation-
targeting countries adopted the inflation-targeting framework in Appendix A.


3.2     Results for inflation-targeting countries

We define the RER for country i relative to the U.S. as

                                                           N ERi,t Pi,t
                                              RERi,t =                  ,                                            (1)
                                                              Pt

where N ERi,t is the price of the foreign currency (U.S. dollars per foreign currency unit). The
variables Pt and Pi,t denote the consumer price index in the U.S. and in country i, respectively.
We assume that the RER is stationary and offer supporting evidence later in this section.8 Given
this assumption, the RER must adjust back to its mean after a shock via changes in the N ER or
changes in relative prices.
    Figure 1 displays scatter plots of the log(RERi,t ) against log (N ERi,t+h /N ERi,t ) at different
horizons, h, for our benchmark countries. Two properties of this figure are worth noting. First, con-
sistent with the notion that exchange rates behave like random walks at high frequencies, there is
no obvious relationship between the log(RERi,t ) and log (N ERi,t+h /N ERi,t ) at a one-year horizon.
However, as the horizon expands, the correlation between log (RERi,t ) and log (N ERi,t+h /N ERi,t )
rises. The negative relation is very pronounced at the 5-year horizon.




    7
      Some countries included in Ilzetzki et al. (2017a,b) are excluded from our analysis because their data is available
only for short samples.
    8
      See Rogoff (1996) for an early discussion of the stationarity of the RER.

                                                           7
3.2.1   Nominal exchange rate regressions

We now discuss results for the benchmark countries based on the following N ER regression

                                            
                                 N ERi,t+h          N ER    N ER
                       log                       = αi,h  + βi,h  log(RERi,t ) + εN  ER
                                                                                 i,t,t+h ,              (2)
                                  N ERi,t

                                                                                               N ER
for country i at horizon h = 1, 2, . . . , H years. Panel (a) of Table 1 reports estimates of βi,h  ,
along with standard errors, for the benchmark inflation-targeting countries.9 A number of features
                                                  N ER
are worth noting. First, the estimated values of βi,h  are negative for all h. Second, the estimated
           N ER
values of βi,h  for all i are statistically significant at three-year horizons or longer. Third, in
                                 N ER
general, the estimated value of βi,h  increases in absolute value for roughly the first five years and
then stabilizes.
   Taken together, the results in Table 1 strongly support the conclusion that, for our benchmark
countries, the current RER is highly negatively correlated with changes in future N ERs at horizons
of three or more years. These results are consistent with those obtained by Cheung et al. (2004)
using a vector error-correction model. One substantive difference between our results and theirs
                                                                     N ER
is that, for horizons greater than one year, our point estimates of βi,h  are greater than one,
indicating that the N ER adjusts more than the RER over time. This finding reflects the fact
relative inflation rates initially move in the wrong direction for re-establishing long-run relative
PPP.


3.2.2   Relative price regressions

We now consider results based on the following relative-price regression

                                                
                                  Pi,t+h /Pt+h          π      π
                        log                          = αi,h + βi,h log(RERi,t ) + επi,t,t+h .           (3)
                                    Pi,t /Pt

This regression quantifies how much of the adjustment in the RER occurs via changes in relative
rates of inflation across countries. Panel (a) of Table 2 reports our estimates and standard errors for


   9
     We compute standard errors using an estimator of Newey and West (1987) with the number of lags equal to
the forecasting horizon plus eight quarters. If not feasible, we use the sample size minus two quarters.

                                                             8
                        π
the slope coefficients βi,h . The key result is that the coefficients are small relative to the estimated
           N ER
values of βi,h                                               π
                . Moreover, the estimated values of βhπ and βi,h are not statistically different from
zero. Taken together, these results suggest that movements in relative prices account for a small
fraction of movements in RERs.


3.3     Sensitivity to monetary policy

Our basic hypothesis is that the process by which the RER adjusts to shocks depends critically on
the monetary-policy regime. We provide two types of evidence in favor of this hypothesis. First,
we redo our analysis for countries that are on fixed or quasi-fixed exchange regimes. Second, we
consider a number of countries that adopted inflation targeting relatively recently. We study the
behavior of RER’s, N ER’s, and relative inflation rates before and after countries adopt inflation
targeting.


3.3.1   Fixed and quasi-fixed exchange rates

In this subsection, we redo our analysis for countries with fixed or quasi-fixed exchange rates.
Results for China and Hong Kong, which have quasi-fixed and fixed exchange rates, respectively,
are reported in panel (b) of Table 1 and panel (b) of Table 2. Several features of these results
                                                  N ER
are worth noting. First, the estimated values of βi,h  are small relative to the estimates for our
                                                      π
benchmark countries. Second, the estimated values of βi,h are statistically significant at every
horizon and are large relative to the estimates for our benchmark countries. Third, the estimated
          π
value of βi,h are larger at longer horizons, h.
   We also consider several euro area countries—France, Ireland, Italy, Portugal, and Spain—vis-
à-vis Germany, starting in 1999. For these countries, the N ER is fixed. Results for regression
(3) are reported in panel (c) of Table 2. As was the case for China and Hong Kong vis-à-vis the
                                        π
United States, the estimated values of βi,h are large, rise in magnitude with the horizon, and are
statistically significant at long horizons.
   In sum, for economies with fixed or quasi-fixed exchange rates, the RER adjusts overwhelmingly
through predictable inflation differentials, not through changes in the N ER.


                                                   9
3.3.2   Countries with changes in exchange rate policy

In this subsection, we redo our analysis for recent inflation-targeting countries (Brazil, Chile,
Colombia, Israel, Mexico, Norway, Peru, Philippines, South Africa, South Korea and Thailand).
We consider two sample periods. The first sample goes from 1982:Q4 until the date at which
the country adopted inflation targeting. The second sample begins when the country adopted
inflation targeting and ends in 2018:Q4. We include the period in which the zero lower bound
(ZLB) is binding in the U.S. and in some other countries in order to have enough observations
to estimate our regressions at a five-year horizon. Our experience with the benchmark countries
suggests that including the ZLB period has a mild effect on the coefficients in regressions (2) and
(3) (see Appendix A).
                                               N ER      π
   Tables (3) and (4) report our estimates of βi,h  and βi,h , using data from the first sample. In
                                                     N ER      π
contrast to our benchmark results, the estimates of βi,h  and βi,h do not follow the consistent
pattern observed for the benchmark flexible exchange rate countries. Indeed, there is no apparent
pattern across the countries considered.
   Tables (3) and (4) also report results for the second sample in which all of the countries have
adopted inflation targeting. In sharp contrast to the first-sample results, now for every country
                  N ER
the estimates of βi,h  are negative and statistically different from zero at longer horizons. For
almost all the countries the absolute value of the coefficients grows with the size of h. By contrast,
                  π
the estimates of βi,h are relatively small in the inflation-targeting sample.
   In sum, once we control for the monetary regime, the co-movement between N ERs, inflation
and RERs is very similar in the recent inflation-targeting countries and the benchmark countries.
We view these results as supportive of our hypothesis that the monetary-policy regime is a central
determinant of the way that the RER adjusts to shocks.


3.4     Out-of-sample forecasts

In the previous section, we argue that for our inflation targeting countries, changes in the N ER
at long horizons display a strong negative correlation with the current level of the RER. A
potential problem with this result is that if the RER is very persistent, we might find in-sample


                                                 10
predictability when none is actually present. Here, we focus on the usefulness of the RER in out-
of-sample forecasting to test the null hypothesis that the N ER is not predictable. Our key result
is that if we control for the monetary-policy regime in effect, we can reject this null hypothesis. We
show that using information about the RER systematically helps forecast the N ER out-of-sample,
at medium and long-run horizons. If we don’t control for the monetary policy regime in effect,
then it is difficult to reject the hypothesis that the N ER is not predictable.
    Our forecasting equation for the N ER is

                                           
                                N ERi,t+h
                      log                       = βhN ER (log(RERi,t ) − µRER,i ) + εN  ER
                                                                                     i,t,t+h .                (4)
                                 N ERi,t

Notice that the parameter βhN ER is common across countries. This specification corresponds to an
unbalanced panel with a common slope coefficient.10 The value µRER,i is the mean of log(RERi,t ),
calculated using data from the date a country adopts inflation targeting up to date t. Our fore-
casting equation is exact in a model where symmetric countries follow the same monetary policy
in the sense that they would have a common value of βhN ER and the expected steady-state change
in the nominal exchange rate is zero. Because we need to have an initial estimate for µRER,i , we
require that a country be in the sample for at least three years before we include it in the regression
analysis. We do not start out-of-sample forecasting until 1993, at which point Germany and New
Zealand are in in the sample.11
    We assess our ability to forecast the N ER relative to a forecast of no change. The latter is the
benchmark in the literature and corresponds to the assumption that the N ER is a random walk
without drift. Define the RMSPE for country i associated with forecasts based on equation (4) as

                                                                             2 1/2
                                                                                
                                     1 X  Ti,h                 
                                                                   N ERi,t+h
                         σi,B,h   =               fi,t,t+h − log                      .                       (5)
                                     Ti,h                          N ERi,t      
                                           t=0



Here, Ti,h denotes the number of forecasts for log(N ERi,t+h /N ERi,t ) in our sample, and fi,t,t+h
  10
      In adopting this approach, we follow Mark and Sul (2001), Groen (2005), Engel et al. (2007), and Mark and
Sul (2011) who use panel methods to improve the forecasting power of exchange-rate models.
   11
      In practice, quarterly consumer price indexes are available with a one-period lag. To address this potential
source of look-ahead bias, we re-did all of our analysis with a measure the RER for country i using lagged price
indexes. We found that our results are very robust to this change.

                                                           11
is the forecast of log(N ERi,t+h /N ERi,t ) based on equation (4). We denote by σi,RW,h the corre-
sponding RMSPE associated with the no-change forecast from a random-walk model.
    For each country i, we report the ratio of the RMSPE associated with the benchmark and
random walk specifications, σi,B,h /σi,RW,h . We also compute a pooled RMSPE implied by our
forecasting equation for all of the countries in our sample, defined as

                                                                                          2 1/2
                                                                                             
                                               Ti,h                      
                                     1       XX                              N ERi,t+h
                      σB,h =       P                     fi,t,t+h − log                              .           (6)
                                    i Ti,h    i   t=0
                                                                               N ERi,t       


We denote by σRW,h the pooled RMSPE implied by the random-walk forecast and report the ratio
of the pooled RMSPEs, σB,h /σRW,h .
    We initially limit the analysis to our benchmark countries. Panel (a) of Table (5) reports
relative RMSPEs for each country and for the pooled sample. For the pooled results, forecasts
based on equation (4) outperform the random-walk model at all horizons greater than two years.
Remarkably, at the four- and six-year horizons, forecasting equation (4) outperforms the random
walk by 24 percent and 50 percent, respectively.12
    We now test the hypothesis that the relative RMSPEs reported in panel (a) of Table 5 were
generated by a DGP in which the N ER is a random walk. Under this hypothesis, changes in
the N ER should not be predictable. We test this hypothesis using a bootstrap procedure.13 We
assume that the stochastic processes for N ERi,t and RERi,t are given by

                                                                        
                                                              N ERi,t
                                                   log                        = εN
                                                                                 i,t
                                                                                    ER
                                                                                       ,                         (7)
                                                             N ERi,t−1
                                   Ai (L) (log (RERi,t ) − µRER,i ) = εRER
                                                                       i,t .                                     (8)


Here, Ai (L) is a polynomial in the lag operator with roots inside the unit circle so that the RER
is a stationary process. The parameter µRER,i is the mean of log (RERi,t ). The random variables

  12
      Additional recent evidence against random-walk-based forecasts for the N ER comes from Cheung, Chinn,
Pascual, and Zhang (2017). Using a sample that spans different monetary policy regimes, they find that for some
countries and some sub-samples, relative-PPP-based forecasts outperform the random-walk model.
   13
      In Appendix A we provide t-statistics from a test studied in Diebold and Mariano (1995) and West (1996).
The implications of the t-statistics are broadly similar to our bootstrap p-values. See Rossi (2005) for a discussion
of the properties of the Diebold and Mariano (1995) test in an environment similar to ours.

                                                              12
εN
 i,t
    ER
       and εRER
            i,t are uncorrelated over time (though potentially correlated within a period). This
DGP embeds the assumption that changes in the N ER are unpredictable at all horizons.14 We
consider up to 8 lags in Ai (L) and choose the lag length separately for each country using the
Akaike information criterion (AIC). Given the estimates of Ai (L), we compute a time series for
εRER
 i,t and εN
          i,t
             ER
                from the data.
    We jointly sample the disturbances to preserve contemporaneous correlations between the N ER
and RER and across countries. We construct 10, 000 synthetic time series, each of length equal
to the size of our sample, by randomly selecting a sequence of estimated disturbances from the
period for which we have a balanced panel. Limiting the bootstrapping to this period preserves
the covariance among the shocks.15 For each synthetic time series, we compute forecasts based on
equation (4) and the random walk without drift. Using these forecasts, we compute RMSPEs for
each country and for the pooled countries.
    Panel (b) of Table 5 shows the percentage of bootstrap simulations in which the value of the
relative RMSPE is less than or equal to the analogue number reported in panel (a) at different
horizons. Consider the first row that pertains to the pooled results. For the three-year horizon,
we can reject the random-walk hypothesis at a 5 percent significance level. At the four-, five-, and
six-year horizons, we can reject the random-walk hypothesis at a 1 percent significance level.
    Up to this point, we maintained the assumption that the RER is stationary. To assess the
robustness of our results, we redo the out-of-sample bootstrap exercises assuming that log(RERi,t )
is difference stationary. In particular, we assume that


                                Bi (L)(1 − L) log (RERi,t ) = µ∆RER,i + εRER
                                                                         i,t .                                      (9)


Here, Bi (L) is a polynomial in the lag operator with roots inside the unit circle and µ∆RER,i is the
mean of the log difference of the RER for county i. We maintain the assumption that changes in
the N ER are given by equation (7). As before, we choose the lag length by the AIC and compute


   14
     Note that if log (N ERi,t /N ERi,t−1 ) has a non-zero mean, that property is reflected in the fitted shocks from
which we construct the bootstrap samples.
  15
     We have a burn-in period of 1000 quarters so that the initial values of log(RERi,t ) are different across bootstrap
samples.

                                                          13
the relative RMSPEs. The implied p-values are reported in panel (c) of Table 5. The results are
very similar to those reported in panel (b) of that table. We conclude that our results are not
sensitive to whether or not we assume that the RER has a unit root.
    The results in this section provide strong support for the view that the N ER is forecastable
at medium and long horizons. Based on this finding we infer that the in-sample correlations
regressions in the previous section are not spurious.



4     Interpreting our results in a simple economic model

In this section, we use a simple endowment economy to highlight the roll of inflation targeting and
home bias in generating our empirical findings. We work with flexible prices to emphasize that
the results from this section do not depend on the presence of nominal rigidities. For analytical
tractability, the model features a number of simplifying assumptions such as complete markets,
UIP, and the law of one price. In the next section, we relax these assumptions and consider an
estimated medium-scale DSGE model that incorporates nominal rigidities. It turns out that the
intuition from our simple model carries over to our estimated model.


4.1    Model setup

The model consists of two symmetric countries which we refer to as home and foreign. To conserve
space, we only display the relevant equations for the home country. The home country is populated
by a representative household with lifetime utility, U , given by

                                               ∞
                                               X
                                      U = E0         β t log (Ct ) .                          (10)
                                               t=0


Here, Ct denotes consumption of the home country and Et the expectations operator conditional
on time-t information, and 0 < β < 1.
    Households can trade in a complete set of domestic and international contingent claims. The




                                                 14
domestic household’s flow budget constraint is given by


                                                                        ∗
                  Pt Ct + Bt + N ERt Bt∗ ≤ PY,t Yt + Rt−1 Bt−1 + N ERt Rt−1  ∗
                                                                            Bt−1 + Tt .                      (11)


Here, Pt is the price of domestic consumption, Bt and Bt∗ are nominal balances of home and foreign
bonds, Rt and Rt∗ are the nominal interest rate on the home and foreign bond, N ERt is the nominal
exchange rate, defined as in our empirical section as the price of the foreign currency unit (units
of home currency per unit of foreign currency). The variable Tt denotes nominal lump-sum taxes
and net proceeds from contingent claims.16 With complete markets, the presence of one-period
nominal bonds is redundant since these bonds can be synthesized using state-contingent claims.
    The output endowment of the home country, Yt , follows the following exogenous law of motion:


                                       log (Yt ) = ρY log (Yt−1 ) + εY,t ,                                   (12)


where εY,t is an i.i.d. shock that follows a normal distribution.
    The first-order conditions with respect to bond holdings are

                                                      Ct
                                        1 =βRt Et            ,                                               (13)
                                                   πt+1 Ct+1
                                                      Ct      N ERt+1
                                        1 =βRt∗ Et                    .                                      (14)
                                                   πt+1 Ct+1 N ERt

Here, πt ≡ Pt /Pt−1 denotes the inflation rate in the home country.
    The home consumption good, Ct , is produced by combining domestic and foreign goods (YH,t
and YF,t , respectively) according to the technology

                                                                      1
                                                ρ
                                    Ct = ω 1−ρ YH,t + (1 − ω)1−ρ YF,t
                                                                  ρ ρ
                                        
                                                                         .                                   (15)


Here, 0.5 ≤ ω < 1 controls the degree of home bias in consumption. The parameter ρ < 1 controls
the elasticity of substitution between home and foreign goods.

  16
    Money holdings can easily be added to the model by including a separable additive term in the utility function
and modifying the budget constraint accordingly.

                                                       15
   We define the RERt as units of the home consumption good per one unit of the foreign
consumption good,
                                                          N ERt Pt∗
                                               RERt =               .                                      (16)
                                                             Pt

Here, Pt∗ is the foreign currency price of the foreign consumption good. With this definition, an
increase in RERt corresponds to a rise in the relative price of the foreign consumption good.
   Complete markets and symmetry of initial conditions imply

                                                              Ct
                                                   RERt =         .                                        (17)
                                                              Ct∗

Because prices are flexible, the law of one price holds, which means Pt = Pt∗ N ERt . Market clearing
                                                            ∗                    ∗
in the output market for the two countries requires YH,t + YH,t = Yt and YF,t + YF,t = Yt∗ . Here,
              ∗                                                                           ∗
the variable YH,t denotes home output used in producing the foreign consumption good and YF,t
denotes foreign output used in producing the foreign consumption good. The variable Yt∗ denotes
the exogenous endowment of output in the home country. This endowment follows an AR(1) with
first-order serial correlation ρY that is analogous to (12). Finally, we assume that both home and
domestic bonds are in zero net supply.
   In the home country the monetary authority sets the nominal interest rate according to the
Taylor rule
                                                   Rt = β −1 πtθπ .                                        (18)

We assume that the Taylor principle holds, so that θπ > 1. We abstract from an output gap term
in the Taylor rule because prices are flexible.17 Monetary policy in the foreign country is set in a
symmetric manner.


4.2       Model properties and regression coefficients

In this section, we use the following parameter values. We set the value of β so that the steady-
state real interest rate is 3 percent. As in Backus et al. (1992), we assume that the elasticity of
substitution between domestic and foreign goods in the consumption aggregator is 1.5 (ρ = 1/3).
  17
       We discuss including an output gap in the Taylor rule in our estimated model in the next section.

                                                         16
We assume that the import share is 15 percent (ω = 0.85) so that there is home bias in consumption
and we set ρY , the first-order serial correlation of the endowment, equal to 0.95.
   Figure 2 displays the impulse response for a negative shock to the domestic endowment, Yt . The
RER falls in response to the shock, i.e the foreign consumption basket becomes cheaper relative to
the domestic consumption basket. Home bias plays a critical roll in the RER movement. Recall
that the RER is given by (17). So, the RER falls, reflecting the scarcity of home goods and
the fact that the home consumption basket places a larger weight on home goods than the size
of the home country (ω > 0.5). Put differently, home consumption falls by more than foreign
consumption because households in the home country consume more of the good that has become
relatively scarce. If there was no home bias (ω = 0.5), the RER would not change in response to
the negative shock to Yt .
   Given the differential paths of consumption in the home and foreign country, household Euler
equations imply that the domestic real interest rate must be higher than the foreign real interest
rate. The Taylor rule and the Taylor principle imply that high real interest rates are associated
with high nominal interest rates and high inflation rates. It follows that the nominal interest
rate and the inflation rate in the home country rise by more than in the foreign country. This
result is inconsistent with the naive intuition that inflation has to be lower in the home country in
order for the RERt to return to its pre-shock level. In fact, inflation is persistently higher in the
home country. So RERt reverts to its steady-state value via changes in N ERt , not prices. This
is inconsistent with naive intuition that differential inflation rates are the mechanism by which
the RER returns to its pre-shock level. In fact, N ERt has to change by enough to offset both
the initial movement in RERt and the cumulative difference between the domestic and foreign
inflation rates.
   To further understand the dynamics of the N ER, it is useful to solve the log-linear version
of the model. Combining the log-linearized Taylor rules, the intertemporal Euler equations (13),
and the relation between the two countries’ marginal utilities implied by complete markets (see
equation (17)), we obtain
                                                       1 − ρY d
                                    π̂ t − π̂ ∗t = −           RERt ,                           (19)
                                                       θπ − ρY


                                                       17
where x̂t is the log deviation of xt from its steady state value. Since the Taylor principle holds
                       1−ρA
(θπ > 1), we have     θπ −ρA
                               < 1. Given that RERt = N ERt Pt∗ /Pt , (19) implies that, on impact,
RERt falls by more than Pt∗ /Pt . It follows that N ERt must initially fall, i.e., the currency in the
home country appreciates on impact.
   As shown in Figure 2, there is a persistent gap between Rt and Rt∗ , reflecting the persistence
in Yt . Since UIP holds in the log-linear equilibrium, the home currency must depreciate over
time to compensate for the gap between Rt and Rt∗ . So the home currency appreciates on impact
and then depreciates. This pattern is reminiscent of the overshooting phenomenon emphasized
by Dornbusch (1976).18 Inflation in the home country is persistently higher than in the foreign
country, so Pt rises by more than Pt∗ . This result, along with the law of one price, implies that the
home country currency depreciates over time, converging to a value that is lower than its pre-shock
value (see Figure (2)).
   In the model, a low current value of RERt predicts that the foreign currency appreciates in
the future. So, the model implies that βhN ER is negative. Moreover, it is increasing in absolute
value with h because the cumulative appreciation of the foreign currency increases over time. In
the appendix we derive the probability limits (plims) of the regression coefficients, βhN ER and βhπ ,
implied by the log-linear model. These plims are given by

                                                      1 − ρhY
                                          βhN ER = −            ,                                      (20)
                                                    1 − ρY /θπ
                                              π     1 − ρhY
                                             βh =             .                                        (21)
                                                  θπ /ρY − 1

Equation (20) implies that βhN ER is negative for all h and increases in absolute value with h. So,
for this shock, the model naturally accounts for the fact that our empirical estimates of βhN ER are
negative and increasing, in absolute value, as h increases.
   The more aggressive is monetary policy (i.e., the larger is θπ ), the smaller is the absolute value
of βhN ER . The intuition for this result is as follows. After a negative shock to Yt , πt is higher
than πt∗ . The higher is θπ , the lower is |πt − πt∗ | and the lower is the depreciation of the domestic

  18
     In Dornbusch (1976), an unanticipated permanent change in the money supply causes the N ER to overshoot
relative to its new long-run level.

                                                    18
currency needed to bring about the required adjustment in RERt . So the absolute value of βhN ER is
decreasing in θπ . Equation (21) implies that βhπ is positive for all h and converges to ρY / (θπ − ρY ).
Consistent with the previous intuition, the higher is θπ , the lower is βhπ for all h.
    Interestingly, the plims of βhN ER and βhπ do not depend on the exact value of ω. The reason
is that ω controls the size of the initial response of the RER to the shock, but not the dynamic
properties thereafter. As a result, the plims of the regression coefficients, which relate future
changes in the N ER or relative prices to the current level of the RER, are independent of ω.
    The sum of the two plims is given by


                                       βhN ER + βhπ = −(1 − ρhY ).                                  (22)


This sum converges to −1 as h → ∞, reflecting the fact that RERt must eventually converge to
its pre-shock steady-state level. While this sum converges to −1, βhN ER converges to a value that
is lower than −1. These properties reflect the fact that N ERt must eventually adjust by more
than RERt to bring the latter back to its steady state value.



5     Medium-Scale DSGE Model

In this section, we address the following question: what shocks and frictions account quantitatively
for the observed correlation between the current RER and future changes in the N ER? We answer
this question by considering an estimated medium-scale DSGE model with three regions: the U.S.,
Germany, and the rest of the World. The model incorporates the two key features of our simple
endowment economy analyzed in Section 4: home bias and inflation targeting in the form of a
Taylor rule. Our analysis focuses on fluctuations in the bilateral exchange rate between the U.S.
and Germany. Having three regions allows us to study bilateral exchange rates without implausible
assumptions about import and export shares.




                                                   19
5.1    Households

For notational ease, the U.S., Germany, and the rest of the World correspond to country 1, 2, and
3, respectively. Each country i has a continuum of households of size ni ∈ (0, 1). The size of the
World population is equal to one: n1 + n2 + n3 = 1. As is Christiano et al. (2005), each household
makes three sets of decisions per period. First, each household decides how much to consume,
how much capital to accumulate, and how much capital services to supply to the market. Second,
each household purchases securities, whose payoffs are contingent on whether it can re-optimize
its nominal wage rate. We assume that there are complete contingent claims markets within each
country. Only U.S. dollar-denominated bonds can be traded internationally. Third, each household
sets its nominal wage rate after finding out whether it can re-optimize it.
   Since households face idiosyncratic risk about whether they can re-optimize their nominal
wage rates, hours worked and wage rates differ across households. So, in principle households are
heterogeneous with respect to consumption and asset holdings. It follows from a straightforward
extension of arguments in Woodford (1998) and Erceg et al. (2000) that, in equilibrium, households
in a given country are homogeneous with respect to consumption and asset holdings. Reflecting
this result, our notation assumes that households are homogeneous with respect to consumption
and asset holdings but heterogeneous with respect to their wage rate and hours worked.
   Similar to Christiano et al. (2005), we assume that the utility of household k in country i is
given by

              ∞
                          "                                              3                                        #
              X                                          χ            X                         Bi,j,t
                    β t µi,t log Ci,t − f C̄i,t−1       − Li,t (k)2 +
                                                    
  Uk,i = E0                                                               log (ηi,j,t ) V              N ERi,j,t        . (23)
              t=0
                                                         2            j=1
                                                                                                Pi,t


Here, Ci,t is the consumption of each household in country i and C̄i,t is per-capita aggregate
consumption. Li,t (k) are hours worked by household k in country i. The scalar f denotes the
degree of habit formation in preferences. Bi,j,t is end-of-period-t holdings of country-j bonds held
by the households in country i. Pi,t is the consumer price index in country i denominated in local
currency units. N ERi,j,t is the price of country-j currency in units of country-i’s currency. The
variable µi,t is a shock to the household’s discount rate.



                                                              20
   The function V governs the utility flow from bond holdings of different countries. The variable
ηi,j,t is a shock to the utility that country i derives from holding the bonds of country j. For
convenience, we assume that ηi,j,t is one in steady state, so that the steady-state utility flow from
bonds is zero. Outside the steady state, there may be shocks that put a premium on one bond or
another—those arising from flights to safety or liquidity, for example. This type of shock breaks
UIP in log-linear versions of the model. We refer to ηi,j,t as a spread shock. Instead of introducing
a shock directly into the UIP condition, as in McCallum (1994), we assume that households derive
utility from bond holdings and that this utility flow varies over time. Engel (2019) and Itskhoki
and Mukhin (2017) argue that these type of shocks are important for understanding the empirical
behavior of exchange rates. The latter provide an extensive discussion of the micro-foundations of
these shocks. Our assumptions about ηi,j,t below allow for the possibility of World-wide shocks to
the marginal utility of holding dollar-denominated bonds or shocks to that marginal utility that
only affect non-U.S. households.
   The household budget constraint is

                  X
                           Bi,j,t N ERi,j,t + Pi,t Ci,t + Pi,t Ii,t + ai (ui,t ) K̄i,t Pi,t + ϕB,i,t =   (24)
                 i={1,i}
                   X
                                                         K
                            Rj,t−1 Bi,j,t−1 N ERi,j,t + Ri,t ui,t K̄i,t + Wi,t (h) Li,t (h) + Ti,t ,
                  j={1,i}



where
                                                                                   
                                                                 Bi,1,t N ERi,1,t
                                ϕB,i,t = 1 {i 6= 1} Φ1,B                                Pi,t ,           (25)
                                                                        Pi,t
 K
Ri,t is the rental rate on capital in country i, K̄i,t is the stock of capital owned by the households
in country i, Ii,t is the household’s investment in country i, ui,t is the capital utilization rate,
ui,t K̄i,t denotes period-t supply of capital services by the household, and ai (ui,t ) K̄i,t denotes the
cost of capital utilization. Ti,t are net receipts from all contingent claims of the household as well
as lump-sum taxes, transfers, profits received from domestic firms. The function Φi,B refers to
costs of holding foreign bonds. As in Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2003), we allow for this cost to
avoid the presence of a unit root in real exchange rates. We assume that households do not pay a
cost for holding bonds denominated in their home currency. The functional form for ai and Φ1,B

                                                           21
are described below. The budget constraint embodies our assumption that a country-i household
can hold bonds denominated in country-i currency. In addition, households in every country can
purchase dollar-denominated bonds. This assumption corresponds to the key empirical finding in
Maggiori et al. (2018).
   We assume that there are nominal wage rigidities, as modeled by Erceg et al. (2000). A labor
aggregator combines labor services from each household to produce the homogeneous labor input
used in production, Li,t , according to

                                               Z   ni                νi,t −1
                                                                                   ν νi,t−1
                                           1                           νi,t
                                                                                     i,t
                              Li,t =                     (Li,t (h))             dh           .   (26)
                                           ni   0



Household h is a monopoly supplier of Li,t (h). The variable Wi,t (h) represents the wages paid
to household h. Labor aggregators are perfectly competitive and take the nominal wage for the
homogeneous labor input, Wi,t , as given. With probability 1 − ξW,i , a household updates its
wage rate to maximize the utility of the household. With probability ξW,i , the wage grows at its
steady-state growth rate. The random variable νi,t controls the substitution between labor types.
   The capital accumulation equation is


                              K̄i,t+1 = ζi,t Fi (Ii,t , Ii,t−1 ) + (1 − δ) K̄i,t .               (27)


The variable ζi,t is an investment-specific technology shock. The function Fi embeds the technology
that transforms current and past investment into capital. We discuss the properties of F below.
The parameter δ controls the capital depreciation rate.
   The final good is created by the household by combining goods from each country using the
production function
                                                3
                                                                                  ! ρ1
                                                X
                                  Yi,t =                  1−ρ
                                                         ωi,j [ϕi,j,t Yi,j,t ]ρ          .       (28)
                                                j=1

Here, Yi,j,t denotes purchases of wholesale goods produced from country j. The price of Yi,j,t in
country i’s currency is Pi,j,t . The parameters ωi,j control the importance of goods from country




                                                             22
                                 ωi,j = 1.19 The term ϕi,j,t represents adjustment costs associated with
                             P
j in producing Yi,t , and
changing the ratio of imports to domestically produced goods. As in Erceg et al. (2006), we assume
that                                         "                                            2 #
                                                         ϕi         Yi,j,t /Yi,i,t
                                  ϕi,j,t = 1 −                                           −1     .               (29)
                                                         2        Yi,j,t−1 /Yi,i,t−1

Erceg et al. (2006) argue that these adjustment costs enable the model to capture the relatively
sluggish response to shocks of the share of imports in final goods.


5.2     Producers

The wholesale good, Yi,j,t , is produced by perfectly competitive wholesalers using a continuum of
intermediate goods according to the technology

                                                 υ 1 Z         nj                υj,t −1
                                                                                                 υ υj,t−1
                                            1      j,t
                                                                                     υj,t
                                                                                                   j,t
                             Yi,j,t =                                  Xi,j,t (m)             dm           .    (30)
                                            nj                0



Here, Xi,j,t (m) denotes purchases of the m’th intermediate good from country j by the wholesaler
in country i. The random variable υj,t controls the substitution between intermediate goods. Since
this variable is indexed by j, we are assuming that a country-j producer of intermediate good m
is affected by υj,t regardless of where the good is sold.
    The intermediate good Xi,j,t (m) is produced by a monopolist in country j using the technology

                                                                                  3
                                                                                  X
                                       α                                1−α
                                 Aj,t Kj,t   (m) (Lj,t (m))                   =         Xi,j,t (m) .            (31)
                                                                                  i=1


The variables Kj,t (m) and Lj,t (m) denote the amount of capital and labor hired by monopolist m
in country j. The intermediate good producers set their price in the currency where their goods
are sold (so-called “local-currency pricing”). With probability 1 − ξP,i , monopolist m sets prices,




  19
     We estimated a version of the model in which the ωi,j ’s are stochastic and obtained results that are similar to
the benchmark case.

                                                                       23
Pj,i,t (m), for j = 1, 2, 3 to maximize profits, which are given by

                                ∞                                              
                                X
                                         t         N ERi,j,t Pj,i,t (m)
                          E0          β Λi,t                            − M Ci,t Xj,i,t (m) ,                     (32)
                                t=0
                                                         Pi,t

subject to wholesaler demand for the product. The variable Λi,t is the marginal utility of the
household in country i during period t and M Ci,t is the monopolist’s real marginal cost of producing
Xi,j,t (m). With probability 1 − ξP,i , monopolists increase their prices Pj,i,t (m) by the steady-state
inflation rate in country j.


5.3    Monetary policy

In country i, the monetary authority follows a Taylor rule given by

                              γi
                                     
                                              θπ,i             !θGDP,i 1−γi
         Ri,t         Ri,t−1          πi,t             GDPi,t
              =                                                                 exp (εR,i,t ) where θi,π > 1.    (33)
         Ri            Ri              πi∗               ˜ i,t
                                                        GDP


Here, εR,i,t is a monetary policy shock, Ri is the steady-state nominal interest rate in country i,
and πi∗ is the target rate of inflation. GDPi,t is defined as the sum of consumption, investment,
                                        ˜ i,t is the natural level of GDPi,t , defined as the
government purchases, and net exports. GDP
level of GDPi,t that would prevail under flexible prices.20 In formulating the Taylor rule in terms
    ˜ i,t , we are proceeding in the spirit of Woodford (2011) and Smets and Wouters (2007).
of GDP
Throughout, we assume that the Taylor principal is satisfied so that θπ,i > 1. We also assume that
0 ≤ γi < 1.


5.4    Final-good market clearing, bond market clearing, and equilibrium

Market clearing for final good Yi,t implies

                                                                                                  
                                                                                Bi,1,t N ERi,1,t
              Ci,t + Gi,t + Ii,t + ai (ui,t ) K̄i,t + 1 {i 6= 1} ΦB,1                                  = Yi,t ,   (34)
                                                                                       Pi,t


  20
    As in Smets and Wouters (2007), we assume that monetary policy shocks, price markup shocks, and wage
markup shocks are not operative in the flexible-price equilibrium.

                                                              24
where Gi,t are government purchases of goods in country i. We assume that the government
balances its budget in each period with lump-sum taxes. As a result, dollar-denominated bonds
are in zero net supply, so
                                            3
                                            X
                                                  nj Bj,1,t = 0.                                (35)
                                            j=1

We adopt a standard sequence-of-markets equilibrium concept. We work with a standard log-linear
approximation around the symmetric balanced-growth steady state. In Appendix E we derive and
display the equations whose solution defines the equilibrium for our model economy. Included
among these equations are the first-order conditions to the optimizations of all of the firms and
households in each country.


5.5    Stochastic processes

In this section, we describe our assumptions about the shocks impacting the environment. Even
though we allow for many shocks, it turns out that only a small subset of the shocks are quan-
titatively important drivers of the equilibrium exchange rate. Our approach allows us to identify
these shocks.
   In what follows, ε·,i,t are iid normal random variables and |ρ·,i | < 1. The aggregate technology
shock Ai,t in equation (31) follows a trend-stationary process with a global stochastic component
(At ) and a country-specific component (Ãi,t ). In particular, we assume that


                                         Ai,t = Ãi,t At Υt(1−α) .                              (36)


The variable Υ is the unconditional growth rate in balanced-growth equilibrium.
   We assume that At , Ãi,t , the shock to the household rate of time discount, µi,t , in equation
(23), the investment-specific technology shock, ζi,t , in equation (27), and the government purchases
shock, Gi,t , in equation (34) evolve according to


                                 log (xi,t ) = ρx,i log (xi,t−1 ) + εx,i,t .                    (37)




                                                     25
                                                                                            νi,t            υj,t
Here, xi,t is the ratio of the variable to its steady-state value. The variables           νi,t −1
                                                                                                     and   υj,t −1
                                                                                                                     , which
act as wage and price markup shocks, also evolve according to (37).
    The spread shocks, ηi,j,t , evolve according to


                                                   ηi,j,t = η̃ i,j,t ηj,t .                                            (38)


Recall that ηi,j,t is a shock to the marginal utility in country i from holding a country-j bond.
According to our specification, a change in ηi,j,t can reflect a change in the marginal utility of a
country-i household for country-j bonds (through η̃ i,j,t ) or a World-wide increase in the marginal
utility of holding country-j bonds (through ηj,t ). The random variables ηj,t evolve according to
(37). We assume that the only η̃ 2,1,t and η̃ 3,1,t are potentially non-zero. For simplicity, we assume
that η̃ 2,1,t = η̃ 3,1,t = η̃ t . For all other combinations of i and j, η̃ i,j,t is zero. These assumptions allow
us to identify ηj,t and reflect the special role that U.S. bonds play in the model. The variables ηj,t
and η̃ i,j,t evolve according to (37).
    Since we only include global output as an observable variable for the rest of the World (see
below), we set a number of shocks in the third country to zero. In particular, we set µ3,t , ζ3,t , G3,t ,
ν3,t , υ3,t , and η3,t to their unconditional steady state values. So, the only shocks originating from
the rest of the World are η̃ 3,1,t and Ã3,t , i.e. shocks to the demand for dollar-denominated bonds
and technology.


5.6       Functional forms

As in Christiano et al. (2005), we assume the function form for investment adjustment costs is
given by
                                                                              
                                                                          Ii,t
                                   Fi (Ii,t , Ii,t−1 ) = Ii,t 1 − Si               ,                                   (39)
                                                                       Ii,t−1 Υ

where Si (1) = Si0 (1) = 0 and Si00 (1) > 0.21 These properties of Si are the only ones relevant for
the log-linear equilibrium conditions.
    We assume that ai (1) = 0 and that ui,t = 1 in steady state. The only other feature of a that

  21
       See Eberly et al. (2012) for firm-level evidence consistent with this form of investment adjustment costs.

                                                             26
is relevant in the log-linear equilibrium is a00i (1) /a0i (1) > 0, which we treat as a parameter to be
estimated.
    We assume that the function V is increasing and strictly concave. The only property of V that
is relevant for the log-linear equilibrium conditions is V 0 (0), which we set equal to the steady-state
value of Λi,t . This assumption amounts to a normalization according to which that ηi,j,t enters the
intertemporal Euler equation with a coefficient of unity.
    Finally, we assume that the cost of holding bonds, ΦB,1 , is given by

                                                                  2
                                                 ψb Υt
                                                         
                                                             b
                                      ΦB,1 (b) =                       .                           (40)
                                                  2          Υt

In our economy, shocks cause borrowing and lending among countries. The magnitude of that
borrowing and lending reflects growth in economy-wide variables, like real GDP. We scale real
bond holdings by Υt so that the adjustment costs do not rise as the economy grows.



6     Estimation

In this section we accomplish three tasks. First, we discuss the data used in our analysis and our
estimation procedure. Second, we discuss parameters that we fix a priori. Third, we discuss the
parameters that we estimate using Bayesian methods (see An and Schorfheide (2007)).


6.1    Data

We estimate the model using data for the U.S. and Germany for the following variables: the growth
rate of per-capita consumption, GDP, and investment, the real wage, the short-term interest rate,
the rate of inflation, and the exchange rate between the U.S. and Germany. We also include data
on hours worked in the U.S. and global GDP. See Appendix B for a detailed description of our
data series.




                                                  27
6.2     Model parameters

We set the markup parameters to νi = 21 and υi = 6, which are in the range considered by
Altig et al. (2011). We calibrate the steady-state ratio of government purchases to output to 0.18.
Consistent with the literature, we set α = 0.25, f = 0.75, β = 0.9968, and δ = 0.025.
   We set Υ, the unconditional quarterly growth rate of output, to the average quarterly growth
rate of per-capita output across the U.S. and Germany in our sample (1.0046). Since we are
working with a log-linear version of the model, the target inflation rates for the U.S., Germany,
and the rest of the World do not affect the empirical analysis.
   Because of data limitations, we set the following rest-of-the-World parameters to the common
                                                                                                 a00        0
                                                                                                    3 (1)/a3 (1)
mean of the priors for the corresponding U.S. and German parameters: S300 (1) = 4,              a00 (1)/a 0 (1)+1   =
                                                                                                 3        3

0.5, γ3 = 0.75, θπ,3 = 1.7, θGDP,3 = 0.1, ϕ3 = 10. In addition, we set the Calvo parameters (ξP,3
and ξW,3 ) so that prices and wages are optimized on average once per year.
   The remaining parameters are estimated using standard Bayesian methods. Tables 6, 7, and
8 display our prior distributions, as well as the posterior mode, posterior standard deviation, and
the interval between the 5th and 95th percentile of the posterior distribution.22 Several features
are worth noting. First, the model estimates imply fairly standard values for the Taylor rule
coefficient for both the U.S. and Germany. Second, the posterior distribution of shock variances is
fairly tightly estimated relative to the prior distributions. Third, there are some differences between
the parameter estimates specific to the U.S. and the parameter estimates specific to Germany. In
particular, the persistence of the marginal efficiency of investment is much lower in Germany than
in the U.S., while the persistence of technology shocks are higher in Germany.


6.3     Analysis

We next turn to the question: what shocks and frictions account quantitatively for the movements
in the RER and the N ER as well as their covariance with inflation?23 We begin by quantifying

  22
      We normalize the markup shocks, the marginal utility of consumption shocks, the marginal efficiency of in-
vestment shocks, and the spread shocks as explained in our Appendix. We use a Metropolis-Hasting algorithm to
simulate draws from the posterior distribution of the parameters. We draw two chains of length 200,000 from the
posterior distribution and discard the first 100,000 draws from each chain. We then keep every fifth draw.
   23
      Throughout this section statistics are computed for the logarithm of the relevant variables.

                                                      28
which shocks drive the volatility in the RER between the U.S. and Germany. Table 9 reports
the fraction of the variance, at different frequencies, of the RER accounted for by the eight most
important shocks. The variation of the RER is overwhelmingly accounted for by the shock to
foreign demand for dollar-denominated bonds (η̃ t ). This shock alone accounts for roughly 75
percent of the variation in the RER at business cycle frequency. So, from the perspective of the
model, almost all of the variance of the RER arises from spread shocks that affecting the difference
in yields between U.S. and foreign bonds.
   To provide further intuition behind the impact of a shock to foreign demand for dollar-
denominated bonds, Figure 3 displays the impulse response functions of different variables to an in-
crease in η̃ t . A positive shock corresponds to an increase in foreign demand for dollar-denominated
bonds. So, the dollar appreciates (N ER1,j,t falls) and the interest rate on dollar-denominated
bonds (R1,t ) falls. The Taylor rule and the appreciation of the dollar lead to a fall in U.S. infla-
tion. Because of sticky prices, the fall in inflation is relatively small so that RER1,j,t falls (i.e.
the U.S. RER appreciates). Since R1,t falls and U.S. demand for dollar-denominated bonds is
not directly affected by η̃ t , the U.S. finances a rise in consumption and investment by borrowing
from the rest of the World (b1,1,t falls). Because of habit formation and adjustment costs, U.S.
consumption, investment, and real GDP rise and then decline in a hump-shaped pattern. In the
foreign economies, export revenues rise because of the appreciation of the dollar and local-currency
pricing. The increase in export revenue offsets some of the foreign households’ desire to save in
the form of dollar-denominated bonds. So, on net, there is a relatively small increase in foreign
holdings of dollar-denominated bonds.
   A key question is: which shock, in practice, accounts for the covariance between the RER and
future changes in the N ER? This covariance is related to the the regression coefficient β N ER
                                                                                           i,h , in

(2) via the relationship

                                                    P                 h      
                                                                                     
                        cov RERi,t , ∆h N ERi,t+h       cov RER  i,t , ∆  N ER i,t+h
               N ER
              βi,h    =                             =                                 .         (41)
                             var (RERi,t )                  var (RERi,t )

where the sum is over the shocks. Table 12 reports the results of decomposing this covariance by
shock. Note that at all horizons reported, roughly 70 percent of the negative covariance is due to

                                                  29
η̃ t , the shock to foreign demand for dollar-denominated bonds.
   Tables 10 and 11 report the fraction of the cyclical variation in GDP as measured by its
deviation from trend for the U.S. and Germany at different frequencies. The key result is that
shocks to foreign demand for dollar-denominated bonds account for less than 10 percent of the
cyclical variation in GDP at business cycle frequency. The shocks that drive this variation are
similar to those highlighted by Smets and Wouters (2007), e.g. shocks to the marginal efficiency
of investment, markup shocks, and shocks to the domestic demand for dollar bonds (η1,t ). In
a closed-economy context, η1,t plays a very similar role of the risk-premium shock in Smets and
Wouters (2007). Both shocks amount to a wedge in the intertemporal Euler equation for the
risk-free asset. According to the model, technology shocks drive the bulk of cyclical variation in
German real GDP. So, in our model, shocks to foreign demand for dollar-denominated bonds are
an important driver of the RER without being an important driver of cyclical output fluctuations.
This finding is consistent with the arguments in Itskhoki and Mukhin (2017).
   The previous results are interesting to the extent that our model is a credible representation
of the data. Our estimated model has a number of quantitative of properties that lend support
to its credibility. We begin by showing that our estimated model can quantitatively account for
                         N ER      π
the estimated values of βi,h  and βi,h in regressions (2) and (3). To this end, we simulate our
estimated model, drawing shocks from the estimated distributions, and run those regressions on
the simulated data. The row labeled asymptotic value in Table 13 refers to regressions run on a
time series of length 1,000,000 and the row labeled small sample refers to the mean of the estimates
from 10,000 regressions run on simulated time series, each of length 100. The row labeled standard
deviation refers to the standard deviation of the estimates across the 10,000 regressions. Notice
                                                    N ER
that the model accounts for the negative values of βi,h  , which grow in absolute value with horizon.
                         π
The estimated values of βi,h are all small in absolute value and statistically insignificantly different
from zero.
                                                    N ER      π
   In the Appendix, Table 27 reports the values of βi,h  and βi,h derived from simulating the
model one shock at a time. In Section 4, we argued that as long as there is home bias and
                                                                                             N ER
inflation-targeting policy (like a Taylor rule), the model implies qualitative patterns for βi,h  and



                                                  30
 π
βi,h that are similar to those in the data. Our single-shock simulations are consistent with this
argument.
   Our estimated model also accounts for the volatility of the RER and N ER. In the data
the standard deviation of both ∆N ER and ∆RER is roughly 4.7 percent per quarter. The
corresponding model statistics are 4.9 and 4.8 percent, respectively. The model accounts for
Mussa (1986)’s observation that changes in the RER and the N ER are highly correlated. The
correlation between ∆N ER and ∆RER is 0.99 in our data and 0.98 in the model. The model also
does reasonably well at accounting for the persistence of the RER. In the data the autocorrelation
of RER is 0.96 while in the model it is 0.91.
   We now provide two additional pieces of evidence in favor of the model’s empirical credibility.
The first pertains to the “Backus-Smith puzzle.” Backus and Smith (1993) document that the RER
is at best weakly correlated with relative consumption across countries. However, many models
counterfactually imply a high, positive correlation between the RER and relative consumption.
This property is easily seen from equation (17) which pertains to a version of the model with
complete markets. In our model, the conditional correlation between relative consumption and
the RER is negative for η̃ t but positive for most other shocks. After an increase in η̃ t , the RER
falls, but U.S. consumption rises (see Figure 3). Itskhoki and Mukhin (2017) make a similar
observation. To compute the unconditional correlation, we simulate the estimated model using
the fitted disturbances of all the shocks and run the following regression

                                                             
                               d 1,2,t = a0 + a1 Ĉ1,t − Ĉ2,t + t .
                              RER                                                              (42)


The plim of a1 implied by our model is equal to 0.19. The estimated value of a1 in our data sample
is -0.02 with a standard error of 0.29. So taking sampling uncertainty into account, our estimated
model is quantitatively consistent with the observed co-movement between the RER and relative
consumption.
   We now turn to the model’s implications for the so-called “forward-premium puzzle” originally
documented by Fama (1984). The issue is that many models counterfactually imply that the
interest rate differential predicts changes in the N ER. This property is easily seen from a log-

                                                31
linear version of equations (13) and (14), which imply that the expected change in a bilateral N ER
is equal to the interest rate differential on bonds denominated in the two currencies, i.e. UIP holds.
In contrast, according to our estimated model, UIP does not hold conditional on shocks to η̃ t , η1,t ,
or η2,t . For example, in Figure 3, after a positive shock to η̃ t , R1,t is persistently lower than R2,t , but
the dollar depreciates over time. However, UIP holds for many of the other shocks in our model,
like disturbances to technology. To determine whether our model can quantitatively account the
failure of the standard, unconditional version of UIP, we simulated the estimated model using the
fitted shocks. We then ran so-called “Fama regression,” on the simulated time series:

                                                                         
                                         ER1,2,t+1 = d0 + d1 R̂1,t − R̂2,t + t .
                                       ∆Nd                                                                         (43)


Fama (1984) rejects the null hypothesis that d1 = 1. The plim of d1 implied by our model is equal
to 0.01. The estimated value of d1 in our data sample is -0.66 with a standard error of 0.74. So
taking sampling uncertainty into account, our model is quantitatively consistent with the observed
co-movements between interest rate differentials and exchange rates.


6.4       Exploring alternative monetary policy regimes

In this subsection, we consider how the economy would have behaved under alternative monetary
policy regimes. We consider two alternative policy regimes. In the first regime the monetary
authority gives some weight to stabilizing the N ER. We refer to this policy as the N ER-targeting
regime. In the second regime we model capital controls as large costs to foreign bond holdings,
that is a large value of ψb in equation (40). We refer to this policy as the capital-control regime.
   In the N ER-targeting regime, the monetary policy rule is given by

                                    γi
                                           
                                                   θπ,i            !θGDP,i 1−γi
               Ri,t         Ri,t−1          πi,t           GDPi,t                         θ
                                                                                          N ER,i
                    =                                                               N ERi,1,t   exp (εR,i,t ) ,   (44)
               Ri            Ri              πi∗             ˜ i,t
                                                            GDP


where θN ER,i > 0.24 According to equation (44), the monetary authority raises the nominal
interest rate when the domestic currency depreciates. The larger is θN ER,i , the higher the weight
  24
       We assume that country i adopts an inflation target that is equal to the U.S. inflation target.

                                                               32
the monetary authority gives to stabilizing the exchange rate. As θN ER,i → ∞, this rule essentially
becomes a fixed exchange rate regime.
   To assess the impact of the change in monetary policy on exchange rates, we focus on the
                  N ER      π
implications for βi,h  and βi,h . To this end, we generate artificial time series from our estimated
model, but assume that German monetary policy is governed by equation (44) with θN ER,i =
0.1. The latter assumption implies that a 10 percent depreciation of the German currency is
accompanied by a 1 percent increase in the German nominal interest rate. Table 14 reports the
                         N ER      π
model-implied plims for βi,h  and βi,h , as well as the implied small sample means. The values
    N ER                                                                  π
of βi,h  are much smaller than in our benchmark model, and the values of βi,h are much larger.
These results imply that the RER is adjusting, over time, primarily through differential inflation
rates, not through changes in the N ER. The reason is that the monetary policy authority does
let the N ER change by as much as it does in the estimated model.
   Under the N ER-targeting regime, differential inflation rates much play a larger role in re-
establishing long-run PPP. Interestingly, the persistence of the RER as measured by its first-order
auto correlation rises from 0.91 under inflation targeting to 0.96 under the N ER-targeting regime.
In this sense, inflation targeting results in more-rapid adjustment of the RER to its long-run value.
   To capture the effects of capital controls, we assume that the cost to German households of
holding dollar-denominated bonds (ψb ) is 100 times larger than in our estimated model. Under
this assumption, the peak rise in German holdings of dollar-denominated bonds after a shock to η̃ t
is less than half of what it is in our benchmark estimated model. The larger is the cost of holding
dollar-denominated bonds, the closer the German economy is to financial autarky.
                                               N ER      π
   As above, we focus on the implications for βi,h  and βi,h . To this end, we generate artificial
time series from our estimated model, but assume that the costs to Germans of holding dollar-
                                                                            N ER      π
denominated bonds are higher. Table 15 reports the model-implied plims for βi,h  and βi,h , as
                                                       N ER      π
well as the implied small sample means. The values of βi,h  and βi,h are similar to the estimates
obtained in our benchmark model. In this sense, the latter estimates are robust to allowing for
modest capital controls.




                                                 33
7     Conclusion

This paper shows that in inflation-targeting countries, the RER adjusts to shocks in the medium
and long run through changes in the N ER, not via differences in inflation rates. For such countries,
the current RER is useful for forecasting future changes in the N ER. Consistent with the Lucas
(1976) critique, these facts depend critically on the monetary policy regime in effect.
    Using a simple endowment economy, we provide intuition for the economics underlying our
statistical findings. This intuition relies on two key assumptions: the monetary authority follows
an inflation-targeting policy like a Taylor rule and there is home bias in consumption. Home bias in
consumption is important to generate movements in the RER. Taylor rules are important because
they keep inflation relatively stable and cause relative prices to move in such a way so that the
N ER has to adjust by more than the RER over time.
    We build and estimate a medium-scale open-economy DSGE model to answer the question:
what shocks and frictions account quantitatively for the movements in the RER and the N ER
as well as their covariance with inflation? We find that shocks to the foreign demand for dollar-
denominated bonds drive the bulk of exchange rate movements. These shocks also quantitatively
account for the dynamic correlations that drive the predictability of the N ER. We argue that
our inferences are credible because the model reproduces key empirical facts about the N ER and
RER as well as aggregate economic fluctuations.




References
David Altig, Lawrence J. Christiano, Martin Eichenbaum, and Jesper Linde. Firm-specific capital,
  nominal rigidities and the business cycle. Review of Economic dynamics, 14(2):225–247, 2011.

Manuel Amador, Javier Bianchi, Luigi Bocola, and Fabrizio Perri. Exchange rate policies at the
 zero lower bound. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2017.

Sungbae An and Frank Schorfheide. Bayesian analysis of dsge models. Econometric reviews, 26
  (2-4):113–172, 2007.

David K Backus and Gregor W Smith. Consumption and real exchange rates in dynamic economies
  with non-traded goods. Journal of International Economics, 35(3-4):297–316, 1993.



                                                 34
David K Backus, Patrick J Kehoe, and Finn E Kydland. International real business cycles. Journal
  of political Economy, 100(4):745–775, 1992.

Marianne Baxter and Alan C Stockman. Business cycles and the exchange-rate regime: some
 international evidence. Journal of monetary Economics, 23(3):377–400, 1989.

Ben S Bernanke and Ilian Mihov. What does the bundesbank target? European economic review,
  41(6):1025–1053, 1997.

Yin-Wong Cheung, Kon S Lai, and Michael Bergman. Dissecting the ppp puzzle: the unconven-
  tional roles of nominal exchange rate and price adjustments. Journal of International Economics,
  64(1):135–150, 2004.

Lawrence J Christiano, Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles L Evans. Nominal rigidities and the
  dynamic effects of a shock to monetary policy. Journal of political Economy, 113(1):1–45, 2005.

Richard Clarida, Jordi Galı, and Mark Gertler. Monetary policy rules in practice: some interna-
  tional evidence. european economic review, 42(6):1033–1067, 1998.

Francis X Diebold and Robert S Mariano. Comparing predictive accuracy. Journal of Business &
  economic statistics, 13:253–263, 1995.

Janice Eberly, Sergio Rebelo, and Nicolas Vincent. What explains the lagged-investment effect?
  Journal of Monetary Economics, 59(4):370–380, 2012.

Charles Engel. Real exchange rate convergence: The roles of price stickiness and monetary policy.
 Journal of Monetary Economics, 2018.

Charles Engel, Nelson C Mark, and West. Exchange rate models are not as bad as you think.
 NBER macroeconomics annual, 22:381–473, 2007.

Christopher J Erceg, Dale W Henderson, and Andrew T Levin. Optimal monetary policy with
 staggered wage and price contracts. Journal of monetary Economics, 46(2):281–313, 2000.

Christopher J. Erceg, Luca Guerrieri, and Christopher Gust. SIGMA: A New Open Economy
 Model for Policy Analysis. International Journal of Central Banking, 2(1), March 2006.

Eugene F Fama. Forward and spot exchange rates. Journal of monetary economics, 14(3):319–338,
  1984.

Jan JJ Groen. Exchange rate predictability and monetary fundamentals in a small multi-country
  panel. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, pages 495–516, 2005.

Dale W Henderson and Warwick J McKibbin. A comparison of some basic monetary policy
 regimes for open economies: implications of different degrees of instrument adjustment and
 wage persistence. In Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, volume 39, pages
 221–317. Elsevier, 1993.

Ethan Ilzetzki, Carmen M Reinhart, and Kenneth S Rogoff. Exchange arrangements entering the
  21st century: Which anchor will hold? Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research,
  2017a.


                                               35
Ethan Ilzetzki, Carmen M. Reinhart, and Kenneth S. Rogoff. The country chronologies to exchange
  rate arrangements into the 21st century: Will the anchor currency hold? Mimeo, 2017 2017b.

Oleg Itskhoki and Dmitry Mukhin. Exchange rate disconnect in general equilibrium. Technical
  report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2017.

Zhengyang Jiang, Arvind Krishnamurthy, and Hanno Lustig. Foreign safe asset demand and the
  dollar exchange rate. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2018.

Robert Kollmann, Beatrice Pataracchia, Rafal Raciborski, Marco Ratto, Werner Roeger, and
  Lukas Vogel. The post-crisis slump in the euro area and the us: Evidence from an estimated
  three-region dsge model. European Economic Review, 88:21–41, 2016.

Thomas Lubik and Frank Schorfheide. A bayesian look at the new open economy macroeconomics,
 innber macroeconomics annual 2005, volume 20’, 2006.

Robert E. Lucas. Econometric policy evaluation: A critique. In Carnegie-Rochester conference
  series on public policy, volume 1, pages 19–46, 1976.

Matteo Maggiori, Brent Neiman, and Jesse Schreger. International currencies and capital alloca-
 tion. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2018.

Nelson C. Mark. Exchange rates and fundamentals: Evidence on long-horizon predictability. The
  American Economic Review, pages 201–218, 1995.

Nelson C Mark and Donggyu Sul. Nominal exchange rates and monetary fundamentals: evidence
  from a small post-bretton woods panel. Journal of international economics, 53(1):29–52, 2001.

Nelson C Mark and Donggyu Sul. When are pooled panel-data regression forecasts of exchange
  rates more accurate than the time-series regression forecasts? Handbook of Exchange Rates,
  pages 265–281, 2011.

Bennett T McCallum. A reconsideration of the uncovered interest parity relationship. Journal of
  Monetary Economics, 33(1):105–132, 1994.

Richard A Meese and Kenneth Rogoff. Empirical exchange rate models of the seventies: Do they
  fit out of sample? Journal of international economics, 14(1-2):3–24, 1983.

Tanya Molodtsova and David H Papell. Out-of-sample exchange rate predictability with taylor
  rule fundamentals. Journal of international economics, 77(2):167–180, 2009.

Michael Mussa. Nominal exchange rate regimes and the behavior of real exchange rates: Evidence
 and implications. In Carnegie-Rochester Conference series on public policy, volume 25, pages
 117–214. Elsevier, 1986.

Whitney K. Newey and Kenneth D. West. A simple, positive semi-definite, heteroskedasticity and
 autocorrelation consistent covariance matrix. Econometrica, 55(3):703–708, 1987.

Kenneth Rogoff. The purchasing power parity puzzle. Journal of Economic literature, 34(2):
  647–668, 1996.



                                              36
Barbara Rossi. Testing long-horizon predictive ability with high persistence, and the meese-rogoff
  puzzle. International Economic Review, 46(1):61–92, 2005.

Barbara Rossi. Exchange rate predictability. Journal of economic literature, 51(4):1063–1119,
  2013.

Lucio Sarno and Giorgio Valente. Deviations from purchasing power parity under different exchange
  rate regimes: Do they revert and, if so, how? Journal of Banking & Finance, 30(11):3147–3169,
  2006.

Stephanie Schmitt-Grohé and Martın Uribe. Closing small open economy models. Journal of
  international Economics, 61(1):163–185, 2003.

Frank Smets and Raf Wouters. An estimated dynamic stochastic general equilibrium model of the
  euro area. Journal of the European economic association, 1(5):1123–1175, 2003.

Frank Smets and Rafael Wouters. Shocks and frictions in us business cycles: A bayesian dsge
  approach. American economic review, 97(3):586–606, 2007.

Alan M Taylor and Mark P Taylor. The purchasing power parity debate. Journal of economic
  perspectives, 18(4):135–158, 2004.

Kenneth D West. Asymptotic inference about predictive ability. Econometrica: Journal of the
  Econometric Society, pages 1067–1084, 1996.

M. Woodford. Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy. Princeton
 University Press, 2011.

Michael Woodford. Control of the public debt: a requirement for price stability? In The Debt
 Burden and Its Consequences for Monetary Policy, pages 117–158. Springer, 1998.




                                               37
                                                                         Figure 1: NER and RER data

                            1 year horizon                                            3 year horizon                                        5 year horizon
                                                                                                                                                      ●●
            Australia      0.4                                                  0.4        ●●
                                                                                          ● ● ●●
                                                                                            ● ●
                                                                                                                                          0.4     ●●●
                                                                                                                                                    ●
                                                                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                                                                        ●
                                                                                                                                                               ●    ●
                                                                                                                                                                        ●
                                            ●   ●                                                       ●
                                           ●                                                                      ●    ●●●                                    ●●●
                                           ●                    ●● ●                                          ●●
                                                                                                               ●
                                                                                                               ●   ● ●
                                    ●●
                                      ●
                                              ● ●    ●●
                                                      ●
                                                      ●    ●●●●
                                                          ●●
                                                         ●●  ●
                                                                                                     ●
                                                                                                     ●           ● ●●                                       ● ● ●
                                                ●●           ●●
                                                              ●      ●
                           0.0         ●
                                            ●      ●
                                                     ●
                                                       ●
                                                          ●● ●
                                                             ●●●●●●
                                                              ●
                                                                  ●             0.0                      ●
                                                                                                                    ● ●
                                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                                                          0.0                 ●
                                                                                                                                                                    ●●
                                                                                                                                                                     ● ●●●
                                            ●      ●           ●●                                      ● ● ●●       ●●●
                                                ●●        ● ●                                            ● ●          ●●● ●
                                                                                                                          ●
                                                                                                                          ●                                           ●  ●●
                                                                                                                ● ● ●                                                   ● ●●
                                                                                                                                                                           ●
                          −0.4                                                 −0.4                                                      −0.4                               ●●
                                                                                                                                                                             ●
                                                                                                                                                                             ●




                            −0.4         −0.2          0.0              0.2      −0.4           −0.2            0.0              0.2       −0.4       −0.2              0.0             0.2

                           0.50                                                 0.50                                                      0.50         ●
                                                                                                                                                       ● ●
                                                                                                                                                     ●●
                                                                                                                                                     ● ●
                                                                                                                                                       ●       ●
                                                                                                 ● ●                                                   ●●       ●
                           0.25                                                 0.25           ●●
                                                                                               ●
                                                                                                                                          0.25
            Canada




                                                                                                 ●       ●●● ● ●●●                                        ●●
                                       ●                 ●●                                      ●
                                                                                                 ●●          ●   ●                                      ●●●●
                                       ● ●
                                       ●                                                         ●           ●                                            ●
                                                 ● ●● ●●● ●●                                        ●
                                                                                                    ●
                                                                                                                                                         ●●
                                      ● ●●     ●●●●     ●● ●                                                                                                 ●
                           0.00       ●●●●●●●●    ●
                                                  ●●
                                                   ●
                                                   ●● ● ●      ●                0.00                ●●
                                                                                                   ●●      ●●●
                                                                                                             ● ● ●●                       0.00
                                           ●●
                                        ● ● ● ●●   ● ● ● ●● ●● ●
                                                             ●
                                                                 ●                                   ●● ●●●●●
                                                                                                            ●●      ●●                                        ● ●● ●●
                                               ●●        ●       ●                                          ●●●                                                ●●●●       ●
                                                                                                              ●            ●●                                     ●● ● ● ●●       ●●●
                                                                                                                             ● ●
                                                                                                                               ●                                  ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                  ●                   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                      ●
                          −0.25                                                −0.25                                                     −0.25

                                   −0.2−0.10.0 0.1 0.2                                   −0.2−0.10.0 0.1 0.2                                      −0.2−0.10.0 0.1 0.2

                           0.8                                                  0.8        ●
                                                                                                                                          0.8       ●●
                                                                                            ●●                                                         ● ●
                                                                                                                                                     ●
                                                                                              ●
            Germany




                           0.4       ●● ●                                       0.4            ●    ●●
                                                                                                     ●
                                                                                                     ●
                                                                                                     ●
                                                                                                    ●●
                                                                                                     ●●     ●
                                                                                                                                          0.4          ● ●
                                                                                                                                                         ●
                                                                                                                                                         ●
                                                                                                                                                          ●
                                                                                                                                                          ●
                                                                                                                                                          ●
                                                                                                                                                         ●●●●
                                                                                                                                                           ●
                                                                                                                                                             ●
                                                                                                                                                             ●
                                                                                                                                                             ●
                                                                                                                                                             ●● ●●
                                                                                                                                                           ●● ●●●● ●
                                                                                                                                                           ●
                                           ● ●●                                                       ●●●
                                                                                                        ●      ●●                                                ●●● ●
                                      ●    ●●   ● ●●●●●  ●                                               ● ●● ●●                                                ●●
                                           ● ● ●●
                                           ●        ●● ●
                                                       ●
                                                        ●
                                                        ●●●                                             ●●●●●●
                                                                                                             ●● ●
                                                                                                                ●●
                                                                                                                ● ●
                                                                                                                  ●
                                                                                                                 ●●
                                                                                                                   ●
                                                                                                                   ●                                             ●●
                                                                                                                                                                 ●  ●●
                                                                                                                                                                    ●
                                                                                                                                                                    ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                      ●●
                                       ● ●●●
                                                   ●●
                                                    ●
                                                    ●●
                                                    ● ●
                                                      ●
                                                      ●●●
                                                        ●● ●
                                                                                                         ● ●●●
                                                                                                                 ●●●● ●                                            ●
                                                                                                                                                                   ● ●●●●●●
                                                                                                                                                                       ●
                           0.0            ●●●●●●
                                               ●●
                                                ●●
                                                     ●●
                                                    ●●
                                                    ● ●
                                                   ● ●●
                                                       ●
                                                       ●●
                                                        ●
                                                        ●
                                                        ●
                                                         ●
                                                         ●
                                                         ●● ●●
                                                         ●●
                                                         ●
                                                         ●●●  ●
                                                           ●● ●
                                                           ●
                                                                                0.0                     ● ● ●
                                                                                                            ●●
                                                                                                                  ●●
                                                                                                                   ●
                                                                                                                    ●●
                                                                                                                     ●
                                                                                                                     ●
                                                                                                                                          0.0                     ● ●●●●
                                                                                                                                                                   ●● ●●●
                                                                                                                                                                        ●●
                                                                                                                                                                        ●
                                          ●       ●         ●                                                 ●  ●   ●●●                                             ● ●  ●●
                                                                                                              ●
                                                                                                              ●
                                                                                                              ●●●● ●●●●●                                              ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                          ●●●●●
                          −0.4                                                 −0.4                                                      −0.4                             ●
                                                                                                                                                                             ●




                                   −0.4             0.0           0.4                    −0.4               0.0            0.4                    −0.4             0.0            0.4
            New Zealand




                                                                                          ●●                                                      ●
                                                                                                                                                   ●● ●
                                                                                         ●●● ●●                                                   ●●●● ● ●
                           0.4                                                  0.4         ●
                                                                                                ●                                         0.4          ●●
                                                                                                                                                          ●
                                                                                                                                                             ●
                                                                                                                                                               ●
                                     ●                                                               ●●●●                                                       ●●
                                                                                                                                                                ●
                                    ●   ●● ●   ●                                                     ●● ●●● ● ●
                                                                                                                                                           ●● ●
                                                                                                                                                              ● ● ●●
                                                     ●●
                                                  ●● ●● ●●
                                                                                              ●                                                            ●●●       ●●
                                   ●●          ● ●●●
                                                  ●   ● ●●●●●                                   ●      ●●● ●● ●●●●●                                          ●        ●●●
                                             ● ●●●●     ●●  ●●●                                             ●                                                ●
                           0.0     ●●
                                      ●       ● ●●
                                               ● ● ●●●●
                                                       ●● ● ●
                                                          ●● ●●●                0.0              ●
                                                                                                   ●
                                                                                                             ●●
                                                                                                             ●●●
                                                                                                              ●●
                                                                                                                                          0.0                  ●●●
                                                                                                                                                                ●●●
                                         ● ● ●●              ●●                                                                                                     ●
                                            ●
                                                       ●      ●                                   ●●●●          ●●●                                                   ●
                                                                                                                                                                     ● ●
                                                         ● ●                                         ● ●         ●●
                                                                                                                  ●●                                                   ● ●
                          −0.4                                                 −0.4                          ●● ●                        −0.4                             ●●
                                                                                                                                                                         ●●●●
                                                                                                                                                                             ●



                            −0.50 −0.25 0.00                      0.25           −0.50 −0.25 0.00                          0.25            −0.50 −0.25 0.00                       0.25

                           0.6                                                  0.6                                                       0.6
                                                                                         ●●                                                      ●● ●
                                                                                                                                                 ●
                                                                                        ●● ●                                                      ●   ●● ● ●
                           0.3                                                  0.3         ●                                             0.3
            Sweden




                                                                                            ●
                                   ● ●   ● ●                                                       ●      ● ●                                       ● ● ●● ●
                                                                                                                                                    ●
                                  ●    ●                                                                                                                   ●
                                  ●        ●●●    ●●
                                                  ●
                                                                                                   ●● ● ● ● ●
                                                                                                           ● ●●● ●
                                                                                                                 ●                                         ●
                                                                                                                                                           ● ●
                                   ●         ●●●●
                                                ●● ●●                                                                                                        ●
                           0.0       ●
                                     ●       ● ● ● ●●
                                                 ●
                                                 ● ● ●●              ●
                                                                                0.0                     ●
                                                                                                          ●
                                                                                                                                          0.0                ●●
                                                                                                                                                              ●
                                       ● ●● ●        ●
                                                     ●              ●●
                                                                     ●
                                                                                                          ●
                                                                                                          ● ●● ●●             ●
                                             ●                                                                                                                  ●●
                                                                                                                             ●●
                                                                                                                              ●
                                                                                                             ●● ●
                                                                                                             ●                                                   ●
                          −0.3                                                 −0.3                          ●
                                                                                                                                         −0.3                               ●        ●
                                                                                                                                                                                    ●●
                                                                                                                                                                                     ●

                          −0.6                                                 −0.6                                                      −0.6
                                   −0.2             0.0           0.2                    −0.2               0.0            0.2                    −0.2             0.0            0.2

                           0.4                                                  0.4                                                       0.4
                                                                                                                                                 ● ●
                                                                                        ●                                                         ●     ●●
                                                                                        ●●●
                                                                                          ●●                                                     ●●
                           0.2               ●
                                                                                0.2        ●        ● ●●
                                                                                                                                          0.2      ●● ●  ●● ●
                                                                                                                                                           ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                  ●●
                                  ● ●         ●●   ●                                                 ●●      ●     ● ●                                   ●●●    ●●
            UK




                                                   ●●                                          ●      ●●●         ●                                          ●
                                   ●●       ●● ●●●● ● ● ● ●                                             ● ●●● ●                                              ● ● ●
                                           ● ●●                                                      ●
                                                                                                     ● ●●
                                                                                                          ● ●●
                                                                                                                    ●● ●
                                                                                                                                                               ●●
                                  ●         ● ● ● ● ●● ●●● ● ●●                                                                                                  ●     ●
                           0.0      ●●   ●         ● ●●
                                                  ●●
                                                    ●●
                                                    ●
                                                         ●●
                                                       ●●●
                                                           ●●   ●
                                                                                0.0                       ●
                                                                                                          ● ●●●
                                                                                                           ●●
                                                                                                               ●
                                                                                                                                          0.0                ● ● ●●● ●●
                                                                                                                                                                      ●
                                            ●                                                                                                                ● ●●
                                                 ●●                                                          ●●                                                     ●
                                                    ●                                                         ●● ●●
                                                                                                                ●●                                                 ●●
                          −0.2                                                 −0.2                                                      −0.2

                            −0.2 −0.1 0.0                    0.1         0.2     −0.2 −0.1 0.0                        0.1          0.2     −0.2 −0.1 0.0                      0.1         0.2

Note: Horizonal axis is the log of the RER. Vertical axis is the future change in the log of the N ER at the specified
horizon. Sources: International Monetary Fund, International Financial Statistics; authors’ calculations.




                                                                                                   38
                                      Table 1: N ER regression results


                                                                        N ER
                                                                       βi,h
                                                                 Horizon (in years)
                                                               1     3       5      7

                      (a) Benchmark countries
                      Australia                              -0.10    -0.84    -1.95    -1.99
                                                             (0.17)   (0.20)   (0.08)   (0.14)
                      Canada                                 -0.11    -0.68    -1.35    -1.74
                                                             (0.14)   (0.17)   (0.30)   (0.30)
                      Germany                                -0.27    -0.97    -1.34    -1.58
                                                             (0.12)   (0.10)   (0.16)   (0.13)
                      New Zealand                            -0.21    -1.06    -1.62    -1.44
                                                             (0.13)   (0.13)   (0.25)   (0.15)
                      Sweden                                 -0.36    -1.12    -1.57    -1.31
                                                             (0.13)   (0.13)   (0.15)   (0.04)
                      United Kingdom                         -0.26    -1.09    -1.68    -1.08
                                                             (0.10)   (0.45)   (0.15)   (0.44)


                      (b) Managed exchange rates
                      China                      -0.10 -0.32 -0.40 -0.30
                                                 (0.04) (0.13) (0.21) (0.19)
                      Hong Kong                   0.04   0.04   0.03   0.02
                                                 (0.04) (0.04) (0.04) (0.04)


Sources: International Monetary Fund, International Financial Statistics; authors’ calculations.




                                                        39
                                 Table 2: Relative price regression results


                                                                         π
                                                                        βi,h
                                                                 Horizon (in years)
                                                               1     3       5      7

                    (a) Benchmark countries
                    Australia                                -0.04 -0.10 -0.06          -0.03
                                                             (0.01) (0.04) (0.04)       (0.02)
                    Canada                                   -0.05 -0.13 -0.14          -0.15
                                                             (0.01) (0.01) (0.03)       (0.04)
                    Germany                                   0.02   0.08   0.14         0.14
                                                             (0.01) (0.03) (0.06)       (0.06)
                    New Zealand                              -0.01 -0.06 -0.09          -0.08
                                                             (0.01) (0.02) (0.01)       (0.02)
                    Sweden                                   -0.05 -0.06    0.00        -0.00
                                                             (0.02) (0.02) (0.02)       (0.02)
                    United Kingdom                           -0.02 -0.03 -0.01          -0.08
                                                             (0.01) (0.04) (0.05)       (0.05)


                    (b) Managed exchange rates
                    China                                    -0.41 -0.90 -1.04 -0.98
                                                             (0.17) (0.18) (0.07) (0.01)
                    Hong Kong                                -0.09 -0.38 -0.79 -1.18
                                                             (0.06) (0.14) (0.16) (0.15)


                    (c) Euro area vis-a-vis Germany
                    France                                   -0.11 -0.77 -1.40          -1.39
                                                             (0.09) (0.27) (0.25)       (0.22)
                    Italy                                    -0.19 -0.54 -0.77          -0.82
                                                             (0.05) (0.09) (0.11)       (0.13)
                    Ireland                                  -0.27 -0.80 -1.12          -1.45
                                                             (0.09) (0.05) (0.05)       (0.04)
                    Portugal                                 -0.24 -0.68 -0.89          -1.05
                                                             (0.05) (0.06) (0.05)       (0.04)
                    Spain                                    -0.16 -0.47 -0.73          -0.93
                                                             (0.03) (0.08) (0.08)       (0.06)


Sources: International Monetary Fund, International Financial Statistics; authors’ calculations.


                                                        40
                            Table 3: N ER regression results, other countries


                   N ER
                  βi,h  :     Before inflation targeting                   During inflation targeting
                                 Horizon (in years)                           Horizon (in years)
                               1        3        5        7                 1        3        5       7


              Brazil         1.01     2.33   2.66       6.58             -0.18    -0.64    -1.19    -1.47
                            (1.08)   (3.17) (2.53)     (1.80)            (0.12)   (0.19)   (0.13)   (0.07)
               Chile        -0.15    -0.77 -1.45       -2.16             -0.34    -1.00    -1.29    -1.33
                            (0.23)   (0.74) (0.60)     (0.23)            (0.14)   (0.16)   (0.13)   (0.11)
          Colombia          -0.15    -0.72 -1.29       -1.66             -0.16    -0.57    -1.06    -1.37
                            (0.10)   (0.17) (0.23)     (0.19)            (0.13)   (0.25)   (0.19)   (0.11)
              Israel         2.20     2.88   2.73       2.29             -0.44    -0.67    -1.20    -1.31
                            (0.90)   (1.29) (1.01)     (1.30)            (0.13)   (0.17)   (0.27)   (0.29)
            Mexico           0.77     0.78   0.60       1.18             -0.24    -0.50    -0.50    -0.38
                            (0.37)   (0.55) (0.60)     (0.77)            (0.15)   (0.32)   (0.45)   (0.32)
            Norway          -0.17    -0.65 -0.86       -0.94             -0.38    -0.96    -1.67    -1.82
                            (0.13)   (0.10) (0.13)     (0.07)            (0.14)   (0.20)   (0.28)   (0.19)
               Peru          0.21     2.10   5.48       8.11             -0.26    -0.80    -1.24    -1.66
                            (0.41)   (1.23) (1.23)     (0.95)            (0.11)   (0.19)   (0.14)   (0.10)
        Philippines         -0.26    -0.68 -1.16       -1.22             -0.11    -0.44    -0.71    -0.89
                            (0.22)   (0.10) (0.17)     (0.13)            (0.09)   (0.12)   (0.10)   (0.08)
          S. Africa         -0.40    -0.94 -0.96       -1.12             -0.38    -1.34    -1.57    -1.11
                            (0.11)   (0.23) (0.08)     (0.04)            (0.10)   (0.14)   (0.22)   (0.12)
           S. Korea         -0.32    -1.15 -1.27       -1.27             -0.50    -0.92    -1.20    -0.92
                            (0.14)   (0.16) (0.12)     (0.23)            (0.19)   (0.27)   (0.12)   (0.09)
          Thailand          -0.49    -2.01 -1.42       -0.81             -0.15    -0.45    -0.74    -0.97
                            (0.13)   (0.84) (0.82)     (0.43)            (0.07)   (0.13)   (0.11)   (0.06)


Sources: International Monetary Fund, International Financial Statistics; authors’ calculations.




                                                        41
                          Table 4: Relative price regression results, other countries


                        π
                       βi,h :    Before inflation targeting                During inflation targeting
                                    Horizon (in years)                        Horizon (in years)
                                  1        3        5        7              1        3        5       7


              Brazil            -1.21    -2.92    -3.30    -7.23         -0.02   0.01       0.09     0.11
                                (1.10)   (3.23)   (2.53)   (1.85)        (0.02) (0.05)     (0.03)   (0.03)
               Chile            -0.13    -0.12     0.14     0.69          0.06   0.17       0.17     0.12
                                (0.14)   (0.47)   (0.43)   (0.20)        (0.02) (0.04)     (0.05)   (0.04)
          Colombia              -0.12    -0.22    -0.12     0.02         -0.03 -0.04       -0.04    -0.07
                                (0.02)   (0.05)   (0.06)   (0.12)        (0.02) (0.05)     (0.03)   (0.03)
              Israel            -2.37    -3.60    -3.58    -3.18          0.10   0.07       0.03    -0.16
                                (0.77)   (1.21)   (0.96)   (1.22)        (0.04) (0.09)     (0.15)   (0.07)
            Mexico              -1.11    -1.62    -1.75    -2.12         -0.02   0.03      -0.02     0.09
                                (0.24)   (0.39)   (0.53)   (0.65)        (0.02) (0.08)     (0.10)   (0.04)
            Norway              -0.09    -0.34    -0.44    -0.43          0.00   0.10       0.23     0.23
                                (0.02)   (0.04)   (0.04)   (0.04)        (0.02) (0.03)     (0.03)   (0.02)
               Peru             -0.38    -2.62    -6.34    -9.17          0.08   0.22       0.29     0.37
                                (0.42)   (1.32)   (1.28)   (0.98)        (0.02) (0.04)     (0.05)   (0.06)
        Philippines             -0.10    -0.12    -0.49    -0.51         -0.01 -0.08       -0.15    -0.22
                                (0.09)   (0.09)   (0.10)   (0.32)        (0.01) (0.03)     (0.03)   (0.02)
          S. Africa             -0.07    -0.19    -0.28    -0.33         -0.05   0.11       0.29     0.18
                                (0.08)   (0.09)   (0.18)   (0.21)        (0.03) (0.03)     (0.03)   (0.02)
           S. Korea              0.09     0.22     0.18     0.11          0.00   0.02       0.09     0.08
                                (0.03)   (0.04)   (0.05)   (0.08)        (0.02) (0.05)     (0.05)   (0.02)
          Thailand               0.04     0.09    -0.21    -0.52          0.01 -0.02       -0.07    -0.09
                                (0.05)   (0.26)   (0.26)   (0.15)        (0.02) (0.04)     (0.04)   (0.05)


Sources: International Monetary Fund, International Financial Statistics; authors’ calculations.




                                                           42
                      Table 5: Out-of-sample forecasting for the N ER


                                           Forecast horizon (in years)
                                         1    2     3      4     5     6

                    (a) RMSPE relative to random walk
                      All countries 1.08 1.03 0.93 0.76              0.62    0.50

                           Australia   1.11    1.11   1.06    0.89   0.68    0.45
                             Canada    1.24    1.34   1.26    1.06   0.89    0.85
                           Germany     1.04    0.97   0.83    0.64   0.50    0.37
                       New Zealand     1.05    0.98   0.83    0.66   0.53    0.43
                             Sweden    1.07    0.98   0.82    0.63   0.50    0.31
                    United Kingdom     1.03    0.96   0.86    0.77   0.72    0.72


                    (b) Bootstrap p-values (stationary RER)
                     All countries 0.82 0.40 0.05 0.00 0.00                  0.00

                           Australia   0.90    0.77   0.59    0.12   0.02    0.00
                             Canada    0.92    0.88   0.75    0.43   0.11    0.09
                           Germany     0.58    0.15   0.03    0.00   0.00    0.00
                       New Zealand     0.72    0.21   0.02    0.00   0.00    0.00
                             Sweden    0.82    0.26   0.06    0.01   0.01    0.00
                    United Kingdom     0.40    0.15   0.07    0.03   0.02    0.03


                    (c) Bootstrap p-values (non-stationary RER)
                      All countries 0.33 0.11 0.03 0.01 0.00                 0.00

                           Australia   0.60    0.46   0.37    0.21   0.08    0.02
                             Canada    0.70    0.64   0.49    0.31   0.19    0.16
                           Germany     0.31    0.18   0.10    0.03   0.01    0.00
                       New Zealand     0.39    0.20   0.08    0.02   0.01    0.00
                             Sweden    0.65    0.36   0.16    0.06   0.03    0.01
                    United Kingdom     0.36    0.22   0.14    0.10   0.09    0.10


Note: Sources: International Monetary Fund, International Financial Statistics; authors’ calculations.




                                                 43
                                                                      Figure 2: Response to endowment shock
                                                                           Yt                                          RERt                                      Ct and C*t




                                  0.0




                                                                                                                                                 0.0
                                                                                                    0.0
                                  −1.0 −0.8 −0.6 −0.4 −0.2
                        Percent




                                                                                          Percent




                                                                                                                                                 −0.2
                                                                                                    −0.2




                                                                                                                                                 −0.4
                                                                                                    −0.4




                                                                                                                                                 −0.6
                                                                                                                                                 −0.8
                                                                                                    −0.6
                                                             0   10   20        30   40        50           0   10   20     30    40        50          0   10   20     30    40   50

                                                                      πt and π*t                                     Rt and R*t                                    NERt




                                                                                                                                                 1.0
                                                                                                    0.10
                                  0.06




                                                                                                                                       Percent
                                                                                                                                                 0.5
                                  0.04




                                                                                                    0.06
                                  0.02




                                                                                                                                                 0.0
                                                                                                    0.02
                                  0.00
                                  −0.02




                                                                                                    −0.02




                                                                                                                                                 −0.5
                                                             0   10   20        30   40        50           0   10   20     30    40        50          0   10   20     30    40   50


Note: The vertical axis is expressed in percent. The horizontal axis shows quarters after the shock. Red-dashed
lines indicate the variables for the foreign country.



                                                         Table 6: Posterior distribution: non-shock parameters

                                                                                                                    Prior                                                                  Posterior
                                                                                                            Shape (mean, std. dev.)                                   mode              st. dev. [5%, 95%]
 U.S.
             γ1      Taylor rule persistence                                                                   Beta (0.75, 0.05)                                          0.90           0.01     [0.87,   0.92]
      θπ,1 − 1       Taylor rule inflation coef.                                                            Inv. Gamma (0.7, 0.15)                                        0.60           0.12     [0.47,   0.92]
       θGDP,1        Taylor rule GDP coef.                                                                     Beta (0.10, 0.05)                                          0.10           0.03     [0.07,   0.17]
            ξP,1     Calvo price setting                                                                        Beta (0.5, 0.10)                                          0.85           0.03     [0.82,   0.91]
           ξW,1      Calvo wage setting                                                                         Beta (0.5, 0.10)                                          0.65           0.06     [0.57,   0.78]
          00
        S1 (1)       Investment adj. costs                                                                    Normal (4.00, 1.50)                                         5.33           1.06     [3.99,   7.45]
  a00        0
     1 (1)/a1 (1)
  00       0
 a1 (1)/a1 (1)+1
                     Utilization adj. costs                                                                    Beta (0.50, 0.15)                                          0.63           0.11     [0.43,   0.80]
           ϕ1        Net export adj. costs                                                                           Normal (10, 2)                                   12.31              1.79    [9.43, 15.28]
 Germany
           γ2        Taylor rule persistence                                                                   Beta (0.75, 0.05)                                          0.90           0.01     [0.88,   0.92]
    θπ,2 − 1         Taylor rule inflation coef.                                                            Inv. Gamma (0.7, 0.15)                                        0.55           0.10     [0.43,   0.76]
     θGDP,2          Taylor rule GDP coef.                                                                     Beta (0.10, 0.05)                                          0.09           0.03     [0.05,   0.17]
          ξP,2       Calvo price setting                                                                        Beta (0.5, 0.10)                                          0.51           0.08     [0.45,   0.71]
         ξW,2        Calvo wage setting                                                                         Beta (0.5, 0.10)                                          0.61           0.06     [0.50,   0.71]
        00
      S2 (1)         Investment adj. costs                                                                    Normal (4.00, 1.50)                                         5.28           1.08     [3.83,   7.38]
  a00        0
     2 (1)/a2 (1)
 a00 (1)/a 0 (1)+1   Utilization adj. costs                                                                    Beta (0.50, 0.15)                                          0.68           0.12     [0.46,   0.85]
  2        2

              ϕ2     Net export adj. costs                                                                           Normal (10, 2)                                       9.41           2.04    [5.99, 12.65]
Note: In our Bayesian estimation, we simulate two MCMC chains of length 200,000.                                                                                                          We discard the first
100,000 draws from each chain, and we keep every 5th draw after the first 100,000 draws.


                                                                                                                     44
                       Table 7: Posterior distribution: shock process persistence

                                                               mode     st. dev.    [5%, 95%]
               U.S.
               ρA,1 Technology                                  0.92      0.03     [0.85,   0.96]
               ρζ,1 Marginal efficiency of investment           0.51      0.14     [0.30,   0.75]
               ρυ,1 Price markup                                0.76      0.10     [0.50,   0.84]
               θυ,1 Price markup                                0.98      0.02     [0.93,   0.99]
               ρν,1 Wage markup                                 0.86      0.12     [0.50,   0.90]
               θν,1 Wage markup                                 0.94      0.03     [0.85,   0.97]
               ρµ,1 Marginal utility of consumption             0.87      0.16     [0.41,   0.94]
               ρG,1 Government purchases                        0.96      0.01     [0.94,   0.98]
               Germany
               ρA,2 Technology                                  0.99      0.03     [0.91,   0.99]
               ρζ,2 Marginal efficiency of investment           0.05      0.04     [0.02,   0.15]
               ρυ,2 Price markup                                0.50      0.20     [0.19,   0.83]
               θυ,2 Price markup                                0.50      0.20     [0.18,   0.82]
               ρν,2 Wage markup                                 0.80      0.13     [0.44,   0.87]
               θν,2 Wage markup                                 0.74      0.16     [0.31,   0.82]
               ρµ,2 Marginal utility of consumption             0.09      0.07     [0.03,   0.25]
               ρG,2 Government purchases                        0.90      0.05     [0.78,   0.95]
               Rest of World
               ρA,3 Technology                                  0.96      0.03     [0.90, 0.98]
               Foreign
                ρη̃ Demand for dollar bonds                     0.93      0.02     [0.90, 0.95]
               Global
                ρA Technology                                   0.52      0.20     [0.20, 0.85]
               ρη,1 Demand for dollar bonds                     0.91      0.03     [0.85, 0.94]
               ρη,2 Demand for German bonds                     0.91      0.02     [0.86, 0.93]


Note: We use a Beta prior with mean 0.5 and standard deviation 0.2 for all parameters shown in this table.




                                                      45
                       Table 8: Posterior distribution: shock process volatility

                                                             mode     st. dev.    [5%, 95%]
               U.S.
               σA,1 Technology                                0.60      0.06     [0.50,   0.69]
               σζ,1 Marginal efficiency of investment         0.64      0.13     [0.45,   0.86]
               σR,1 Monetary policy                           0.16      0.01     [0.14,   0.19]
               συ,1 Price markup                              0.65      0.06     [0.57,   0.75]
               σν,1 Wage markup                               0.38      0.03     [0.35,   0.45]
               σµ,1 Marginal utility of consumption           0.20      0.05     [0.10,   0.28]
               σG,1 Government purchases                      0.54      0.04     [0.48,   0.63]
               Germany
               σA,2 Technology                                1.06      0.29     [0.67,   1.55]
               σζ,2 Marginal efficiency of investment         1.20      0.09     [1.06,   1.37]
               σR,2 Monetary policy                           0.10      0.01     [0.09,   0.12]
               συ,2 Price markup                              0.07      0.19     [0.06,   0.62]
               σν,2 Wage markup                               0.51      0.05     [0.43,   0.61]
               σµ,2 Marginal utility of consumption           0.50      0.05     [0.44,   0.60]
               σG,2 Government purchases                      0.75      0.06     [0.66,   0.87]
               Rest of World
               σA,3 Technology                                0.53      0.13     [0.44, 0.85]
               Foreign
                ση̃ Demand for dollar bonds                   0.05      0.01     [0.04, 0.08]
               Global
                σA Technology                                 0.07      0.08     [0.04, 0.31]
               ση,1 Demand for dollar bonds                   0.02      0.01     [0.02, 0.04]
               ση,2 Demand for German bonds                   0.04      0.01     [0.03, 0.06]


Note: We use an Inverse Gamma prior with mean 0.2 and standard deviation 1 for all parameters shown in this
table.




                                                     46
                        Table 9: Variance decomposition of US/German RER

                                                                   Frequency
                                                                 (in quarters)
                                                              1-8 8-32 32-100
                       η̃ t   Foreign demand for dollar bonds 71     73     86
                     η2,t     Demand for German bonds         12      8      3
                     η1,t     Global demand for dollar bonds   6      5      2
                     R1,t     U.S. Monetary policy             4      3      1
                     A2,t     German technology                3      5      4
                     R2,t     German Monetary policy           2      1      0
                     υ1,t     U.S. price markup                1      2      0
                     ν2,t     German wage markup               0      2      1
Note: Statistics are computed using parameter values from the posterior mode. Shocks are excluded from the
table if they account for less than 2 percent of the variance at each frequency.



                              Table 10: Variance decomposition of US GDP

                                                                  Frequency
                                                                (in quarters)
                 U.S.                                        1-8 8-32 32-100
                 η1,t Global demand for dollar bonds         17     23     21
                 ζ1,t U.S. marginal efficiency of investment 18     16     10
                 R1,t U.S. monetary policy                   12     16     13
                 υ1,t U.S. price markup                       1     16     16
                 G1,t U.S. government purchases              30      9      6
                  η̃ t Rest-of-World demand for dollar bonds 19      7      5
                 A1,t U.S. technology                         1      7     18
                 µ1,t U.S. marginal utility of consumption    0      4      2
                 ν1,t U.S. wage markup                        2      2      9
Note: Statistics are computed using parameter values from the posterior mode. Shocks are excluded from the
table if they account for less than 2 percent of the variance at each frequency.




                                                     47
                            Table 11: Variance decomposition of German GDP

                                                                               Frequency
                                                                             (in quarters)
                U.S.                                                      1-8 8-32 32-100
                A2,t    German technology                                  5     36     61
                η2,t    Global demand for German bonds                    25     26     16
                ν2,t    German wage markup                                 1     12     13
                G2,t    German government purchases                       32     11      4
                µ2,t    German marginal utility of consumption            20      6      1
                ζ2,t    German marginal efficiency of investment          11      4      2
                R2,t    German monetary policy                             4      4      2
Note: Statistics are computed using parameter values from the posterior mode. Shocks are excluded from the
table if they account for less than 2 percent of the variance at each frequency.



         Table 12: Shocks driving N ER regression coefficients in estimated DSGE model

                                                                            Horizon
                                                                           (in years)
                                                                 1            3 5        7
                         η̃ t   Foreign demand for dollar bonds 70           74 74      73
                       A2,t     German technology                9           10 12      14
                       η2,t     Global demand for German bonds 6              4 3        3
                       η1,t     Global demand for dollar bonds   4           2 2         2
                       ν2,t     German wage markup               3           3 2         2
                       R1,t     U.S. monetary policy             3            2 2        1

Note: The table show the percent of the correlation between the RER and future changes in the N ER accounted
for by each shock at different horizons. Statistics are computed using parameter values from the posterior mode.




                                                      48
                            Table 13: Regression coefficients in estimated DSGE model

                                                                                                                                                               Horizon (in years)
                                                                                                                                                             1      3      5      7
                                                N ER
              (a) N ER regression coefficient, βi,h
                          Asymptotic value                                                                                                            -0.28 -0.62 -0.80 -0.91
                         Small-sample mean                                                                                                            -0.40 -0.81 -1.00 -1.08
                        Small-sample st. dev.                                                                                                          0.17 0.30 0.38 0.44

                                                          π
              (a) Relative-price regression coefficient, βi,h
                           Asymptotic value                                                                                                           -0.02 -0.02 -0.01 -0.00
                          Small-sample mean                                                                                                           -0.04 -0.05 -0.05 -0.04
                         Small-sample st. dev.                                                                                                         0.06 0.17 0.26 0.32
Note: Statistics are computed using parameter values from the posterior mode of our benchmark model. The row
labeled asymptotic value refers to regressions run on a time series of length 1,000,000 and the row labeled
small-sample mean refers to the mean of the estimates from 10,000 regressions run on simulated time series, each
of length 100. The row labeled small-sample st. dev. refers to the standard deviation of the estimates across the
10,000 regressions.



                Figure 3: Response to foreign demand for dollar-denominated bonds
                                        Foreign demand for $ bonds                                                  RERt                                                NERt
                                                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                    0
                            0.3
                  Percent




                                                                     Percent




                                                                                                                                       Percent
                                                                                                                                                      −1
                                                                                    −1
                            0.2




                                                                                                                                                      −2
                                                                                    −2
                            0.1




                                                                                                                                                      −3
                                                                                    −3
                            0.0




                                                                                                                                                      −4
                                                                                    −4




                                    0       10   20        30   40             50                         0   10   20        30   40             50           0   10   20          30   40   50

                                                   gdpt                                                                 Ct                                                   It
                                                                                    0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
                            0.4




                                                                                                                                                      1.5
                            0.2




                                                                                                                                                      1.0
                            0.0




                                                                                                                                                      0.5
                            −0.2




                                                                                                                                                      0.0
                            −0.4




                                                                                    −0.1




                                                                                                                                                      −0.5




                                    0       10   20        30   40             50                         0   10   20        30   40             50           0   10   20          30   40   50

                                                      πt                                                                Rt                                                  b1,t
                                                                                                                                                      5
                            0.05




                                                                                    0.02 0.04




                                                                                                                                                      0
                            0.00




                                                                                                                                                      −5
                            −0.05




                                                                                    −0.02




                                                                                                                                                      −10
                            −0.10




                                                                                                                                                      −15
                                                                                    −0.06




                                    0       10   20        30   40             50                         0   10   20        30   40             50           0   10   20          30   40   50


Note: The vertical axis is expressed in percent. The horizontal axis shows quarters after the shock. Black lines
indicate the variables for the U.S.. Red-dashed lines indicate the variables for Germany. Blue dashed-dotted lines
indicate the variables for the rest of the World.



                                                                                                                   49
              Table 14: Regression coefficients in estimated DSGE model, N ER target

                                                                        Horizon (in years)
                                                                      1      3      5      7
                                                N ER
              (a) N ER regression coefficient, βi,h
                          Asymptotic value                          -0.13 -0.19 -0.19 -0.19
                         Small-sample mean                          -0.23 -0.32 -0.31 -0.30
                        Small-sample st. dev.                        0.10 0.13 0.13 0.15

                                                          π
              (a) Relative-price regression coefficient, βi,h
                           Asymptotic value                         -0.03 -0.28 -0.49 -0.62
                          Small-sample mean                         -0.05 -0.44 -0.72 -0.84
                         Small-sample st. dev.                       0.06 0.20 0.27 0.33

Note: Statistics are computed using parameter values from the posterior mode of our benchmark model. The row
labeled asymptotic value refers to regressions run on a time series of length 1,000,000 and the row labeled
small-sample mean refers to the mean of the estimates from 10,000 regressions run on simulated time series, each
of length 100. The row labeled small-sample st. dev. refers to the standard deviation of the estimates across the
10,000 regressions.



            Table 15: Regression coefficients in estimated DSGE model, capital controls

                                                                        Horizon (in years)
                                                                      1      3      5      7
                                                N ER
              (a) N ER regression coefficient, βi,h
                          Asymptotic value                          -0.30 -0.67 -0.85 -0.96
                         Small-sample mean                          -0.42 -0.85 -1.02 -1.09
                        Small-sample st. dev.                        0.17 0.30 0.37 0.43

                                                          π
              (a) Relative-price regression coefficient, βi,h
                           Asymptotic value                         -0.02 -0.00      0.02 0.04
                          Small-sample mean                         -0.04 -0.04     -0.03 -0.02
                         Small-sample st. dev.                       0.07 0.18       0.26 0.32

Note: Statistics are computed using parameter values from the posterior mode of our benchmark model. The row
labeled asymptotic value refers to regressions run on a time series of length 1,000,000 and the row labeled
small-sample mean refers to the mean of the estimates from 10,000 regressions run on simulated time series, each
of length 100. The row labeled small-sample st. dev. refers to the standard deviation of the estimates across the
10,000 regressions.




                                                       50
