                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       THE IMPACT OF CLIMATE CHANGE SKEPTICISM ON ADAPTATION IN A
                            MARKET ECONOMY

                                      Matthew E. Kahn
                                       Daxuan Zhao

                                     Working Paper 23155
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w23155


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   February 2017




We thank Daron Acemoglu, Devin Bunten, Ed Glaeser and Josh Graff-Zivin for useful comments
and suggestions. All remaining errors are ours. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Matthew E. Kahn and Daxuan Zhao. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Impact of Climate Change Skepticism on Adaptation in a Market Economy
Matthew E. Kahn and Daxuan Zhao
NBER Working Paper No. 23155
February 2017
JEL No. Q54,R21

                                         ABSTRACT

Climate change will increase the risk of temperature extremes. Induced innovation could offset
some of this threat. This paper explores the demand and supply for climate adaptation innovation
in a market economy. Climate change induces this innovation because the rising temperatures
increase demand for self protection products and for profit firms respond to these incentives. We
then augment the model to introduce climate skeptics. Such skeptics reject the claim that the
world is warming and thus do not increasingly demand adaptation products. We study how the
economy's rate of adaptation innovation, cross city migration, real estate pricing and the welfare
of agents with rational expectations are all affected by the presence of such skeptics.


Matthew E. Kahn
Department of Economics
University of Southern California
KAP
Los Angeles, CA 90089
and NBER
kahnme@usc.edu

Daxuan Zhao
Department of Finance
 School of Business
Renmin University of China
Beijing
P.R. China, 100872
zhaodaxuan@gmail.com
1 Introduction
Rising greenhouse gas emissions exacerbate the risk of severe climate change. Climate change poses

a variety of ambiguous new challenges for agricultural production (Roberts, Schlenker and Eyer

2012, Burke and Emerick 2016), for cities close to coasts and rivers (Albouy et. al. 2016, Desmet,

Nagy and Rossi-Hansberg 2015), for economic growth (Dell, Jones and Olken 2012; Deryugina

and Hsiang 2014; Burke, Hsiang and Miguel 2015, Hsiang and Jina 2014) and for public health

(DesChenes and Greenstone 2011).

      Despite the scientic consensus concerning the risks posed by climate change, a large segment of

U.S voters, members of Congress and the new Trump Administration view climate change as a low

policy priority.
                   1 In 2009, 212 U.S members of Congress voted against introducing a national carbon

cap and trade market. Cragg et. al. (2013) document that Congressmen from poor, conservative

areas whose local per-capita carbon footprint was high were much more likely to vote against the

bill. Throughout this paper, we will refer to the set of people who do not view climate change to

be a major quality of life challenge as "climate skeptics".

      In this paper, we model how people adapt to a given level of aggregate greenhouse gas emissions

when a proportion of the population are climate skeptics. We study how the well being of people

with rational expectations is aected by the presence of climate skeptics and vice-versa.            In our

model, there is no collective action because there is no government. A group of individuals form

an economy. As these individuals pursue their own self interest they exacerbate an environmental

externality as a byproduct of private consumption.          Each agent is small and takes the climate

change challenge as a given but then chooses how to self protect against this emerging risk. We

study endogenous adaptation innovation.

      To set up the baseline, our rst economy features a set of identical individuals who suer from

exposure to hotter temperature.       As climate change raises temperature levels, each individual is

willing to pay more to be exposed to less heat. In aggregate, this creates demand for products that

facilitate adapting to the new climate conditions. Throughout this paper, we refer to this set of

products as the "air conditioner". If aggregate demand for this product is sucient, then for prot

rms will design and sell the product (Acemoglu and Linn 2004).

      Our model of climate change adaptation integrates several dierent literatures.          Ehrlich and

Becker (1972) model self protection against risks. In their model, people can invest in activities such

as living in a safe neighborhood that reduce their exposure to risk. In our context, if an individual

is exposed to less heat this reduces his death risk. We build on the Ehrlich and Becker (1972) work

by studying how the aggregate demand for self protection aects innovation. Our problem mirrors

Acemoglu and Linn (2004). They document that the aging of the large Baby Boomer cohort creates

an increase in aggregate demand for new drugs that help this aging cohort. They nd that drug

companies direct research eorts to supply new drugs for which there is increasing demand. In our

climate change adaptation setting, higher temperature increases the risk for all and this stimulates

  1
    See http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2014/09/23/most-americans-believe-in-climate-change-but-give-it-
low-priority/


                                                     2
aggregate demand for pro-adaptation products.

   As individuals engage in private self protection, they contribute to global greenhouse gas emis-

sions (Davis and Gertler 2015). No individual air conditioner user has an incentive to internalize

this externality. Air conditioner use both provides a private good (adaptation services to the in-

dividual) and a public bad (greater greenhouse gas emissions). We use our micro-founded model

to characterize when this society's welfare is reduced by the induced innovation. This piece of the

analysis diers from the case of induced new drug innovation which features no negative externalities

associated with innovation.

   We then relax the assumption that all consumers are identical and introduce the "climate skep-

tics". We assume that this group is unaware that temperature is an increasing function of greenhouse

gas emissions. We study whether there is sucient aggregate demand so that the air conditioner is

introduced. The climate skeptics do not demand this product (and this lowers aggregate demand

for it) and they increase the total severity of climate change by producing greenhouse gas emissions.

We study how the well being of non-skeptics is aected.

   In an extension of our basic model, we introduce two spatial locations that dier with respect

to their baseline temperature. The cooler city is the safer city. Standard compensating dierentials

logic predicts that land rents will be higher there (Rosen 2002).      Migration to the cooler city

represents a substitute for air conditioning. This model allows us to highlight the interplay between

locational choice and innovation. If people can move to a relative safe cooler place then this lowers

their demand for products that oset climate risk and reduces the prot motive for innovators to

oer such products. Since migration to a cooler place does not increase the stock of greenhouse gas

emissions, the social planner prefers to use migration rather than introducing the air conditioner to

protect the population. Limited housing supply in the safer areas bounds the use of this protection

strategy.   We explore how the existence of climate skeptics (who do not increasingly demand to

live in the cooler safer city) benets the rational agents because this group pays lower rents for

temperate areas relative to what they would have paid if all agents are rational.

   The remainder of this paper is organized as follows:      Section 2 presents the baseline model

where adaptive innovation is intended to reduce climate change risk; section 3 extends the model

to multiple cities. In Section 4, we study the interplay between locational choice and innovation in

the presence of climate skeptics. Section 5 concludes.




2 Induced Innovation Intended to Reduce Climate Change Risk
In this section, we present a model featuring a large number of individuals who suer from the rising

temperature caused by climate change. If an air conditioner exists, each individual can oset the

negative eects of heat through air conditioning but in aggregate this creates a feedback eect as

aggregate rising electricity demand increases greenhouse gas emissions which exacerbates climate

change risk (Davis and Gertler 2015, Nordhaus 2011). Using our model, we discuss the individual's

optimal consumption, the probability that innovation takes place and how this equilibrium compares




                                                 3
to the Pareto optimum.



2.1     Preferences

Consider a static model in which each person in the economy seeks to maximize his expected utility.

There are     N   identical people. Each person's expected utility is represented by;



                                                     s(q)u(c),                                                      (1)



where    c   is the consumption each person and         s(q)   is the probability that each person survives to

enjoy consumption. This survival probability is a function of                   q   which denotes the risk that each

individual faces. To simplify our discussion, we focus on temperature as the single risk. Here                     q   is

the temperature      T   that aects a person's survival probability. We assume that



                                                s0 < 0   and   s00 <0,

since the survival rate is decreasing with respect to temperature .
                                                                                    2   u(c)   is a twice dierentiable

utility function. We assume that

                                               u0 > 0    and   u00 < 0.

A person's utility is increasing with respect to consumption.

      Each person has an exogenously determined income of                 y.   Each person's budget constraint can

be expressed as;



                                                        c ≤ y.                                                      (2)


      Throughout this paper, we assume that climate change has no impact on individual or aggregate

income. This is a simplifying assumption but we recognize that we are ruling out certain climate

change scenarios. In particular, a set of macro studies such as Weitzman (2009) and Costello et.

al.   (2010) have modeled how climate change can increase the likelihood of rare disasters (which

is modelled as a huge drop in consumption). Nordaus and Boyer (2003) model the feedback eect

for how climate change impacts aggregate income. Deryugina and Hsiang (2015) use cross-county

U.S data to estimate the recent historical impact of temperature on per-capita income. Under a

business as usual scenario, they predict that warmer daily temperatures will lower annual growth

by roughly .1 percentage points.

      By not allowing for a direct income eect caused by climate change, we are assuming that the

world population is urbanized and faces medium term smooth (rather than abrupt) climate change.

Economies such as Singapore have demonstrated a continued capacity to grow despite constant

exposure to high heat and humidity.            Future research could model how endogenous innovation

is aected by declining incomes caused by climate change. We posit that there are two osetting

   2
     We do not consider the polar case in which the initial temperatures are extremely low and warming raises survival
rates.


                                                          4
eects. First, lower income means that people face limits on their ability to pay for adaptation goods

and this reduces aggregate demand for such self protection goods. On the other hand, if climate

change's path is predictable then in a dynamic model, forward looking patient agents may be willing

to invest earlier in such adaptation goods to guarantee that their incomes are not reduced by future

heat.    There is also the possibility that rms will invest in adaptation technology to shield their

workers from expected heat (Gra-Zivin and Kahn 2016). Such rm level demand for adaptation

products creates an additional source of revenue for adaptation suppliers. Our model abstracts from

dynamic considerations and people receive an income endowment rather than working for a rm.



2.2      The Demand for Air Conditioning

Each person in our economy takes the temperature as an exogenous variable. Since temperature

increases lead to a lower survival rate, each person is willing to pay more for products to oset this

heat exposure. The air conditioner is the only possibly available self protection product.

       If a person does not purchase an air conditioner, then the temperature he faces (the indoor

temperature) is equal to the outdoor temperature                       T.   A person who owns an air conditioner can

adjust the indoor temperature             q    by operating it but this requires sacricing some consumption to

purchase the required electricity to run the air conditioner. The person's survival rate increases by

owning and operating the air conditioner as the survival rate increases from                            s(T )   to   s(q).   For a

person who owns an air conditioner, this person's budget constraint can be written as:



                                                      c + ητ (T − q) + P ≤ y,                                                     (3)


where     P   is the price of air conditioner;          η   is price of electricity ; and   τ   describe the eciency of air

conditioners i.e. the electricity consumption required for reducing temperature by one degree
                                                                                                                             3.

       If the outdoor temperature is           T,    the person will buy the air conditioner only when



                                        s(q)u[y − ητ (T − q) − P ] > s(T )u(y).                                                   (4)



This condition states that the person buys the air conditioner when the utility from owning it is

greater than the utility from not buying it. This equation can be used to solve for the maximum

willingness to pay for the air conditioner which is the value                P   that solves. If the maximum willingness

to pay for the air conditioner is             P̄   , we write;



                                        s(q)u[y − ητ (T − q) − P̄ ] = s(T )u(y).                                                  (5)



The comparative statics are straightforward.


Proposition 1.        ∂ P̄
                      ∂T     > 0 and   ∂ P̄
                                       ∂y     > 0. The willingness to pay for an air conditioner is an increasing
function of the outdoor temperature T and income y .
   3
    Our model is a one-period model. The time duration is long enough such that the air conditioner fully depreciates
by the end of this period.


                                                                   5
2.3        Adaptation Technology Supply

Air conditioner production requires that a producer incurs a xed cost of              F   and a variable cost of

V.       Any producer can enter the market costlessly. Therefore, a producer will set the price at the

average cost and earn zero prot. Each of the          N   people are willing to pay   P   for an air conditioner.

The for prot rm will enter the market if this revenue             N ×P    is greater than or equal to the total

cost      F +N ×V.     Therefore, the price of the air conditioner will be determined by;


                                                           F
                                                  P =        + V.                                               (6)
                                                           N

The price of the air conditioner decreases with the scale of the market and increases with the cost

of production.

         In a more realistic model of R&D, some of these innovation eorts could fail but as long as the

expected prots are positive, then there is sucient incentive for innovators to enter the market.



2.4        Climate Change

We introduce climate change as a forcing process that increases average temperatures as the cumu-

lative stock of greenhouse gas emissions (GHG) increases. This approach follows Nordhaus (2011)

who models how world temperature aects per-capita income and then models the feedback from

global income to the temperature level.

         We assume that temperature is a sucient statistic for the climate at the location where people

live. We label the outdoor temperature as         T.   We assume that the temperature rises in proportion

to total aggregate consumption such that



                                                 T = φN c + T0 ,                                                (7)



where the parameter       φ   measures the strength of climate change due to consumption, and            T0   is the

minimum temperature in the absence of economic activity.
                                                        4

         Electricity is an input in running one's air conditioner.         Electricity and composite consump-

tion are allowed to have dierent greenhouse gas emissions factors. We assume that the outdoor

temperature is related to total consumption based on the equation;



                                        T = φN c + ϕN τ (T − q) + T0 ,                                          (8)



where the parameter       φ measures the strength of climate change due to consumption; ϕ is the strength
of climate change led by electricity consumption; and               τ   is the eciency parameter representing

electricity consumption for one degree temperature reduction. This equation introduces the feedback

of how aggregate consumption aects the environment.

     4
    Recall that in our static economy that people live for one period. If previous generations consumed goods and
created greenhouse gas emissions then T0 for the current generation will be higher because of the consumption of the
previous generation. In this sense, climate change entails an intergenerational externality.


                                                           6
2.5      Social Welfare and the Climate Change Adaptation Technology

The social welfare function is dened as the sum of each individual's expected utility. If there is no

adaptive innovation, then social welfare will increase with the growth of income and then decrease

since that income growth causes two eects. First, income growth causes higher temperature which

reduces the survival rate.      Second, higher income raises each individual's consumption.              In the

appendix, we solve for the conditions such that the climate adaptive technology increases social

welfare.

       In our model, the xed cost of production      F    is related to the eciency parameter     τ.   The ef-

ciency of the adaptive technology will continuously improve if there is sucient market demand,

such that: rst, a larger population reduces the average R&D cost for designing more ecient air

conditioners. Second, as individual income increases, people can aord the more ecient technol-

ogy. Third, if the electricity price is high, then people are willing to purchase a more ecient air

conditioners.
                5



2.6      Eects of Climate Skeptics on Induced Innovation

We now allow for a subset of the agents to be unaware of the fact that climate change is occurring.

These "climate skeptics" simply believe that the temperature never changes.                The population of
                                             b
"behavioral naive agents" in our economy is N and the remainings are rational agents,                N b. N r +
Nb = N.       We dene   ω = N b /N    as the percentage of climate skeptics in our economy.             Since

the skeptics are unaware that the aggregate temperature is rising, their willingness to pay for the

air conditioner is too low.      Our model assumes that the skeptics do not update their survival

probabilities as temperature increases.The utility function for the skeptic is
                                                                                      6


                                                   ub = u(c);

and the rational agents' expected utility is



                                                ur = s(q)u(c).

Climate change is driven by total emissions. In the absence of adaptation innovation, the tempera-

ture exposure for all agents follows the process presented in equation 7.

       The pricing function is dened in equation 6. However, the demand for the air conditioners is

no longer equal to the number of total agents. Only rational agents purchase air conditioners. The

pricing function is:
                                                       F
                                             P =            + V.                                             (9)
                                                   (1 − ω)N
Consider the condition determining induced innovation in equation 4.

   5
    In the Appendix, we present a detailed discussion establishing these claims.
   6
    Climate skeptics take the survival rate as a constant value since they are unaware that it is decreasing as a
function of climate change. To simplify our discussion, the initial survival rate is assumed to be 1.


                                                       7
      In our economy, the income         y   is exogenous.          As equation 7 shows, the average temperature

increases with the income and the willingness to pay on air conditioners also increases with income.

We dene a         ȳ   as the key cuto such that the air conditioners will be produced when            y ≥ ȳ .     It

satises that

                                      s(q)u[ȳ − ητ (T − q) − P ] = s(T )u(ȳ).                                     (10)

                                                                                                             ∂ ȳ
Substitute equation 7 and 9 into equation 10; and dierentiate it with respect to              ω , we have   ∂ω     > 0.

Proposition 2.   The climate adaptive innovation will only occur if the income level for individuals
is much higher in an economy featuring "climate skeptics". ∂ω
                                                            ∂ ȳ
                                                                 > 0.

      If the economy features a large share of climate skeptics, then there is not enough aggregate

demand to encourage adaptation innovation.



2.7       Applying the Lucas Critique to Climate Change Adaptation

The original Lucas Critique focused on how the optimal decision rules of consumers change as

government changes "the rules of the game" (Lucas 1976). If consumers change their consumption

patterns when a permanent tax cut is enacted, then historical estimates of the marginal propensity

to consume out of current income will not be useful in predicting future behavior under the new

policy.

      Here we seek to apply this same logic in the case of climate change. While there is no government

in our model, Mother Nature has changed the "rules of the game".                      As temperatures increase, a

researcher who seeks to extrapolate what the death rate will be based on the pre-air conditioner

time series of data on death rates and temperature would overstate the relationship.

      An econometrician who calculates the death rate at a point in time before the air conditioner

is induced and plots this with respect to temperature would over-estimate the long run increase

in the death rate caused by climate change. This econometrician's reduced form model implicitly

assumes that the rising temperature will not trigger an adaptation response. In the "no adaptation"

case, historical relationships between the death rate and temperature can be used to predict future

impacts caused by climate change.              As shown by our model, the induced innovation takes place

because of climate change. Rising temperatures increase the willingness to pay for innovation and

the aggregate market potential induces product entry.

      In an economy where the adaption technology is introduced, researchers will observe the tem-

perature       T   and the survival rate     s(q)   where   q   is solved from the person's optimal consumption
       7
problem .

      Figure 1 illustrates this relationship. When the temperature is lower than            T ∗ which is the critical
value of adaptive innovation, the probability of death increases with temperature. At the critical

value   T ∗,   there is a structural break since the induced innovation decreases the death rate. This

nding highlights that the Social Cost of Carbon, dened as the aggregate willingness to pay for

  7
      The detailed solution is in the web appendix. Please refer to equation 15 and 16.


                                                                8
    Figure 1: The Probability of Death as a Function of Temperature




Figure 2: The Observed Death Rate in the Presence of Climate Skeptics




                                   9
an extra ton of carbon dioxide to not be released, can decline over time if adaptation innovations

involve a xed production cost.

   An economy featuring climate skeptics will exhibit a dierent time series path documenting

the relationship between the death rate and outdoor temperature. As shown in Figure 2,                  T1∗ , T2∗
and    T3∗   are the critical temperatures such that the adaption technology is induced in economies

1, 2, and 3 respectively. The three economies dier with respect to their share of agents who are

skeptics.      We have   ω1 < ω2 < ω3 .   The economy featuring a larger share of skeptics will induce

adaptive technology later (when temperatures are higher). This claim is based on the xed cost of

introducing the new technology. For prot rms will only develop the product if aggregate demand

is high enough. Holding population and income constant, this aggregate demand for the innovation

is lower if the share of skeptics is higher.

   Climate skeptics do not purchase air conditioners even when the adaptation technology is

available. Their death rate keeps growing with the temperature and only rational agents experience

a structural beak once the air conditioner is induced. The observed overall death rate is the weighted

average of the death rates for the two types of agents.




3 Adaptation Through Migration and Innovation
In this section, we introduce an extension of the model by allowing people to choose between living

in two cities. These locations dier with respect to their average temperature with one being cooler

than the other. The cooler city thus oers a ow of "natural capital" such that one's demand for

air conditioning is lower if one lives in that city. As we discuss below, each individual will pay a city

specic rent. The cooler city will feature higher rents but its residents will have lower operating costs

for running their air conditioners (if the air conditioner is invented).         In equilibrium, individuals

will be indierent between living in the two cities but as we study below the social planner would

prefer to pack more people into the cooler city because this reduces overall risk exposure to higher

temperatures without exacerbating the climate change externality.

   Migration and adaptation innovation are substitutes in reducing population risk exposure. Their

respective welfare eects hinge on the specics for a given economy.



3.1        The Spatial Model

Consider two cities in an economy. All economic agents have the same preferences and face zero

migration costs. This guarantees that all will be attracted to the cooler city if rents are zero. We

study how climate change and the introduction of an adaptive technology inuence the spatial

equilibrium.

   The two cities are denoted as       i ∈ {1, 2}.   We assume that the baseline temperature      T0i    diers

between two cities because of the heterogeneity of geographical factors, such as latitude, altitude,

distance from the coast. Climate change raises temperatures in both cities. The temperature              Ti   for

city   i   is related to the baseline temperature   T0i   and the total emissions as shown in equation 7. To




                                                          10
simplify our discussion, we assume city                 i=1   is always hotter, i.e.   T1 > T2 .   We have



                                                    T1 = T2 + ∆T, and∆T > 0,

where     ∆T    indicates the temperature gap between two cities.

     We assume that the two cities are of equal size and that each contains half of the housing and

that no more homes can be constructed.                     Each city can provide         N/2   units of houses.     The rent

is   Ri   in city    i.    Each period each person chooses where to live and consumes his endowment of

income. This income can be spent on consumption and housing if the air conditioner does not exist

and it can be spent on consumption, electricity, housing and renting the air conditioner if the air

conditioner is created. The budget constraint without air conditioners will be



                                                            c + Ri ≤ y;

People in city         i   have a utility   ui   if they do not have air conditioners,



                                                       ui = s(Ti )u(y − Ri ).                                            (11)



We assume the rents are collected by one landlord and fully spent on the consumption of composite

commodity.

     If air conditioners are purchased, each person's budget constraint will be



                                                   c + P + κ(Ti − qi ) + Ri ≤ y,

where     qi   is the indoor temperature with air conditioners. The utility function for people with air

conditioners in city           i   is

                                            ui = s(qi )u(y − P − κ(Ti − qi ) − Ri ).                                     (12)


Denition.          The interior equilibrium is given a temperature in each city                 {T1 , T2 },   a set of prices

{P, R1 , R2 },      and aggregate air conditioners output            {M }   such that:


     1. People maximize their own utility.


     2. The producers of air conditioners maximize prot if air conditioners are produced. Equation

          6 holds.


     3. The utility is equalized across the two cities.



                                                                 ui = ū,

          where   ū   is constant.




                                                                11
   4. The housing markets clear in each city.



                                                   Ni = N/2


   5. If air conditioners are produced, the air conditioner market clears

                                                   ˆ
                                                       I = M,

      and each person buys an air conditioner.



3.2   The Spatial Equilibrium

In equilibrium, each person's utility will be equalized across the two cities. From equation 11, the

equilibrium condition is

                                          s(Ti )u(y − Ri ) = ū.

   Based on equation 12 , the spatial equilibrium condition for agents will be,



                                 s(q)u(y − P − κ(Ti − qi ) − Ri ) = ū.

Specically, the optimal indoor temperature can be found based on the rst-order condition of the

utility function;



             s0 (qi )u(y − P − κ(Ti − qi ) − Ri ) + κs(qi )u1 (y − P − κ(Ti − qi ) − Ri ) = 0.

Proposition 3.    The rent decreases with the local temperature. The local rent compensates people
for temperature risk. dR
                      dTi < 0.
                         i



   High local temperature reduce survival rates.         Rational agents are aware of this risk.    They

are willing to pay higher rents to live in the safer city.      This willingness to pay is related to the

income level. If air conditioners are bought by agents, air conditioners can oset climate risk. But,

air conditioner usage is costly. Recognizing this, people will want to live in the cold city since it

reduces death risk. This implies that the hotter city features lower rents.

Proposition 4.     Since there are only rational agents in this model and the agents do not have an
air
   conditioner,
                 the equilibrium rent will be more sensitive to income when the income increases.
d dTi /dy > 0. If there are only rational agents in the model and agents have an air conditioner,
    dRi
                                                                        
the rent will be less sensitive to income when the income increases. d dRdTi /dy < 0.
                                                                           i



   When income is lower than the break-even income         y∗,   peoples do not buy air conditioners and

the rent is related to the local temperature. However, as proposition 4 showed, the rent dierence

between the two cities increases with income.       When the income of agents is higher than       y∗,   air

conditioners are purchased.    The rent dierence between cities will decrease with the increasing

income.



                                                    12
4 The Spatial Equilibrium and Innovation in an Economy Featuring
  Climate Skeptics
We now model how the spatial equilibrium is aected by the existence of climate skeptics.                                    The

rational agents will tend to cluster in the cooler city. Whether they pay a rent premium for this

amenity hinges on whether they or the skeptics are the marginal buyer of housing. If the share of

skeptics in the economy is large, then the rational agents will live in the cooler city and not pay

a rent premium. In such an economy, the air conditioner is less likely to be invented because the

skeptics do not demand it and the rational agents oset the heat through where they live and thus

are now willing to pay less for the air conditioner.



4.1      The Spatial Equilibrium with Two Types of Agents

We extend our two-city model. We dene              Nix   to denote the distribution of these two types of agents

between two cities,       x ∈ {r, b}.   The total population in city            i   is   Ni = Nir + Nib .
   We study the location choice and consumption patterns of both sets of agents. The new equi-

librium is dened as follows:


Denition.      The interior equilibrium is given by the temperature in each city                           {T1 , T2 },   a set of

                                                        N1r , N2r , N1b , N2b
                                                    
rents   {P, R1 , R2 },   the allocation of people                               , and aggregate air conditioners output

{M }    such that:


  1. People maximize their utility.


  2. The producers of air conditioners maximize prot if air conditioners are produced. Equation

        6 holds.


  3. No individual perceives that he can raise his utility by moving to a dierent city.



                                                    ub1 = ub2    and   ur1 = ur2 .


  4. The housing markets clear in each city.



                                                  Nir + Nib = Ni = N/2


  5. If air conditioners are produced, the air conditioner market clear.

                                                             ˆ
                                                                 I = M,

        where each person has an air conditioner.


If the number of rational people is less than half of total population, they will only concentrate

in the cold city.        The land rent in each city is decided by the marginal agent.                       If the number of



                                                              13
rational agents is less that half of total population           N r < N/2,   the marginal agent is the behavioral

agent. Since behavioral agents do not recognize the threat of climate change, the rent premium in

the cooler city will not increase over time. If the number of rational agents is greater than half of

the total population   N r ≥ N/2,    the marginal agent is the rational agent. In this case, the land rent

is decided by the spatial equilibrium condition          ur1 = ur2 .
     The rational agents thus benet from lower rents in the cool city if their share of the population

is low. If there are many climate skeptics in the economy, the cool city's rents will be low and will

not reect the increasing actual death risk from living in the hotter city.



4.2    The Interplay Between Induced Innovation and Migration in an Economy
       Featuring "Climate skeptics"

The key condition determining whether there will be production of air conditioners is shown in

equation 6. The count of the rational agents plays a crucial role here. If the number of rational

agents is less that half of the total population         N r < N/2,    they will all live in the cold city. Only

when that city's temperature rises above the critical threshold, or if the rational agents' income

increases enough, will they demand air conditioners. The price of air conditioners will be


                                                         F
                                               P =          + V.                                               (13)
                                                         Nr

Consider the break-even condition as shown in equation 4, the break-even temperature                    T∗   at city

2 (cold city ) will decrease with the number of rational agents. When                T2 >   T ∗ , rational agents in
city 2 buy air conditioners.

     If the number of rational agents is more than half of total population           N r ≥ N/2, rational agents
will occupy the cold city rst and then start to live in the hot city. If only the rational agents in

the hot city purchase air conditioners, the price of air conditioners will be


                                                         F
                                            P̂ =               + V.
                                                    Nr   − N/2

The price of the air conditioner should satisfy the following equations



                          s(q1 )u[y − P̂ − κ(T1 − q1 ) − R1 ] ≥ s(T1 )u(y − R1 ),

                          s(q2 )u[y − P̂ − κ(T2 − q2 ) − R2 ] < s(T2 )u(y − R2 ).

T∗   is the break-even temperature, and then        T1 > T ∗ > T2 .     This equation implies that only agents

in the hot city purchase air conditioners. If the temperature is high enough, all rational agents will

start to use air conditioners as the price of air conditioners decreases (due to the scale eect in

production). In this case,   T2   is greater than   T ∗.
     To summarize, if the count of non-skeptics is small, this group will cluster in the cool city and

the air conditioner will not be induced until the overall temperature in the cool city is very high.




                                                           14
If the count of skeptics is small, the rational agents will locate in both cities. The rent discount for

the hot city will rise over time and rational agents in both cities will demand the air conditioner

and it will be more quickly induced into being produced.




5 Conclusion
Climate change imposes a threat to our quality of life. Both innovation and migration could help

us to adapt to this threat. Market technologies can be invented that can oset some of the climate

change threat but at a cost. In our model of a market economy without an active government, the

adaptation technology does not originally exist but it is invented because climate change increases

the aggregate demand for it. When we introduce the spatial economy, rational agents seek to move

to the place that is less aected by climate change. Supply side limits of land and xed costs to

innovation raise the adaptation price.

   We then introduce climate skeptics as a set of consumers who do not perceive climate change

to represent an increasing threat to their quality of life. We model how the innovation process by

for prot rms and the spatial equilibrium is aected by the presence of people who are climate

skeptics. The skeptics are willing to pay less for adaptation solutions because they do not perceive

the severity of the climate risk.

   Financial research has studied how the well being of rational agents is aected by the presence

of behavioral agents (see Campbell 2016). Our paper has extended this approach to the economics

of climate change adaptation. The presence of a larger share of climate skeptics impacts innovation,

migration and real estate prices and thus the well being of the rational agents. Climate skeptics do

not demand adaptive innovation and are not willing to pay a price premium to live in the cooler

city. Holding total population constant, an increase in the number of climate skeptics reduces the

aggregate demand for land in the cool city and reduces the demand for adaptation innovation. This

lowers the market price of land in the cool city but raises the price of adaptation products because

fewer people are willing to bear the R&D cost.

   Future research could relax our maintained assumption that the skeptics never update their

beliefs and demand adaptation products. This dynamic should increase the rate of innovation. If

skeptics are prone to update their information and change their minds about climate change, then

this highlights the role that the media and persuasion play in facilitating climate change adaptation

through market product innovation.       In this case, skeptics benet from the presence of rational

agents because the skeptics would now have an option to later purchase climate adaptation goods.

These goods exist because of the earlier aggregate demand by non-skeptics.




                                                  15
References
 [1] Acemoglu, D., 2002. Directed Technical Change?, Review of Economic Studies, 69(4): 781-09.


 [2] Acemoglu, D., and Linn, J., 2004. Market Size in Innovation: Theory and Evidence from the

    Pharmaceutical Industry, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(3): 1049-1090.


 [3] Albouy, D., Graf, W. F., Kellogg, R., and Wol, H., 2016. Climate Amenities, Climate Change,

    and American Quality of Life, Journal of the Association of Environmental and Resource

    Economists, 3(1): 205 - 246.


 [4] Andreoni, J., and Levinson, A., 2001. The Simple Analytics of the Environmental Kuznets

    Curve. Journal of Public Economics, 80(2):269-286.


 [5] Barreca, A., Clay, K., Deschenes, O., Greenstone, M., and Shapiro, J.S., 2016. Adapting to

    Climate Change: The Remarkable Decline in the US Temperature-Mortality Relationship over

    the Twentieth Century, Journal of Political Economy, 124(1):213 - 250.


 [6] Bunten, D., and Kahn, M. E., 2017. Optimal Real Estate Capital Durability and Localized

    Climate Change Disaster Risk, Journal of Housing Economics.


 [7] Burke, M., Hsiang, S. M., and Miguel, E., 2015. Global Non-linear Eect of Temperature on

    Economic Production, Nature, 527: 235239.


 [8] Campbell, J. Y., 2016. Restoring Rational Choice:     The Challenge of Consumer Financial

    Regulation, American Economic Review, 106(5):1-30.


 [9] Costello, C. J., Neubert, M. G., Polasky, S. A., and Solow A.R., 2010, Bounded Uncertainty and

    Climate Change Economics, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 107(18):8108-10.


[10] Davis, L.W., 2008, Durable Goods and Residential Demand for Energy and Water: Evidence

    from a Field Trial, The RAND Journal of Economics, 39(2):530-46.


[11] Davis, L.W., and Gertler, P. J., 2015. Contribution of Air Conditioning Adoption to Fu-

    ture Energy Use under Global Warming, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,

    112(19):5962-7.


[12] Dell, M., Jones, B. F., and Olken, B. A., 2012. Temperature Shocks and Economic Growth:

    Evidence from the Last Half Century, American Economic Journal:          Macroeconomics, 4(3):

    6695.


[13] Deryugina, T., and Hsiang, S. M., 2014. Does the Environment Still Matter? Daily Tempera-

    ture and Income in the United States, No. w20750. National Bureau of Economic Research.


[14] Deschênes, O., and Greenstone, M., 2007. The Economic Impacts of Climate Change: Evidence

    from Agricultural Output and Random Fluctuations in Weather, American Economic Review

    97(1): 354385.



                                                16
[15] Deschênes, O., and Greenstone, M., 2012. The Economic Impacts of Climate Change: Evidence

    from Agricultural Output and Random Fluctuations in Weather: Reply, American Economic

    Review 102(7): 3761-3773.


[16] Deschênes, O, and Greenstone, M., 2011. Climate Change, Mortality, and Adaptation: Evi-

    dence from Annual Fluctuations in Weather in the US, American Economic Journal: Applied

    Economics, 3(4): 152-85.


[17] Desmet, K, Nagy, D. K, and Rossi-Hansberg, E., 2015. The Geography of Development: Eval-

    uating Migration Restrictions and Coastal Flooding. National Bureau of Economic Research.


[18] Ehrlich, I., and Becker, G. S., 1972. Market Insurance, Self-Insurance, and Self-Protection,

    Journal of Political Economy, 80(4): 623-648.


[19] Hsiang, S. M., and Jina, A. S., 2014. The Causal Eect of Environmental Catastrophe on

    Long-run Economic Growth: Evidence from 6,700 Cyclones, No. w20352. National Bureau of

    Economic Research.


[20] Lucas, R. E., 1976. Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique. In Brunner, K., and Meltzer,

    A. ,The Phillips Curve and Labor Markets. Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public

    Policy. New York: American Elsevier: 1946.


[21] Nordhaus, W. D., 2011. Estimates of the Social Cost of Carbon: Background and Results from

    the RICE-2011 Model, No. w17540. National Bureau of Economic Research.


[22] Nordhaus, W. D., 2015. Climate Clubs: Overcoming Free-riding in International Climate Policy.

    American Economic Review 105(4): 1339-1370.


[23] Nordhaus, W. D., and Boyer, J., 2003. Warming the World:        Economic Models of Global

    Warming. MIT press.


[24] Nordhaus, W. D., and Yang, Z., 1996. A Regional Dynamic General-equilibrium Model of

    Alternative Climate-change Strategies, American Economic Review, 1:741-65.


[25] Pindyck, R. S., 2013. Climate Change Policy: What do the Models Tell Us?. Journal of Eco-

    nomic Literature, 51(3): 860-72.


[26] Roberts, M. J., Schlenker, W., and Eyer, J., 2012. Agronomic Weather Measures in Econometric

    Models of Crop Yield with Implications for Climate Change, American Journal of Agricultural

    Economics, aas047


[27] Stokey, N. L.,1998. Are there Limits to Growth?, International Economic Review, 39(1):1-31.


[28] Weitzman, M. L., 2009. On Modeling and Interpreting the Economics of Catastrophic Climate

    Change, Review of Economics and Statistics, 91(1): 1-19.




                                               17
[29] Zivin, J. G., and Kahn, M. E., 2016. Industrial Productivity in a Hotter World: The Aggregate

    Implications of Heterogeneous Firm Investment in Air Conditioning. No. w22962. National

    Bureau of Economic Research.




                                               18
Web Appendix
A The Welfare Eects from Induced Adaptation Innovation
We study how social welfare is aected by adaption innovation.                             The social welfare function is

dened as the sum of each individual's expected utility. First, we discuss the planner's problem in

the absence of air conditioning and then we resolve the problem if the planner chooses to introduce

the air conditioner.

    Based on equation 1, 2 and 7, the social planner's problem is



                                                 maxc :N s(T )u(c)

subject to

                                         T = φN c + T0 ;        and    c ≤ y.

    The socially optimal consumption         c   is equal to income            y   if   y ≤ c̃;    otherwise   c = e
                                                                                                                   c,   where   c̃
             0
satises φN s (φN c̃   + T0 )u(c̃) + s(φN c̃ + T0   )u0 (c̃)   = 0.   The competitive equilibrium of this model

is dierent from the Pareto optimum shown above. The temperature is an exogenous variable from

the individual's perspective. Individual agents spend all of their income on consumption to yield

their maximum utility, i.e.    c = y.   In this case, total social welfare               W   will equal



                                          W = N s(φN y + T0 )u(y).

Dierentiating the social welfare function with respect to income yields the expression;


                          dW
                              = φN 2 s0 (φN y + T0 )u(y) + N s(φN y + T0 )u0 (y) .
                           dy   |          {z          } |         {z          }
                                  Climate Change Eect                   Income Eect


    This equation demonstrates that income growth causes two eects. First, income growth causes

higher temperature which reduces the survival rate. Second, higher income raises each individual's

consumption. The net eect of higher income depends on the tradeo between the climate change
                                                                      dW (e
                                                                          c)
eect and the direct income eect.          If we have a        c,
                                                                e      dy      = 0.        In this economy, each person

maximizes his utility. Social welfare increases with income if                     y ≤ c̃,   and decreases with income if

y > c̃.   Social welfare is not always growing as the aggregate economy grows. Holding technology

constant, the environmental feedback eect reduces social welfare.

    The planner's problem shifts if the air conditioner is introduced. The air conditioners will be

purchased only when equation 4 is satised. As proposition 1 shows, higher outdoor temperature and

income will increase an individual's willingness to pay. To study the Pareto optimal consumption

of the composite commodity and electricity, we focus on the case in which each individual's income
                                                                                               F
is high enough so that each can aord to buy the air conditioner;                       P̄ >   N   +V.




                                                          19
   The planner's problem is

                                                 max : N s(q)u(c)                                      (14)
                                                  c,q

subject to


                                                   F
              c + ητ (T − q) + P ≤ y, P =          N    + V ,and T = φN c + ϕN τ (T − q) + T0 .

Solving this problem, the consumption for each person will satisfy


                              (1 + φN ητ − ϕN τ ) 0
                                                 s (q)u(c) + s(q)u0 (c) = 0,                           (15)
                                      ητ

where
                                                                               F
                    (1 + φN ητ − ϕN τ )c − (1 − ϕN τ )y + ητ T0 + (1 − ϕN τ )( N +V)
               q=                                                                    .                 (16)
                                                  ητ
   In this case, total social welfare   W   is



                                                 W = N s(q)u(c).

Dierentiating the total social welfare function with respect to income yields;

                                                                   
             dW       0          (1 + φN ητ − ϕN τ ) dc (1 − ϕN τ )                 dc
                 = N s (q)u(c)                          −             + N s(q)u0 (c) .                 (17)
              dy                          η          dy     ητ                      dy
Substitute equation 15 into equation 17,


                                     dW                  (1 − ϕN τ )
                                         = −N s0 (q)u(c)             .
                                      dy                     ητ

   The above equation shows that if         ϕN τ > 1,       the adaptation innovation actually lowers social

welfare as income grows. It implies that the air conditioner eciency is a key parameter for deter-

mining whether social welfare increases by inducing the invention of the air conditioner. If the air

conditioners are not green enough, the aggregate survival risk imposed by the greater aggregate

carbon emissions associated with individual air conditioner adoption lowers social welfare.

   Note that the gain in social welfare here depends on the population size. If the population is

large enough, the introduction of the air conditioner cannot increase the social welfare since carbon

emissions of electricity consumption exacerbates climate change risk.

   We now consider the impact of population growth on social welfare holding per-capita income

constant. If the population   N   is large enough, the utility of a single agent is very small. Dierenti-

ating total social welfare with respect to the number of people yields:

                                                                                       
             dW      0               ϕτ c ϕτ y                        0          F   ϕτ V
                = N s (q)u(c) φτ c −     +       −                 N s (q)u(c)     +              .
             dN                       η    η                                    N2    η
                  |             {z             }                   |           {z         }
                         Climate Change Eect                   Scale Economies in Production

   This equation highlights two points. First, an increase in the population generates more carbon



                                                          20
emissions and the resulting climate change reduces the social welfare. Second, the greater demand

for air conditioners induces new adaptation innovation. Since there are more people who share the

xed cost of innovation, this increases social welfare. The total eect of population growth depends

on this trade-o between these two eects. We dene

                                       s
                                                       Fη
                                  N
                                  e=                                  .                                 (18)
                                           φτ cη + ϕτ y − ϕτ c − ϕτ V

   If   N <N
           e,     social welfare increases with population size. Equation 18 shows that         N
                                                                                                e   increases

with the xed cost of air conditioners     F   and decreases with the eciency of air conditioners         τ.
A higher xed cost for air conditioners production enhances the scale economy eect.                 Greater

demand for the air conditioning can increase social welfare because it increases the likelihood that

this innovation takes place. If the air conditioners are more energy ecient, then the environment

can be protected even for a larger total population.

   Our pareto planner is solving a one period problem.                If there are multiple generations and

each generation lives for one period, then the planner will face a dynamic tradeo if greenhouse gas

emissions are a stock pollutant. In this case, the planner would recognize that higher consumption by

an early generation will permanently raise the baseline temperature for every subsequent generation

and this would increase the death risk for every subsequent generation. To simplify our discussion,

we focus on the one period problem.




B The Evolution of Adaptive Technology Eciency
In this section, we introduce a producer who can invest more on R&D to develop a more energy

ecient technology.     In our model, the xed cost of production          F   is a function of the eciency

parameter   τ,   such that

                                                F = F (τ ),                                             (19)


specically,

                                           F0 < 0   and   F 00 > 0.

It implies that the R&D investment can improve the eciency of air conditioner, i.e. less electricity

spending on cooling. It implies that energy ecient air conditioner could lead to lower emissions

in the economy with more people. The R&D investment features diminishing returns. Given this

set-up, this section discusses the optimal technology selection.

   Substitute equation 19 into equation 6 and resolve the optimal problem as shown in equation

14. We can solve for the optimal technology selection that satises



                                      F = τ F 0 + N (y − c − V ).

Note that the optimal consumption     c   satises equation 15. Based on this rst order condition, we




                                                     21
derive the relationship between technology selection as a function of key parameters.

   We nd that the more ecient technology is selected when the population is larger, income is
                                             ∂τ          ∂τ                ∂τ
higher or the electricity price is higher.
                                             ∂N   < 0,   ∂y   < 0,   and
                                                                           ∂η   < 0.   The technology selected by

the producer depends upon the market demand. A larger population reduces the average R&D cost

for designing more ecient air conditioners. As individual income increases, people can aord the

more ecient technology. If the electricity price is more expensive, people are willing to purchase a

more ecient air conditioners.

   Recall proposition 2. It shows that the adaption innovation can improve the social welfare if it

is energy ecient enough. The eciency of air conditioners improves if the population increases,

income grows or the price of electricity is high.        Our ndings regarding the relationship between

carbon emissions and income (holding other factors constant) resembles the Environmental Kuznets

Curve (EKC)(Stokey 1998; Andreoni and Levinson 2001). Climate change adaptive technology is

introduced when income is high enough as shown in proposition 1. The eciency of air conditioners

can be improved as shown in proposition 5.

   The "rebound eects" literature has emphasized that increases in energy eciency can actually

increase resource consumption if demand is suciently price elastic (Davis 2008). In our setting,

consumers will be aware that improvements in air conditioner energy eciency reduces the price

of achieving extra cooling and thus a lower death risk. As equation 16 shows, the optimal indoor
                                                                                   ∂q               ∂2q
temperature decreases with the air conditioner's energy eciency.
                                                                                   ∂τ   < 0   and
                                                                                                    ∂τ 2
                                                                                                           > 0.   This

discussion highlights that the existence of an EKC for electricity consumption will hinge on the

shape of the utility function with respect to consumption and the shape of the death risk function

with respect to temperature.     If the marginal utility of consumption is high and if the marginal

reduction in death risk for a reduction in temperature is low, the agents in this economy will be

more likely to reduce their electricity consumption as energy eciency improves.

   In our model, consumers must pay more for the more energy ecient air conditioner because

the more ecient technology features a higher xed innovation cost. This means that people will

have less disposable income to purchase extra cooling (an income eect). However, the marginal

increase in the xed cost for the more ecient air conditioner for each individual consumer will be

small if the population is large. The income eect will be smaller and the rebound eect will be

larger in an economy with a large population.




                                                     22
