NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE MACROECONOMIC EFFECTS OF GOVERNMENT ASSET PURCHASES:
EVIDENCE FROM POSTWAR US HOUSING CREDIT POLICY
Andrew Fieldhouse
Karel Mertens
Morten O. Ravn
Working Paper 23154
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23154

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2017, Revised July 2017

We are grateful to the Department of Housing and Urban Development as well as Shane Sherlund
for providing data, and to participants at various seminars for useful comments. Karel Mertens
acknowledges the hospitality of the Economics Department at Colombia University where parts
of the research were conducted. Financial support from the ADEMU (H2020, No. 649396)
project and from the ESRC Centre for Macroeconomics is gratefully acknowledged. The views in
this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Federal Reserve
Bank of Dallas, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Andrew Fieldhouse, Karel Mertens, and Morten O. Ravn. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Macroeconomic Effects of Government Asset Purchases: Evidence from Postwar US
Housing Credit Policy
Andrew Fieldhouse, Karel Mertens, and Morten O. Ravn
NBER Working Paper No. 23154
February 2017, Revised July 2017
JEL No. E44,E5,G28,R38
ABSTRACT
We document the portfolio activity of federal housing agencies and provide evidence on its
impact on mortgage markets and the economy. Through a narrative analysis, we identify
historical policy changes leading to expansions or contractions in agency mortgage holdings.
Based on those regulatory events that we classify as unrelated to short-run cyclical or credit
market shocks, we find that an increase in mortgage purchases by the agencies boosts mortgage
lending, in particular refinancing, and lowers mortgage rates. Agency purchases influence prices
in other asset markets, stimulate residential investment and expand homeownership. Using
information in GSE stock prices to construct an alternative instrument for agency purchasing
activity yields very similar results as our benchmark narrative identification approach.

Andrew Fieldhouse
Department of Economics
Cornell University
404 Uris Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853
andrew.fieldhouse@gmail.com
Karel Mertens
Department of Economics
Cornell University
404 Uris Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853
and NBER
km426@cornell.edu

Morten O. Ravn
Department of Economics
University College London
London WC1E 6BT
UK
m.ravn@ucl.ac.uk

1

Introduction

The residential mortgage market in the United States is one of the largest capital markets in the world and by
far the dominant source of credit for American households. The mortgage market finances housing, which
is a key component of both household wealth and aggregate spending, see e.g. Leamer (2007). Many accounts of the causes and propagating factors of the 2007/08 financial crisis assign an important role to a
boom and bust in the availability of mortgage credit.1 The US mortgage market is also subject to heavy
government involvement through various federal agencies, including the housing government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs). In the decades preceding the 2007/08 crisis, the various agencies collectively accumulated
a large share of the total outstanding US mortgage debt on their balance sheets. In this paper, we investigate
whether agency portfolio purchases of mortgage assets influence the availability and cost of housing credit,
and whether there are spillovers to other debt markets and economic activity more broadly.

While the history of agency activity offers a rich source of variation to study the effects of government
asset purchases, it also presents a number of challenges. The largest agencies, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac,
have been privately owned for much of their existence and therefore carry responsibilities to stock owners as
well as to their public missions of providing “stability” and “ongoing assistance” in mortgage markets. Both
profit and public objectives cause these agencies to systematically and rapidly respond to market conditions,
such that changes in their mortgage purchasing activity reflect changes in housing credit demand and many
other influences. Some of the correlation between agency balance sheets on the one hand and credit growth
or mortgage rates on the other is therefore likely to reflect reverse causality.

We propose two different strategies to isolate changes in agency purchasing activity free of confounding influences. Our first and principal strategy is to focus on historical credit policy interventions affecting agency
mortgage holdings, in the spirit of the approaches in Romer and Romer (1989, 2010) and Ramey (2011) to
studying monetary and fiscal policy. Based on a narrative analysis of the regulatory history of the housing
agencies, we identify and quantify significant policy events affecting agency purchases. These include adjustments to capital requirements, portfolio caps, or statutory borrowing authority, direct appropriations and
1

See e.g. Mian and Sufi (2009), Justiniano, Primiceri, and Tambalotti (2014), or Di Maggio and Kermani (2016).

1

capital injections by the Treasury, or changes to the pool of mortgages eligible for agency purchase, such as
changes in conforming loan limits or authorizations to enter new mortgage market segments.

Credit policy changes are often reactions to cyclical conditions in mortgage and housing markets, the recent
crisis being a prime example. However, many interventions are motivated by other longer run objectives
such as increasing homeownership. Based on an extensive analysis of historical sources, we classify each
significant credit policy change as motivated by either cyclical considerations or by other non-cyclical objectives.2 This results in an indicator summarizing the non-cyclically motivated policy events, which we
use as an instrumental variable in regressions of a variety of outcome variables on measures of agency purchasing activity. Similar to the approach in Ramey and Zubairy (2016) to estimating government spending
multipliers, we estimate the cumulative effects of an increase in agency purchases on mortgage credit and
originations, as well as impulse responses to news shocks about future agency purchasing activity.

Our second and complementary identification approach is based on instrumenting measures of agency purchasing activity with orthogonalized innovations in Fannie and Freddie excess stock returns. This alternative
strategy is analogous to Fisher and Peters (2010), who use excess return innovations in major US defense
stocks as a measure of news shocks to military spending. Passmore (2005) estimates that the advantages
granted by federal housing credit policy account for much of the market value and portfolio size of Fannie
and Freddie. We show that news about policy interventions affecting GSE balance sheets is reflected in their
stock market valuation. Positioned last in a causal ordering behind credit aggregates, interest rates, and other
macro variables, we find that residual variation in Fannie and Freddie excess stock returns predicts agency
mortgage purchases. This motivates us to use this residual variation as an alternative instrumental variable
to estimate the response of credit aggregates to shocks to agency mortgage purchases.

It is not clear ex ante that government purchases of mortgage assets have meaningful effects on the cost
and availability of housing credit. If financial market frictions are relatively unimportant, an increase in
agency purchases may have little impact on the volume of mortgage credit, and simply lead to crowding out
2 The

full narrative analysis is in a companion background paper, Fieldhouse and Mertens (2017), available at http://www.
nber.org/papers/w23165.

2

of private holdings. If such frictions are instead pervasive, mortgage market policies may on the other hand
be very important for the provision of credit to residential borrowers. Based on our methodology, we find
that agency purchases indeed lead to statistically significant expansions in mortgage credit. Our estimates
indicate that each additional dollar in agency mortgage purchases leads to a 3 to 4 dollar cumulative increase
in mortgage originations over the course of three to four years, and a net expansion in the stock of mortgage
debt of around one dollar. The rise in originations is largely driven by an increase in refinancing activity, but
is also followed by a greater volume of originations financing home purchases. The expansionary effects on
housing credit are accompanied by temporary reductions in mortgage interest rates, which fall by 10 to 15 basis points for more than a year following an increase in agency purchases of one percent of trend originations.

Agency purchases also affect prices in other asset markets. We estimate that the 10-year Treasury rate
and the 3-month T-bill rate both decline when the agencies increase their purchases of mortgages. A key
policy objective behind President Hoover’s introduction of housing credit policies in the 1930s was to stimulate the construction sector, while another recurrent motivation has been to promote homeownership. We
find evidence that supports these roles of the agencies in that new housing starts and homeownership rates
rise following an increase in agency mortgage purchases. We also find some evidence that agency mortgage
purchases increase house prices and stimulate private sector consumption. There is no clear evidence of any
significant impact on the unemployment rate or personal income.

Perhaps our most surprising finding concerns the relationship between housing credit and monetary policies. We show that the narratively identified housing credit policy shocks have forecasting power for the
residual shock component of the Romer and Romer (2004) decomposition of funds rate target changes,
while the reverse is not true. Instead, we find that cyclically motivated housing credit policy changes lean
against the wind of contractionary monetary disturbances. Housing credit policy shocks have larger effects
on refinancing originations than interest rate shocks, and influence homeownership independent of shortterm interest rates. The quantitative effects of housing credit policy and conventional monetary shocks are
very similar along many other dimensions. These findings suggest that both may share similar transmission
channels, and that the interplay between monetary and credit policy deserves more attention.

3

2

Mortgage Purchases as Credit Policy in the United States

The US government intervenes in the mortgage market in many ways. We focus attention on the federal
involvement in purchasing residential mortgages. The first significant use of this type of policy dates back
to the Great Depression. The sharp and sustained downturn in credit markets motivated Congress to create
the Home Owners’ Loan Corporation in 1933. Financed by bonds, the Corporation purchased delinquent
mortgages from lenders and refinanced these mortgages into fully amortizing fixed-rate loans with long
maturities to lower monthly payments for distressed mortgagors. In 1938, Congress created Fannie Mae
to support a secondary market for government-guaranteed mortgages. Fannie’s authority to acquire mortgage debt was increased greatly after WWII to support the construction sector and promote homeownership
among veterans. The late 1960s saw the creation of Ginnie Mae to provide continued support the market
for government-guaranteed mortgages. In 1970, Fannie Mae obtained permission to enter the conventional
market, i.e. the market for loans not directly guaranteed or insured by the government, and the newly created
Freddie Mac joined Fannie Mae in developing a nationwide secondary market for conventional mortgages.

Over time, the agencies have played an increasingly active role. The two largest GSEs, Fannie and Freddie,
acquire mortgages through advance commitments to buy loans from mortgage lenders, which are delivered
once the loans are originated in the primary market.3 Until the late 1960s, the purchases by Fannie were
financed predominantly by borrowing from the Treasury. Afterwards, as quasi-private entities, Fannie and
Freddie have financed these purchases with a mix of private capital and debt issued in capital markets. A
third financing option is the issuance of mortgage pools, i.e. mortgage-backed securities (MBS). Securitization was brought to the conventional market by Freddie Mac in the early 1970s, and took off in the 1980s
when it was also adopted by Fannie Mae. Mortgage securitization has consistently been GSE-dominated,
perhaps with the brief exception of the 2004-2006 private-label securitization boom. In the process of packaging whole mortgages into securities, the agencies also assume the credit risk in return for guarantee fees.
From the early 1990s onwards, the agencies increasingly retained their own and acquired each other’s MBS,
as opposed to selling them to private investors.
3 Another

major housing GSE is the Federal Home Loan Bank System, chartered during the Depression to provide wholesale
liquidity to member mortgage lending institutions. We use the term ‘GSE’ to refer to Fannie and Freddie.

4

Figure 1 illustrates the evolution of agency involvement in the residential mortgage market over time. The
upper left panel shows the stock of total residential mortgage debt both as a ratio of GDP and as ratio of
total residential wealth. The upper right panel shows the total annualized volume of residential mortgage
originations as a ratio of GDP and as a fraction of outstanding mortgage debt. The lower panels of Figure 1
provide measures of agency market shares, constructed by consolidating data on holdings and net purchases
of whole loans and MBS as reported on the agencies’ balance sheet and activity statements. The left panel
shows the fraction of mortgage debt owned by Fannie, Freddie, and Ginnie as well as all other federal agencies with mortgage holdings, such as the Federal Home Loan Banks and the Federal Reserve.4 The lower
right panel show the flows of net mortgage purchases by the agencies as a percentage of total originations.
The blue line shows the net portfolio purchases. To distinguish these portfolio purchases clearly from those
for securitization, the figure also shows in red the combined issuance of MBS by the agencies.5

The post-WWII period witnessed a marked expansion in mortgage debt, rising from around 10 percent
of GDP at the end of WWII to more than 80 percent by 2008, before steadily declining in the wake of the
2007/08 financial crisis. Originations of new mortgages are volatile, procyclical, and average around 20
percent of outstanding debt at an annualized rate.6 By any measure, the government agencies have over time
become large players in the mortgage market. Between 1980 and 2006, total purchases in the secondary
market by Fannie and Freddie alone average around 40 to 50 percent of originations. The majority of these
acquisitions were packaged in MBS and sold off to private investors. The portfolio purchases, comprising
whole loans retained for the portfolio as well as net acquisitions of MBS, have averaged 7 percent of originations between 1967 and 1990, and about 15 percent between 1990 and 2006. At the peak in 2004, almost
a quarter of all residential mortgage debt resided on the balance sheet of a federal agency, with roughly 20
percent owned by Fannie and Freddie alone. In early September 2008, Fannie and Freddie were taken into
conservatorship and were required to gradually wind-down their balance sheets by two-thirds. The Federal
4

Other agencies include the Home Owners’ Loan Corporation, Treasury, Veterans Administration, Federal Housing Administration, Federal Farmers Home Administration, Resolution Trust Corporation, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Public
Housing Administration. We do not include mortgages in government pension funds. See the data appendix for sources.
5 Because purchases may include loans originated in prior periods, the market shares may occasionally exceed 100 percent.
6 Net additions to the stock of mortgage debt are considerably smaller than originations since both existing home sales as well
as refinancing transactions typically lead to minor net changes in mortgage debt.

5

Reserve subsequently pursued several rounds of large-scale purchases of agency MBS under its quantitative
easing (QE) programs, and its current holdings amount to roughly 15 percent of total mortgage debt outstanding. For readers wishing more information about the institutional history of the housing agencies, the
appendix provides more background.

The focus of this paper is on the portfolio purchases of the housing agencies, shown in blue in the lower
right panel in Figure 1. Prior to the Fed’s QE programs, Fannie and Freddie accounted for the bulk of
agency mortgage acquisitions. Even as privately owned corporations, Fannie and Freddie have been key
agents of federal housing policy and differ from traditional financial intermediaries in a number of important
ways. First, they have always maintained authorization to borrow from the Treasury. While this authorization was limited and never formally exercised, it sufficed to create the widely held belief that the US
government would never allow a GSE to default. This perception, eventually justified by the government
takeover of Fannie and Freddie in 2008, meant that interest rates on agency bonds have typically been close
to Treasury rates. Second, agency debt is eligible for open market operations by the Fed. In the 1960s and
1970s the Fed made significant purchases of agency debt, see Haltum and Sharp (2014), and again so under
the QE programs. Third, the prudential supervision of the GSEs is separate from private banks and, prior to
2008, resided within the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD).7 Regulatory oversight of
the GSEs was traditionally light compared to that of private banks, and the GSEs generally enjoyed much
less stringent capital and reporting requirements. For instance, despite being publicly listed companies, Fannie and Freddie were exempt from filing with the Security and Exchange Commission until the early 2000s.
Finally, for much of their existence, the GSEs have also benefitted from various preferential tax treatments.

In exchange for the privileges granted by federal law, the GSEs face a number of restrictions and obligations. Fannie and Freddie cannot originate loans in the primary market and are not allowed to diversify
portfolio holdings much beyond mortgage assets. Their purchases are limited to conforming mortgages that
must meet certain underwriting standards, and the principal on the loans cannot exceed a maximum amount,
known as the conforming loan limit. The authority for adjusting the limit and other loan characteristics that
7 Since

2008, the regulatory authority lies with the Federal Housing Finance Agency, an independent federal agency.

6

determine what mortgages are conforming has generally lied with Congress and the HUD Secretary. In 1980
the conforming loan limit became indexed to a house price index maintained by Freddie Mac. Since then
typically around 80 percent of mortgages have been conforming.8 Finally, the GSEs are expected to balance
stock owner interests with certain public policy objectives, including the stabilization and enhancement of
mortgage markets, as well as assistance with the provision of credit to lower-income households.

3

Related Literature

There are relatively few attempts at identifying the dynamic effects of agency purchases on mortgage credit,
residential investment or homeownership. An early literature estimates reduced form models of credit and
housing markets to assess the impact of GSE activity in the 1970s, e.g. Arcelus and Meltzer (1973), Meltzer
(1974), Hendershott and Villani (1977, 1980), Jaffee and Rosen (1978), and Kaufman (1985). Although no
clear consensus emerges from this early work, Smith, Rosen, and Fallis (1988) conclude that an additional
dollar in government lending increases mortgage debt by 25 to 35 cents after three to four quarters. Arcelus
and Meltzer (1973) and Meltzer (1974), however, argue there is no effect on residential investment or home
purchases, while Jaffee and Rosen (1978) and Hendershott and Villani (1977, 1980) find a positive impact
of agency activity on home construction.

Starting with Hendershott and Shilling (1989), a number of studies document significant interest rate spreads
between conforming and jumbo loans, which suggests that the GSEs affect the cost of mortgage credit.
Hendershott and Shilling (1989) attribute this result to a credit supply channel operating through agency
securitization. A number of studies investigate the time series relationship between GSE activity and credit
costs. Naranjo and Toevs (2002), for instance, find a negative long-run relationship between GSE purchases
and mortgage rates, while González-Rivera (2001) finds only a negative short-run relationship.9 Lehnert,
8 In

response to the financial crisis, the limit was increased substantially for the financing of homes in urban areas, which
further expanded the pool of mortgage debt eligible for GSE purchase.
9 Naranjo and Toevs (2002), who use vector error-correction (VEC) and GARCH (generalized autoregressive conditional heteroskedastic) models and monthly time series data from 1986 to 1998, find that both GSE purchases and securitization reduce
conforming mortgage spreads and volatility, while documenting some spill over to reductions in non-conforming loans, which
they attribute to investor substitution effects. González-Rivera (2001), who uses VEC models and monthly data from 1994 to
1999, finds a negative short-run relationship of GSE purchases responding to widening secondary mortgage market spreads, and
some evidence of a pass through from secondary to primary mortgage rates from agency purchases.

7

Passmore, and Sherlund (2008) study the impact of GSE activities on primary and secondary market mortgage spreads using both generalized impulse response analysis and causal orderings in VAR models. Based
on monthly data from 1993 to 2005, these authors find little evidence that higher GSE purchases impact
mortgage spreads, which is consistent with the Meltzer view that credit market interventions are neutral. In
a May 2005 speech, Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan conveys a similar view of the role of the
GSEs’ portfolio activities, stating that “Fannie’s and Freddie’s purchases... with their market-subsidized
debt do not contribute usefully to mortgage market liquidity, to the enhancement of capital markets in the
United States, or to the lowering of mortgage rates for homeowners” (Greenspan, 2005).

In this paper, we contribute new evidence against the Greenspan-Meltzer view that agency mortgage purchase have little effect on the cost and availability of mortgage credit. Our approach is similar in spirit to
Lehnert et al. (2008), but adopts novel and arguably better identification strategies to control for the endogeneity of agency purchases. We also study a much longer time frame than any of the earlier papers, and we
estimate the effects on both credit aggregates and mortgage rates. Moreover, our dynamic regressions allow
us to study many other variables of interest, including housing starts, home prices, homeownership rates,
cyclical indicators, and various other interest rates and credit spreads.

Our paper is related to the many analyses of the large-scale MBS purchases by the Federal Reserve under the QE programs. To isolate the effects of these purchases, the literature typically restricts attention to
high frequency financial data, and most studies conclude that the MBS purchases lowered secondary market
mortgage yields on impact, see e.g. Gagnon et al. (2011), Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jørgensen (2011), Patrabansh, Doerner, and Asin (2014), and Hancock and Passmore (2011, 2015).10 Exploiting cross-sectional
variation, a few recent studies also uncover evidence that is suggestive of a positive impact on mortgage
lending. Di Maggio, Kermani, and Palmer (2016), for instance, find that, after the first QE intervention,
originations of mortgages qualifying for inclusion in securities eligible for purchase by the Fed increased
substantially more than those of non-qualifying mortgages. No such differential effects are evident after
the second QE intervention, which did not include MBS purchases. Darmouni and Rodnyansky (2016)
10 Stroebel

and Taylor (2012) instead find no effects of the MBS purchases under QE1.

8

find that banks with larger mortgage positions increased lending relative to banks with smaller positions,
and Chakraborty, Goldstein, and MacKinlay (2016) show that banks with MBS exposure increased their
mortgage origination share relative to other banks. By studying a longer history of housing credit policy
interventions, we are able to circumvent some key limitations of the event studies of the Fed’s large-scale
MBS purchases. Our approach permits an analysis beyond the very short-run response of financial variables,
and unlike the cross-sectional studies, provides direct evidence on aggregate rather than relative effects.

Our study also fits in a broader empirical literature that aims to identify credit supply shocks and estimate their aggregate effects. Peek, Rosengren, and Tootell (2003), for instance, use bank health indicators
as proxies for loan supply shocks and find substantial effects on inventory investment and other aggregates.
Gilchrist and Zakrajs̆ek (2012) look at innovations in corporate bond spreads after removing cyclical default
premia, and demonstrate their strong predictive content for macroeconomic fluctuations. Bassett, Chosak,
Driscoll and Zakrajs̆ek (2014) study residual variation in survey measures of bank lending standards and find
an impact on economic activity. Mian, Sufi, and Verner (2017) use variation in the timing of bank branching
deregulation in the 1980s to construct differential state-level credit supply shocks, and find that these shocks
impact household borrowing and employment. Both our narrative policy indicator and the GSE excess return
shocks can similarly be viewed as proxies for credit supply shocks in the mortgage market.

Many existing theories of financial frictions can explain the non-neutrality of agency mortgage purchases.
Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jørgensen (2011) and Di Maggio et al. (2016), among others, discuss a variety of
potential transmission channels associated with the MBS purchases under the QE programs. Many of these
channels have similar implications for mortgage purchases by the GSEs. Through the portfolio rebalancing
channel, for instance, private investors bid up the price of mortgages when rebalancing assets towards some
desired composition of mortgages and agency liabilities. For the GSEs, the latter are not reserves, but debt
instruments that closely substitute for Treasuries in terms of liquidity and (perceived) safety.11 Depending
on the level of segmentation in financial markets, rebalancing effects may spill over to other asset markets,
in which case yields on mortgage substitutes—particularly other types of long-term debt—may fall as well.
11 This

difference may be less important if the Federal Reserve simultaneously acquires agency debt.

9

Agency mortgage purchases also matter when private mortgage lenders face capital constraints because of
regulations or binding incentive constraints, for instance as in the theoretical models of Gertler and Kiyotaki
(2010) or Cúrdia and Woodford (2011). Because the GSEs are more highly leveraged than private lenders,
aggregate lending capacity increases with agency market share. Agency purchases that drive up the price of
mortgages may additionally improve the net worth position of private mortgage lenders, while the exchange
of mortgages for agency debt lowers their risk-weighted leverage ratios. Increased agency activity in the
secondary mortgage market may also reduce liquidity premia. Our findings support a role for credit supply
channels in determining household debt, homeownership, and residential investment, but it is beyond the
scope of this paper to isolate precisely which of these channels may be more important.

4
4.1

Identifying Causal Effects of Agency Mortgage Purchases
Endogeneity Problems

To assess the impact of agency portfolio purchases, one might be tempted to simply correlate measures of
agency activity, such as those in Figure 1, with credit and other macroeconomic aggregates. This would,
however, ignore various endogeneity problems. For one, the agencies respond to changes in market conditions. To maintain market share, for instance, the GSEs vary purchases with the supply of mortgages into the
secondary market, which in turn depends on fluctuations in the housing market and the economy. A different
endogeneity concern is that agency purchases typically expand relative to the mortgage market when credit
is tight and/or conditions in the housing market are deteriorating. This was evidently the case during the
latest financial crisis through the actions of the Fed and Treasury, but is also true of earlier episodes.

Figure 2 shows the average real levels of agency and private holdings of mortgage debt over the course
of business and credit cycles since the mid-1950s. The left panel of Figure 2 shows the average real levels of
agency and privately held mortgage debt centered around NBER business cycle peaks. On average, growth
in agency holdings is high relative to growth in private holdings prior to a business cycle peak. The growth
in private mortgage holdings slows down just prior to the peak and remains low for a prolonged period after
the start of a recession. The pace of growth of agency holdings, in contrast, remains roughly unchanged for
10

at least two years after the beginning of an economic downturn.

The right panel of Figure 2 shows the average real levels of mortgage holdings centered around the peak
of credit cycles, defined as the quarter preceding the start of credit crisis episodes based on the datings in
Eckstein and Sinai (1986) and subsequent updates.12 Agency and private holdings grow at roughly similar
rates prior to a credit crunch. Growth in private holdings of mortgage debt slows markedly following the
start of a credit crisis. In contrast, growth in agency holdings accelerates at the onset of a credit crunch and
remains elevated for about ten quarters, before flattening toward the pre-crunch trend.

The evidence thus indicates that agencies tend to increase their share of the market in cyclical downturns and
credit crunches. These countercyclical purchase dynamics are robust to omitting the 2007/08 crisis and the
Federal Reserve’s interventions. There are a number of reasons why the agencies jointly maintain or expand
purchases during cyclical downturns. A public mission to provide stability to mortgage markets is mandated
in the GSEs’ statutory charters. Credit crises also offer particularly profitable opportunities for the GSEs because their lending spreads widen relative to private intermediaries, due to countercyclical mortgage spreads
and the implicit guarantee provided by the US government. Finally, the federal government often undertakes
deliberate regulatory or legislative actions to further enable agency expansions during downturns. The fact
that agency purchases tend to accelerate when mortgage spreads are elevated and/or credit is tight induces a
negative relationship with mortgage credit aggregates. This negative association needs to be accounted for
in order to determine the causal effects of agency mortgage purchases.

4.2

Narrative Analysis of Policy Changes Affecting Agency Mortgage Holdings

Our principal strategy to control for reverse causality in the relationship between agency mortgage purchases
and credit conditions is to use a narrative identification approach involving major regulatory events impacting agency mortgage holdings. By focusing on policy interventions by the federal government, we exclude
variation in purchase activity resulting from the agencies’ regular response to market developments. Be12 The

dating of pre-1986 credit crunches is from Eckstein and Sinai (1986). The dating of post-1986 crunches is based on
Owens and Schreft (1993) for the 1990 commercial real estate crunch, Lehnert, Passmore, and Sherlund (2008) for the 1998
Russian default/LTCM crisis, and Bordo and Haubrich (2010) for the 2007/08 financial crisis.

11

cause policymakers themselves often respond to conditions in mortgage and housing markets, we exclude
interventions with short-run stabilization motives as the primary objective. The end result of our narrative
analysis is a record of housing credit policy events that we use as an instrumental variable for agency purchase activity. Here, we summarize the methodology of the narrative analysis, and describe the resulting
policy indicators. A companion background paper, Fieldhouse and Mertens (2017), provides the full narrative analysis of credit policy events, including explanations of relevant findings for each policy event and
extensive documentation that allows verification of our analysis.

4.2.1

Overview of Methodology

The development of the narrative instrumental variable follows five steps: Identifying significant policy
changes affecting agency portfolios; quantifying their ex ante projected impact on agency holdings; pinpointing the timing of when the policies became publicly known; classifying each policy change as either
cyclically or non-cyclically motivated; and restricting the sample for consistent use as an instrument for
agency purchasing activity. Next, we describe the procedures used in each of these steps. Table 1 provides
an overview of the historical primary sources used in the narrative analysis.

I. Identifying Significant Policy Changes Policy changes affecting agency purchases and mortgages holdings have historically been directed by a range of policymakers, notably Congress, the President and the
Cabinet, particularly the Secretaries of the Treasury and HUD, various regulatory agencies in the executive
branch, and the Federal Reserve. The relevant regulatory institutions were disbanded and reinvented several
times over the decades, and as a result there is no single consistent source tracking the history of housing
credit policy. Instead, a wide range of sources is required for identifying and analyzing policy changes.

Policy actions generally originate from one of three sources: enacted legislative changes, regulatory policy
changes published in the Federal Register or as other binding agreements with regulators, and macroeconomic stabilization policies managed by the Federal Reserve or Treasury. We restrict attention to significant
policy actions, meaning actions that would either be expected to directly impact agencies’ permissible volume of net purchases and retained portfolio holdings, or else considerably expand the pool of eligible mort-

12

gages an agency was authorized or required to purchase. Interventions determined at the legislative level
include adjusting statutory leverage ratios, capital requirements, and conforming loan limits, provision of
working capital, mandatory retirements of public stock, and direct appropriations or borrowing authority for
purchases, among others. Regulatory policy actions include setting permissible debt-to-capital ratios, imposing capital surcharges in excess of statutory capital requirements, capping portfolio size or growth, setting
affordable housing goals, and authorizing entrance to new segments of the mortgage market. Macroeconomic stabilization actions include the Fannie and Freddie conservatorship agreement in September 2008,
subsequent amendments to these agreements, and the large-scale MBS purchase programs conducted by the
Federal Reserve and Treasury since 2008.

We use the comprehensive Congressional Research Service report “A Chronology of Housing Legislation
and Selected Executive Actions, 1892-2003” (CRS, 2004) as a starting point for identifying significant policy changes, particularly pertinent public laws. This legislative history is cross-referenced with the Congressional Quarterly Almanac’s Housing and Development tracker. We additionally search appendices of the
Budget of the United States Government for information about policy changes affecting Ginnie Mae during
relevant years, cross-referenced with HUD appropriations bills and related reports of the House and Senate Appropriations Committees. After identifying public laws affecting the agencies, we use the ProQuest
Congressional Publications Database to collect the legislative text of those enacted laws, related committee
reports and Congressional hearing transcripts, and any preceding House and Senate versions of the final
bill.13 We then analyze relevant sections of these primary sources to confirm these laws’ material impact on
mortgage holdings and better understand the nature of the policy changes.

Legislative actions often set in motion the drafting of new regulatory rules. Identified significant legislative
events are the starting point for a directed search of the related regulatory changes in HeinOnline’s Federal
Register Library. We also obtain information from the GSEs’ annual reports about significant regulatory
changes, as well as from 10-K filings in more recent years. We additionally used sections of the Economic
13 The

ProQuest Congressional Publications Database provides a comprehensive compilation of all public laws, committee
reports, and hearings. Public laws and related legislative actions since 1973 are available from Congress.gov, a project of the
Library of Congress, along with committee reports since 1995. Most older public laws are available through LegisWorks Statutes
at Large Project. Most hearing transcripts are digitally available since 1985 from the US Government Publishing Office.

13

Report of the President and Annual Report of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve, as well as the
various reports by regulators to collect information about regulatory rulings. We use newspapers, financial
newswires, and mortgage industry newsletters to help direct the search for information about the rulings in
the Federal Register, particularly the Wall Street Journal, American Banker, and National Mortgage News.14
Final rules published in the Federal Register almost always include a detailed background and overview of
the initial proposed rule, public comments received, and subsequent modifications.

Using these procedures, we are confident that we have identified the overwhelming majority of significant
policy events. The main concern is developing a policy indicator that is correlated with underlying regulatory shocks to agency purchasing activity. The larger the number of significant policy events identified, the
higher the relevance of the instrument.

II. Quantification To be included, we require that primary sources either explicitly cite projections of the
policy change’s impact, or contain information that can be used to quantify the impact. We describe here
our general approach, and show later that the resulting projections align closely with the ex post estimated
balance sheet impact.

For each policy change, we use contemporaneous sources to obtain an ex ante estimate of the projected
impact on the agencies’ capacity to purchase mortgages, measured in annualized billions of dollars. If a
baseline is needed for quantifying a policy change, say for Fannie’s regulatory capital when its debt-tocapital ratio is increased, we use the most recent data publicly available prior to the policy change. We
use ex ante balance sheet data on regulatory capital, liabilities, and/or assets in conjunction with standing
leverage or capitalization requirements to estimate the impact of related changes, such as increases in permissible leverage ratios. Similarly, public capital injections are quantified as a multiple of one more than the
prevailing leverage ratio, to capture the potential increase in assets supported by related debt issues plus the
working capital itself. Direct appropriations are straightforward to quantify, at most requiring a pro-rata annualization adjustment based on relevant implementation lags. To quantify potential impacts of discretionary
14 This

is done by Factiva and LexisNexis Academic searches of key words related to the regulatory policy change, in search
windows around the vicinity of the event. After roughly pinpointing the publication date of a rule, we search the Federal Register
for the rule itself, and then work backwards to initial rulings.

14

conforming loan limit changes, we rely on estimates from Congressional committee reports accompanying
legislation. Such reports typically cite the extent to which a large conforming loan limit increase would
restore a GSE’s real purchase activity. We quantify the impact of such adjustments as the difference between
annualized purchase volumes immediately preceding the policy change and the home price index-adjusted
purchase volume of the benchmark year being restored. For relatively large, open-ended changes, such as
leverage ratio increases, potential effects on mortgage holdings are annualized using a two-year rule, which
assumes half of the full potential impact would be realized within the first year of taking effect.

For other policies that are inherently harder to quantify, such as authorizations for program expansions into
new mortgage market segments, we search for ex ante estimates of projected impacts on purchasing activity
from committee reports, market analysts, regulators, or agency executives. We do not include policies that
would not have been expected to impose or alleviate binding constraints on agency activity. For instance,
when adjustments to leverage ratios or affordable housing goals are viewed as non-binding by most accounts
and this appears consistent with the agencies’ balance sheet and purchase behavior, we do not consider the
policy change significant. We also exclude any laws or regulations that merely extend prior authorizations,
and for certain authorizations affecting Ginnie Mae, we use a current policy baseline as opposed to a current
law baseline for scoring annual funding changes.

When estimating the quantitative aspects of the policies, we rely on information released by the Congressional Budget Office, Government Accountability Office, Treasury Department, and Congressional Research
Service that contain detailed analyses of policy changes, background information, and/or balance sheet data
for the agencies in question, see Table 1. We also use information from the annual or periodic reports of the
agencies and regulators, particularly regarding balance sheet data, and from appropriations bills and budget
appendices for certain policies affecting Ginnie Mae. Committee report language occasionally cites projected effects of a pending policy change, and we also use the financial press and industry newsletters to
search for projections of the impact of policies that are difficult to quantify.

15

III. Timing

At the operational level, the agencies sell commitments to purchase conforming mortgages

from primary market lenders, which may then be exercised by the mortgagee up to an expiration date. Consequently, actual agency purchases tend to lag behind the issuance of commitments to purchase mortgages
from primary market originators. Together with the usual policy implementation lags, the policy events are
therefore best thought of as news shocks about agency mortgage purchases. We date each policy intervention to the month in which we estimate that it became publicly anticipated, rather than the month in which
it was formally announced or took effect. We show in the next section that this timing approach is roughly
consistent with the observed movements in consolidated agency mortgage holdings.

The ProQuest Congressional Publications Database, HeinOnline’s Federal Register Library, the CQ Almanac, and financial press are the primary sources used for documenting pertinent news surrounding policy
changes and the implementation dates. For regulatory changes, we use the month in which proposed rules
were first published in the Federal Register or reported in the press. We date legislative changes when the
provision including the policy change was agreed upon in the House, Senate, or conference version of a
bill, rather than upon subsequent enactment. For Fannie and Freddie, we additionally check the timing by
cross-referencing policy announcements with GSE stock price movements and the financial press, as often
policy news is priced into GSE shares.

IV. Classification by Motivation

The classification of the policy events distinguishes between interven-

tions that are guided by prevailing business cycle and financial conditions, and those that are plausibly free
of such contemporaneous influences. Our instrument for agency mortgage purchases only includes the latter
to avoid bias due to the systematic relaxation of policies during periods of stress in mortgage or housing
markets. The classification is based on identifying the primary motivations underlying each of the policy interventions. To make this classification, we parse historical documents, paying particular attention
to the rationales invoked by policymakers and the press, the nature of the legislative vehicles or regulatory
processes, the relation to known periods of economic and financial stress, and the time horizon of policy
objectives.

16

The principal data sources for identifying policy motives include Congressional committee reports and hearings, Presidential speeches and signing statements, the Budget of the US Government, Economic Report of
the President, Federal Reserve Bulletin, Annual Report of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve,
CQ Almanac, and the financial press (see Table 1). For legislated policies, the accompanying reports of the
Senate Committee on Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs and the House Financial Services Committee
typically detail congressional intent and any pertinent economic context. Major housing policy laws are
also usually accompanied by a Presidential signing statement explaining the bill’s motivation, context, and
intended impact. Budget appendices and/or committee reports accompanying appropriations bills usually
explain the impetus for certain policy changes affecting Ginnie Mae. Final rules published in the Federal
Register also almost always include a detailed background and history, shedding light on regulators’ motives.

Based on these sources, we classify the policy changes as either cyclically motivated or non-cyclically motivated. Interventions classified as cyclically motivated tend to emphasize short-term outcomes, such as
boosting housing starts in a recession. Legislative vehicles for such policy actions tend to be quickly drafted
and enacted, with a relatively concise legislative history and narrow focus. Policymakers are typically quite
explicit about cyclical concerns and objectives, overwhelmingly so when policies are implemented in close
proximity to recessions or credit crunches. Language we search for in committee reports and signing statements as strong evidence of cyclical motivations include “emergency, crisis, recession, credit shortage, credit
crunch, housing starts, employment, construction, downturn, depressed, stimulus, boost”, etc. Policies enacted during or near a recession or credit crunch are held to a particularly high bar for being classified as
non-cyclical, but are not automatically classified as cyclically motivated.

Interventions motivated by social policy, budgetary, or other more ideological objectives are classified as
unrelated to the business or financial cycle, provided the various historical sources do not at the same time
indicate significant short-term economic or financial market concerns. Political rather than economic context
shapes the development of these interventions, such as an administration’s emphasis on expanding affordable
homeownership opportunities to lower-income households, concerns regarding the structural budget deficit,
or ideological hostility toward the GSEs. It is often hard to establish a single rationale for the non-cyclical ac-

17

tions, which can be motivated by a mix of objectives. For our purposes, however, a more precise distinction
between these objectives is not essential. Language we search for as indicative of non-cyclical motivations
include “long-term, farsighted, comprehensive, low-income, affordable housing, American Dream, homeownership, budget deficit, reduce borrowing, off-budget, privatize,” etc. Legislative actions classified as
non-cyclical emphasize longer-term outcomes, such as increasing homeownership rates. Legislative vehicles for such interventions tend to be slower-moving bills, particularly deliberate overhauls of housing policy
with a lengthy legislative history; the National Housing Acts, Housing and Urban Development Acts, and
Housing and Community Development Acts of various years tend to meet this description, being slowly
crafted and negotiated between the House, Senate, and White House, and focusing on broad, long-term
objectives for housing policy, such as urban revitalization or access to affordable housing for various constituencies. New regulatory rules set in motion by such bills also tend to be classified as non-cyclical, such
as HUD setting new affordable housing goals for the GSEs. Occasionally, interventions are prompted by
specific events that we view as unrelated to the cycle, such as the regulatory actions taken in the aftermath
of accounting scandals at Fannie and Freddie in 2003-2004.

V. Sample Restrictions

Occasionally a law or public rule sets in place changes in purchase authorizations

or balance sheet restrictions to take effect only multiple years after announcement. To obtain a good indicator
for news about pending purchase behavior, we exclude changes with very long implementation delays and
focus on interventions taking effect within nine months of their news being made public. We also restrict
attention to policy events after January 1967. This choice is made to select a period of relative institutional
stability, as it roughly coincides with the creation of Ginnie and Freddie, the emergence of a nationwide
secondary market for conventional mortgages, and the beginning of the ascendancy of the privatized GSE
era. This starting point is also in part determined by the availability of time series used in the empirical
analysis. We focus exclusively on the mortgage portfolio activity of Fannie, Freddie, and Ginnie, ignoring
less significant government entities for which monthly data is not easily available. We also include purchases
by the Federal Reserve and Treasury in the recent financial crisis, but in most of the analysis in Sections 5
and 6 the sample is truncated at December 2006 to deliberately exclude the financial crisis and the Fannie and
Freddie conservatorship period. As shown in Figure 1, the three housing agencies that we analyze account

18

for the large majority of government agency mortgage holdings between 1967 and 2006.

4.2.2

The Narrative Measures of Policy Changes

Table 2 lists the policy events resulting from the narrative analysis. Each intervention is described by the
agencies affected, by its annualized projected impact (in billions of US dollars), timing, and motivation. The
monthly sample contains 45 months with interventions in the post 1967 sample (there are 52 interventions in
total but some occur within the same month). Out of these, 28 are classified as cyclically motivated, leaving
19 distinct non-cyclically motivated policy events. In the sample that excludes interventions after December
2006, there are 15 cyclically and 17 non-cyclically motivated policy events.

Figure 3 depicts the interventions as a percentage of the average annualized level of originations in the
preceding 12 months. The left (right) panel shows the non-cyclical (cyclical) policy indicator. For reference, each figure also shows credit crisis episodes in grey. The cyclically motivated interventions almost all
occur during credit crunches or recessions, while those not motivated by cyclical concerns appear unrelated
to the cycle. The largest interventions are those introduced since the start of the 2007/08 financial crisis,
which are mostly classified as cyclical.15 The only post-2006 events that we consider non-cyclical are the
removal of Fannie and Freddie portfolio caps in February 2008, which was contingent on the timely filing
of financial reports after the accounting scandals, and a 2012 Treasury decision to accelerate the mandated
decline in portfolio caps under the GSE conservatorship agreements. Relative to average originations, the
three largest non-cyclical changes are the October 1977 combination of a conforming loan limit increase
and the expansion of the Brooke-Cranston Tandem program, an increase in Fannie’s debt-to-capital limit in
December 1982, and the tightening of Fannie’s capital requirements in September 2004 in the wake of the
accounting scandals. We refer to Fieldhouse and Mertens (2017) for a detailed discussion of all policy events.

Do the policy changes that we have narratively identified lead to actual changes in agency purchases and
retained mortgage portfolios? To investigate this, it is important to take into account the potentially significant delays between the policy events and their impact on the agency portfolios. Recall that agencies
15 These include the Fed and Treasury MBS programs from late 2008 onwards, but also the loosening of capital requirements
and portfolio caps for Fannie and Freddie and the introduction of ‘jumbo’ conforming loan limits in 2008.

19

initially make advance commitments to buy loans from mortgage providers and subsequently effectuate
these as loans are originated in the primary market. We regress three activity indicators, net mortgage purchase commitments made by the agencies, the actual net purchases of mortgages, and the stock of agency
mortgage holdings, on the indicator for non-cyclical policy events mt :
36

yt = α +

∑

β j mt− j + ut

(1)

j=−l

We use monthly observations from January 1967 to December 2014 in log first differences of current dollars. Because monthly commitment and purchase flows are relatively volatile, we run the regressions for a
36 month backward moving average of these two variables. The event indicator mt is the non-cyclically motivated narrative measure scaled by the average level of agency mortgage holdings over the prior 12 months.
All regressions include the current value of mt as well as three years of lags. For each activity measure, we
estimate two versions of (1), one in which we set l = 0 and one in which l = 12. The second version includes
a full year of leads of mt , which allows us to verify the plausibility of our timing of the interventions. Figure
4 shows the estimated dynamics of the agency activity measures around the policy events, obtained as the
sum of the slope coefficients β j over various horizons, together with 95 percent Newey and West (1987)
confidence bands.

The policy change indicator strongly predicts significant changes in agency purchase commitments (left
panel) which pick up at date 0 and peak at a 3 to 4 percent higher level roughly two years out. Actual
purchases (middle panel) follow a very similar trajectory as commitments, but with a lag of a few months,
demonstrating that the policy changes act as news shocks for actual purchases. The right panel shows that
the higher pace of mortgage purchases is followed by a persistent and statistically significant increase in the
agencies’ retained portfolio.

The specifications allowing a lead response to the events suggest that our indicator accurately captures the
timing of the change in purchasing activity. It is also encouraging that the size of the estimated response of
agency mortgage holdings converges to around one percent within 24 months of the policy event, which is

20

consistent with our scoring of the projected impact of the policy changes.

5

The Cumulative Effects of Agency Mortgage Purchases on Mortgage Credit

We estimate the cumulative impact of agency mortgage purchases on credit aggregates by using the noncyclically motivated policy changes as an instrument for agency purchasing activity. As shown in Figure 1,
the growth in mortgage debt over our sample period has on average exceeded growth in GDP, while agency
holdings have increased at an even faster pace. Because of these differential trends, expressing the impact
on credit aggregates and other variables in terms of elasticities can be misleading.16 To address these issues,
we run local projections-IV regressions similar to those used by Ramey and Zubairy (2016) to estimate cumulative government spending multipliers.

Our results are based on local projections for horizon h and outcome variable yt of the form
∑hj=0 pt+ j
yt+h − yt−1
= αh + γ h
+ ϕh (L)Zt−1 + ut+h
Xt
Xt

(2)

where pt is either the volume of commitments or actual purchases by the agencies in month t. Both yt and
pt are expressed in constant dollars using the core PCE price index. For every horizon h, the change in yt as
well as the cumulative change in commitments or purchases pt is expressed as a ratio of Xt , a deterministic
trend in real personal income obtained by fitting a third degree polynomial of time to the log of personal income deflated by the core PCE price index.17 For stock variables, the dependent variable is the change in the
stock between t − 1 and period t + h, scaled by Xt . For credit flow measures, we construct yt by cumulating
the flows ft such that yt+h − yt−1 = ∑hj=0 ft+ j .

Each regression includes a full year of monthly lags of a number of control variables Zt , such that ϕh (L)
is a lag polynomial of order 11. The controls include variables with predictive content for the dependent
variables, and always include lagged values of yt /Xt (or ft /Xt for flow variables), as well as lags of agency
16 Both

the news aspect and the scaling issues also occur in other contexts, in particular in the measurement of the effects of
fiscal policy interventions, see for instance Ramey (2011), Mertens and Ravn (2012), and Ramey and Zubairy (2016).
17 The results do not differ meaningfully when we use polynomials of different order. In online appendix A.1, we also show
that the results are robust to using a trend in mortgage originations instead of personal income.

21

net purchases and commitments as a ratio of Xt . In addition Zt contains lagged growth rates of the core PCE
price index, a nominal house price index and total mortgage debt, the log level of real mortgage originations,
housing starts, and lags of several interest rate variables: the 3-month T-bill rate, the 10-year Treasury rate,
the conventional mortgage interest rate, and the BAA-AAA corporate bond spread. Finally, we add lags of
two cyclical indicators: the unemployment rate and the growth rate of real personal income. All growth rates
are quarter-over-quarter. The data appendix provides full details on the sources and construction of the time
series. In online appendix A.1, we discuss results for a number of alternative control (sub)sets.

The coefficient γh in (2) measures the multiplier associated with an additional dollar in commitments or
purchases made between period t and t + h. This multiplier is the total cumulative dollar change in yt between period t and t + h. We estimate γh by two-stage least squares (2SLS) using the dollar impact estimates
of the non-cyclically motivated policy events reported in Table 2, deflated by the core PCE price index and
expressed as a ratio of Xt , as the instrument. Our baseline estimates use an effective sample of 480 monthly
observations, starting in January 1967.18 In online appendix A.1, we look at different sample periods.

The central identifying restriction is exogeneity of the instrument, which requires that the residuals in (2) and
the narrative measure are uncorrelated. To the extent that the lagged controls are informationally equivalent
to all relevant impulses to the dependent variables occurring prior to time t, the regression residuals correspond to their horizon h forecast errors. The latter depend only on unpredictable shocks occurring between
period t and t + h. Our instrument is based on the projected impact of policy events constructed from ex
ante information. These estimates should therefore be uncorrelated with shocks occurring after time t. The
identifying restriction then boils down to the assumption of orthogonality between the instrument and all
shocks in month t other than the one associated with the policy event itself. If the control set does not fully
capture all impulses prior to date t − 1, then the exogeneity requirement is stricter and the instrument must be
uncorrelated with the history of relevant impulses to the left hand side variables. The omission of the cyclically motivated events aims at dropping policy actions that may be correlated with all other time t shocks.
18 With

local projections, every successive horizon h = 0, 1, 2... requires a separate regression with h leads of observations
beyond the end point of the sample, see Jordà (2005) for a discussion. For h > 0, we add the required observations beyond
December 2006 such that the number of observations remains constant at T = 480 for every h.

22

Our narrative classification retains the non-cyclically motivated events for which correlation with contemporaneous shocks is unlikely, while the lagged controls provide additional insurance that the confounding
effects of any remaining correlations with prior shocks are eliminated, see also Ramey (2016).

5.1

First-Stage Diagnostics

We first assess the strength of our narrative instrument. The left panel of Figure 5 shows the Newey and
West (1987) robust F-statistics on the excluded instrument in the first-stage regressions for horizons h = 0 to
h = 60, which are of the form
∑hj=0 pt+ j
m̃t
= α̃h + γ̃h + ϕ̃h (L)Zt−1 + ũt+h
Xt
Xt

(3)

where m̃t is the non-cyclical narrative policy indicator expressed in real dollars. The figure shows the Fstatistics when using either cumulative commitments or purchases as the measure of agency activity pt .

The results indicate that the narrative measure is a reasonably strong instrument for agency purchasing
activity for horizons between 4 to 48 months after the policy events, with robust F-test statistics exceeding
or close to 10. The F-statistics are low for very short horizons, which is natural given the implementation
lags and our timing according to the arrival of news about impending regulatory changes. Beyond horizons
of 48 months, the F-statistics fall to lower levels, which is also not surprising as other influences on agency
purchases accumulate with the forecast horizon. Given these results we restrict attention to the 4- to 48month horizon. The F-statistics are very similar when we instrument for either purchases or commitments.

The right panel of Figure 5 depicts IV estimates of the dollar change in agency purchases for every dollar of commitments issued over the various time horizons based on the regressions in (2) using cumulative
agency purchases as the outcome variable and cumulative commitments as the independent variable. The
fine lines denote 95 percent Newey and West (1987) confidence intervals. Because of the time delays associated with secondary market transactions, the pass-through from commitments to purchases is high but
smaller than unity for shorter horizons. After about one year the relationship becomes one-for-one with very

23

narrow confidence intervals. The interpretation of the credit multiplier estimates presented next therefore
depends somewhat on the denominator used, but only for horizons of less than one year. At longer horizons,
there is essentially no difference between using commitments or purchases as the agency action measure.

5.2

Cumulative Credit Multipliers

According to the Meltzer-Greenspan view, the portfolio activities of the agencies have no meaningful impact on housing or household debt. Without credit market imperfections, the ownership of mortgage debt is
irrelevant. Any change in agency mortgage holdings has no impact on total mortgage debt, but leads instead
to perfect crowding out of private holdings. If, on the other hand, there are frictions impeding on the private flow of credit to residential borrowers, agency activity may not be neutral for the volume of mortgage
lending. We now examine whether agency mortgage purchases indeed impact housing credit, and test the
neutrality hypothesis using the local projections in (2) and the narrative policy instrument.

Figure 6 shows the impact of an increase in either agency commitments or purchases, together with the
95 percent Newey and West (1987) confidence bands. There is a marked difference between the short and
long-run effects. In the short run, the results are consistent with neutrality: The upper left panel shows that
a dollar purchased increases agency mortgage holdings initially by almost a dollar. The short-run effect of
a dollar increase in commitments on agency holdings is lower at around 60 cents, which is expected given
the time delay between commitments and purchases. The right panel shows that private holdings decline
initially by roughly the same amount as the increase in agency holdings, although the confidence bands are
wide.19 The middle panels in Figure 6 show that as the dollar in mortgage debt changes from private to
agency ownership, there are initially no significant changes in originations or mortgage debt.

Over longer horizons, however, there is clear evidence against the notion that agency purchases are neutral for mortgage credit. The cumulative impact on total mortgage originations increases with the horizon
and becomes statistically significant after 6 months. Over the course of 3 years and beyond, there is a
19 This

almost surely reflects the fact that our measure of private holdings is partially based on interpolation of quarterly data.
Private holdings are measured by subtracting agency holdings from total mortgage debt. Total mortgage debt is constructed using
monthly data on originations and an interpolation of implied quarterly repayment rates. See the data appendix for more detail.

24

cumulative increase in originations of 3 dollars or more for every dollar purchased by the agencies. The
estimated long-run multipliers for total originations are highly statistically significant and nearly identical
for commitments and purchases. The point estimates for the impact on the stock of mortgage debt at shorter
horizons are roughly in line with the range reported in Smith, Rosen, and Fallis (1988). The increase in
mortgage debt becomes statistically significant after three to four years and in the longer run reaches a level
of around one dollar. As the time horizon grows, the increase in agency holdings slowly dissipates toward
levels expected before the expansion. Similarly, the negative impact on the level of private mortgage holdings vanishes over time and eventually turns into an increase, although not one that is statistically significant.

The results in the middle row of Figure 6 imply that agency portfolio expansions lead to a substantial rise in
mortgage lending activity. Originations take place when borrowers refinance, purchase an existing home, or
purchase a new home. Unless there are changes in house prices or homeownership, the first two transactions
typically lead only to small net changes in mortgage debt because a similar amount of mortgage debt is
repaid. Since the increase in originations is a multiple of the net change in debt, it is likely driven mostly by
a rise in transactions of the first two types, with new home purchases playing a more important role beyond
horizons of two years. The bottom row of Figure 6 distinguishes between refinancing originations in the
left panel, and home purchase originations in the right.20 Refinancing originations indeed respond faster
and by a substantially larger amount than purchase originations. Refinancing originations see a statistically
significant increase beyond 6 months, and within 3 years are higher by roughly 3 dollars per dollar of agency
purchases. Home purchase originations rise more slowly and are statistically significantly higher after 18
months, increasing by nearly one dollar within 4 years. The rise in purchase originations occurs somewhat
faster than the rise in total mortgage debt, suggesting that existing home sales respond before new home
sales. The longer-run cumulative change in purchase originations is comparable to the increase in mortgage
debt, which suggests a positive impact on residential construction. In the impulse response analysis below,
we indeed find evidence for an increase in housing starts. We also document positive effects on homeownership rates and, although less clearly, on home prices, both of which also contribute to the rise in mortgage
20 Data

prior to 1990 is approximated using the refinancing share of S&Ls, see data appendix. Unfortunately, we were unable
to find data distinguishing between originations for new and existing home sales with a sufficient time span.

25

debt. The bulk of the effect on originations is nevertheless due to refinancing.21

Given the procyclicality of mortgage originations, the large positive effect on originations makes it unlikely
that the estimates are severely contaminated by the countercyclical actions of the agencies over the sample.
The decrease in private holdings and the delayed effect on originations also suggest that the estimates are not
merely picking up increased supply of mortgages to the secondary market, as would occur if private lenders
simply passed on newly originated loans to the agencies; if this were the case, originations would rise before
or roughly simultaneously with agency purchases and without a decline in private holdings. It is precisely
in this direction that the results change when we instead estimate γh in (2) by ordinary least-squares (OLS).
To illustrate this, Figure 7 compares the OLS and 2SLS responses of mortgage originations. Regardless of
whether the baseline or full set of controls is included, the OLS estimates suggest that the bulk of the increase
in originations occurs within a few months. Given the decision lags and time delays associated with making
new mortgage loans, the delayed and gradual rise in originations that appears after instrumentation is much
more consistent with a causal interpretation. The comparison in Figure 7 is generally informative about
the endogeneity concerns in practice. Systematic GSE expansions during times of high primary mortgage
demand or high private sector credit supply would lead to an upward bias using OLS, while the stabilizing
actions of the agencies lead to a downward bias. Since the OLS estimates exceed the 2SLS estimates for
horizons up to 2 years, the former appears the dominant practical concern in our sample.22

6

Impulse Response Analysis of News Shocks to Agency Purchases

To evaluate the effects of agency purchases on residential investment and homeownership, as well as analyze
the response of interest rates and other macro aggregates, in this section we conduct an impulse response
analysis of shocks to agency mortgage purchases. Given the gradual and anticipated nature of agency balance
sheet expansions, our goal is to identify the response to shocks to expectations of future agency purchasing
21 This

is consistent with Di Maggio et al. (2016), who document an increase in refinancing activity by 170% during the Fed’s
first QE program.
22 In online appendix A.1, we elaborate on the role of instrumenting, and we discuss additional results on agency securitization.
We also verify robustness in several dimensions, such as the choice of scaling variable Xt , the sample choice, the set of controls,
as well as the exclusion of specific policy events in the narrative instrument. The expansionary effects of agency purchases on
mortgage credit are shown to be robust to many details of the analysis.

26

activity. We adopt a local projections approach and use the narrative instrument for identification. We also
present results for an alternative instrumentation strategy that exploits information in GSE stock prices.

6.1

Empirical Specification with the Narrative Instrument

For a given monthly outcome variable yt , we estimate the response at horizon h based on

yt+h − yt−1 = αh + δh

7
12 ∑ j=0 pt+ j
×
8
X̃t

!
+ ϕh (L)Zt−1 + ut+h

(4)

The right hand side variable of interest measures annualized agency commitments made over an 8 month
period, expressed as a ratio of X̃t , a long-run trend in annualized originations. The latter is obtained by fitting
a third degree polynomial of time to the log of real originations obtained using the core PCE price index as
the deflator. The control variables Zt−1 are the same as in equation (2) estimating dollar cumulative effects.
When an outcome variable is not included in the benchmark control set, we always add 12 monthly lags of
that variable as additional controls (in growth rates for trending variables and in levels for other variables).

The regression in (4) estimates the month h ≥ 0 response to a time 0 news shock to agency purchases.
Expected agency purchases are proxied by agency commitments made over the next 8 months. We choose
an 8 month horizon to measure expected future commitments because at this horizon the robust F-statistic
associated with the narrative instrument in the first-stage regression is the largest, and equals 11.68. The
results are very similar for somewhat shorter or longer horizons. To address endogeneity, we use the indicator of non-cyclical policy events, deflated by the core PCE price index and scaled by trend originations
X̃t , as the instrument. The IV estimates of δh in (4) can be interpreted as the response associated with a one
percentage point increase in the agency flow market share that becomes anticipated h periods before. For
perspective, the average market share in terms of portfolio purchases was approximately 7 percent between
1967 and 1990, and about 15 percent between 1990 and 2006, see Figure 1.

27

6.2

Empirical Specification with the GSE Excess Returns Instrument

Although our narrative instrument is a good predictor of agency purchasing activity, it is based on relatively
few policy events. It is therefore always possible that our findings are driven by the small sample size. To
gain confidence that this is not the case, as well as address other potential concerns with the narrative identification method, we also pursue an alternative approach inspired by Fisher and Peters (2010). These authors
interpret innovations in excess stock returns of major defense contractors as news shocks about future military spending. Fisher and Peters (2010) obtain these innovations by ordering the excess returns last in a
recursively identified structural vector autoregressive system. The recursive scheme assumes that none of
the macro aggregates included in the analysis are affected on impact by the news shock, while excess stock
returns react contemporaneously to all macroeconomic shocks. We follow a similar strategy to identify the
response to news shocks to agency purchases.23

Passmore (2005) estimates that 44 percent to 89 percent of Fannie and Freddie’s stock market value is
derived from their special GSE status, and that the GSEs would hold far fewer mortgages in portfolio and
have higher capital ratios if they were purely private. Any news about changes in the policies guiding the
GSEs’ portfolios business and leverage is thus likely to affect their market value. To construct an alternative
measure of news of agency purchasing activity, we identify innovations in the excess return of GSE stock
based on similar recursivity assumptions as Fisher and Peters (2010). To implement these assumptions, we
estimate the response at horizon h through the following regression:

yt+h − yt−1 = αh + δh

7
12 ∑ j=0 pt+ j
×
8
X̃t

!
+ ζhWt + ϕh (L)Zt−1 + ut+h

(5)

Relative to (4), this specification adds the contemporaneous controls Wt , which includes the interest rate
variables (3-month T-bill, 10-year Treasury, the conventional rate, BAA spread), the log of real originations,
the log changes in mortgage debt, real house prices, the core PCE price index and personal income, the log
of housing starts, and the unemployment rate. When we rotate in another variable, we also include it in Wt .
One other modification relative to (4) is that the log of the GSE stock price-to-S&P 500 ratio is added to Zt .
23 Different

from Fisher and Peters (2010), we use local projections-IV. Online appendix A.5 shows that the SVAR approach
yields similar results.

28

The response coefficient δh in (5) is estimated using 2SLS, where the first stage is a regression of the log
change in the GSE stock price-to-S&P 500 ratio on Wt and Zt−1 . This specification imposes that shocks to
expected agency purchases have no contemporaneous impact on the variables in Wt . The instrument used
in the 2SLS estimation of (5) is therefore the monthly innovation in the GSE excess stock return, orthogonalized to the monthly innovations in the variables in Wt . By assumption, other endogenous influences on
GSE excess returns, such as shocks to household demand for mortgages, are eliminated by allowing excess
returns to respond contemporaneously to mortgage credit, interest rates, prices, and the cyclical indicators.

Figure 8 plots the standardized cumulative sum of these innovations, together with the non-cyclical narrative
indicator for reference. The GSE excess returns shocks are followed by statistically significant increases in
agency purchasing activity. The F-statistic for the GSE excess returns instrument is the highest for agency
commitments at a horizon of 5 months, and equals 8.55.24 To provide further evidence that GSE stock prices
reflect changes in agency purchasing activity, Figure 9 plots the response of the GSE stock price-to-S&P 500
ratio to a one pp. increase in the expected future agency market share, measured by agency commitments
as a ratio of trend originations. This response is estimated by (4) using the narrative policy indicator as the
instrument, and reveals a clear relative increase in GSE stock prices that is statistically significant at horizons
of 4 to 12 months. Fieldhouse and Mertens (2017) also provide narrative evidence that announcements of
policy changes affecting Fannie and Freddie are generally associated with adjustments in their stock prices.

Because the GSE excess returns instrument contains monthly observations, it potentially contains more
information about variation in agency purchases than the narrative policy indicator.25 Our narrative indicator contains, for instance, little information for the 1990s because of the scarcity of quantifiable and binding
regulatory changes. However, this period witnessed a rapid expansion of GSE balance sheets and may be
particularly important for learning the effects of agency purchases. As is well known, however, equity prices
24 For

simplicity, we keep the horizon for cumulating commitments in equation (5) at 8 months, the same as in equation (4).
The value of the first-stage robust F-statistic for this horizon is 7.68. Changing the horizon for cumulating commitments in
specification (5) to 5 months does not lead to any meaningful changes in the results.
25 Assuming the GSE excess returns shocks contain all of the information about agency purchase shocks, it becomes possible to
estimate the variance contribution of these shocks to any endogenous variables of interest. In online appendix A.5, we do this in
the context of an SVAR model.

29

are volatile, and the GSE excess return shocks are, on the other hand, also relatively noisy. While the GSE excess returns shocks clearly have predictive power for agency commitment activity, the first-stage F-statistics
are somewhat lower than for the narrative instrument. Another caveat is that the GSE excess return shocks
may also pick up unanticipated variation in the scale of the GSEs’ securitization business. Nevertheless, we
view this identification strategy as a useful alternative to the narrative approach. The next sections show that
both instruments generally lead to very similar impulse response estimates.

6.3

Effects on Mortgage Credit and Interest Rates

Figure 10 displays the responses of mortgage credit and interest rates to news about higher future purchases.
Each of the panels shows the point estimates and confidence bands for the first 24 months after an increase in
anticipated agency purchases by one percentage point of trend originations. The responses in blue are based
on the narrative instrument, while those in red are based on the GSE excess returns instrument.

The first row in Figure 10 displays the responses of real originations and mortgage debt to the agency
purchase shock. Based on the narrative instrument, mortgage originations start rising after a few months and
reach peak increases of 4 percent to 5 percent between 12 and 18 months after the shock. With a slightly
longer delay, the stock of mortgage debt also gradually rises to levels that are about 0.3 percent higher after
two years. Using the GSE excess returns instrument, the rise in originations occurs slightly more rapidly
but is more transitory. The peak increase in originations is around 4 percent and occurs between 10 and 14
months. The size and shape of the rise in the stock of mortgage debt is also very similar across instruments.
The expansions in both the stock and gross flow of mortgage credit following a positive shock to agency
purchases are statistically significant for multiple periods for both instruments. The results again indicate
that agency purchases stimulate mortgage lending significantly. Online appendix A.3 shows that the impulse
response analysis also confirms that refinancing originations account for a large share of the increase.

The second row in Figure 10 shows the impact on interest rates on 30-year fixed rate mortgages in the
primary market. The left panel illustrates the interest rate effect on newly originated conventional conforming mortgages, whereas the right panel contains the impact on interest rates of mortgages guaranteed by the

30

Federal Housing Administration. According to the narrative instrument, the mortgage rates in the primary
market are largely unaffected in the initial months after the increase in agency mortgage purchase commitments. As the agencies’ purchasing activity picks up, however, both mortgage rates gradually decline and
are lower by around 10 basis points after 6 months. The declines in mortgages rates appear quite persistent,
and help explain the increase in refinancing activity. When using the GSE excess returns instrument, by
construction there is no impact on interest rates in the first month. After 6 to 18 months, both mortgage
rates are lower by 10 to 15 basis points. For both instruments, the declines in mortgage rates are statistically
significant for multiple periods. This decrease in mortgage cost is consistent with agency purchases affecting the aggregate supply of housing credit, for instance because of portfolio rebalancing effects or because
private mortgage lenders are capital constrained. Agency purchases also alleviate any constraints faced by
private intermediaries, for instance because the higher prices of mortgage assets improve their net worth, or
because the sale of mortgages in exchange for agency debt lowers their risk-weighted leverage.

The issuance of agency debt to finance the mortgage purchases potentially puts upward pressure on interest rates on other debt instruments. Such pressure may be limited if significant amounts of agency debt
are purchased by foreign investors, as has been the case since the mid-1980s, or by the Federal Reserve, as
was the case in the early years of our sample, see Haltum and Sharp (2014). Depending on the level of segmentation in financial markets, the rebalancing and other effects may also spill over to other asset markets
and cause the yields on substitutes to mortgages to fall. These include other high duration instruments such
as long-term Treasuries and corporate bonds. In addition, lower mortgage rates lead to more prepayments,
which do not carry any penalty in the United States. There is considerable evidence that lower effective durations cause mortgage investors to bid up the price of higher duration instruments, see for instance Boudoukh
et al. (1997), Perli and Sack (2003), Hanson (2014), and Malkhozov et al. (2016). The broader impact on
long-term yields is therefore ex ante not clear.

The left panel of the bottom row in Figure 10 shows the estimated response of the 10-year Treasury rate.
The results are very similar to those for the long-term mortgage rates just discussed: The 10-year Treasury
rate responds little the first couple of months, but as the agency mortgage purchases commence, it declines

31

in a gradual and persistent manner by up to 5 to 10 basis points. The drop is significant between 3 and 6
months after the shock. The results are similar for the two instruments but confidence intervals are wider
using excess returns. In online appendix A.2, we discuss additional results on the effects on other interest
rates and credit spreads.26 Overall, the results indicate that there are significant spill-overs from agency
actions in mortgage markets to other longer-term asset markets.

The right panel in the bottom row of Figure 10 reports the impact on the 3-month T-bill rate. The results are
qualitatively similar to those for the long-term rates discussed above. Quantitatively, we find some indication
of a larger drop in short-term rates than in the longer term rates. Based on the narrative instrument, and with
a delay of a few months, the T-bill rate drops persistently by 15 to 20 basis points with a partial reversion
taking place at longer forecast horizons. The results using the GSE excess return instrument yields again
similar results (although quantitatively smaller). The negative response of short-term interest rates indicates
that a potentially important explanation for the expansion in mortgage lending and the decline in mortgage
rates is a more accommodative stance of monetary policy. In Section 7 below, we investigate the role of
monetary policy and its interactions with housing credit policy in greater detail.

The finding that increases in agency mortgage purchases produces a boom in mortgage lending and declining interest rates is robust. In online appendix A.4, we report very similar results for samples that omit
the Volcker years, or for the subsample starting in October 1982, the end of the period of non-borrowed
reserve targeting by the Federal Reserve. Thus, the results are not driven by differences in Federal Reserve
operating procedures in the 1970s or by the inclusion of the Volcker period. There is narrative evidence that
political pressure to support the GSEs was exerted with some success in the late 1960s and 1970s, leading for
instance the Federal Reserve to purchase significant amounts of agency debt, see Haltum and Sharp (2014).
In the post-1982 sample, however, it seems less likely that political pressure to support government housing
policies can explain an accommodative monetary policy response. Finally, the results also do not appear to
be particularly sensitive to the inclusion of any individual policy event, see online appendix A.4.
26 We

find, for instance, that the spreads between mortgage rates and 10-year Treasury rates decline. The statistical significance
of these reductions however is at the 10 percent level and therefore more marginal, suggesting that positive spill-over effects on the
demand for long-term Treasuries are relatively important. We also find that agency mortgage purchases lead to lower long-term
interest rates on corporate bonds, and to a narrowing of the BAA-AAA bond spread.

32

6.4

Effects on Housing and Other Macro Aggregates

Next, we assess the evidence for the broader macroeconomic effects of government asset purchases. Figure
11 shows the responses of a range of monthly macro aggregates to an agency purchase shock, together with
95 percent Newey and West (1987) confidence bands. As in Figure 10, the responses are to an anticipated
increase in purchases by one percentage point of trend originations, estimated using either the narrative instrument (blue) or the GSE excess returns instrument (red). We consider the following additional outcome
variables at the monthly frequency: housing starts, real house prices, the homeownership rate, real personal
consumption expenditures, real personal income, and the unemployment rate.27

The first panel in Figure 11 shows the effects on residential investment, as measured by monthly housing
starts. Based on the narrative instrument, the number of new housing starts rises to levels that are roughly
1 to 2 percent higher after about 6 months. Housing starts remain elevated for about a year and drop off to
prior levels afterwards. Using the GSE excess returns instrument, housing starts pick up more quickly and
remain around 2 percent higher between 4 and 12 months after the shock. For both instruments, the size
and shape of the response of housing starts is similar and statistically significant for multiple periods. We
thus find evidence that the expansion in the stock of mortgage debt following a shock to agency purchases is
associated with higher levels of residential investment.28

The top middle panel in Figure 11 plots the impact on real house prices, as measured by the Freddie Mac
house price index deflated by the core PCE price index. Using the narrative instrument, we find that real
house prices rise gradually but very persistently over time, with a point estimate that becomes significantly
positive at longer forecast horizons only. The GSE excess returns instrument, in contrast, does not reveal a
significant change in house prices at any horizon. Thus, we have no clearcut evidence of an impact of agency
mortgage purchases on house prices. Moreover, the point estimates imply that very little of the increase in
27 All

these variables, except the unemployment and the homeownership rate, are included logs and all nominal variables are
deflated by the core PCE price index. The homeownership rate is only available at quarterly frequency, and the monthly series in
this case simply consists of the quarter values. See the data appendix for precise definitions and sources.
28 The more immediate effects on residential construction are consistent with the more delayed impact on mortgage debt in
Figure 10. This is because financing in the building phase is typically through a short-term construction loan that is converted into
a residential mortgage loans only after the borrower takes up occupancy of the house.

33

the dollar volume of mortgage credit is explained by increases in house prices.

The top right panel in Figure 11 shows the response of the homeownership rate, as measured by the Census
Bureau, which is often cited as one of the primary motivations for housing credit policy. Using the narrative
instrument, there is a sustained increase in homeownerhip by around 5 basis points beyond a horizon of 10
months. Based on the GSE excess returns instrument, homeownerhip also rises by a similar magnitude, but
the increase occurs somewhat more rapidly. While there is considerable uncertainty in the estimates, the
responses are in both cases statistically significant at the 95 percent level for multiple months, indicating that
agency activity indeed has an effect on homeownership. This also implies that the expansion in the stock of
mortgage debt is in part driven by an increase in homeownership.

The remaining panels in Figure 11 show the responses of consumption expenditures, personal income, and
the unemployment rate. Using the narrative instrument, we find that an increase in agency mortgage purchases stimulates consumption very modestly and with a delay of more than a year. Personal sector income
and the unemployment rate are approximately unchanged over the entire forecast horizon. The increase in
consumption is imprecisely estimated and none of the impulse responses are significantly different from zero
at the 95 percent level. The point estimates are somewhat different for the GSE excess returns instrument
and show an increase in personal consumption expenditures similar to that estimated using the narrative instrument, but with a much shorter delay of 3-4 months. There is a decline in the unemployment rate around
a year after the shock. Standard errors are, however, large for this instrument as well.

In sum, we find evidence that agency mortgage purchases stimulate residential investment and homeownership, and some indication of a positive effect on personal consumption expenditures. The confidence bands
in Figure 11 are, however, relatively wide, and the power of our instruments to detect a macroeconomic
impact of agency mortgage purchases beyond the housing sector is rather limited.

34

7

Housing Credit Policy vs. Conventional Monetary Policy

In the previous section, we found that increases in agency mortgage purchases lead to an expansion in mortgage credit and to declines in short- and long-term interest rates. A natural question to ask is to what extent
these effects reflect conventional monetary policy actions, and how monetary and credit policies interact
more broadly. The left panel in Figure 12 reports the estimated response of the federal funds rate to an
agency purchase shock using the methods of the previous section. According to the narrative instrument,
there is a delayed and transitory decline in the funds rate by up to 30 basis points after 6 months. This
decrease is statistically significant after 4 to 12 months. The GSE excess returns instrument also yields a
temporary decline in the funds rate, but it is smaller in size and not statistically significant.

We obtain similar results for the post 1982 subsample, after excluding the non-borrowed reserves targeting period, or after omitting larger policy events from the narrative instrument (see online appendix A.4).
There is therefore evidence that agency mortgage purchases are accompanied by accommodative monetary
policy. A possible alternative interpretation is that both identification schemes erroneously pick up the influence of recessionary shocks causing downward adjustments in the Federal Reserve’s interest rate target.
However, if this were the case, we would not expect to find increases in strongly procyclical variables such as
mortgage originations or housing starts. To gain more insight into the nature of the funds rate response, we
make use of the decomposition by Romer and Romer (2004) of changes in the intended funds rate at FOMC
meetings into a systematic and a residual shock component.29 The systematic component is measured by the
explained variation in a regression of target changes on changes in Greenbook forecasts of inflation, output
growth, and unemployment. Monetary policy shocks are measured by the residuals in the regression, and
capture the remaining variation in target changes not explained by changes in the Greenbook forecasts.

The middle panel in Figure 12 depicts the estimated response of the cumulative Romer and Romer (2004)
shocks to an agency purchase shock using the regressions in (4) and (5). With a few months delay, the narrative instrument yields a significant and persistent decline by up to 10 basis points. The funds rate decline
is therefore not explained by inflation and output considerations alone, and possibly reflects also an inde29 We

use the updates by Wieland and Yang (2016) to extend the sample of the original series.

35

pendent reaction to credit market conditions and/or credit policies. We note, however, that the GSE excess
returns instrument does not yield a similar significant decline in the Romer and Romer (2004) residual.

To investigate whether monetary policy affects housing credit policy, the right panel in Figure 12 reports
the response of the cumulated narrative measures of credit policy changes in Table 2, deflated by the core
PCE price index and as a percentage of trend originations, to a monetary shock. There is no evidence for
monetary policy shocks impacting the non-cyclical measure of agency purchase shocks, as our narratively
identified housing credit policy instrument is not itself predictable by the Romer and Romer (2004) residuals.
This provides assurance that our narrative instrument does not erroneously pick up the effects of monetary
policy shocks. Similarly, adding the current and lagged values of the Romer and Romer (2004) shocks as additional control variables in (4) also has very little effect on the results, see online appendix A.4. The cyclical
housing policy measure (in red), on the other hand, does show a statistically significant decline following
an expansionary monetary policy shock, which illustrates the importance of accounting for the endogeneity
of credit policies. Consistent with an objective of stabilizing credit flows, we thus find that housing credit
policies on average act to offset the effects of monetary policy disturbances.

To further judge the extent to which agency purchase shocks operate through more conventional monetary transmission channels, Figure 13 compares the impact of a traditional monetary policy shock (in red)
with the response to the agency purchase shock identified using the narrative instrument (in blue). The response to a monetary shock is obtained by similar regressions as in equation (4), but replacing the agency
market share on the right hand side with the contemporaneous level of the 3-month T-bill rate, and using
the Romer and Romer (2004) shock measure as an instrument.30 In the figure, the impact of the interest
rate shock is scaled such that the maximum decline in the 3-month T-bill rate is the same as for the agency
purchase shock identified with the narrative instrument. For easier comparison, the responses to the monetary policy shock in Figure 13 are shifted forward by 4 months such that the maximum interest declines
for each of the policy shocks coincide. As before, the bands are 95 percent Newey and West (1987) intervals.
30 Conditional

on including an informationally sufficient set of lagged variables as controls, valid identification under this
approach requires only contemporaneous exogeneity of the Romer and Romer (2004) shocks. The predictability of the Romer
and Romer (2004) shocks by agency purchase shock therefore does not necessarily invalidate the identification of the response to
monetary shocks.

36

Figure 13 reveals that conventional monetary policy shocks and credit policy shocks have qualitatively similar effects on many of the variables shown. Although each of the policies involves purchases of different
types of assets with different sources of financing, both generate a decline in long-term interest rates, a rise
in originations and mortgage debt, and an increase in housing starts. Consistent with most of the existing
empirical literature, an expansionary monetary shock leads to increases in consumption and income and a
decline in the unemployment rate.31 The monetary shock responses provide a familiar reference point for
judging the quantitative impact of agency purchase shocks. After scaling the estimates to imply the same
decline in the short-term interest rate and accounting for the more immediate effects of a funds rate target
shock on short-term interest rates, many responses to each of the policy shocks are similar in terms of magnitude and timing.

There are, however, also some notable differences between the responses in Figure 13. The first is that
agency purchases lead to a rise in originations that is roughly twice as large as that of the interest rate
shock. There is little indication that a conventional monetary policy shock causes a significant rise in real
house prices, while the decline in long-term interest rates is slightly more pronounced and persistent after an
agency purchase shock. Both the rise in housing starts and mortgage debt, on the other hand, are very similar for both policy shocks. Taken together, the results indicate that agency purchases have a larger effect on
mortgage repayments than conventional interest rate policy. In appendix A.3, we compare the responses of
refinance and purchase originations. Whereas purchase originations respond very similarly to both shocks,
refinancing originations react more strongly to the agency purchase shock, and account for the entire difference in the effect on total originations.

Another notable difference between credit policy and traditional interest rate shocks is the effect on the
homeownership rate (right panel, third row in Figure 13). Unlike the response to an agency purchase shock,
there is no indication that a conventional interest rate shock has any positive effect on homeownership. In
most months, the estimated effect on homeownership instead is negative, though small and generally not sta31 The

response to both shocks also feature a similar ‘price puzzle’, i.e. a decline in the price level as measured by the PCE price
index. Results are available on request.

37

tistically significant. Apart from the different response of originations and homeownership, however, it does
appear as if credit policy operates through similar transmission channels as conventional monetary policy.

In online appendix A.5, we compare agency activity and conventional monetary shocks in terms of their
contribution to fluctuations in credit aggregates and interest rates. Because our local projections approach
is not well suited for this purpose, we assess the variance contributions in an SVAR setting using the GSE
excess returns identification strategy and the Romer and Romer (2004) residuals as a proxy for monetary
shocks. The main finding is that GSE excess returns shocks explain up to 15% and 10% of the medium-run
forecast error variance of mortgage originations and housing starts, respectively, which is roughly comparable to the contribution of monetary policy shocks. In addition, while shocks to monetary policy are
substantially more important for the variance of interest rates in the short run, the role of GSE excess returns shocks for long-term interest rates exceeds the role of monetary policy shocks at longer horizons. The
SVAR-based analysis overall indicates that the contribution of credit policy shocks to fluctuations in housing
and credit markets is non-negligible.

To explore the potential effects of agency mortgage purchases when conventional interest rate policy does
not respond, for instance because it is constrained by the zero lower bound, Figure 14 reports the results from
a counterfactual experiment in which the short-term interest rate is assumed to remain constant. As before,
the responses are to an increase in anticipated agency purchases by one percentage point of trend originations, as in (4) and (5). However, we now additionally assume the realization of a sequence of monetary
shocks such that the 3-month T-bill rate remains unchanged at every horizon.32 An important caveat with
this experiment is that the short-term rate remains constant because of successive monetary surprises rather
than an anticipated policy response. As such, the results are clearly subject to the Lucas critique. Figure 14
shows the counterfactual responses in red and the earlier baseline estimates in blue, in both cases with 95
percent Newey and West (1987) bands. Panel A shows the results when using the narrative instrument to
identify the effects of agency purchase shocks, and panel B when we use the GSE excess returns instrument.

32 The impact of monetary shocks on the outcome variables is obtained as in Figure 13, i.e. by using the Romer and Romer
(2004) shocks as an instrument in local projections on the 3-month T-bill rate and the control variables.

38

The results from the counterfactual experiment in Figure 14 indicate that conventional monetary policy plays
an important role in explaining the effects of agency purchase shocks. Under both identification schemes,
the rise in originations is only about half as large when short-term interest rates remain constant, and there is
no longer any sign of an increase in the stock of mortgage debt. The drop in long-term interest rates is much
reduced with the narrative instrument, but remains more clearly present with the excess returns instrument.
The positive effect on housing starts is smaller using the GSE excess returns instrument, and disappears
entirely with the narrative instrument. The combination of expansionary monetary and credit policy therefore seems particularly important for stimulating residential investment. Even with constant interest rates,
however, purchases of mortgage assets continue to have statistically significant effects on mortgage lending,
regardless of the instrument. In addition, the path of short-term interest rates appears largely irrelevant for
the increase in the homeownership rate following a shock to agency purchases.

8

Concluding Remarks

The postwar period witnessed a remarkable expansion in residential mortgage debt. During the same period,
an increasing share has come to reside on what is ultimately the balance sheet of the federal government.
In this paper, we provide evidence that government mortgage purchases influence the volume and cost of
mortgage lending. In order to tackle reverse causality, we make use of a number of policy changes that have
impacted the ability of government agencies to acquire mortgage debt. Using policy interventions that we
classify as non-cyclically motivated to construct an instrumental variable for (news about) agency mortgage
purchases, we find that an increase in these purchases stimulates mortgage originations and debt, and temporarily lowers mortgage rates. Consistent with the evidence in Di Maggio et al. (2016) regarding the effects
of the QE interventions, we find that agency purchases have particularly large effects on refinancing activity.
We also find a positive impact on housing starts and homeownership, and some indications of positive effects
on house prices and consumption expenditures. An alternative identification strategy based on instrumenting
with orthogonalized innovations in GSE excess returns yields very similar results overall.

One important aspect of our findings is the apparent similarity and interaction between housing credit policies and conventional interest rate policy. We find that greater agency mortgage purchases lead to broad
39

declines in short and long-term interest rates. Our measure of non-cyclically motivated credit policy changes
predicts the Romer and Romer (2004) monetary policy shock measure, and expansionary credit policy appears to be accommodated by monetary policy. In contrast, we find that credit policy adjusts in order to
offset the effects of monetary disturbances. It may therefore be necessary to account for credit policy to understand the effects of monetary policy. Agency purchase shocks have relatively larger effects on mortgage
originations and refinancing activity than interest rate shocks, and influence homeownership regardless of
the path of short-term interest rates. The quantitative effects of credit and monetary policy shocks on many
other variables, including residential investment, are otherwise remarkably similar.

There are several interesting avenues for future research: Unlike theoretical or multivariate statistical models,
our local projections/IV-approach does not allow an assessment of the historical contribution of structural
shocks without further assumptions. In online appendix A.5, we apply our GSE excess returns identification
strategy in an SVAR setting, and we find that the contribution to the short-run variability of mortgage credit
and housing starts is substantial and similar to that of monetary policy shocks. Future work can verify in
more detail whether credit policy shocks are important causal factors in past housing or credit cycles, in
particular during the most recent housing boom and bust.33 Our results can be used to help evaluate the
credit policy interventions in the recent financial crisis, the possible impact of unwinding the Fed’s current
mortgage holdings, or the various proposals for GSE reform. We have made no attempt at understanding
more precisely the nature or implications of the credit frictions and transmission channels through which
housing credit policies operate. Future work may apply similar cross-sectional identification strategies as Di
Maggio et al. (2016), Darmouni and Rodnyansky (2016), or Chakraborty, Goldstein, and MacKinlay (2016)
to other housing credit policy events documented in our narrative analysis. Finally, it is possible to apply a
similar analysis to government mortgage guarantees and securitization.
33 The

expansion of the GSE’s market share from the early 1990s to mid-2004 was dramatic, but came to a grinding halt when,
following revelations of accounting fraud, regulators imposed capital surcharges on Fannie and Freddie in the fall of 2004 and
eventually portfolio caps in mid-2006.

40

References

Arcelus, Francisco and Allan H. Meltzer, “The Markets for Housing and Housing Services,” Journal of
Money, Credit and Banking, 5 (1973), 78–99.
Bassett, William F., Mary Beth Chosak, John C. Driscoll, and Egon Zakrajs̆ek, “Changes in Bank Lending
Standards and the Macroeconomy,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 62 (2014), 23–40.
Bordo, Michael D. and Joseph G. Haubrich, “Credit Crises, Money and Contractions: An Historical View,”
Journal of Monetary Economics, 57 (2010), 1–18.
Boudoukh, Jacob, Matthew Richardson, Richard Stanton, and Robert F. Whitelaw, “Pricing MortgageBacked Securities in a Multifactor Interest Rate Environment: A Multivariate Density Estimation Approach,” The Review of Financial Studies, 10 (1997), 405–446.
Chakraborty, Indraneel, Itay Goldstein, and Andrew MacKinlay, “Monetary Stimulus and Bank Lending,”
University of Miami manuscript, 2016.
Congressional Research Service, “A Chronology of Housing Legislation and Selected Executive Actions,
1892-2003,” Washington, D.C: U.S. Government Printing Office, 2004.
Cúrdia, Vasco and Michael Woodford, “The Central-Bank Balance Sheet as an Instrument of Monetary
Policy,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 58 (2011), 54–79.
Darmouni, Olivier and Alexander Rodnyansky, “The Effects of Quantitative Easing on Bank Lending Behavior,” forthcoming, Review of Financial Studies, 2017.
Davis, Morris A. and Jonathan Heathcote, “The Price and Quantity of Residential Land in the United States,”
Journal of Monetary Economics, 54 (2007), 2595–2620.
Di Maggio, Marco and Amir Kermani, “Credit-Induced Boom and Bust,” forthcoming, Review of Financial
Studies, 2016.
Di Maggio, Marco, Amir Kermani, and Christopher Palmer, “How Quantitative Easing Works: Evidence on
the Refinancing Channel,” Columbia Business School Research Paper No. 16-1, 2016.
Eckstein, Otto and Allen Sinai, “The Mechanisms of the Business Cycle in the Postwar Era”, in The American Business Cycle: Continuity and Change, Robert J. Gordon, ed. (Chicago, IL: NBER and The University of Chicago Press, 1986).
Fieldhouse, Andrew and Karel Mertens, “A Narrative Analysis of Mortgage Asset Purchases by Federal
Agencies,” NBER Working Paper No. 23165, 2017.
Fisher, Jonas D.M. and Ryan Peters, “Using Stock Returns to Identify Government Spending Shocks,” The
Economic Journal, 120 (2010), 414–436.
Gagnon, Joseph, Matthew Raskin, Julie Remache, and Brian Sack, “The Financial Market Effects of the
Federal Reserve’s Large-Scale Asset Purchases,” International Journal of Central Banking, 7 (2011),
3–43.
Gertler, Mark and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki, “Financial Intermediation and Credit Policy in Business Cycle Analysis,” in Handbook of Monetary Economics, Volume 3A, Benjamin M. Friedman and Michael Woodford,
eds. (San Diego, CA: North-Holland, 2010).
Gilchrist, Simon and Egon Zakrajs̆ek, “Credit Spreads and Business Cycle Fluctuations,” American Economic Review, 102 (2012), 1692–1720.
Greenspan, Alan, “Government-Sponsored Enterprises,” Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan to the Conference on Housing, Mortgage Finance, and the Macroeconomy, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia, May 19, 2005.
González-Rivera, Gloria, “Linkages Between Secondary and Primary Markets for Mortgages,” The Journal
of Fixed Income, 11 (2001), 29–36.
41

Haltum, Renee and Robert Sharp, “The First Time the Fed Bought GSE Debt,” Federal Reserve Bank of
Richmond Economic Brief 14-04, 2014.
Hancock, Diana and Wayne Passmore, “Did the Federal Reserve’s MBS Purchase Program Lower Mortgage
Rates?,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 58 (2011), 498–514.
Hancock, Diana and Wayne Passmore, “How Does the Federal Reserve’s Large-Scale Asset Purchases
(LSAPs) Influence Mortgage-Backed Securities (MBS) Yields and U.S. Mortgage Rates?,” Real Estate
Economics, 43 (2015), 855–890.
Hanson, Samuel G., “Mortgage Convexity,” Journal of Financial Economics, 113 (2014), 270–299.
Hendershott, Patric H. and Kevin E. Villani, “The Federally Sponsored Credit Agencies: Their Behavior
and Impact,” in Capital Markets and the Housing Sector: Perspectives on Financial Reform, Robert M.
Buckley, John A. Tucillo, and Kevin Villani, eds. (Cambridge, MA: Ballinger Publishing Co., 1977).
Hendershott, Patric H. and Kevin E. Villani, “Residential Mortgage Markets and the Cost of Mortgage
Funds,” Journal of the American Real Estate and Urban Economics Association, 8 (1980), 50–76.
Hendershott, Patric H. and James D. Shilling, “The Impact of the Agencies on Conventional Fixed-Rate
Mortgage Yields,” Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics, 2 (1989), 101-115.
Jaffee, Dwight M. and Kenneth T. Rosen, “Estimates of the Effectiveness of Stabilization Policies for the
Mortgage and Housing Markets,” Journal of Finance, 33 (1978), 933-946.
Jordà, Òscar, “Estimation and Inference of Impulse Responses by Local Projections,” American Economic
Review, 95 (2005), 161–182.
Justiniano, Alejandro, Giorgio E. Primiceri, and Andrea Tambalotti, “Credit Supply and the Housing Boom,”
NBER Working Paper No. 20874, 2015.
Kaufman, Herbert M., “FNMA and the Housing Cycle: Its Recent Contribution and Its Future Role in
a Deregulated Environment,” in The Federal National Mortgage Association in a Changing Economic
Environment, Supplement to a Report by the Comptroller General of the United States. (Washington,
D.C.: U.S. Government Accountability Office, 1985).
Krishnamurthy, Arvind and Annette Vissing-Jørgensen, “The Effects of Quantitative Easing on Interest
Rates: Channels and Implications for Policy,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 3 (2011), 215–
265.
Leamer, Edward E., “Housing IS the Business Cycle,” NBER Working Paper No. 13428, 2007.
Lehnert, Andreas, Wayne Passmore, and Shane M. Sherlund, “GSEs, Mortgage Rates, and Secondary Market Activities,” Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics, 36 (2008), 343-363.
Malkhozov, Aytek, Philippe Mueller, Andrea Vedolin, and Gyuri Venter, “Mortgage Risk and the Yield
Curve,” The Review of Financial Studies 29 (2016), 1220–1253.
Meltzer, Allan H., “Credit Availability and Economic Decisions: Some Evidence from the Mortgage and
Housing Markets,” Journal of Finance, 29 (1974), 763–777.
Mertens, Karel and Morten O. Ravn, “Empirical Evidence on the Aggregate Effects of Anticipated and
Unanticipated US Tax Policy Shocks,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 4 (2012), 145–
181.
Mian, Atif and Amir Sufi, “The Consequences of Mortgage Credit Expansion: Evidence from the U.S.
Mortgage Default Crisis,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124 (2009), 1449–1496.
Mian, Atif, Amir Sufi, and Emil Verner, “How Do Credit Supply Shocks Affect the Real Economy? Evidence
from the United States in the 1980s,” Princeton University manuscript, 2017.
Naranjo, Andy and Alden Toevs, “The Effects of Purchases of Mortgages and Securitization by Government
Sponsored Enterprises on Mortgage Yield Spreads and Volatility,” Journal of Real Estate Finance and
Economics, 25 (2002), 173–195.
Newey, Whitney K. and Kenneth D. West, “A Simple, Positive Semi-Definite, Heteroskedasticity and Auto42

correlation Consistent Covariance Matrix,” Econometrica, 55 (1987), 703–708.
Owens, Raymond E. and Stacey L. Schreft, “Identifying Credit Crunches,” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Working Paper 93-02, 1993.
Patrabansh, Saty, William M. Doerner, and Samuel Asin, “The Effect of Monetary Policy on Mortgage
Rates,” FHFA Working Paper 14-2, 2014.
Passmore, S. Wayne, “The GSE Implicit Subsidy and the Value of Government Ambiguity,” FEDS Working
Paper No. 2005-05, 2005.
Peek, Joe, Eric S. Rosengren, and Geoffrey M.B. Tootell, “Identifying the Macroeconomic Effects of Loan
Supply Shocks,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 35 (2003), 931–946.
Perli, Roberto, and Brian P. Sack, “Does Mortgage Hedging Amplify Movements in Long-Term Interest
Rates?,” The Journal of Fixed Income, 13 (2003), 7–17.
Ramey, Valerie A., “Identifying Government Spending Shocks: It’s All in the Timing,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 126 (2011), 1–50.
Ramey, Valerie A., “Macroeconomic Shocks and Their Propagation,” in Handbook of Macroeconomics,
Volume 2A, John B. Taylor and Herald Uhlig, eds. (San Diego, CA: North-Holland, 2016).
Ramey, Valerie A. and Sarah Zubairy, “Government Spending Multipliers in Good Times and in Bad: Evidence from U.S. Historical Data,” University of California, San Diego manuscript, 2016.
Romer, Christina D. and David H. Romer, “Does Monetary Policy Matter? A New Test in the Spirit of
Friedman and Schwartz,” in NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1989, Volume 4, Olivier Jean Blanchard and
Stanley Fischer, eds. (Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 1989).
Romer, Christina D. and David H. Romer, “A New Measure of Monetary Shocks: Derivation and Implications,” American Economic Review, 94 (2004), 1055–1084.
Romer, Christina D. and David H. Romer, “The Macroeconomic Effects of Tax Changes: Estimates Based
on a New Measure of Fiscal Shocks,” American Economic Review, 100 (2010), 763–801.
Shiller, Robert J., Irrational Exuberance, 3rd ed. (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2015).
Shumway, R.H. and D.S. Stoffer, “An Approach to Time Series Smoothing and Forecasting Using the EM
Algorithm,” Journal of Time Series Analysis, 3 (1982), 253–264.
Smith, Lawrence B., Kenneth T. Rosen, and George Fallis, “Recent Developments in Economic Models of
Housing Markets,” Journal of Economic Literature, 26 (1988), 29–64.
Stroebel, Johannes and John B. Taylor, “Estimated Impact of the Federal Reserve’s Mortgage-Backed Securities Purchase Program,” International Journal of Central Banking, 8 (2012), 1–42.
Wieland, Johannes F. and Mu-Yeung Yang, “Financial Dampening,” University of California, San Diego
manuscript, 2016.

43

Residential Mortgage Debt

Residential Mortgage Originations

90
As Ratio of GDP
As Ratio of Residential Wealth

80

As Ratio of GDP
As Ratio of Residential Mortgage Debt
60

70
50

Percent

Percent

60
50

40

30

40
30

20

20
10
10
1900

1910

1920

1930

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

1955 1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010

Agency Purchases and Pool Issuance
140

Total
Total excl. Federal Reserve
FNMA,FHLMC & GNMA

25

Percent of Total Originations

Percent of Total Mortgage Debt

Agency Mortgage Holdings

20

15

10

120

Total Net Portfolio Purchases
Total Net Portfolio Purchases excl. Federal Reserve
Agency Pool Issues

100

80

60

40

20

5

0

0
1930

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

1955 1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010

2010

Figure 1 Mortgage Debt, Annualized Originations, and Agency Market Shares
Notes: Residential mortgage debt and originations include home as well as multifamily mortgages. Agency holdings include
holdings of both whole loans and pools. Agency purchases are net purchases for portfolio investment, whereas pool issues
approximate purchases backing new issuance of mortgage pools (mortgage-backed securities). The grey bars are NBER-dated
recessions. Sources: see data appendix.

44

Recessions

Credit Crunches
40

Agency Held
Agency Held excl. Great Recession
Privately Held
Privately Held excl. Great Recession

30

Log Difference with Peak

Log Difference with Peak

40

20

10

0

20

10

0

-10

-10

-20

-20

-8

-6

-4

-2

0
2
4
6
Quarters from Peak

8

10

Agency Held
Agency Held excl. 2007 Financial Crisis
Privately Held
Privately Held excl. 2007 Financial Crisis

30

12

-8

-6

-4

-2

0
2
4
6
Quarters from Peak

8

10

12

Figure 2 Real Mortgage Debt by Holder in Recessions and Credit Crunches
Notes: Mortgage debt is deflated by the core PCE price index. Left panel: average of 9 NBER recessions starting 1957Q2,
1960Q1, 1969Q4, 1973Q4, 1980Q1, 1981Q3, 1990Q3, 2001Q1, 2007Q4. Right panel: average of credit crunches beginning one
quarter after the following dates: 1955Q3, 1959Q1, 1965Q4, 1968Q4, 1972Q4, 1978Q1, 1980Q4, 1990Q1, 1998Q2, 2007Q2.
See data appendix for sources.

Not Cyclically Motivated

Cyclically Motivated
50
Percent of Trend Originations

Percent of Trend Originations

6

4

2

0

-2

40

30

20

10

0

-4

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

Figure 3 Measures of Policy Events Affecting Agency Mortgage Holdings: Jan 1967 to Dec 2014
Notes: The figure shows projected changes in the consolidated agency mortgage portfolio as a percentage of average annualized
mortgage originations over the prior twelve months. The left panel shows changes classified as unrelated to the business or
financial cycle. The right panel shows changes classified as primarily motivated by cyclical considerations. For sources and
classification see Fieldhouse and Mertens (2017). Shaded areas are credit crunch periods, see data appendix for chronology.

45

Agency Net Purchase Commitments

Agency Net Portfolio Purchases

7
6

3
No leads
Including 12 month lead

6

No leads
Including 12 month lead

2.5

4
3
2
1

percent deviation

5
percent deviation

5

4
3
2
1

0

0

-1

-1

-2

-2

2
1.5
1
0.5
0
-0.5
-1

-10

-5

0

5
10
15
20
25
months from policy event

30

35

-10

-5

0

5
10
15
20
25
months from policy event

30

35

-10

-5

0

5
10
15
20
25
months from policy event

30

35

Figure 4 Agency Purchases and Holdings Before and After Non-Cyclical Policy Events
Notes: Response estimated from a regression in first differences on the contemporaneous value and 36 lags of the non-cyclically
motivated narrative measure scaled by the average level of agency mortgage holdings over the prior 12 months. Finer lines are
95% Newey and West (1987) confidence bands.

Agency Net Portfolio Purchases

First Stage Robust F-statistic

1.2

20
18

1
16
14

0.8

12

dollars

Statistic

percent deviation

Agency Mortgage Holdings

7
No leads
Including 12 month lead

10

0.6

8

0.4
6
4

0.2

Agency Commitments
Agency Purchases

2

0

0
0

10

20

30
40
horizon (months)

50

60

0

6

12

18

24
30
horizon (months)

36

42

48

Figure 5 Preliminary Diagnostics
Notes: The left panel shows Newey and West (1987) robust F-statistics of the first-stage regressions of cumulative agency commitments and purchases, respectively, on the narrative instrument. The right panel shows the estimated dollar increase in agency
purchases per dollar increase in commitments. Finer lines in the right panel are 95% Newey and West (1987) confidence bands.
Sample: Jan 1967 to Dec 2006.

46

Private Mortgage Holdings

Agency Mortgage Holdings
1.5

Agency Commitments
Agency Purchases

1.2

1

1

0.5

0.8

dollars

dollars

Agency Commitments
Agency Purchases

0.6

0
-0.5
-1

0.4

-1.5
0.2

-2
-2.5

0
0

6

12

18

24
30
horizon (months)

36

42

0

48

6

12

Mortgage Originations: Total

36

42

48

42

48

42

48

Agency Commitments
Agency Purchases

1.5

4

1

3

0.5

dollars

dollars

24
30
horizon (months)

Residential Mortgage Debt

Agency Commitments
Agency Purchases

5

18

2

1

0

-0.5

0

-1

-1
0

6

12

18

24
30
horizon (months)

36

42

48

0

6

Mortgage Originations: Refinancing

12

18

24
30
horizon (months)

36

Mortgage Originations: Purchase
1.5

4

Agency Commitments
Agency Purchases

3.5

Agency Commitments
Agency Purchases
1

3

dollars

dollars

2.5
2
1.5

0.5

0

1
0.5

-0.5

0
-1

-0.5
0

6

12

18

24
30
horizon (months)

36

42

48

0

6

12

18

24
30
horizon (months)

36

Figure 6 Estimated Balance Sheet Adjustments and Mortgage Credit Multipliers Associated with
Agency Mortgage Purchases
Notes: The figure shows dollar changes per dollar increase in agency net portfolio purchases or commitments to purchase cumulated over the reported horizon in months. Estimates are from local projections-IV regressions, see equation (2). Finer lines are
95% Newey and West (1987) confidence bands. Sample: Jan 1967 to Dec 2006. In the bottom row panels, the sample excludes
May 1985 to Dec 1986 because of missing data on refinance shares, see data appendix.

47

Mortgage Originations
4
3.5

dollars

3
2.5
2
1.5
1

2SLS with full controls
OLS with full controls
OLS with baseline controls

0.5
0
0

6

12

18

24
30
horizon (months)

36

42

48

Figure 7 The Role of Instrumentation
Notes: The figure shows dollar changes per dollar increase in agency net portfolio purchases cumulated over the reported horizon
in months. The benchmark estimates are from local projections as in equation (2), comparing OLS and 2SLS estimates. The
specification with baseline controls excludes the interest rate and cyclical controls.

6

4

percent

2

0

-2

Narrative Policy Indicator
Cum. GSE Excess Return Shocks (Standardized)

-4

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

Figure 8 Cumulative GSE Excess Returns Shocks
Notes: The figure shows the standardized cumulative sum of the orthogonalized GSE excess returns innovations, as well as the
indicator for non-cyclical policy changes for reference. The GSE excess returns shock is obtained as the residual in a regression
of the log of the GSE stock price-to-S&P 500 ratio on twelve lags of this ratio, all of the benchmark lagged control variables, as
well as the contemporaneous values of the control variables with the exception of the agency purchase/commitment ratios. The
first observation for the GSE excess returns shock is Aug 1971, which reflects the month in which Fannie Mae stock was traded
for the first time on the New York Stock Exchange (Aug 1970) plus the model lag length of 12 months.

48

GSE stock index rel. to S&P500
6

4

percent

2

0

-2

-4

-6

-8
0

6

12
horizon (months)

18

24

Figure 9 Impulse Response to a Shock to Anticipated Agency Purchases
Notes: The figure shows the response of the log GSE stock price-to-S&P 500 ratio to a one pp. increase in the expected future
agency market share measured by agency commitments as a ratio of trend originations. Estimates are from local projectionsIV regressions instrumented with the narrative policy indicator, see equation (4). Finer lines are 95% Newey and West (1987)
confidence bands. Sample: Aug 1971 to Dec 2006.

49

Figure 10 Impulse Responses to a Shock to Anticipated Agency Purchases
Notes: The figure shows responses to a one pp. increase in the expected future agency market share measured by agency commitments as a ratio of trend originations. Estimates are from local projections-IV regressions instrumented with the narrative policy
indicator, see equation (4), or orthogonalized GSE excess stock returns innovations, see equation (5). Finer lines and shaded areas
are 95% Newey and West (1987) confidence bands. Sample: Jan 1967 to Dec 2006.

50

Figure 11 Impulse Responses to a Shock to Anticipated Agency Purchases
Notes: The figure shows responses to a one pp. increase in the expected future agency market share measured by agency commitments as a ratio of trend originations. Estimates are from local projections-IV regressions instrumented with the narrative policy
indicator, see equation (4), or orthogonalized GSE excess stock returns innovations, see equation (5). Finer lines and shaded areas
are 95% Newey and West (1987) confidence bands. Sample: Jan 1967 to Dec 2006.

Figure 12 Interactions between Monetary and Credit Policies
Notes: Left and middle panel: The figure shows responses for a one pp. increase in agency market share measured by agency
commitments as a ratio of trend originations. Estimates are from local projections-IV regressions instrumented with the narrative
policy indicator, see equation (4), or orthogonalized GSE excess stock returns innovations, see equation (5). Finer lines and shaded
areas are 95% Newey and West (1987) confidence bands. Right panel: The figure shows responses to a monetary shock obtained
as in Figure 11. Finer lines and shaded areas are 95% Newey and West (1987) confidence bands. Sample: Jan 1967 to Dec 2006.

51

Figure 13 Responses to A Shock to Anticipated Agency Purchases Versus a Monetary Policy Shock
Notes: The figure shows responses to a one pp. increase in the expected future agency market share as well as the response to a
monetary policy shock. Estimates are from local projections-IV regressions instrumenting agency commitments with the narrative
policy indicator, see equation (4), and instrumenting the 3 month T-bill rate with the Romer and Romer (2004) monetary policy
shock measure. Finer lines and shaded areas are 95% Newey and West (1987) confidence bands. Sample: Jan 1967 to Dec 2006.

52

A. Narrative Instrument

B. GSE Excess Returns Instrument

Figure 14 Shock to Anticipated Agency Purchases: Counterfactual with Constant Short-Term Rate
Notes: The figure shows responses to a one pp. increase in the expected future agency market share and a sequence of monetary
shocks such that the 3-month T-bill rate remains constant. Estimates are from local projections-IV regressions instrumenting
agency commitments with the narrative policy indicator. Finer lines and shaded areas are 95% Newey and West (1987) confidence
bands. Sample: Jan 1967 to Dec 2006.

53

Table 1: Sources for Narrative Analysis
Government Publications
Board of Governors
Congressional Budget Office
Congressional Quarterly
Congressional Research Service
Council of Economic Advisors
Department of Housing and Urban
Development

Department of the Treasury

Federal Home Loan Mortgage
Corporation
Federal Housing Finance Administration
Federal National Mortgage Association

Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission
Government Accountability Office

US Congress

Office of Federal Housing Enterprise
Oversight
Office of the Federal Register
Office of Management and Budget
The President’s Commission on Housing
Press and Online Sources

Overview Books and Articles
Bartke
Elliot, Feldberg, and Lehnert
Greenspan
Haar
Hagerty
Hoffman and Cassell
Hunter
McLean

Annual Report, Press releases, Federal Reserve Bulletin
The Housing Finance System and Federal Policy: Recent Changes and Options for
the Future (1983), Controlling Risks of Government-Sponsored Enterprises (1991)
Congressional Quarterly Almanac
A Chronology of Housing Legislation and Selected Executive Actions, 1892-2003
(2004), The Conforming Loan Limit (2008)
Economic Report of the President
HUD news releases, The Secondary Market in Residential Mortgages (1982), 1986
Report to Congress on the Federal National Mortgage Association (1987), The
National Homeownership Strategy: Partners in the American Dream (1995),
Privatization of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac: Desirability and Feasibility (1996),
Profiles of GSE Mortgage Purchases in 2001-2004 (2008)
Press releases and statements, Report of the Secretary of the Treasury on
Government-Sponsored Enterprises (1990), Government Sponsorship of the FNMA
and the FHLMC (1996)
Press releases and statements, Annual Report, Form 10-K
Press releases and statements, Mortgage Market Notes
Press releases and statements, Annual Report, Form 10-K, Monthly Volume
Summary, Information Statement, MBSenger, Offering Circular, Background and
History of the Federal National Mortgage Association (1969, 1973)
Final Report of the Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission (2011)
The Federal National Mortgage Association in a Changing Environment (1985),
GSEs: A Framework for Limiting the Government’s Exposure to Risk (1991),
Housing Enterprises: Potential Impacts of Severing Government Sponsorship (1996),
HUD’s Mission Oversight Needs to be Strengthened (1998)
Hearing transcripts and reports: Committees on Appropriations, Committees on
Banking and Currency, Committee on Banking, Finance and Urban Affairs, and
Committee on Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs
Press releases and statements, Annual Report, Mortgage Market Notes, Mortgage
Markets and the Enterprises, Evaluating the Capital Adequacy of Freddie Mac and
Fannie Mae (1998), Special Examination Reports (2003, 2004, 2006)
Federal Register
Budget of the United States Government
The Report of The President’s Commission on Housing (1982)
ABA Banking Journal, American Banker, The American Presidency Project, The
Bond Buyer, Dow Jones Capital Market Reports, Dow Jones News Service, Dow
Jones Newswires, Financial Times, MarketWatch, National Mortgage News, The New
York Times, Reuters News, The Wall Street Journal, The Washington Post

Fannie Mae and the Secondary Mortgage Market (1971), Home Financing at a
Crossroads: A Study of the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation (1973)
The History of Cyclical Macroprudential Policy in the US (2013)
The Age of Turbulence: Adventures in a New World (2007)
Federal Credit and Private Housing: The Mass Financing Dilemma (1960)
The Fateful History of Fannie Mae: New Deal Birth to Mortgage Crisis Fall (2012)
Mission Expansion in the Federal Home Loan Bank System (2010)
The FNMA: Its Response to Critical Financing Requirements of Housing (1971)
Shaky Ground: The Strange Saga of the US Mortgage Giants (2015)

Notes: For detailed bibliographical references, see Fieldhouse and Mertens (2017).

54

Table 2: Narrative Measures of Policy Changes
Policy Description
HUDA 1968: Special Assistance
HUDA 1968: Increased Debt-to-Capital Ratio
Increased Debt-to-Capital Ratio
HUDA 1969: Special Assistance
Treasury-Guaranteed Capitalization
EHFA 1970: Special Assistance
Conforming Mortgage Program Approval
FHA/VA Tandem Authorization
FHA/VA Tandem Authorization
Subsidized Mortgage Purchase Program
FHA/VA Tandem Authorization
HCDA 1974: Conforming Loan Limit
HCDA 1974: Conforming Loan Limit
EHPA 1974: Tandem Program
FY1976 Approps: Tandem Program
HCDA 1977: Conforming Loan Limit
HCDA 1977: Conforming Loan Limit
HCDA 1977: Tandem Program Expansion
FY1979 Approps: Special Assistance
HCDA 1978: Mortgagee Expansion
FY1980 Approps: Special Assistance
HCDA 1979: Conforming Loan Limit
FY1981 Approps: Special Assistance
ARM Program Approval
ARM Program Approval
Second Mortgage Program Approval
FY1982 Approps: Special Assistance
Increased Debt-to-Capital Ratio
FY1983 Approps: Special Assistance
FY1984 Supp. Approps: Tandem Repeal
Second Mortgage Program Approval
Decreased Debt-to-Capital Ratio
Public Listing: Stock Split Capitalization
FHEFSSA 1992: Capital Requirements
Affordable Housing Goals of 1995
Affordable Housing Goals of 2004
Affordable Housing Goals of 2004
Accounting Scandal: Capital Surcharge
Portfolio Growth Limit Imposed
Portfolio Limit Increase
Portfolio Limit Increase
ESA 2008: Jumbo Loan Limit
ESA 2008: Jumbo Loan Limit
Removal of Portfolio Limit
Removal of Portfolio Limit
Reduced Capital Surcharge

Agency
GNMA
FNMA
FNMA
GNMA
FNMA
GNMA
FNMA
GNMA
GNMA
FHLMC
GNMA
FNMA
FHLMC
GNMA
GNMA
FNMA
FHLMC
GNMA
GNMA
FHLMC
GNMA
FHLMC
GNMA
FHLMC
FNMA
FNMA
GNMA
FNMA
GNMA
GNMA
FHLMC
FNMA
FHLMC
FNMA
FHLMC
FNMA
FHLMC
FNMA
FHLMC
FNMA
FHLMC
FNMA
FHLMC
FNMA
FHLMC
FNMA

55

Impact
+$0.25 billion
+$1.39 billion
+$1.13 billion
+$0.75 billion
+$2.6 billion
+$0.38 billion
+$0.4 billion
+$1.5 billion
+$3.3 billion
+$1.5 billion
+$1.65 billion
+$1.14 billion
+$0.46 billion
+$3.88 billion
+$2.5 billion
+$4.82 billion
+$0.21 billion
+$3.75 billion
+$1.0 billion
+$2.0 billion
+$1.0 billion
+0.86 billion
-$0.2 billion
+$0.37 billion
+$0.4 billion
+$5.0 billion
+$0.17 billion
+$6.25 billion
-$1.47 billion
-$2.92 billion
+$1.0 billion
-$2.7 billion
+$1.62 billion
-$4.25 billion
+$0.61 billion
+$7.6 billion
+$7.6 billion
-$141.4 billion
-$42.8 billion
+$17.15 billion
+$2.14 billion
+$41.57 billion
+$41.57 billion
+$9.28 billion
+$9.05 billion
+$53.33 billion

News
Aug. 1968
Oct. 1968
Dec. 1969
Dec. 1969
Apr. 1970
July 1970
Nov. 1971
Sep. 1973
Jan. 1974
May 1974
May 1974
Aug. 1974
Aug. 1974
Oct. 1974
Oct. 1975
Oct. 1977
Oct. 1977
Oct. 1977
Sep. 1978
Oct. 1978
July 1979
Dec. 1979
Sep. 1980
May 1981
June 1981
Sep. 1981
Dec. 1981
Dec. 1982
Dec. 1982
Nov. 1983
Jan. 1986
Apr. 1987
Nov. 1988
Mar. 1990
Dec. 1995
Apr. 2004
Apr. 2004
Sep. 2004
June 2006
Sep. 2007
Sep. 2007
Feb. 2008
Feb. 2008
Feb. 2008
Feb. 2008
Mar. 2008

Effective
July 1969
Oct. 1968
Dec. 1969
Dec. 1969
Apr. 1970
July 1970
Feb. 1972
Sep. 1973
Jan. 1974
May 1974
May 1974
Aug. 1974
Aug. 1974
Oct. 1974
Oct. 1975
Oct. 1977
Oct. 1977
Oct. 1977
Oct. 1978
May 1979
Nov. 1979
Dec. 1979
Dec. 1980
July 1981
Aug. 1981
Nov. 1981
Dec. 1981
Dec. 1982
Dec. 1982
Nov. 1983
Jan. 1986
Dec. 1987
Nov. 1988
Mar. 1990
Jan. 1996
Jan. 2005
Jan. 2005
Sep. 2004
July 2006
Sep. 2007
Sep. 2007
Apr. 2008
Apr. 2008
Mar. 2008
Mar. 2008
Mar. 2008

Classification
Non-Cyclical
Non-Cyclical
Cyclical
Cyclical
Cyclical
Cyclical
Non-Cyclical
Cyclical
Cyclical
Cyclical
Cyclical
Non-Cyclical
Non-Cyclical
Cyclical
Cyclical
Non-Cyclical
Non-Cyclical
Non-Cyclical
Non-Cyclical
Non-Cyclical
Non-Cyclical
Cyclical
Cyclical
Cyclical
Cyclical
Cyclical
Cyclical
Non-Cyclical
Cyclical
Non-Cyclical
Non-Cyclical
Non-Cyclical
Non-Cyclical
Non-Cyclical
Non-Cyclical
Non-Cyclical
Non-Cyclical
Non-Cyclical
Non-Cyclical
Cyclical
Cyclical
Cyclical
Cyclical
Non-Cyclical
Non-Cyclical
Cyclical

Policy Description

Agency

Impact

News

Effective

Classification

Reduced Capital Surcharge
Reduced Capital Surcharge
HERA 2008: Jumbo Loan Limit
HERA 2008: Jumbo Loan Limit
Conservatorship: Portfolio Limit Increase
Conservatorship: Portfolio Limit Increase
MBS Purchase Program Launch
QE1 Launch
ARRA 2009: Jumbo Loan Limit
ARRA 2009: Jumbo Loan Limit
HASP: Portfolio Limit Increase
HASP: Portfolio Limit Increase
QE1 Expansion
MBS Purchase Program Sales
Agency MBS Reinvestment
Third SPSPA Amendment
Third SPSPA Amendment
QE3 Launch
QE3 Taper

FHLMC
FNMA
FNMA
FHLMC
FNMA
FHLMC
Treasury
Fed
FNMA
FHLMC
FNMA
FHLMC
Fed
Treasury
Fed
FNMA
FHLMC
Fed
Fed

+$43.33 billion
+$17.75 billion
-$13.34 billion
-$13.34 billion
+$67.5 billion
+$66.75 billion
+$80.0 billion
+$250.0 billion
+$13.34 billion
+$13.34 billion
+$50.0 billion
+$50.0 billion
+$750.0 billion
-$120.0 billion
+$262.0 billion
-$22.16 billion
-$22.16 billion
+$480.0 billion
-$60.0 billion

Mar. 2008
May 2008
July 2008
July 2008
Sep. 2008
Sep. 2008
Sep. 2008
Nov. 2008
Feb. 2009
Feb. 2009
Feb. 2009
Feb. 2009
Mar. 2009
Mar. 2011
Sep. 2011
Aug. 2012
Aug. 2012
Sep. 2012
Dec. 2013

Mar. 2008
May 2008
Jan. 2009
Jan. 2009
Sep. 2008
Sep. 2008
Sep. 2008
Dec. 2008
Feb. 2009
Feb. 2009
May 2009
May 2009
Mar. 2009
Mar. 2011
Sep. 2011
Aug. 2012
Aug. 2012
Sep. 2012
Jan. 2014

Cyclical
Cyclical
Cyclical
Cyclical
Cyclical
Cyclical
Cyclical
Cyclical
Cyclical
Cyclical
Cyclical
Cyclical
Cyclical
Cyclical
Cyclical
Non-Cyclical
Non-Cyclical
Cyclical
Cyclical

Acronyms (in chronological appearance): Housing and Urban Development Act (HUDA); Emergency Home Finance Act
(EHFA); Housing and Community Development Act (HCDA); Emergency Home Purchase Act (EHPA); fiscal year (FY);
adjustable-rate mortgage (ARM); Federal Housing Enterprises Financial Safety and Soundness Act (FHEFSSA); Economic
Stimulus Act (ESA); Mortgage-backed securities (MBS); Housing and Economic Recovery Act (HERA); quantitative easing (QE); American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA); Home Affordability and Stability Plan (HASP); and Senior
Preferred Stock Purchase Agreements (SPSPA).

Historical Background
This appendix provides some more historical background to the evolution of agency market shares depicted
in Figure 1.34 During the Depression, the Home Owners’ Loan Corporation took ownership of nearly 15%
of mortgage debt. Housing and homeownership reemerged as a priority at the end of WWII, which is reflected in the strong growth of Fannie holdings in the late 1940s until the Korean War again shifted priority
away from housing. A struggling Fannie was rechartered as a mixed private-public ownership corporation
in 1954. In 1968, Fannie Mae was split into a publicly listed private corporation and a government-owned
Ginnie Mae. In the 1970s, Fannie expanded almost without interruption and the agencies mortgage holdings reached close to 10 percent of total mortgage debt. However, Fannie’s large debt-financed balance
sheet incurred heavy losses after interest rates rose sharply in 1979. Profitability was only restored through
a strategy of aggressive portfolio expansion and by entering the securitization business. At its creation in
1970, ownership of Freddie Mac was restricted to the savings and loans, which had no interest in creating
a competitor. As a result, Freddie focused on the securitization of conventional loans, maintaining only a
relatively modest mortgage portfolio for warehousing until the late 1980s. In the second half of the 1980s,
rising delinquencies and a more hostile attitude of the Reagan administration towards the GSEs led to a
reduction in the agencies’ market share.
34 Table

1 contains references to various books an articles that contain more comprehensive overviews.

56

Various reforms in the aftermath of the 1980s S&L crisis set the stage for a prolonged rise in agency activity
in the 1990s and early 2000s, and by 2002, the agencies held close to one quarter of the total outstanding
mortgage debt on their portfolios. Before, in 1989 Freddie was turned into a publicly traded company with
the same profit incentives for balance sheet growth as Fannie, while the Federal Home Loan Banks were
granted permission to invest in MBS. Prudential regulations were tightened for private banks, but remained
light for the GSEs despite a 1992 reform. The agencies increasingly retained their own and acquired each
other’s MBS, as opposed to selling them to private investors. As part of an ambitious homeownership strategy, the Clinton administration was supportive of the efforts by Fannie and Freddie to develop automated
underwriting systems and ramped up affordable housing goals for their purchases.
The rapid rise in agency ownership of mortgage debt increasingly became a cause of concern with public officials, and in the wake of the Enron scandal Fannie and Freddie were required to start filing reports
with the Security and Exchange Commission. Allegations of accounting fraud in 2003 prompted an investigation by regulators, leading to capital surcharges in the fall of 2004 and settlements that included portfolio
caps in 2006. This contributed to a sharp fall in the agencies’ market share, which declined 10 percentage
points from 2003 to 2007. During the turmoil in mortgage markets in 2007, the portfolio caps and capital
surcharges were relaxed, allowing the agencies to step up purchasing activity. In early September 2008,
Fannie and Freddie were taken into conservatorship by the FHFA and Treasury Department.
The 2008 conservatorship agreement allowed for continued GSE balance sheet growth in the short run,
but also mandated a long-run wind-down of their portfolios at an annual rate of 10%, increased to 15% in
2012, until they reach a $250 billion each. The day after the agreement, the Treasury announced its own
MBS purchase program, while the Federal Reserve’s MBS program was launched a few weeks later. As
a result of the Fed and Treasury programs, the combined agency ownership share regained levels similar
to the early 2000s despite a gradual decline in holdership by the traditional housing agencies. In contrast,
Fannie and Freddie have been allowed to grow their MBS guarantee book essentially without limits. Since
the financial crisis, the vast majority of conforming loans originated have been acquired, guaranteed, and
sold off in MBS by the agencies.
Data Sources and Construction
Data underlying Figure 1: Residential Mortgage Debt post-1945 is the sum of home mortgages and multifamily residential mortgages from the Federal Reserve’s Financial Accounts of the United States. Pre-1945
data is spliced using Series N-151 (Nonfarm Residential Mortgage Debt) from the Historical Statistics of the
United States (1960 edition). Nominal GDP post-1929 is from the National Income and Product Accounts,
spliced using series Ca-10 from the Historical Statistics of the United States (Table Ca9-19, Millenial Edition). The data for Housing Wealth post-1930 is from Davis and Heathcoate (2007) available at and updated
by the Lincoln Institute of Land Policy, http://www.lincolninst.edu/research-data/data. Pre-1930
data is spliced using Series N-129 (Total Nonfarm Residential Wealth) from the Historical Statistics of the
United States (1960 edition).
Agency Mortgage Holdings is the sum of the retained mortgage portfolios of Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac,
Ginnie Mae, the FHLBanks, the Treasury Department, the Federal Reserve, and a number of other government agencies. Both holdings of whole loans and mortgage pools are included.
Fannie Mae: Monthly data on Fannie’s retained mortgage portfolio from 1950 to 2003 is from various
issues of the Federal Reserve Bulletin, which stopped reporting GSE portfolio statistics in 2003. From
57

then onwards, the data is from Fannie’s monthly volume summary cross-checked with the annual
reports from OFHEO/FHFA for consistency. Prior to 1950, the data is based on fiscal year data from a
Fannie publication titled “FNMA Background and History” (1969 and 1973 editions), as well as Series
N-159 from the Historical Statistics of the United States (1960 edition).
Freddie Mac: Monthly data on Freddie’s retained mortgage portfolio from 1970 to 2003 is from various issues of the Federal Reserve Bulletin, and after 2003 from Freddie’s monthly volume summary
cross-checked with the annual reports from OFHEO/FHFA for consistency.
Ginnie Mae: Quarterly data on Ginnie’s home and multifamily mortgage from the Financial Accounts
of the United States. Monthly data is available from 1968 to 1974 from various issues of the Federal
Reserve Bulletin.
FHLBanks: Data on FHLB mortgage holdings is from various issues of FHFA annual reports (annual
from 1992 to 2007 and quarterly since 2008). Pre-1992 annual data is from a 1993 CBO study titled
“The Federal Home Loan Banks in the Housing Finance System” (p. 15).
Treasury: Data from the Treasury Department https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/
data-chart-center/Pages/mbs-purchase-program.aspx
Federal Reserve: Data from the Federal Reserve’s Financial Accounts of the United States.
Other Agencies: The home and multifamily holdings of the Veterans Administration, the Federal
Housing Adminstration, the Federal Farmers Home Administration, the Resolution Trust Corporation, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and Public Housing Administration are all obtained
from the Financial Accounts of the United States. Data from the Home Owner’s Loan Corporation
(which in the Financial Accounts is included with Fannie Mae) is series N-158 from the Historical
Statistics of the United States (1960 edition).
The upper left panel of Figure 1 shows annual data up to 1952 and quarterly data afterwards. Missing quarterly data on FHLB holdings is obtained by linear interpolation of annual data.
Residential mortgage originations shown in the lower left panel of Figure 1 is the quarterly aggregate of the
monthly series described below.
Agency Net Portfolio Purchases and Pool Issues is the sum of net portfolios purchases of both whole loans
as well as mortgage pools, and of issues of mortgage pools respectively, by Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, Ginnie Mae, the FHLBanks, the Treasury Department, the Federal Reserve, and a number of other government
agencies:
Fannie Mae: Monthly data on Fannie’s net portfolio purchases from 1953 to 1998 is from various issues of the Federal Reserve Bulletin (portfolio purchases less sales). More recent data is from Fannie’s
monthly volume summary cross-checked with the annual reports from OFHEO/FHFA for consistency.
While data on purchases is available over the entire sample, data on portfolio sales is missing for 1986
and 1988-1997. We impute the missing observations using data on Fannie’s commitments to purchase
and sell, actual purchases, and the net change in the retained portfolio. The imputation is done by
Kalman smoothing in a state space model estimated by maximum likelihood as in Shumway and Stoffer (1982) using monthly data from 1980 to 2014. The model used is a vector autoregressive process
for the net portfolio purchase rate, retained mortgage portfolio growth, and the ratio of purchases and
net commitments to the retained portfolio. Data on Fannie pool issues from 1993 is from Lehnert,
58

Passmore, and Sherlund (2008), extended to 2014 using Fannie’s monthly volume summaries. Pre1993 monthly data is obtained by subtracting Freddie and Ginnie pool issues from total net purchases
by agency mortgage pools from monthly releases by the Department of Housing and Urban Development from the Survey of Mortgage Lending Activity (obtained through the National Archives and
Records Administration).
Freddie Mac: Monthly data on Freddie’s net portfolio purchases from 1993 onwards is from Lehnert, Passmore, and Sherlund (2008) and Freddie’s monthly volume summaries. Data before 1984 is
obtained by subtracting Freddie pool issues from total wholesale loan purchases available from the
Federal Reserve Bulletin. Data between 1984 and 1993 is imputed using data on Freddie holdings and
repayment rates in Fannie’s portfolio. The imputation is done by Kalman smoothing in a state space
model estimated by maximum likelihood as in Shumway and Stoffer (1982) using monthly data from
1980 to 2014. The model used is a vector autoregressive process for Freddie’s net portfolio purchase
rate, retained mortgage portfolio growth and repayment rates in Fannie’s retained portfolio. Monthly
data on Freddie pool issuance is from the journal of the Federal Home Loan Bank Board (various
issues, 1971-1980), the Federal Reserve Bulletin (1980-1998), and the monthly volume summaries
(1998 onwards).
Ginnie Mae: Monthly data on Ginnie’s net portfolio purchases from 1968 to 1971 is from various
issues of the Federal Reserve Bulletin. Subsequent data is imputed by assuming that repayment rates
for mortgages packaged in pools backed by Ginnie are the same as for mortgages held in portfolio.
Monthly data on Ginnie pool issues since 1968 was provided to us directly by the Department of
Housing and Urban Development.
FHLBanks: Data on net purchases by the FHLBanks is imputed using net changes in holdings and
assuming that the combined repayment rate on mortgages debt in Fannie, Freddie and Ginnie pools is
identical to the repayment rate on mortgages in mortgage-backed securities held by the FHLBanks.
Treasury: Data on MBS purchases is from the Treasury Department https://www.treasury.gov/
resource-center/data-chart-center/Pages/mbs-purchase-program.aspx.
Federal Reserve: Data on MBS purchases using the date of settlement, available from the Board
of Governors https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/reform_mbs.htm and the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York https://www.newyorkfed.org/markets/ambs/ambs_schedule.html.
Other Agencies: Data on combined net purchases by the other agencies is imputed using net changes
in holdings and by assuming that the combined repayment rate on mortgages debt in Ginnie pools is
identical to the repayment rate on mortgages in mortgage-backed securities held in portfolio.
The lower right panel of Figure 1 shows quarterly data from 1952 onwards.
Data underlying Figure 2: Agency mortgage holdings is the quarterly series from Figure 1. Private
mortgage holdings is total residential mortgage debt from Figure 1 less agency holdings. Both series are
deflated by the price index for personal consumption expenditures excluding food and energy from NIPA
(series PCEPILFE from the FRED database at the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis). The chronology for
pre-1986 credit crunches is from Eckstein and Sinai (1986). The dating of post-1986 crunches is based on
Owens and Schreft (1993) for the 1990 commercial real estate crunch), Lehnert, Passmore, and Sherlund
(2008) for the 1998 Russian default/LTCM crisis, and Bordo and Haubrich (2010) for the 2007 Financial
Crisis.
59

Monthly agency data: The monthly series for consolidated agency mortgage holdings and net portfolio
purchases sums the monthly series for Fannie, Freddie, Ginnie, the Federal Reserve, and the Treasury described above (see data underlying Figure 1). All series are seasonally adjusted using the X-13 program
from the Census Bureau.
Agency purchase commitments are the sum of the following series:
Fannie Mae: Monthly data on the stock of total outstanding unfulfilled commitments from 1953 to
1990 is available from various issues of the Federal Reserve Bulletin. To obtain net purchase commitments made during the month, we add net purchases to the net change in commitments outstanding.
From 1990 onwards we use net commitments (issued less to sell) from the Federal Reserve Bulletin
(up to 2003) and Fannie’s monthly volume summaries (2003 onwards).
Freddie Mac: Monthly data on Freddie’s net portfolio commitments (issued less to sell) is from Freddie’s monthly volume summaries from 1998 onwards. For observations before 1998, we use Freddie
net portfolio purchases.
Federal Reserve: Data on MBS purchases using the trade date, available from the Board of Governors
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/reform_mbs.htm and the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York.
No data for net commitments is available for Ginnie Mae and the Treasury, and we simply use the series for
net portfolio purchases.
Monthly mortgage market data: The conventional mortgage rate is the 30-year fixed-rate conventional
conforming mortgage rate. From 1971 onwards, the conventional rate is the monthly average commitment
rate from the Freddie Mac primary mortgage market survey. Pre-1971 data is from the Federal Housing
Adminstration (FHA)/Departement of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) series for the primary conventional market rate, available from the Federal Reserve Bulletin (various issues).
The FHA mortgage rate is the 30-year fixed-rate FHA-guaranteed mortgage rate. Rate data for FHAmortgages offered in the secondary market from 1963 is provided by FHA/HUD and is available from
various issues of the Federal Reserve Bulletin. Earlier data is from the NBER’s macrohistory database (series m13045). The series has a handful of missing observations and was discontinued in 2000. We impute
data by Kalman smoothing in a VAR/state space model estimated by maximum likelihood as in Shumway
and Stoffer (1982) using several closely related interest rate series over the 1976-2014 period: the conventional 30-year rate (FHA/HUD as well as the Freddie Mac series), the 3-month and 10-year Treasury rates,
and yields on Ginnie Mae securities (from the Federal Reserve Bulletin as well as the MTGEGNSF Index
from Bloomberg). A couple of missing observations prior to 1976 were imputed in a similar fashion using
data on the 3-month and 10-year Treasury rates, on interest rate data provided by Saul B. Klaman’s 1961
NBER publication “The Postwar Residential Mortgage Market”, and on interest rate ceilings on FHA loans
applicable at the time. The 10-year and 3-month Treasury rates are from the FRED database (GS10 and
TB3MS).
The primary source of monthly data on residential mortgage originations are monthly news releases from
the Survey of Mortgage Lending Activity (SMLA) conducted by HUD from 1970 to 1997, accessed through
the National Archives and Records Administration (Tables 2 and 3: total originations of long term mortgage
loans for 1-to-4 nonfarm homes and multifamily residential properties). The monthly series is interpolated
after 1997 using quarterly data on originations (series USMORTORA in Datastream) and weekly data on
mortgage applications (series MBAVBASC on Bloomberg), both from the Mortgage Bankers’ Association
60

(MBA). The interpolation is done through Kalman smoothing of an estimated VAR/state space model as in
Shumway and Stoffer (1982). Observations before 1965 are based on data of total new non-farm mortgages
of $20,000 or less recorded from the Federal Home Loan Bank Board and available from the NBER’s macrohistory database (series m02173). To obtain an estimate of total originations, we assume that the share of
originations of $20,000 or less in all originations is the same as the share in originations by Savings & Loans
associations. Data on S&L originations (total and $20,000 or less) is available from various issues of the
Savings and Home Financing Sourcebooks, a publication by the Federal Home Loan Bank Board up prior
to 1990. Data between 1965 and 1970 is imputed using total originations by S&L associations based on
Kalman smoothing in a VAR/state space model estimated as in Shumway and Stoffer (1982) using monthly
data from 1954 to 1985. The series is seasonally adjusted using the X-13 program from the Census Bureau.
Unfortunately, the monthly SMLA releases do not contain information on the purpose of the mortgage loans.
However, the Savings and Home Financing Sourcebooks published prior to 1990 contain monthly data on refinancing originations by S&L banks (although observations from May 1985 to December 1986 are missing).
After 1990, quarterly totals of refinancing originations are available from the MBA (series USMORRVLA in
Datastream). As an estimate of the share of refinancing loans, we use the monthly shares at S&L banks before 1990, and the quarterly shares from the MBA afterwards. Our monthly series on refinance and purchase
originations are obtained by applying the estimated share of refinancing to our series for total residential
mortgage originations.
The monthly series for mortgage debt is based on interpolation of the quarterly mortgage debt series from the
Financial Accounts of the United States (see Figure 1) using the series on monthly originations. The series
is constructed by linear interpolation of the implied quarterly repayment rates. The final series is seasonally
adjusted using the X-13 program from the Census Bureau.
Other monthly variables The series on (seasonally adjusted) housing starts is from the Census Bureau
and obtained through the FRED database at the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis (series HOUST). House
prices post-1975 are measured by the Freddie Mac house price index (FMHPI) available at http://www.
freddiemac.com/finance/house_price_index.html. The data are extended before 1975 by splicing
with the home purchase component of the BLS Consumer Price Index (PHCPI from FRED), obtained from
Shiller (2015), and seasonally adjusted using the X-13 program from the Census Bureau. The series is
deflated by the nominal price level, measured by the core PCE price index to obtain a real house price index
(series PCEPILFE from FRED). To the best of our knowledge, no monthly data on the homeownership
rate is available. We therefore simply use quarterly values of series RHORUSQ156N from FRED. Monthly
personal consumption expenditures is from NIPA (series PCE from FRED). Monthly personal income is
from NIPA (series PI from FRED). The unemployment rate is series UNR from FRED. The short and longterm nominal interest rates 3-month and 10-year Treasury rates are series TB3MS and GS10 from FRED.
The GSE stock price index post 1988 is the geometric average of stock price indices for Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac (from Bloomberg), and the Fannie stock price index from 1970 through 1988. The S&P 500
index is the nominal index from Shiller (2015) deflated by the nominal price level. The BAA and AAA
corporate bond rates are the Moody’s seasoned BAA and AAA yields (series BAA and AAA from FRED).

61

A
A.1

Appendix for Online Publication: Additional Results and Robustness Checks
Cumulative Credit Multipliers

This section discusses a number of robustness checks of the results presented in Section 5 regarding the
cumulative effects of agency purchases.

Scaling by Trend Originations The baseline specification in (2) uses a trend in personal income as the
scaling variable. Figure A.1 reports the results when we instead use a long run trend in annualized mortgage
originations. The latter is obtained by fitting a third degree polynomial of time to the log of real mortgage
originations obtained using the core PCE price index as the deflator. This is potentially consequential for the
results because of trend growth of the mortgage market relative to the economy. However, the figure shows
that the results remain generally similar to the baseline in Figure 6. Cumulative originations do not increase
in the short run, but are higher by 4 dollars after 3 to 4 years, while mortgage debt rises in the long run by
almost one dollar. The bulk of the new originations are for refinance purposes, while originations for home
purchases are higher by 1 to 1.5 dollars after 3 to 4 years.

Agency Pool Issuance Figure A.2 reports the cumulative dollar change in agency issuance of mortgage
pools, i.e. MBS. In contrast to originations or total mortgage debt, the choice of scaling variable is important
for the cumulative impact on agency MBS issuance. Scaling by trend income implicitly assigns a larger
relative weight to policy changes that occur later in the sample. The left panel of Figure A.2 shows that at
relatively short horizons, agency MBS issuance rises by roughly the same dollar amount as the increase in
agency mortgage holdings, see Figure 6. The fact that private mortgage holdings also decrease by roughly
the same amount implies that the agency portfolio purchases are predominantly of MBS, while there are
no additional MBS sales to private investors. As the horizon increases, cumulative MBS issuance rises to
close to 2 dollars after three to four years. The increase in MBS issuance coincides closely with the rise
in originations. Cumulative MBS issuance converges to around 40% to 50% percent of the cumulative rise
in originations, which is about the typical agency securitization share since the mid-1980s. The right panel
of Figure A.2 shows in contrast no short-run impact on MBS issuance when the scaling variable is a trend
in originations, implying that the agency portfolio purchases are instead of whole loans. MBS issuance
1

gradually rises, but the total cumulative increase is a smaller share of the total increase in originations. This
pattern is more similar to agency behavior before the growth of mortgage securitization in the mid-1980s.
Agency Mortgage Holdings
Agency Commitments
Agency Purchases

1.2

2

1

1

0.8

0

dollars

dollars

Private Mortgage Holdings

0.6

0.4

-1

-2

0.2
-3

Agency Commitments
Agency Purchases

0
0

6

12

18

24
30
horizon (months)

36

42

48

0

6

12

18

Mortgage Originations

24
30
horizon (months)

36

42

48

Residential Mortgage Debt

5
2
4
1
dollars

dollars

3
2
1

0

-1

0
-1

-2

Agency Commitments
Agency Purchases

-2

Agency Commitments
Agency Purchases
-3

0

6

12

18

24
30
horizon (months)

36

42

48

0

6

12

Mortgage Originations: Refinancing

24
30
horizon (months)

36

42

48

Mortgage Originations: Purchase
2.5

Agency Commitments
Agency Purchases

4

18

Agency Commitments
Agency Purchases

2

3

dollars

dollars

1.5
2

1

1
0.5
0

0

-0.5
-1
-1
-2
0

6

12

18

24
30
horizon (months)

36

42

48

0

6

12

18

24
30
horizon (months)

36

42

48

Figure A.1 Cumulative Estimates Using Trend Originations as the Scaling Variable
Notes: The figure shows dollar changes per dollar increase in agency net portfolio purchases or commitments to purchase cumulated over the reported horizon in months. Estimates are from local projections-IV regressions, see equation (2). Finer lines are
95% Newey and West (1987) confidence bands. Sample: Jan 1967 to Dec 2006. In the bottom row panels, the sample excludes
May 1985 to Dec 1986 because of missing data on refinance shares.

2

Scaling by Trend Income

Scaling by Trend Originations

Agency Pool Issues

Agency Pool Issues

2.5

Agency Commitments
Agency Purchases

2

2

1.5

dollars

dollars

1

1.5

1

0.5
0
-0.5

0.5
-1

Agency Commitments
Agency Purchases

-1.5

0
0

6

12

18

24
30
horizon (months)

36

42

48

0

6

12

18

24
30
horizon (months)

36

42

48

Figure A.2 Total Mortgage Pool Issuance Associated with Agency Mortgage Purchases
Notes: The figure shows dollar changes per dollar increase in agency net portfolio purchases or commitments to purchase cumulated over the reported horizon in months. Estimates are from local projections-IV regressions, see equation (2), using non-cyclical
policy events as the instrument. Finer lines are 95% Newey and West (1987) confidence bands. Sample: Jan 1967 to Dec 2006.

Other Robustness Checks

Table A.1 clarifies how the results depend on instrumentation and the choice

of controls. Estimates from the benchmark specifications of Section 5 using net commitments and purchases
are reported in columns [6] and [7], respectively. Given the similarity of the results, the other columns all report multipliers associated with commitments only. To assess the role of instrumentation, column [5] reports
the OLS estimates for the benchmark specification. Columns [3] to [4] display the OLS and IV estimates
when the cyclical indicators (unemployment and income growth) are omitted. Columns [1] and [2] further
omit the interest rate controls. Finally, column [8] shows the IV estimates when we use all policy events,
both cyclical and non-cyclical, to construct the instrument. To better visualize the role of instrumentation
by the narrative instrument, Figure A.3 displays the cumulative effects on agency holdings and mortgage
originations estimated by OLS and 2SLS for all horizons.

We highlight the following patterns from the results in Table A.1. First, the point estimates across the IV
regressions are all quite similar. Controlling for interest rates is the most consequential. When leaving out
interest rates in [2], we find somewhat smaller increases in mortgage originations and debt. The results are
essentially unchanged by including the cyclical controls (unemployment and income growth). Interestingly,

3

and conditional on including the richest control set as in our benchmark specification, the results remain similar when we also include the cyclically motivated policy events in the instrument, see column [8]. This is in
our view not too surprising. Based on our reading of the various historical policy actions, see Fieldhouse and
Mertens (2017), recognition and decision lags likely exceed one month in practice. With a sufficiently rich
set of lagged controls, including the cyclical actions may therefore not lead to any meaningful violation of
the exogeneity requirements. Instrumentation with policy events, however, is important for the results. The
OLS estimates in columns [1], [3], and [5] differ substantially in size and display very different time patterns
from the IV counterparts in columns [2], [4], and [6]: Agency holdings rise immediately and more or less
independently of the horizon, private holdings do not fall significantly over shorter horizons, and originations are higher by an amount that is much less dependent on the horizon. The OLS estimates are likely
contaminated by reverse causality, as this pattern is more consistent with private lenders simply passing on
newly originated loans to the agencies rather than selling existing loans off their balance sheets. Figure A.3
further illustrates this by depicting the full set of OLS and 2SLS estimates for agency holdings and mortgage
originations. Regardless of whether the baseline or full set of controls are included, the bulk of the increase
in mortgage originations per dollar change in commitments occurs within the first 12 months (panel A),
and within even a much shorter window when the regressor is agency purchases. Such a pattern indicates a
much stronger contemporaneous relation between originations and agency purchases. Given decision lags
as well as the time delays associated with the making of new mortgage loans, the delayed and gradual rise
in originations that appears after instrumentation is more consistent with a causal interpretation. Figure A.3
also reveals that the total agency mortgage holdings increase by a substantially smaller amount than the
dollar purchased or committed, even at relative short horizons. This indicates that agency purchases tend to
coincide with higher sales of mortgage assets to private investors and/or with higher repayment rates, both
of which are likely to reflect other influences on the private demand for mortgage credit in the primary or
secondary market.

Table A.2 verifies the robustness of the results to variations in the sample and to the inclusion of additional indicators of agency activity. For comparison, column [1] repeats the benchmark estimates based on
net commitments. For brevity, all other columns are based on using commitments as the measure of agency

4

purchasing activity. Column [2] extends the end point of the sample from December 2006 to December
2014. Note that in this case the h-th regression in (2) drops the last h observations. Column [3] restricts the
sample by setting September 1982 as the starting point, marking the end of the period of non-borrowed reserves targeting by the Federal Reserve. This shorter sample selects a period of more stable monetary policy.
Because of the smaller sample, we omit in this case the cyclical controls to reduce the number parameters to
be estimated. Columns [4], [5], and [6] show results when we omit in turn each of the three largest policy
interventions from the non-cyclical narrative instrument: the October 1977 conforming loan limit increase
and expansion of the Brooke-Cranston Tandem program, the December 1982 increase in Fannie Mae’s debtto-capital limit, and the September 2004 tightening of capital requirements. In each case we add the omitted
event as a separate dummy variable, including both the contemporaneous value and twelve lags to the control variables. The final two columns include lagged values of two indicators of agency activity as additional
controls: the volume of mortgage pool issues (in ratio of Xt ) and log ratio of GSE stock prices to the S&P
500 index. In the latter case, the sample starts in September 1971 instead of December 1967, reflecting the
fact that Fannie Mae stock started trading on August 31, 1970.

All variations of the baseline specification reported in Table A.2 yield cumulative origination multipliers
in the range of 2.5 to 4.5 after 3 to 4 years. Moreover, the impact on originations is consistently highly
statistically significant. The estimated cumulative change in mortgage debt also remains in the range of the
benchmark specification. The credit multipliers are the lowest when we extend the sample to include the recent financial crisis (column [2]) and when we add GSE excess stock returns to the control set (column [8]).
In these cases, the impact on mortgage debt is no longer significant at conventional levels. We also highlight
that the inclusion of the September 2004 policy event is important for the precision of the estimates. The
instrument that omits the 2004 event is generally weaker and produces wider confidence bands. On the other
hand, omitting the 1977 and 1982 events (columns [5] and [6]) does not have a large influence on the results.

5

A. Per Dollar in Agency Commitments
Agency Mortgage Holdings
0.7

Mortgage Originations
4

0.6
3.5

0.5

0.4
dollars

dollars

3

0.3

2.5
2
1.5

0.2
1

2SLS with full controls
OLS with full controls
OLS with baseline controls

0.1

0
0

6

12

18

24
30
horizon (months)

2SLS with full controls
OLS with full controls
OLS with baseline controls

0.5

36

42

0

48

0

6

12

18

24
30
horizon (months)

36

42

48

B. Per Dollar in Agency Purchases
Agency Mortgage Holdings
0.9

Mortgage Originations
4

0.7

3.5

0.6

3

0.5

2.5

dollars

dollars

0.8

0.4

2
1.5

0.3
0.2

1

2SLS with full controls
OLS with full controls
OLS with baseline controls

0.1
0
0

6

12

18

24
30
horizon (months)

2SLS with full controls
OLS with full controls
OLS with baseline controls

0.5

36

42

0

48

0

6

12

18

24
30
horizon (months)

36

42

48

Figure A.3 Comparing OLS and 2SLS Estimates of Mortgage Credit Multipliers
Notes: The figure shows dollar changes per dollar increase in agency net portfolio purchases or commitments to purchase cumulated over the reported horizon in months. The specification with baseline controls excludes the interest rate and cyclical
controls.

6

Table A.1 OLS and IV Estimates of Balance Sheet Adjustments and Mortgage Credit Multipliers
Agency Holdings

Months
12

[1]
0.35∗∗∗
(0.19, 0.50)

(0.35, 0.88)

(0.18, 0.48)

(0.43, 0.93)

(0.21, 0.49)

(0.40, 0.92)

(0.44, 0.91)

(0.25, 0.87)

18

0.37∗∗∗

0.55∗∗∗

0.33∗∗∗

0.58∗∗∗

0.35∗∗∗

0.54∗∗∗

0.57∗∗∗

0.42∗∗∗

(0.25, 0.49)

(0.33, 0.78)

(0.22, 0.44)

(0.35, 0.81)

(0.26, 0.45)

(0.30, 0.77)

(0.34, 0.80)

(0.15, 0.70)

24

0.37∗∗∗

0.50∗∗∗

0.31∗∗∗

0.51∗∗∗

0.33∗∗∗

0.47∗∗∗

0.49∗∗∗

0.37∗∗∗

(0.26, 0.48)

(0.29, 0.71)

(0.20, 0.42)

(0.29, 0.73)

(0.23, 0.43)

(0.26, 0.69)

(0.27, 0.70)

(0.12, 0.63)

36

0.36∗∗∗

0.26∗∗

0.28∗∗∗

0.26∗∗

0.29∗∗∗

0.23∗

0.24∗

0.15

(0.27, 0.46)

(0.01, 0.51)

(0.18, 0.38)

(0.01, 0.50)

(0.20, 0.38)

(−0.00, 0.47)

(−0.01, 0.50)

(−0.15, 0.44)

0.35∗∗∗

0.25∗∗

0.26∗∗∗

0.23∗

0.27∗∗∗

0.22∗

0.21∗

0.19

(0.25, 0.44)

(0.00, 0.49)

(0.16, 0.36)

(−0.03, 0.49)

(0.18, 0.36)

(−0.04, 0.47)

(−0.03, 0.45)

(−0.08, 0.46)

48

Private Holdings

12
18
24
36

[5]
0.35∗∗∗

[6]
0.66∗∗∗

[7]
0.68∗∗∗

[8]
0.56∗∗∗

−0.16

−0.76∗∗

−0.12

−0.81∗∗

−0.11

−0.75∗∗

−0.77∗∗

−0.68∗

(−0.47, 0.15)

(−1.36, −0.15)

(−0.40, 0.15)

(−1.43, −0.19)

(−0.38, 0.17)

(−1.40, −0.11)

(−1.39, −0.15)

(−1.49, 0.13)

−0.17

−0.43

−0.07

−0.31

−0.07

−0.23

−0.25

0.01

(−0.41, 0.06)

(−1.01, 0.15)

(−0.29, 0.14)

(−0.94, 0.31)

(−0.28, 0.14)

(−0.81, 0.34)

(−0.86, 0.36)

(−0.70, 0.73)

−0.12

−0.26

0.06

−0.11

0.06

−0.07

−0.07

0.20

(−0.35, 0.10)

(−0.85, 0.34)

(−0.15, 0.26)

(−0.73, 0.50)

(−0.14, 0.25)

(−0.63, 0.48)

(−0.64, 0.49)

(−0.52, 0.93)

−0.03

0.14

0.27∗∗∗

0.34

0.30∗∗∗

0.30

0.31

0.55

(−0.29, 0.22)

(−0.73, 1.01)

(0.09, 0.45)

(−0.32, 0.99)

(0.11, 0.49)

(−0.27, 0.88)

(−0.28, 0.91)

(−0.17, 1.27)

0.67

0.55∗∗∗

0.90∗

0.57∗∗∗

0.82∗

0.78∗

0.84

(−0.63, 1.97)

(0.32, 0.78)

(−0.14, 1.94)

(0.33, 0.81)

(−0.13, 1.76)

(−0.13, 1.68)

(−0.18, 1.87)

0.18∗∗

−0.14

0.21∗∗∗

−0.14

0.24∗∗∗

−0.09

−0.10

−0.12

(0.02, 0.35)

(−0.54, 0.26)

(0.06, 0.36)

(−0.56, 0.29)

(0.09, 0.40)

(−0.53, 0.34)

(−0.54, 0.34)

(−0.70, 0.46)

0.20∗∗∗

0.12

0.26∗∗∗

0.27

0.29∗∗∗

0.30

0.32

0.44

(0.06, 0.34)

(−0.31, 0.56)

(0.12, 0.40)

(−0.21, 0.74)

(0.14, 0.43)

(−0.11, 0.72)

(−0.13, 0.77)

(−0.10, 0.97)

0.25∗∗∗

0.24

0.37∗∗∗

0.40∗

0.39∗∗∗

0.40∗

0.41∗

0.58∗∗

(0.10, 0.39)

(−0.23, 0.71)

(0.23, 0.50)

(−0.08, 0.88)

(0.25, 0.53)

(−0.01, 0.81)

(−0.02, 0.84)

(0.02, 1.13)

0.33∗∗∗

0.40

0.55∗∗∗

0.59∗∗

0.59∗∗∗

0.54∗∗

0.56∗∗∗

0.70∗∗∗

(0.15, 0.51)

(−0.27, 1.08)

(0.43, 0.68)

(0.12, 1.07)

(0.46, 0.73)

(0.13, 0.95)

(0.14, 0.98)

(0.18, 1.21)

0.54∗∗∗

0.92∗

0.81∗∗∗

1.13∗∗∗

0.84∗∗∗

1.03∗∗∗

0.98∗∗∗

1.03∗∗

(0.30, 0.78)

(−0.16, 1.99)

(0.65, 0.98)

(0.31, 1.95)

(0.67, 1.01)

(0.31, 1.76)

(0.29, 1.68)

(0.24, 1.83)

2.24∗∗∗

1.33∗∗∗

2.43∗∗∗

1.22∗∗∗

2.37∗∗∗

1.32∗∗∗

1.35∗∗∗

1.45∗∗∗

(1.69, 2.79)

(0.42, 2.24)

(1.99, 2.86)

(0.37, 2.07)

(1.94, 2.80)

(0.44, 2.20)

(0.40, 2.31)

(0.41, 2.50)

18

2.47∗∗∗

1.87∗∗∗

2.80∗∗∗

2.00∗∗∗

2.72∗∗∗

2.14∗∗∗

2.29∗∗∗

2.50∗∗∗

(1.99, 2.94)

(0.99, 2.74)

(2.47, 3.14)

(1.14, 2.85)

(2.38, 3.06)

(1.32, 2.96)

(1.37, 3.20)

(1.55, 3.45)

24

2.48∗∗∗

2.03∗∗∗

2.93∗∗∗

2.37∗∗∗

2.83∗∗∗

2.52∗∗∗

2.59∗∗∗

2.94∗∗∗

(2.06, 2.90)

(1.17, 2.89)

(2.58, 3.27)

(1.49, 3.26)

(2.49, 3.18)

(1.68, 3.35)

(1.67, 3.51)

(1.92, 3.97)

36

2.46∗∗∗

2.83∗∗∗

3.14∗∗∗

3.38∗∗∗

3.13∗∗∗

3.40∗∗∗

3.54∗∗∗

3.62∗∗∗

(1.98, 2.94)

(1.39, 4.28)

(2.68, 3.61)

(2.00, 4.77)

(2.63, 3.62)

(2.10, 4.71)

(2.25, 4.83)

(2.15, 5.10)

48

2.56∗∗∗

3.38∗∗∗

3.25∗∗∗

4.02∗∗∗

3.23∗∗∗

3.96∗∗∗

3.76∗∗∗

3.92∗∗∗

(2.05, 3.07)

(1.34, 5.41)

(2.65, 3.84)

(2.13, 5.90)

(2.64, 3.83)

(2.20, 5.72)

(2.09, 5.43)

(2.02, 5.82)

Comm.
OLS
No
No

Comm.
2SLS-NC
No
No

Comm.
OLS
Yes
No

Comm.
2SLS-NC
Yes
No

Comm.
OLS
Yes
Yes

Comm.
2SLS-NC
Yes
Yes

Purch.
2SLS-NC
Yes
Yes

Comm.
2SLS-ALL
Yes
Yes

12

24
36
48

Dollar increase in:
Method:
Interest rate controls:
Cyclical controls:

[4]
0.68∗∗∗

0.19

18

Originations

[3]
0.33∗∗∗

(−0.12, 0.51)

48

Mortgage Debt

[2]
0.61∗∗∗

12

Notes: Numbers are dollar amounts. Estimates are from local projections-IV regressions, see equation (2). OLS: no instrument
used; 2SLS-NC, instrument based on non-cyclical policy events; 2SLS-ALL: instrument based on all policy events. 95% Newey
and West (1987) confidence bands in parentheses. Asterisks denote 10%, 5%, or 1% significance. Sample: Jan 1967 to Dec 2006.

7

Table A.2 Credit Multipliers, Sample and Robustness Checks

Agency Holdings

Months
12

[1]
0.66∗∗∗
(0.40, 0.92)

18

0.54∗∗∗
(0.30, 0.77)

24

0.47∗∗∗
(0.26, 0.69)

(0.28, 0.82)

0.23∗

0.32∗∗∗

−0.09

0.32

0.21

0.16

0.21

0.27

(−0.00, 0.47)

(0.11, 0.53)

(−0.39, 0.20)

(−0.19, 0.83)

(−0.04, 0.45)

(−0.11, 0.43)

(−0.09, 0.52)

(−0.13, 0.66)

36
48

Private Holdings

12
18
24
36
48

Mortgage Debt

12

[4]
0.88

[5]
0.64∗∗∗

[6]
0.67∗∗∗

[7]
0.72∗∗∗

[8]
0.63∗∗∗

(0.31, 1.22)

(0.23, 0.71)

(−0.35, 2.11)

(0.38, 0.90)

(0.38, 0.96)

(0.40, 1.04)

(0.32, 0.94)

0.62∗∗∗

0.29∗∗∗

0.78

0.52∗∗∗

0.53∗∗∗

0.60∗∗∗

0.48∗∗∗

(0.27, 0.96)

(0.12, 0.46)

(−0.18, 1.75)

(0.29, 0.75)

(0.27, 0.78)

(0.29, 0.90)

(0.12, 0.85)

0.55∗∗∗

0.23∗∗

0.59

0.45∗∗∗

0.47∗∗∗

0.53∗∗∗

0.43∗∗

(0.05, 0.42)

(−0.16, 1.35)

(0.23, 0.67)

(0.24, 0.69)

(0.25, 0.82)

(0.04, 0.81)

0.22∗

0.19

0.07

0.17

0.20

0.15

0.20

0.30

(−0.04, 0.47)

(−0.10, 0.47)

(−0.30, 0.44)

(−0.82, 1.16)

(−0.07, 0.46)

(−0.15, 0.44)

(−0.14, 0.54)

(−0.08, 0.68)

−0.75∗∗

−1.23∗∗

−0.66∗

−0.83

−0.72∗∗

−0.83∗∗

−0.94∗∗

−0.95∗∗∗

(−1.40, −0.11)

(−2.20, −0.27)

(−1.33, 0.00)

(−3.34, 1.68)

(−1.36, −0.07)

(−1.58, −0.08)

(−1.70, −0.18)

(−1.67, −0.23)

−0.23

−0.68∗

0.05

0.31

−0.21

−0.32

−0.31

−0.30

(−0.81, 0.34)

(−1.40, 0.04)

(−0.33, 0.43)

(−2.22, 2.83)

(−0.81, 0.39)

(−0.94, 0.29)

(−1.03, 0.41)

(−1.28, 0.67)

−0.07

−0.53∗

0.27

0.65

−0.04

−0.17

−0.11

−0.25

(−0.63, 0.48)

(−1.15, 0.09)

(−0.10, 0.64)

(−1.76, 3.07)

(−0.62, 0.54)

(−0.73, 0.38)

(−0.82, 0.60)

(−1.30, 0.80)

0.30

−0.24

0.87∗∗∗

0.73

0.36

0.42

0.33

−0.24

(−0.27, 0.88)

(−0.94, 0.47)

(0.37, 1.36)

(−0.47, 1.93)

(−0.24, 0.97)

(−0.27, 1.11)

(−0.40, 1.05)

(−1.05, 0.57)

0.82∗

0.41

1.27∗∗

1.62

0.87∗

1.09∗

0.89

0.15

(−0.13, 1.76)

(−0.79, 1.61)

(0.02, 2.52)

(−2.92, 6.17)

(−0.12, 1.87)

(−0.07, 2.26)

(−0.45, 2.23)

(−0.87, 1.18)

−0.09

−0.47

−0.19

0.05

−0.07

−0.16

−0.22

−0.32

(−0.53, 0.34)

(−1.10, 0.16)

(−0.69, 0.30)

(−1.64, 1.74)

(−0.51, 0.36)

(−0.66, 0.35)

(−0.73, 0.28)

(−0.81, 0.17)

0.30

−0.06

0.34∗

1.09

0.31

0.20

0.29

0.18

(−0.57, 0.44)

(−0.01, 0.69)

(−1.30, 3.48)

(−0.13, 0.75)

(−0.21, 0.62)

(−0.23, 0.81)

(−0.55, 0.91)

0.40∗

0.02

0.50∗∗∗

1.25

0.41∗

0.29

0.42

0.18

(−0.01, 0.81)

(−0.46, 0.49)

(0.19, 0.82)

(−1.01, 3.50)

(−0.02, 0.84)

(−0.09, 0.67)

(−0.12, 0.96)

(−0.59, 0.94)

0.54∗∗

0.08

0.77∗∗∗

1.05∗∗

0.57∗∗∗

0.58∗∗

0.54∗∗

0.03

(0.13, 0.95)

(−0.54, 0.70)

(0.43, 1.12)

(0.06, 2.03)

(0.14, 1.00)

(0.09, 1.06)

(0.01, 1.07)

(−0.57, 0.63)

1.03∗∗∗

0.60

1.34∗∗∗

1.79

1.07∗∗∗

1.24∗∗∗

1.09∗∗

0.45

(0.31, 1.76)

(−0.45, 1.65)

(0.40, 2.29)

(−1.87, 5.46)

(0.31, 1.84)

(0.33, 2.15)

(0.03, 2.14)

(−0.30, 1.20)

1.32∗∗∗

0.41

2.08∗∗∗

−0.23

1.39∗∗∗

1.32∗∗∗

1.14∗

1.47∗∗∗

(0.44, 2.20)

(−1.47, 2.28)

(1.06, 3.11)

(−5.14, 4.69)

(0.51, 2.26)

(0.40, 2.23)

(−0.01, 2.28)

(0.48, 2.46)

18

2.14∗∗∗

1.40∗

3.00∗∗∗

1.56

2.20∗∗∗

2.00∗∗∗

2.04∗∗∗

2.38∗∗∗

(1.32, 2.96)

(−0.02, 2.83)

(2.34, 3.66)

(−1.86, 4.98)

(1.38, 3.03)

(1.13, 2.88)

(0.88, 3.20)

(1.19, 3.57)

24

2.52∗∗∗

1.74∗∗∗

3.61∗∗∗

2.79∗

2.59∗∗∗

2.35∗∗∗

2.55∗∗∗

2.63∗∗∗

(1.68, 3.35)

(0.61, 2.88)

(2.95, 4.28)

(−0.21, 5.79)

(1.73, 3.45)

(1.48, 3.22)

(1.40, 3.70)

(1.05, 4.20)

36

3.40∗∗∗

2.51∗∗∗

4.79∗∗∗

4.43∗∗∗

3.53∗∗∗

3.56∗∗∗

3.70∗∗∗

2.69∗∗∗

(2.10, 4.71)

(1.27, 3.75)

(3.44, 6.14)

(1.29, 7.57)

(2.17, 4.89)

(2.00, 5.12)

(1.97, 5.44)

(0.92, 4.46)

48

3.96∗∗∗

3.39∗∗∗

4.81∗∗∗

5.59

4.07∗∗∗

4.29∗∗∗

4.35∗∗∗

3.06∗∗∗

(2.20, 5.72)

(1.47, 5.30)

(2.22, 7.40)

(−2.41, 13.60)

(2.22, 5.93)

(2.13, 6.45)

(1.81, 6.90)

(1.23, 4.89)

67M1-06M12
Benchmark

67M1-14M12
Full
Sample

82M10-06M12
Post-1982
Sample

67M1-06M12
Omitting
Sept 2004

67M1-06M12
Omitting
Dec 1982

67M1-06M12
Omitting
Oct 1977

67M1-06M12
Controls incl.
Pool Issues

71M09-06M12
Controls incl.
GSE excess return

24
36
48

Sample:
Modification:

[3]
0.47∗∗∗

(−0.11, 0.72)

18

Originations

[2]
0.76∗∗∗

12

Notes: Numbers are dollar amounts. Estimates are from local projections-IV regressions, see equation (2), using non-cyclical
policy events as the instrument. 95% Newey and West (1987) confidence bands in parentheses. Asterisks denote 10%, 5%, or 1%
significance.

8

A.2

Additional Results on Interest Rates and Credit Spreads

This section discusses a number of additional results regarding the effects of news shocks to agency purchases on interest rates and credit spreads. Figure A.4 shows point estimates for the first 24 months after an
increase in anticipated purchases by one percentage point of trend originations, together with 95% Newey
and West (1987) confidence bands. The responses in blue are based on the regressions in (4) and the narrative
instrument. The responses in red are based on the regressions in (5) and the GSE excess returns instrument.

The first two panels in Figure A.4 show the responses of the AAA-rated and BAA-rated long term corporate bond yields. Taken together, the results suggest that agency purchases exert a downward pressure on
corporate yields with a timing that coincides with the actual purchasing of mortgage assets by the agencies.
The response of the corporate yields is qualitatively similar to those of mortgage and Treasury rates, showing
initially no effect, and subsequently a gradual decline. The 95% confidence bands around the responses are
relatively wide, and the responses are only marginally significant in the case of the narrative instrument.
The declines in corporate bond yields are also quantitatively smaller than mortgage and Treasury rates, in
particular for the narrative instrument. The third panel in Figure A.4 shows statistically significant shortrun increases in the spread between AAA-rated corporate bonds and 10-year Treasuries. Agency purchases
appear therefore to induce the greatest spill-overs on the demand for the relative liquidity and safety of
Treasuries, which do not have prepayment risk. The increases are, however, relatively short-lived, with the
effects dissappearing after 7 or 8 months in the case of the narrative instrument, and only after a few months
in the case of the GSE excess returns instrument. The next panel shows evidence for a drop in the spread
between BAA and AAA-rated corporate bonds after 7 or 8 months, suggesting also some positive spill-over
effects on the demand for riskier long-term bonds.

The middle and right panels in the second row of Figure A.4 show declines in the spreads of mortgage
rates over the 10-year Treasure rates of a few basis points after about 6 months. The declines are at best
only marginally significant, indicating that agency purchases have important positive spill-over effects on
the demand for long-term Treasuries. The left panel in the bottom row of Figure A.4 shows the response of
the spread between the 3-month T-bill rate and the Federal Funds rate. With a delay of a few months, this
9

spread increases by 5 basis points or more when using the narrative instrument for identification. While this
may indicate some upward pressure on short-term interest rates relative to the funds rate target, the increase
is not statistically significant at conventional confidence levels. The GSE excess returns instrument does not
yield any indication of an impact. Finally, the right panel on the bottom row shows the response of the slope
of the Treasury yield curve, measured by the difference between the 10-year and 3-month yields. In the
case of the narrative instrument, there is initially no impact on the slope of the yield curve. However, as the
agency purchases induce a broad-based decline in both long and short-term interest rates, the slope of the
yield curve gradually steepens for the first 8 months. Subsequently, the yield curve flattens relatively quickly
and returns to prior levels one year after the new shock. In contrast, the GSE excess returns instrument does
not produce any significant impact on the slope of the Treasury yield curve.

10

Figure A.4 Impulses Responses to A Shock to Anticipated Agency Purchases
Notes: The figure shows responses to a one pp. increase in the expected future agency market share measured by agency commitments as a ratio of trend originations. Estimates are from local projections-IV regressions instrumented with the (1) narrative
policy indicator, see equation (4), or orthogonalized GSE excess stock returns innovations, see equation (5). Finer lines and shaded
areas are 95% Newey and West (1987) confidence bands. Sample: Jan 1967 to Dec 2006.

11

A.3

Impulse Responses of Mortgage Originations by Type

This section discusses additional results regarding the effects of news shocks to agency purchases on mortgage originations by type. The available data allows us to distinguish between refinancing and purchase
originations (see data appendix). The average share of refinancing originations in the 1967-2006 sample is
25% (and 28% in the 1967-2014 sample). The refinancing share is volatile and ranges from values of 10%
during the high nominal interest rates of the late 1970s and early 1980s, to up to 75% during refinancing
booms.

Figure A.5 shows point estimates for the first 24 months after an increase in anticipated purchases by one
percentage point of trend originations, together with 95% Newey and West (1987) confidence bands. The
responses in blue are based on the regressions in (4) and the narrative instrument. The responses in red are
based on the regressions in (5) and the GSE excess returns instrument. For reference, the left panel repeats
the responses of total mortgage originations shown in Figure 10. The middle panel shows the estimated
response of refinancing originations, while the right panel shows the estimated response of originations financing the purchase of a home. We note that for the estimates in these two panels, the sample excludes
May 1985 to December 1986 because of missing data on refinance shares, see data appendix.

The results in Figure A.5 are consistent with those for the dollar credit multipliers reported in Section 5.
Refinancing originations show a gradual increase following the agency purchase shock, regardless of the instrument used for identification. Purchase originations also rise, but with a longer delay relative to refinance
originations. Using the narrative instrument, purchase originations are initially lower for the first six months
or so, before rising by similar levels between 12 and 24 months as for the GSE excess returns instrument. Using the average share of refinancing originations of 25% over the benchmark sample, the estimates in Figure
A.5 imply that refinancing originations account for the larger share of the increase in total originations.

12

Figure A.5 Impulse Responses to a Shock to Anticipated Agency Purchases
Notes: The figure shows responses to a one pp. increase in the expected future agency market share measured by agency commitments as a ratio of trend originations. Estimates are from local projections-IV regressions instrumented with the narrative policy
indicator, see equation (4), or orthogonalized GSE excess stock returns innovations, see equation (5). Finer lines and shaded areas
are 95% Newey and West (1987) confidence bands. Sample: Jan 1967 to Dec 2006. In the middle and right panels, the sample
excludes May 1985 to Dec 1986 because of missing data on refinance shares, see data appendix.

Figure A.6 compares the response of originations to a traditional monetary policy shock (in red) with the
response to the agency purchase shock identified using the narrative instrument (in blue). Responses to
monetary shocks are identified using the Romer and Romer (2004) monetary policy shock measure as an
instrument, as explained in Section 7. As in Figure 13, the impact of the interest rate shock is scaled such
that the maximum decline in the 3-month T-bill rate is identical as for the agency purchase shock identified
with the narrative instrument. The left panel repeats the responses of total mortgage originations shown in
Figure 13 and shows that the agency purchase shock generates a larger increase in total originations. The
middle panel shows the responses of refinancing originations, while the right panel shows the estimated
responses of originations financing the purchase of a home. The results in Figure A.6 indicate that the
differential impact on total originations is due to the different impact on refinancing activity. The response
of purchase originations (right panel) is very similar in timing and size across both shocks. The response of
refinancing originations to monetary policy shock, on the other hand, is much more muted than the response
to the agency purchase shocks.

13

Figure A.6 Responses to A Shock to Anticipated Agency Purchases Versus a Monetary Policy Shock
Notes: The figure shows responses to a one pp. increase in the expected future agency market share as well as the response to a
monetary policy shock. Estimates are from local projections-IV regressions instrumenting agency commitments with the narrative
policy indicator, see equation (4), and instrumenting the 3 month T-Bill rate with the Romer and Romer (2004) monetary policy
shock measure. Finer lines and shaded areas are 95% Newey and West (1987) confidence bands. Sample: Jan 1967 to Dec 2006.
In the middle and right panels, the sample excludes May 1985 to Dec 1986 because of missing data on refinance shares, see data
appendix.

14

A.4

Impulse Response Analysis: Sensitivity Checks

Omitting the 1977-1982 and NBR-targeting Periods Figure A.7 shows the response to a shock to anticipated agency purchases by one percentage point of trend originations, together with 95% Newey and
West (1987) confidence bands. Each figure shows results based on the narrative instrument for two different subsamples. The first subsample omits the period of non-borrowed reserves targeting under the Volcker
chairmanship of the Federal Reserve from October 1979 to August 1982. The second subsample omits
the 6 years between 1977 and 1982, which are more broadly characterized by relatively high interest rate
volatility. Each of the excluded periods contain several sizeable credit policy changes as well as a greater
incidence of large monetary policy shocks in the Romer and Romer (2004) measure. Their exclusion allow
us to verify the role of these parts of the sample for our results regarding the interactions between the two
types of policies. The results in Figure A.7 are qualitatively very similar to those of the full sample, and in
both cases include both significant rise in originations as well as declines in short- and long-term interest
rates. Compared to the full sample, the rise in the stock of mortgage debt is, however, no longer evident
when we omit the 6 years between 1977 and 1982.

Post-1982 Sample

Figure A.8 shows the response to a shock to anticipated agency purchases based on a

shorter sample that starts in October 1982 instead of December 1967. The Figure reports results for each
of the instruments, as in Figure 10. The October 1982 starting period marks the end of the period of nonborrowed reserves targeting by the Federal Reserve and selects a period of more stable and inflation averse
monetary policy. Because of the smaller sample, we omit in this case the cyclical controls (personal income
and unemployment) to reduce the number parameters to be estimated. The results remain qualitatively very
similar to those of the full sample, indicating a rise in originations and declines in short- and long-term
interest rates. Compared to the full sample, the rise in the of stock mortgage debt is smaller and no longer
statistically significant in the case of the GSE excess returns instrument.

Omitting Policy Events from the Narrative Instrument

Figure A.9 shows the response to a shock to

anticipated agency purchases for the benchmark specification together with those when we omit in turn
each of the three largest policy interventions from the narrative instrument: the October 1977 conforming

15

loan limit increase and expansion of the Brooke-Cranston Tandem program, the December 1982 increase
in Fannie Mae’s debt-to-capital limit, and the September 2004 tightening of capital requirements. In each
case we add the omitted event as a separate dummy variable, including both the contemporaneous value
and twelve lags to the control variables. While there is some variation in the size of the responses, the
results remain qualitatively similar to the benchmark narrative estimates. In all cases, there are increases in
originations and mortgage debt, and declines in short- and long-term interest rates.

Including Romer and Romer (2004) Shocks as Controls Figure A.10 compares the benchmark narrative
impulse response estimates of Figure 10 with those from a specification that includes both the contemporaneous value as well as 12 lags of the Romer and Romer (2004) monetary shock measure as additional
controls. Figure A.10 shows that controlling for the Romer and Romer (2004) shocks has little effect on the
estimation results.

16

Figure A.7 Impulse Responses Excluding 1977-1982 and NBR Targeting Periods
Notes: The figure shows responses to a one pp. increase in the expected future agency market share measured by agency commitments as a ratio of trend originations. Estimates are from local projections-IV regressions instrumented with the narrative policy
indicator, see equation (4). Finer lines and shaded areas are 95% Newey and West (1987) confidence bands. Sample: Jan 1967 to
Dec 2006, excluding the period indicated.

17

Figure A.8 Impulses Responses in the Post-1982 Sample
Notes: The figure shows responses to a one pp. increase in the expected future agency market share measured by agency commitments as a ratio of trend originations. Estimates are from local projections-IV regressions instrumented with the (1) narrative
policy indicator, see equation (4), or orthogonalized GSE excess stock returns innovations, see equation (5). Finer lines and shaded
areas are 95% Newey and West (1987) confidence bands. Sample: Oct 1982 to Dec 2006.

18

Mortgage Originations

Residential Mortgage Debt

8

0.6

Benchmark
Omitting Sept 2004
Omitting Dec 1982
Omitting Oct 1977

7
6

Benchmark
Omitting Sept 2004
Omitting Dec 1982
Omitting Oct 1977

0.5

0.4

percent

percent

5
4
3

0.3

0.2

2
0.1
1
0

0
-1

-0.1
0

6

12
horizon (months)

18

24

0

6

Conventional Mortgage Rate

18

24

18

24

FHA Mortgage Rate

10

10

Benchmark
Omitting Sept 2004
Omitting Dec 1982
Omitting Oct 1977

5

Benchmark
Omitting Sept 2004
Omitting Dec 1982
Omitting Oct 1977

5

0

0

basis points

basis points

12
horizon (months)

-5

-5

-10

-10
-15
-15

-20

-20

-25
0

6

12
horizon (months)

18

24

0

6

12
horizon (months)

10-year Treasury Rate
10

3-month T-bill Rate

5

5
0

0
basis points

basis points

10

Benchmark
Omitting Sept 2004
Omitting Dec 1982
Omitting Oct 1977

-5

-10

-5
-10
-15
-20

Benchmark
Omitting Sept 2004
Omitting Dec 1982
Omitting Oct 1977

-25

-15
-30

-20

-35

0

6

12
horizon (months)

18

24

0

6

12
horizon (months)

18

24

Figure A.9 Impulses Responses when Omitting Largest Policy Events
Notes: The figure shows responses to a one pp. increase in the expected future agency market share measured by agency commitments as a ratio of trend originations. Estimates are from local projections-IV regressions instrumented with different versions of
narrative policy indicator, see equation (4).

19

Figure A.10 Controlling for Romer and Romer (2004) Shocks
Notes: The figure shows responses to a one pp. increase in the expected future agency market share measured by agency commitments as a ratio of trend originations. Benchmark estimates are from local projections-IV regressions instrumented with the
narrative policy indicator, see equation (4). The new specification includes additionally the contemporaneous value and 12 lags of
the Romer and Romer (2004) shocks as controls. Finer lines and shaded areas are 95% Newey and West (1987) confidence bands.
Sample: Jan 1967 to Dec 2006.

20

A.5

Forecast Error Contributions from an SVAR Model

The local projections-IV specifications do not allow an assessment of the historical role of structural shocks
to housing credit policy, which requires knowledge of the variance contribution of these shocks to the cumulative purchase measures in equations (2) or (4). In order to gain some insight into the importance of GSE
activity for the dynamics of credit aggregates and interest rates, this section estimates the variance contribution of the orthogonalized GSE excess returns innovations in a structural vector autoregressive (SVAR)
model. The main finding is that the contribution of GSE excess returns shocks to the short-run variability of
mortgage credit and housing starts is roughly as important as monetary policy shocks. In addition, shocks to
monetary policy are substantially more important for the forecast error variance of interest rates in the short
run. The role of GSE excess returns shocks for long-term interest rates exceeds the one of monetary policy
shocks at horizons beyond 18 months.

In order to estimate forecast error variance contribution of shocks to GSE activity, we adopt a VAR model
for the joint dynamics of the ratio of agency purchases and commitments to trend originations, as well as
all of the variables included as controls in the LPIV regressions: the log levels of core PCE and house price
indices, the log difference of total mortgage debt, the log levels of real mortgage originations and housing
starts, the 3-month T-bill rate, the 10-year Treasury rate, the conventional mortgage interest rate, the BAAAAA corporate bond spread, the unemployment rate, and the log of real personal income. In addition, the
VAR system also includes the log of the S&P 500 index and the log ratio of the GSE stock index to the S&P
500. We estimate the VAR by OLS using 12 lags of all the endogenous variables and using monthly data
from August 1971 to December 2006. The start of the sample reflects the month in which Fannie Mae stock
was traded for the first time on the New York Stock Exchange, which was August 1970.

The impact of a shock to orthogonalized GSE excess returns is the response to an innovation to the GSE stock
index variable, which is obtained by taking the lower triangular Choleski decomposition of the estimated covariance matrix of the VAR residuals, ordering all of the variables except agency purchases/commitments
above the GSE stock index variable. This approach imposes the same exclusion restrictions as the LPIV
model in (4) within the SVAR context, which amounts to assuming that none of the variables ordered before
21

the GSE stock index variable responds within the same month to orthogonalized GSE excess returns innovations.

Figure A.11 shows the resulting impulse responses, which for ease of comparison are scaled to imply a
similar 6 month impact on originations as the LPIV estimates in Figure 10. The GSE excess returns shocks
lead to statistically significant increases in agency net commitments and net purchases (not shown). Consistent with our main findings, Figure 10 shows that originations, mortgage debt and housing starts all rise
significantly following a positive innovations in GSE excess returns, while interest rates decline in the short
run. One difference between the VAR and the LPIV estimates in Figure 10 is that interest rates rise in the
longer run. The SVAR estimates are otherwise generally similar to those obtained using LPIV regressions
using the GSE excess returns as an instrument for agency mortgage purchases.

Mortgage Originations

Residential Mortgage Debt

Housing Starts

0.5

8

6

4

3

0.4

4

2

2

0

percent

percent

percent

0.3

0.2

1

0

0.1
-2

-1
0

-4

-6

-2

-0.1
0

6

12
horizon (months)

18

24

-3
0

6

Conventional Mortgage Rate

18

24

0

6

10-year Treasury Rate

30

25

25

20

20

12
horizon (months)

18

24

3-month T-bill Rate
40

30

15
20

10
5
0

10

basis points

basis points

15
basis points

12
horizon (months)

5
0

10

0

-5

-5

-10
-10

-10

-20

-15

-15
-20

-20
0

6

12
horizon (months)

18

24

-30
0

6

12
horizon (months)

18

24

0

6

12
horizon (months)

18

24

Figure A.11 SVAR Impulse Responses to a GSE Excess Return Shock
Notes: The figure shows SVAR impulse responses to an innovation in orthogonalized GSE excess returns. Finer lines are 95%
confidence bands obtained from a residual wild bootstrap using 10,000 replications. Sample: Aug 1970 to Dec 2006.

An advantage of the SVAR model is that it is straightforward to evaluate of the relative importance of shocks
22

in driving fluctuations in the endogenous variables. Figure A.12 depicts the share of the forecast error
variance at various horizons that is due to the identified GSE excess returns innovations. For comparison,
Figure A.12 also shows the variance contribution of monetary policy shocks identified using the Romer and
Romer (2004) measure as a proxy using the methodology in Stock and Watson (2012) and Mertens and
Ravn (2013). We find that the GSE excess returns shocks explain up to 9% of the agency net purchases
and commitments forecast variance (not shown). The contribution of monetary policy shocks remains below
2% at all horizons considered. Figure A.12 reveals that both shocks account for a substantial fraction of
the forecast variance of originations and housing starts at horizons beyond 6 months. GSE excess returns
shocks explain up to 14% of the forecast variance of originations at horizons between 12 and 18 months,
and around 7% to 8% of housing starts between 8 and 14 months. In comparison, monetary shocks explain
between 8% to 9% of originations, and around 14% of housing starts at similar horizons. Neither of the
shocks accounts for much of the forecast variance of the stock of mortgage debt at horizons up to 36 months.
Monetary shocks account for a substantial share of the short-run forecast variance of the 3-month T-bill
rates, and up to 11%, respectively 7%, of the variance in mortgage and 10-year Treasury rates at horizons
around 6 months. GSE excess returns shocks are relative less important for the variability in interest rates
at shorter horizons, but become relatively more important than monetary policy shocks in accounting for the
uncertainty in long-term interest rates at horizons exceeding 18 months.

23

Mortgage Originations

Residential Mortgage Debt

15

Housing Starts

4

15

3.5
3
10

10
percent

percent

percent

2.5
2
1.5
5

5
1

GSE excess returns shock
Monetary shock

GSE excess returns shock
Monetary shock

0.5

0

GSE excess returns shock
Monetary shock

0
0

6

12

18
24
horizon (months)

30

36

0
0

6

12

Conventional Mortgage Rate

18
24
horizon (months)

30

36

0

6

12

10-year Treasury Rate

12

30

36

45

7

GSE excess returns shock
Monetary shock

40

6

10

18
24
horizon (months)

3-month T-bill Rate

35
5

6

percent

30
percent

percent

8
4

3

4

25
20
15

2
10
2

GSE excess returns shock
Monetary shock

0

1

GSE excess returns shock
Monetary shock

0
0

6

12

18
24
horizon (months)

30

36

5
0

0

6

12

18
24
horizon (months)

30

36

0

6

12

18
24
horizon (months)

30

36

Figure A.12 Forecast Error Variance Contributions of Monetary and GSE Excess Returns Shocks
Notes: The figure shows contributions to the forecast error in the SVAR model. Monetary policy shocks are identified using
the Romer and Romer (2004) measure as external instrument. GSE excess returns shocks are identified as described in the text.
Sample: Aug 1970 to Dec 2006.

References

Mertens, Karel and Morten O. Ravn, “The Dynamic Effects of Personal and Corporate Income Tax Changes
in the United States,” American Economic Review, 103 (2013), 1212–1247.
Romer, Christina D. and David H. Romer, “A New Measure of Monetary Shocks: Derivation and Implications,” American Economic Review, 94 (2004), 1055–1084.
Stock, James H. and Mark W. Watson, “Disentangling the Channels of the 2007-2009 Recession,” Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity, 1 (2012), 81–135.

24

