                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               BANKRUPTCY SPILLOVERS

                                      Shai Bernstein
                                    Emanuele Colonnelli
                                      Xavier Giroud
                                     Benjamin Iverson

                                     Working Paper 23162
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w23162


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   February 2017




We are grateful to Effi Benmelech, Jess Cornaggia, Song Ma, Enrico Moretti, Holger Mueller,
Charles Nathanson, Josh Rauh, Amit Seru, as well as seminar participants at Stanford, NYU,
Penn State University, University of Toronto, the 2017 Jackson Hole Finance Conference, and
the Yale Junior Finance Faculty Conference for helpful comments and suggestions. Any opinions
and conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the
views of the U.S. Census Bureau or the National Bureau of Economic Research. All results have
been reviewed to ensure that no confidential information is disclosed.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Shai Bernstein, Emanuele Colonnelli, Xavier Giroud, and Benjamin Iverson. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Bankruptcy Spillovers
Shai Bernstein, Emanuele Colonnelli, Xavier Giroud, and Benjamin Iverson
NBER Working Paper No. 23162
February 2017
JEL No. G33,R12

                                           ABSTRACT

How do different bankruptcy approaches affect the local economy? Using U.S. Census microdata
at the establishment level, we explore the spillover effects of reorganization and liquidation on
geographically proximate firms. We exploit the random assignment of bankruptcy judges as a
source of exogenous variation in the probability of liquidation. We find that within a five-year
period, employment declines substantially in the immediate neighborhood of the liquidated
establishments, relative to reorganized establishments. Most of the decline is due to lower growth
of existing establishments and, to a lesser extent, reduced entry into the area. The spillover effects
are highly localized and concentrate in the non-tradable and service sectors, particularly when the
bankrupt firm operates in the same sector. These results suggest that liquidation leads to a
reduction in consumer traffic to the local area and to a decline in knowledge spillovers between
firms. The evidence is inconsistent with the notion that liquidation leads to creative destruction,
as the removal of bankrupt businesses does not lead to increased entry nor the revitalization of the
area.

Shai Bernstein                                    Xavier Giroud
Stanford Graduate School of Business              MIT Sloan School of Management
655 Knight Way                                    100 Main Street, E62-639
Stanford, CA 94305                                Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER                                          and NBER
shaib@stanford.edu                                xgiroud@mit.edu

Emanuele Colonnelli                               Benjamin Iverson
Stanford University                               Northwestern University
Department of Economics                           2001 Sheridan Road
579 Serra Mall                                    Evanston, IL 60208
Stanford, CA 94305                                b-iverson@kellogg.northwestern.edu
e.colonnelli@gmail.com
                                            I.    Introduction

Bankruptcy institutions play a significant role in resolving insolvency and financial distress in the

economy. Since 1980, more than 1.8 million businesses have filed for bankruptcy in the U.S. Most

of these cases are resolved through either reorganization (Chapter 11 under the U.S. Bankruptcy

code), that attempts to rehabilitate the distressed firm, or liquidation (Chapter 7 under the U.S.

Bankruptcy code), in which the firm ceases to exist and all assets are auctioned. Given their

importance, bankruptcy institutions have spurred a large literature that mostly focused on how

these two regimes affect the bankrupt firms and their claim holders.1 Yet, bankruptcy institutions

may have far-reaching implications on other economically related firms that are not represented in

courts. In this paper, we explore the spillover effects these two bankruptcy regimes, liquidation and

reorganization, may impose on the local economy.

    In theory, the impact of liquidation—relative to reorganization—on the local economy is am-

biguous. The agglomeration literature highlights the importance of complementarities that arise

between geographically proximate firms (for recent surveys, see Duranton and Puga (2004); Glaeser

and Gottlieb (2009); Moretti (2010)). If agglomeration matters—i.e., if spatial concentration of

economic activity benefits firms within the agglomeration—liquidation might disrupt agglomera-

tion economies and therefore hurt neighboring firms. In this case, reorganization may lead to a

more desirable outcome, as firms are allowed to restructure, continue their operations, and preserve

existing agglomeration linkages.

    On the other hand, liquidation could benefit the local economy. In particular, if inefficient

companies are liquidated, their assets (such as buildings, capital, and labor) can be absorbed by

the local economy and redeployed toward more productive uses, attracting new entrants to the

area, enhancing synergies with neighboring firms, and contributing to the revitalization of the

neighborhood. In other words, liquidation can initiate a “creative destruction” process in which

inefficient assets are replaced by more efficient ones.2 On the other hand, reorganization may permit

   1
     See, e.g., Baird (1986, 1993); Aghion et al. (1992); Hart (2000).
   2
     Creative destruction is the driving mechanism in the “cleansing theories” of recessions (e.g., Caballero and
Hammour (1994, 1996)), according to which the process of liquidation and reallocation of production factors is a main
function of recessions. As Schumpeter (1934) states it, “depressions are not simply evils, which we might attempt to
suppress, but forms of something which has to be done, namely, adjustment to change” (p. 16).


                                                         2
the continuation of inefficient firms due to conflicts of interest and agency problems among claim

holders (e.g., Bebchuk (1988); Gertner and Scharfstein (1991)). This may prevent the reallocation

of assets to better uses, limiting potential synergies with local firms and the revitalization of the

area.

    Ultimately, whether these two bankruptcy procedures create positive or negative spillovers is an

empirical question. However, estimating these spillover effects is challenging. First, many companies

have multiple establishments, which makes it difficult to determine the relevant local area and

identify all establishments that are potentially affected by the bankrupt firm. Second, the decision

to liquidate versus reorganize is not random. The primary concern is that liquidation is likely more

prevalent in declining areas. Hence, finding an association between liquidation and a subsequent

decline in economic activity could be spurious, merely reflecting a negative trend at the local level.

    To overcome the first obstacle, we use detailed micro data at the establishment level from the

U.S. Census Bureau. Specifically, we combine the Longitudinal Business Database (LBD) with

bankruptcy filings from LexisNexis Law to obtain a comprehensive dataset of 91,000 establishments

belonging to bankrupt firms. Using the geo-codes from the LBD, we determine the relevant local

area for each bankrupt establishment and then study how bankruptcy affects other establishments

at the same location.3

    To overcome the second obstacle—the endogeneity of the decision to liquidate versus reorga-

nize—we employ an instrumental variable (IV) approach that exploits the fact that U.S. bankruptcy

courts use a blind rotation system to assign cases to judges, effectively randomizing filers to judges

within each court division. The assignment of bankruptcy judges is therefore orthogonal to the

filer’s characteristics and, importantly, to the local economic conditions in the vicinity of the filer’s

establishments. Judges differ in their propensity to force the liquidation of companies by pushing

them to Chapter 7, as opposed to allowing them to reorganize in Chapter 11. The random allo-

cation of filers to bankruptcy judges thus results in the assignment of similar companies to judges

who differ in their propensity to treat the firms with different bankruptcy procedures. We exploit
   3
      Using Census data allows us to consider all industries. This is in sharp contrast to most of the literature on
agglomeration that examines the manufacturing sector only. Manufacturing is found disproportionately in small- and
medium-size cities, as well as the rural fringes of cities (Kolko (2000)). Hence, exploring the entire population of
bankrupt firms allows us to explore relations across all industries and all geographies, including larger and denser
cities.


                                                         3
this heterogeneity among judges to instrument for the probability that a given company is liqui-

dated. This, in turn, allows us to disentangle the effect of liquidation from potential confounds

such as changes in local economic conditions. In essence, this identification strategy is closest to

the ideal experiment in which otherwise identical companies are randomly assigned to liquidation

or reorganization.4

    Using this empirical approach, we find that the liquidation of an establishment imposes negative

spillovers on the immediate neighborhood (as captured by Census blocks). Specifically, relative to

reorganized establishments, we find that liquidation leads to an average decrease in employment of

4% per year among non-bankrupt businesses in the same Census block. This estimate corresponds

to a multiplier of 1.3, that is, for every job that is lost at the liquidated establishment, another 1.3

jobs are lost due to spillovers. The effect takes place gradually and persists over the five-year period

after the bankruptcy filing. We further decompose this effect into changes at existing establishments

and entry into the area. We find that most of the decline in employment is due to lower growth of

existing establishments and, to a lesser extent, reduced entry into the area.

    Overall, these results indicate that liquidation adversely affects the local economy through

spillovers. As such, our results are inconsistent with the creative destruction argument, which

posits that forcing the liquidation of distressed firms will help revitalize the local area and induce

entry by freeing up resources for healthy firms to use. Under creative destruction, we would expect

higher employment following liquidation, or at least higher entry into the area. Yet, neither is

supported by the data.

    Interestingly, we find that the spillover effects are highly localized. The effects are strongest at

the Census block level, and decay for larger geographical areas (Census block groups and Census

tracts). This is consistent with prior evidence on the localized nature of agglomeration spillovers

(Rosenthal and Strange (2003); Arzaghi and Henderson (2008)).

    We also explore how the spillover effects differ depending on the “fate” of the bankrupt es-

tablishment, that is, whether it continued operations, remained vacant, or was reallocated to a

different user. Consistent with the notion that liquidation leads to a disruption of existing agglom-
   4
     This approach follows the growing literature that takes advantage of the random assignment of judges and
heterogeneity in judges’ interpretation of the law (e.g., Kling (2006); Doyle (2008); Chang and Schoar (2013); Dobbie
and Song (2015); Galasso and Schankerman (2015); Bernstein et al. (2016)).


                                                         4
eration linkages, we find that the negative spillovers on local employment are larger if the bankrupt

establishment stays vacant or is redeployed to a different industry, while they are smaller if the

establishment remains with its current user or remains in the same industry.

    Finally, we examine three mechanisms through which liquidation may spill over to neighboring

firms. First, liquidation may reduce customer traffic to the area. This will cause negative spillovers

on nearby stores if those stores relied on these customers for their own demand (Pashigian and

Gould (1998), Gould et al. (2005), Benmelech et al. (2014)).5 In the second mechanism, liquida-

tion may reduce business synergies between proximate firms. As highlighted by prior literature,

such synergies may arise through the reduction of production costs pertaining to three key factors:

goods, knowledge, and workers (Moretti (2011), Glaeser and Gottlieb (2009), and Duranton and

Puga (2004)). Specifically, by locating near firms in similar industries, businesses can reduce trans-

portation costs of goods and services, increase the flow of ideas and skills between firms, and create

thick labor markets to better match workers and firms. By forcing the removal of a business from

a locally agglomerated market, liquidation may disrupt these synergies. Finally, in the third mech-

anism, it might be the case that the liquidation of an establishment simply reduces local demand

for goods and services, as the employees of that establishment either lose their jobs or relocate to

other areas (Moretti (2010)).

    To examine these potential mechanisms, we decompose our sample into three broad industry

sectors: 1) the non-tradable sector (e.g., restaurants and retail), which relies on local demand and

customer flow to the area, 2) the tradable sector (e.g., manufacturing), which is likely to rely on non-

local demand, and 3) services (e.g., law firms, health services, and advertisement agencies, among

others). Consistent with the customer traffic channel, we find that the liquidation of non-tradable

establishments adversely affects neighboring non-tradable establishments, while the liquidation of

tradable or services establishments does not. This result suggests that liquidation affects estab-

lishments that rely on local demand by reducing customer traffic to the local area. Moreover,

we also find that the liquidation of services establishments adversely affects neighboring services

establishments, which is consistent with the knowledge spillover and information sharing channel.
   5
     Liquidated stores may further deter customers if establishments are vacant and neglected. Indeed, evidence from
residential real estate shows that vacancy leads to poor maintenance and increased crime (Campbell et al. (2011);
Ellen et al. (2013); Cui and Walsh (2015)). Arguably, the same may apply to commercial real estate.


                                                         5
   In contrast, our evidence is inconsistent with other spillover mechanisms. In particular, we find

no evidence that tradable liquidations affect non-tradable employment, which is inconsistent with

the employee demand channel. We also find that tradable employment is unaffected by liquidation

in any sector, which is consistent with the notion that these businesses rely on non-local demand,

and therefore may be least affected by geographically proximate liquidations. Finally, the fact that

the liquidation spillovers we identify are highly localized is inconsistent with the transportation

cost and labor market pooling channels, as these mechanisms likely function in areas larger than a

Census block.

   These results further show that liquidation is not always detrimental to the area. In particular,

the non-result in the tradable sector indicates that liquidation only hurts the surroundings if the

liquidated establihsment’s operations are tied to the local environment. This finding echoes well

with the agglomeration literature. As Moretti (2011) emphasize in his review (p. 1278): “[t]heory

suggests that the local multiplier for the tradable sector should be smaller than the one for the non-

tradable sector, and possibly even negative. Consistent with this hypothesis, Carrington (1996),

Moretti (2010), and Black et al. (2005) fail to find any significant effect of employment in the

tradable sector.”

   Our paper contributes to several strands of the literature. First, several articles examine the

costs and benefits of reorganization procedures such as Chapter 11 (e.g., Baird (1986); Aghion et al.

(1992); Bradley and Rosenzweig (1992); Hotchkiss (1995); Gilson (1997); Bris et al. (2006)), while

others consider frictions that may exist in distressed liquidations (e.g., Shleifer and Vishny (1992);

Pulvino (1998, 1999); Strömberg (2000); Thorburn (2000); Campbell et al. (2011)). However, this

literature has typically ignored any spillover effects of bankruptcy on non-bankrupt firms. This

paper shows that these externalities are large enough to be a first-order consideration in assessing

the costs and benefits of the two bankruptcy regimes.

   Two recent studies examine the spillover effects of the closure of large retail chains. Benmelech

et al. (2014) document that following a retail chain’s shutdown, stores located in the same shopping

mall are more likely to close as well. Shoag and Veuger (2014) find that after a big-box store closes,

consumers rapidly reduce their visits to nearby stores. While related, our paper differs in several



                                                  6
regards. Our focus is on the externalities of the two main bankruptcy procedures—reorganization

and liquidation. We do so through an identification strategy that exploits the random allocation of

bankruptcy judges. This not only allows for a tight identification of the spillovers of liquidation, but

these spillovers are estimated relative to the policy-relevant option of reorganization, which may

also include establishment shutdowns that are not forced. Moreover, we use establishment-level

data from the U.S. Census Bureau, which allows us to study all sectors and hence provide a rich

characterization of the spillovers of liquidation and reorganization, and the mechanisms through

which these spillovers occur.

    Second, this paper contributes to the large literature that studies the benefits of agglomeration.

Ellison and Glaeser (1997) show that there is significant geographic clustering of industries, and

many theories exist as to why firms co-locate. To date, the empirical literature on agglomeration

spillovers has mostly focused on the expansion of agglomeration economies through entry decisions

(e.g., Rosenthal and Strange (2003); Greenstone et al. (2010)).6 In contrast, our study examines

the disruption of agglomeration economies. By focusing on disruptions that break agglomeration

linkages through liquidation, and through the reliance on random variation in the assignment of

bankruptcy judges, we show how agglomerations can propagate negative shocks that impose neg-

ative externalities on other firms within the cluster.7 Further, our detailed micro-level data and

clean identification scheme allow us to examine more closely the various channels of agglomeration

spillovers across a wide range of industries and with more precise geographic locations. This is in

contrast to most of the literature on agglomeration that examines the manufacturing industry only,

which is typically found disproportionately in small- and medium-size cities, as well as the rural

fringes of cities, rather than in dense cities (Kolko (2000)).

    Finally, our paper contributes to the growing literature in macroeconomics that studies the

propagation of shocks across industries and firms (e.g., Acemoglu et al. (2012); Carvalho (2014);

Acemoglu et al. (2016)). In this vein, our paper shows how the (quasi-)random liquidation of an

    6
      Two exceptions include Jofre-Monseny et al. (2015), who study the closure of large manufacturing plants in
Spain, and Gathmann et al. (2016), who examine the spillovers effects of mass layoffs in Germany.
    7
      Note that agglomeration spillovers arising from an expansion versus disruption of agglomeration economies need
not be symmetric. Indeed, several theories of agglomeration highlight agglomerations’ ability to absorb negative
shocks (e.g., Krugman (1991)). In fact, as discussed above, liquidation may even benefit the local area if the liquidated
establishment’s capital and labor are redeployed efficiently within the agglomeration.


                                                           7
establishment propagates through the establishment’s agglomeration and ultimately affects local

employment.

   The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section II discusses the institutional back-

ground. Section III presents the data. Section IV describes the methodology. Section V provides

the results. Section VI concludes.



                             II.     Institutional Background

Bankruptcy procedures can be broadly classified into two main categories: liquidation through

a cash auction, and reorganization through a structured bargaining process (Hart (2000)). The

U.S. Bankruptcy code contains both procedures, with liquidation falling under Chapter 7 and

reorganization taking place under Chapter 11 of the code. Bankruptcy formally begins with the

filing of a petition for protection under one of the two chapters. In nearly all cases, it is the debtor

that files the petition and chooses the chapter of bankruptcy, although under certain circumstances

creditors can also file for an involuntary bankruptcy. Firms can file for bankruptcy where they are

incorporated, where they are headquartered, or where they do the bulk of their business (see 28 USC

§ 1408), thereby giving the largest, nationwide firms some leeway in the choice of bankruptcy venue.

However, once a firm files for bankruptcy, it is randomly assigned to one of the bankruptcy judges

in the divisional office in which it files. This random assignment is a key part of our identification

strategy, which we outline in Section IV.

   Firms that file for Chapter 7 bankruptcy expect to liquidate all assets of the firm, and hence

face a relatively straightforward process, although it can be lengthy (Bris et al. (2006)). A trustee

is put in place to oversee the liquidation of the assets of the firm, and proceeds from the asset sales

are used to pay back creditors according to their security and priority. According to U.S. Court

filing statistics, liquidations are frequent, as about 65% of all business bankruptcy filings in the U.S.

are Chapter 7 filings.

   A significant portion of firms that originally file for Chapter 11 bankruptcy also end up in

Chapter 7 through case conversion. Conversion to Chapter 7 occurs when the bankruptcy judge

approves a petition to convert the case. Conversion petitions are typically filed either by a creditor


                                                   8
or the court itself (e.g., by a trustee), accompanied with a brief which outlines why liquidation will

provide the highest recovery for the creditors.8 Importantly, while there are uniform criteria by

which a judge may convert a case from Chapter 11 to Chapter 7, there is significant variation in

the interpretation of these criteria across judges. The random allocation of bankruptcy judges thus

results in the assignment of similar companies to judges who differ in their propensity to trigger

liquidation. As we discuss in Section IV, we exploit this heterogeneity among judges to instrument

for the probability that a given company is liquidated.

     Firms that remain in Chapter 11 pass through a structured bargaining process in which man-

agement and creditors negotiate a plan that outlines any restructuring that will be undertaken,

including instituting a new capital structure or selling assets. As shown in Bernstein et al. (2016), a

significant number of assets are sold and many firms are completely shut down even if they remain

in Chapter 11. The key difference between the two bankruptcy regimes is that in Chapter 7 liquida-

tion is forced, while in Chapter 11 it is only an option. Meanwhile, negotiations in Chapter 11 are

subject to a variety of bargaining costs and principal-agent conflicts that may result in inefficient

outcomes. This is important to keep in mind, as establishments that remain in Chapter 11 serve as

the counterfactual in our analysis. Thus, we compare spillovers of establishments that are forced to

be shut down in liquidation to those of establishments that are still bankrupt—and hence may be

sold or shut down—but pass through the reorganization process.



                                                 III.      Data

A.       Bankruptcy Data

We gather data on Chapter 11 bankruptcy filings from LexisNexis Law, which obtains filing data

from the U.S. Courts system. These data contain legal information about each filing, including the

date the case was filed, the court in which it was filed, the judge assigned to the case, an indicator of

whether the filing was involuntary or not, and status updates on the case. From the status updates,

we are able to identify cases that were converted to Chapter 7. The LexisNexis dataset contains a
     8
     We examined court documents for a random sample of 200 cases and found that, on average, a motion to convert
a case occurs 4 months after the bankruptcy filing. Importantly, in nearly all cases this is the first major motion on
which a judge rules.


                                                          9
few bankruptcies beginning as early as 1980, but coverage is not complete in these early years as

courts were still transitioning to an electronic records system. We begin our sample in 1992, when

LexisNexis’ coverage jumped to over 2,000 bankruptcy filings per year (from 450 in 1991) across 70

different bankruptcy districts (out of 91). By 1995, LexisNexis covers essentially 100% of all court

cases across all bankruptcy districts.9 We end our sample with cases that were filed in 2005 so as to

be able to track economic activity near bankrupt firms for a five-year period after the bankruptcy

filing.


B.        Establishment-Level Data

The establishment-level data are obtained from the U.S. Census Bureau’s Longitudinal Business

Database (LBD). An establishment is a “single physical location where business is conducted”

(Jarmin and Miranda (2002)), e.g., a retail store, supermarket, restaurant, warehouse, or manufac-

turing plant. The LBD covers all business establishments in the U.S. with at least one paid employee.

Importantly, the LBD allows us to identify all establishment locations of the bankrupt firms, and

also identify geographically proximate establishments that may be affected by the bankruptcy.

      We match bankruptcy filings from LexisNexis to the bankrupt firms’ establishments in the LBD

using the procedure of Bernstein et al. (2016). Specifically, we match the bankruptcy filings from

LexisNexis to the U.S. Census Bureau’s Business Register                 the Standard Statistical Establishment

List (SSEL)          using the employer identification number (EIN), which is contained in both datasets.

Importantly, each legal entity of a firm can have a separate EIN, and thus there can be multiple EINs

(and multiple bankruptcy filings) for each firm. Further, an EIN can have multiple establishments in

the LBD. We match bankrupt EINs to all establishments in the SSEL in the year of the bankruptcy

filing to form our initial sample of 129,000 bankrupt establishments belonging to 28,000 unique

firms.10




     9
          See Iverson (2015) for more information on the LexisNexis data.
     10
          Note that the Census Bureau requires us to round observation counts.


                                                            10
C.      Geographical Units

In our baseline analysis, we define a location at the level of the Census block. Census blocks are

the smallest geographic area for which the Census Bureau reports information. In a city, the shape

of a Census block follows the geographic pattern of the streets, usually a rectangular grid. Census

blocks in suburban and rural areas may be large, irregular, and bounded by a variety of features,

such as roads, streams, and transmission lines (U.S. Census Bureau (1994)). There are more than

11 million blocks in the 2010 Decennial Census.11

     Census blocks serve as a valuable source for small-area geographic studies (e.g., Echenique and

Fryer (2007); Bayer et al. (2008)). They are especially appealing in our context since establish-

ments are small economic entities. Arguably, blocks are likely to best approximate the area that is

economically relevant to the establishment.

     The Census Bureau started collecting block information for business establishments as of the

1992 Census. This coincides with the initial year of our sample. However, block coverage is in-

complete in 1992 and becomes increasingly more comprehensive in subsequent Census years. To

fill in missing geo codes, we use the most recent block information (e.g., if an establishment has no

block information available in 1992, but does in 1997, we fill in the pre-1997 years with the 1997

block code). Out of the initial 129,000 establishments of the bankrupt firms, we obtain a final sam-

ple of 91,000 establishments (belonging to 20,000 unique bankrupt firms) with non-missing block

information.12

     We also examine how bankruptcy regimes affect larger areas. Census block groups are the next

level above Census blocks in the geographic hierarchy. A Census block group is a set of one or more

contiguous Census blocks. There are about 220,000 block groups in the 2010 Decennial Census.

Finally, the largest area we consider is the Census tract. A Census tract usually covers a contiguous

area and contains up to nine block groups. There are about 74,000 tracts in the 2010 Decennial
   11
      Note that Census blocks are not delineated based on population. In fact, about 45% of the Census blocks do
not have any population, while a block that includes an apartment complex might have several hundred inhabitants
(U.S. Census Bureau (1994)).
   12
      A related issue is that block boundaries are sometimes redrawn, which could lead to inconsistent block codes over
time. To mitigate this issue, we replace inconsistent block codes by the most recent block code (e.g., if an establishment
has inconsistent block codes in 1996 and 1997, we use the 1997 block code). This correction is immaterial for our
results we obtain almost identical estimates if we use the opposite approach, that is, rely on the earliest available
block code to fix inconsistencies.


                                                           11
Census.


D.    Summary Statistics

Table I provides summary statistics for the 91,000 establishments belonging to 20,000 firms that

filed for Chapter 11. Out of these establishments, 16,000 pertain to firms that were converted to

Chapter 7 liquidation (8,000 firms), while the remaining 75,000 establishments belong to firms that

stay in Chapter 11 reorganization (12,000 firms). Note that approximately 40% of the bankrupt

firms filing for Chapter 11 convert to Chapter 7.

     As can be seen, Chapter 7 establishments are on average smaller compared to Chapter 11 estab-

lishments (28.0 versus 38.8 employees), have lower payroll per employee ($19,600 versus $22,700),

and belong to smaller companies (2.7 versus 8.1 establishments; 72 versus 309 employees). The lat-

ter is in line with prior research documenting that Chapter 7 firms tend to be smaller than Chapter

11 firms (e.g., Bris et al. (2006)).

     The table also provides additional statistics at the block, block group, and tract level. As

is shown, the average Census block in our sample consists of 55.5 establishments corresponding

to 1,105 employees. When we contrast the blocks of Chapter 7 and Chapter 11 establishments,

we observe again systematic differences. In particular, Chapter 7 blocks are on average smaller

(50.6 versus 56.5 establishments; 926 versus 1,143 employees), and they are populated by smaller

establishments (16.1 versus 19.5 employees per establishment).

     Overall, the differences in Table I highlight the importance of selection into the bankruptcy

regimes, and hence the need for identification in assessing the externalities of liquidation versus

reorganization. We discuss our identification strategy in detail in the next section.



                               IV.     Identification Strategy

A.    Empirical Design

Quantifying the externalities of liquidation (Chapter 7) relative to reorganization (Chapter 11)

is challenging due to the inherent selection into bankruptcy regimes. For example, companies



                                                 12
filing for Chapter 7 directly may operate in declining areas, which could bias our estimate of local

externalities. To mitigate this selection issue, we focus only on firms that filed for Chapter 11

reorganization, and exploit the fact that a significant fraction (40%) of these firms are converted

to Chapter 7 liquidation subsequently. We then quantify the local externalities of liquidation by

estimating the following specification:



                           Yl,t+m = α + β · Liquidationpit + γ · Xlpit + µk + lpi                                 (1)

where l indexes location (e.g., blocks, block groups, and tracts) around bankrupt establishment p,

that belongs to bankrupt firm i. The year of the bankruptcy filing is t and k defines the industry

of the bankrupt firm. The main dependent variable Yl,t+m is the annualized percentage change in

employment at the location l of the bankrupt establishment (excluding employment of the bankrupt

establishment itself) in the m years following the bankruptcy filing year. In most of the analysis

we will focus on the 5 years after the bankruptcy filing.13 Other dependent variables, such as the

change in the number of plants, are similarly defined as percent changes from their level in the

year of the bankruptcy filing.14 Liquidationpit is a dummy variable equal to one if establishment p

belongs to a company i whose Chapter 11 filing (in year t) is converted into Chapter 7 liquidation.

The decision of whether the case is converted to Chapter 7 liquidation or remains in Chapter 11

reorganization is typically taken in the bankruptcy filing year.15 Xlpit is a vector of pre-bankruptcy

characteristics at the establishment, firm, and location level.16 We further include 2-digit NAICS

industry fixed effects to account for unobserved heterogeneity at the industry level. The coefficient

of interest is β which captures the local externalities of liquidation relative to reorganization.

                                5 −#emp0
  13
      More precisely, y = #emp #emp0
                                         , where #emp is the total number of employees at the location of the bankrupt
establishment (net of the employees of the bankrupt establishment). Year 0 is the year of the bankruptcy filing. Year
5 is five years after the bankruptcy filing. For ease of exposition, we annualize this five-year growth rate.
   14
      To mitigate the impact of outliers, we trim all dependent variables at the 5th and 95th percentiles of their
empirical distribution.
   15
      To verify this, we examined the court documents of 200 randomly selected cases in our sample, and found that
for the median case the time between case filing and a decision on whether the case will remain in Chapter 11 or be
converted to Chapter 7 is 4 months.
   16
      The firm-level controls include i) log(employment) of the bankrupt firm, ii) log(establishments) of the bankrupt
firm, and iii) a dummy variable indicating whether other related firms (e.g., subsidiaries of the same firm) also filed
for bankruptcy at the same time. The establishment-level control is log(employment) of the bankrupt establishment.
Finally, the block-level control is log(employment) in the block of the bankrupt establishment. All controls are
measured in the year of the bankruptcy filing (year 0).


                                                          13
    A caveat of specification 1 is that, even among Chapter 11 filers, there might be a substantial

amount of selection among firms that convert to Chapter 7. Symptomatic of this issue are the

differences in Table 1—e.g., Chapter 7 firms have fewer establishments, fewer employees, and operate

in smaller Census blocks. Naturally, these differences raise concerns that Chapter 7 firms may differ

based on unobservables as well. For example, firms that are converted to Chapter 7 may typically

reside in less resilient areas. Under this scenario, a negative shock at the local level may trigger

both the conversion to Chapter 7 and the decline of the local area.

    To mitigate this concern, we use an instrumental variable that exploits the heterogeneity among

bankruptcy judges in their propensity to convert Chapter 11 filings into Chapter 7 liquidation.

This instrument does not rely on differences in actual bankruptcy laws, as the bankruptcy code is

uniform at the federal level. Rather, the instrument makes use of the fact that bankruptcy judges’

interpretation of the law varies significantly (e.g., LoPucki and Whitford (1993); Bris et al. (2006);

Chang and Schoar (2013)).

    Bankruptcy judges work in 276 divisional offices across the U.S., each of which pertains to one

of 94 U.S. Bankruptcy Districts. A firm filing for bankruptcy may choose to file either where it

is i) headquartered, ii) incorporated, or iii) does most of its business. Once a filing is made in a

particular division, judge assignment is random.17 We can then rely on this random assignment to

generate exogenous variation in the probability that a given case is converted to Chapter 7, since

judges vary in their propensity to convert filings. We implement this instrumental variable approach

by estimating the following first-stage regression:



             Liquidationpit = ρ + π · ShareCasesConvertedj + λ · Xlpit + δdt + µk + ηlpi                            (2)

where ShareCasesConvertedj is the share of Chapter 11 cases that judge j ever converted to


   17
     As an example, consider the bankruptcy district of New Jersey, which is divided into three divisions: Camden,
Newark, and Trenton. The Local Rules of the New Jersey Bankruptcy Court lay out exactly which counties pertain
to each division, and firms must file in the division “in which the debtor has its principal place of business.” Once a
case is filed in a particular division, the Local Rules state that “case assignments shall be made by the random draw
method used by the Court” (D.N.J. LBR 1073-1). More broadly, the random assignment of bankruptcy judges within
districts is an important feature of the U.S. bankruptcy process. The rationale is to help ensure a fair distribution of
cases and prevent “judge shopping,” or parties’ attempts to have their cases heard by the judge who they believe will
act most favorably (see, e.g., Federal Judicial Center (2016)).


                                                          14
Chapter 7, excluding the current case.18 Importantly, the inclusion of division by year fixed effects,

δdt , ensures that we exploit the random variation in judge assignment within a division-year cell.

The coefficient π captures the extent to which a judge j’s propensity to convert a case to Chapter

7 affects the probability that a given case is converted into Chapter 7 liquidation.

    We then estimate the following second-stage regression:



                         yl,t+m = α + β · Liquidationpit + γ · Xlpit + δdt + µk + lpi                                (3)

where Liquidationpi are the predicted values from the first-stage regression. The second-stage

regression mirrors the OLS regression in equation (1), except that it relies on the exogenous com-

ponent of Liquidation—i.e., the component that is induced by the randomization of bankruptcy

judges.

    In all regressions, we cluster standard errors at the division by year level. Doing so accounts

for any arbitrary correlation of the error terms within bankruptcy courts. Lastly, we weight all

regressions by the inverse of the number of establishments operated by the bankrupt firm to ensure

that each firm receives the same weight and hence avoid overweighting large bankruptcy cases.

    If the conditions for a valid instrumental variable are met, β captures the causal effect of Chapter

7 liquidation on local employment and other outcomes of interest, relative to reorganization. It is

important to note that the estimates in the instrumental variables analysis are coming only from the

sensitive firms—i.e., firms that switch bankruptcy regimes because they were randomly assigned to a

judge who commonly converts cases to Chapter 7 (Imbens and Angrist (1994)). Clearly, some firms

will stay in Chapter 11 no matter the judge, and other firms will convert to Chapter 7 regardless

of the judge. Thus, the instrumental variables estimates only capture the local average treatment

effect on the sensitive firms, and should be interpreted as such.




   18
     This standard leave-one-out measure deals with the mechanical relationship that would otherwise exist between
the instrument and the conversion decision for a given case. We have experimented with alternative definitions of the
instrument as well: i) the share of cases that judge j converted to Chapter 7 in the five years prior to the current case;
and ii) judge fixed effects. Both the first and second stage results are unaffected by the choice of the instrument.


                                                           15
B.    Validity of the Instrument

To be valid, our instrument needs to bring about significant changes in the probability of converting

a Chapter 11 filing into Chapter 7 liquidation (rank condition). Moreover, the instrument needs to

be unrelated to the evolution of the bankrupt establishment’s local area (exclusion restriction). In

the following, we discuss both conditions.


                                           B.1.   First Stage

Table II presents the results of the first-stage regression, which confirms that the instrument strongly

affects the probability of conversion to Chapter 7 liquidation. In column (1), the regression includes

division by year fixed effects. In column (2), we also include control variables. In column (3), we

further include industry fixed effects. As is shown, the coefficient of share of cases converted is

economically large and highly significant in all specifications. The estimates of 0.58-0.59 imply that

a one-standard deviation increase in the instrument (0.13) corresponds to an increase in the prob-

ability of Chapter 7 liquidation by 7.5-7.6%, a 12.2-12.3% increase compared to the unconditional

probability of 40%. In addition, the instrument is “strong” in a statistical sense. The F -statistic

ranges between 75.7 and 80.0, which is well above the F = 10 threshold of Staiger and Stock (1997)

and the critical values of Stock and Yogo (2005). This alleviates concerns about weak instruments.


                                    B.2.     Exclusion Restriction

The exclusion restriction requires that our instrument, judge leniency, has no direct effect on post-

bankruptcy changes in employment at the location of the bankrupt establishment other than through

the effect on the probability of conversion to Chapter 7 liquidation. The random allocation of

bankruptcy judges, while not sufficient, strongly supports that the exclusion restriction is satis-

fied—analogous to the ideal setting of randomized experiments. In Table III we conduct random-

ization tests showing that the instrument is uncorrelated with a large set of covariates and industry

fixed effects.

     Column (1) shows that the R2 from regressing the share of cases converted on division-by-year

fixed effects alone is 0.78, suggesting that there is substantial variation in judge conversion propen-

                                                   16
sities between divisions and over time. However, the random assignment of judges occurs within

court divisions, and therefore, we want to verify that covariates are orthogonal to the instrument

conditional on the division-by-year fixed effects. In columns (2)-(5), we include industry fixed

effects and controls. Column (2) includes the baseline controls. In columns (3)-(5), we further in-

clude pre-trends in employment (that is, the change in employment in the three years preceding the

bankruptcy filing in the block, block group, and tract, respectively, of the bankrupt establishment)

as well as controls for the block’s industry composition, which include the share of employment

in the block that is in tradable and non-tradable industries (compared to the omitted category of

services). As can be seen, none of the controls is statistically significant and all point estimates

are close to zero. Further, the industry fixed effects are jointly insignificant, and the R2 remains

unchanged in all specifications. Overall, this evidence lends strong support to the randomization

assumption.



                                          V.     Results

A.    Main Results

Table IV presents the main results, in which we focus on how liquidation affects neighboring firms,

relative to reorganization. In columns (1)-(2), the dependent variable is the annualized percent-

age change in employment in the block of the bankrupt establishment within the five-year period

following the bankruptcy filing (excluding employment of the bankrupt establishment itself). All re-

gressions include the baseline controls, industry fixed effects, and division by year fixed effects. The

OLS estimate reported in column (1), which does not account for selection, shows that liquidation

is associated with an annual employment growth rate that is 2.5 percentage points lower relative

to reorganization. The IV-2SLS estimate in column (2), which relies on the random assignment of

bankruptcy judges, is somewhat larger in magnitude. It implies that liquidation leads to an annual

employment growth rate that is 4.0 percentage points lower relative to reorganization.

     To better understand how to interpret the magnitudes of the effect, it is important to note

that the liquidation effect captured here is at the block level (we will consider larger geographical



                                                  17
units in Section III.C below). Since the average number of employees in the blocks of Chapter

7 establishments is 926 (Table I), this coefficient implies that liquidation leads to a decrease in

block-level employment by 37 employees per year, relative to reorganization. A simple back-of-

the-envelope calculation indicates that this estimate corresponds to a multipler of approximately

1.3, that is, for every job that is lost at the liquidated establishment, another 1.3 jobs are lost due

to spillovers.19 Interestingly, this estimate is in the ballpark of other multipliers that have been

estimated in the agglomeration literature. In particular, following the opening of a manufacturing

plant, Moretti (2010) estimates a multiplier in the range of 1.0-2.5.

    In columns (3)-(4), the dependent variable is the annualized percentage change in the number

of establishments in the block of the bankrupt establishment within the five-year period following

the bankruptcy filing (again excluding the bankrupt establishment). The results mirror those in

columns (1)-(2). Specifically, the estimates imply that the number of establishments drops by 3.7%

to 4.7% per year. Overall, the results in Table IV indicate that liquidation imposes large negative

externalities on the immediate surroundings of the liquidated establishment.

    In Figures 1 and 2, we examine the dynamics of the local externalities at the block level.

Specifically, we estimate variants of the regressions in columns (2) and (4) of Table 4, but instead of

using as the dependent variable the annual change in employment (and number of establishments,

respectively) over a five-year period, we now consider horizons of 1 to 5 years following the filing

date and report the cumulative change in employment.

    Figure 1 plots the coefficients (along with the 95% confidence bounds) pertaining to the em-

ployment regressions. As can be seen, the local externalities take time to materialize. After one

year, the decrease in employment is relatively modest. It is only after two years that it becomes
  19
     The calculation is as follows. Our IV-2SLS estimate implies that block-level employment (net of the liquidated
establishment’s employment) decreases by 4% annually, corresponding to 37 employees annually, within the five-year
period following the bankruptcy filing. One complication, however, is that some of these employees may find jobs
within the broader labor market. To obtain a rough estimate of the reallocation, we rely on the estimates from
Section V.C, in which we study broader geographies. In particular, we document that tract-level employment (net
of the affected block) increases by 0.5%, which suggests that some of the employment losses in the block of the
liquidated establishment are offset by reallocation within the tract. The number of employees in the block and tract
of the liquidated establishments is 926 and 6,862, respectively (see Table I). Accordingly, the reallocation within the
tract amounts to 0.5% Ö (6,862 – 926) = 29.7 employees, and hence the net employment losses at the block level
are about 37 – 29.7 = 7.3 employees. Since these are annual figures, and since the effect takes five years to unfold,
the five-year employment losses are 5 Ö 7.3 = 36.5 employees. Finally, since the average liquidated establishment
has 28 employees (Table I), the corresponding muliplier is 1.3. Naturally, we caveat that this calculation is based on
simplifying assumptions, and is only meant to provide a rough ballpark.


                                                          18
sizable and statistically significant. Finally, the effect stabilizes somewhat after four to five years.

Similarly, in Figure 2, we repeat this analysis for the number of establishments. The results mir-

ror those for employment. We find that the number of establishments declines monotonically and

becomes statistically significant in year 3 and stabilizes in years 4 and 5.

     These results are robust to a variety of alternative specifications. First, we find similar results

if we weight the regressions by block-level employment, showing that our results are not driven by

small blocks with few employees. Similarly, our results are robust if we split the sample into blocks

with above- and below-median total employment in the year of the bankruptcy filing, illustrating

again that the results are not driven by the smallest blocks. Second, we verify that outliers are

not affecting our estimates by i) trimming the employment change distribution at the 10th and

90th percentiles, and ii) removing blocks whose employment drops to zero within five years of the

bankruptcy filing. Both tests yield robust results. Third, we obtain similar results if we drop all

cases in which the bankrupt firm had multiple establishments in the same block. Finally, and related,

we also obtain similar results if we drop all cases in which multiple establishments (belonging to

any firm) entered bankruptcy in the same year in the same block.


B.    Decomposing the Effect to Entrants and Existing Establishments

The previous section explored the spillover effects of liquidation on aggregate employment and the

number of establishments, relative to reorganization. In this section we decompose these aggregate

effects to examine separately how liquidation spillovers affect existing establishments and how it

affects the entry of new establishments to the area. In particular, we are interested in understanding

the extent to which the aggregate negative spillovers of liquidation are driven by the disruption of

agglomeration linkages among existing firms, and whether liquidation leads to a “creative destruc-

tion” process by increasing entry to the area. This creative destruction may occur if liquidation frees

up resources such as employees, machinery, and real estate, that were previously unavailable. To

do so, we decompose the overall changes in employment into changes in: i) employment of existing

establishments (“existing”), and ii) employment of new establishments (“new”):




                                                   19
                          #emp5 − #emp0   (#empnew
                                               5   − 0) + (#empexisting
                                                               5        − #empexisting
                                                                              0        )
            ∆emppi5 =                   =
                             #emp0                          #emp0

where #empm is the number of employees in a given Census block in year m after the bankruptcy

filing (excluding the bankrupt establishment). Similarly, #empexisting
                                                              m        is the number of employees

working at establishments that existed in the year of the bankruptcy filing, and #empnew
                                                                                     m   is the

number of employees that are working at establishments that did not exist in the year of the

bankruptcy filing and thus entered later into the area. Therefore, this decomposition separately

explores the effect of liquidation on the share of employment growth due to existing establishments,

and the portion of employment growth due to the entry of new establishments.

   We decompose the change in the number of establishments analogoulsy. Specifically, we distin-

guish between changes in the number of existing establishments due to establishment closures, and

changes in entry due to establishment openings:


                             #plants5 − #plants0   (#plantsbirth
                                                           5     − 0) + (0 − #plantsdeath
                                                                                    0     )
             ∆plantspi5 =                        =                                          .
                                  #plants0                        #plants0

   The results are presented in panels (a) and (b) of Table V.20 In columns (2)-(3) of panel (a), we

estimate variants of the baseline specification (reproduced in column (1)), decomposing the change

in employment into its two components. As can be seen, the decline in employment operates mostly

through a decrease in employment within existing establishments of 3 percentage points per year,

which captures 75% of the overall effect. To a lesser extent, the effect is also driven by a decline in

employment due to less entry into the region of 1 percentage point per year (which captures 25%

of the overall effect). We obtain a similar pattern in panel (b) where we decompose the number of

establishments into closures and openings. As is shown, most of the effect comes from the closure

of existing establishments.

   These results are inconsistent with the creative destruction argument, according to which liq-

uidation could help revitalize the local area by freeing up resources of distressed establishments to

  20
       As in the main analysis, we annualize the changes in employment (and number of establishments, respectively).


                                                         20
induce entry. Instead, our estimates indicate that, if anything, liquidation slightly deters entry into

the area, while simultaneously reducing employment at existing establishments.


C.     Different Geographical Areas

In the analysis so far, we examined the spillovers of liquidation at the Census block level—the

smallest geographic unit used by the Census Bureau. This choice is intuitive given the small size of

the average bankrupt establishment. Nevertheless, it is instructive to study larger geographies as

well to explore how far reaching the relative effect of liquidation is. To do so, we explore spillover

effects of bankruptcy in Census block groups and Census tracts. Following the terminology of

Section V.B, we separately explore the effect of liquidation on aggregate employment in panel (a)

of Table VI, employment in existing establishments in panel (b), and employment associated with

entry in panel (c).

     In column (2) of panel (a), we examine how liquidation affects aggregate employment at the block

group level. Census block groups are the next level above Census blocks in the geographic hierarchy,

and consist of a set of contiguous blocks. As is shown, the drop in employment is smaller (–1.7%)

and marginally insignificant (t = 1.60). This suggests that the externalities of liquidation are

localized—they are substantial in the immediate neighborhood of the liquidated establishment and

decay with distance. In column (3), we further examine the impact of liquidation on employment at

the tract level. Not surprisingly, no effect is found within such large areas—the coefficient is virtually

zero and highly insignificant.21 The results are consistent with prior literature that illustrate that

spillover effects decay quickly with geographic distance (Rosenthal and Strange (2003); Arzaghi and

Henderson (2008); Ahlfeldt et al. (2015)).

     In columns (4)-(5) of panel (a), we examine the potential reallocation of employees within

broader geographies. To do so, we consider the change in employment in the block group (and tract,

respectively), net of the block of the bankrupt establishment. As is shown, we find some evidence of

reallocation within the tract. Specifically, the coefficient in column (5) is positive (0.005), although

not statistically significant. This might suggest that some of the employment losses in the block of
  21
     Note that the latter can be interpreted as a placebo test. Indeed, within a tract, the economic relevance of
a liquidated establishment is trivial. Hence, finding any effect at the tract level would be symptomatic of omitted
variables or other form of non-randomness in the allocation of bankruptcy judges.


                                                        21
the liquidated establishment are offset by reallocation within the tract. Indeed, given that tracts

are more than seven times larger than blocks, taking this point estimate at face value would suggest

that roughly 80% of the effect at the block-level is offset by increases in employment elsewhere in

the tract.22

     We repeat the analysis separately for existing establishments in panel (b) and for new establish-

ments in panel (c). As expected, we find that the results in panel (b) mirror the results in panel

(a), and the spillover effects on existing establishments decay for larger geographical units. In panel

(c) we can further explore the “creative destruction” hypothesis that liquidation triggers entry, but

this time, using larger geographical units such as Census block groups and Census tracts. Similar

to the evidence in Section V.B, we find no evidence for increased entry following liquidation events.

In fact, in all geographical units we find that the coefficient of liquidation is negative, as shown

in columns (1) through (3). In columns (4) and (5) we focus on Census block groups and Census

tracts, respectively, net of the block itself. In both instances the coefficient of liquidation remains

negative. In sum, even when exploring larger geographical units, we find no evidence for increased

entry following the liquidation of the bankrupt firms, when compared to reorganization.


D.     Industry Sectors and Underlying Mechanisms

In this section we attempt to shed light on the underlying mechanisms through which bankruptcy

generates spillovers on neighboring firms. We focus on three potential mechanisms. Specifically,

liquidation may affect (1) customer traffic, (2) synergies between businesses, and (3) local demand

for goods and services.

     To examine these mechanisms, we decompose employment in each block into three broad indus-

try sectors: (1) the non-tradable sector (e.g., restaurants and retail) that relies on local demand and

customer flow to the area, (2) the tradable sector (e.g., manufacturing) that is likely to rely on non-

local demand, and (3) services (e.g., publishers, lawyers, accountants, and advertisement agencies,

among others).23 This decomposition is provided in panels (a), (b), and (c), respectively, of Table
  22
      The average block has 926 total employees and the average tract has 6,862 total employees. Accordingly, employ-
ment losses in the block of the liquidated establishment amount to 4% Ö 926 = 37 employees, while the reallocation
within the tract amounts to 0.5% Ö (6,862 – 926) = 29.7 employees. However, this is a rough figure, as the point
estimates are not tightly estimated.
   23
      We identify service industries using the classification of the Census (www.census.gov/econ/services.html). In


                                                         22
VII. In each panel, column (1) considers all bankruptcies, whereas columns (2)-(4) only consider

bankruptcies in the non-tradable, services, and tradable sectors, respectively. In other words, the

first column of each panel shows how the overall effect of -0.040 from column (2) of Table IV is

decomposed across these three broad industry sectors: -0.014 comes from a decline in non-tradable

employment, -0.029 from services, and 0.003 from the tradable sector. Thus, the overall decline in

employment is driven by the non-tradable and services sectors. The results in columns (2)-(4) of

Table VII then provide all 3 Ö 3 = 9 combinations of sector-specific block-level employment and

sector-specific bankruptcies. We can shed light on which mechanism is driving the overall effects

by examining how bankruptcies affect employment within and across these industry sectors.

    We begin with the first channel, that is, the possibility that liquidation reduces customer traffic

to a specific area. In panel (a), the dependent variable is employment growth at the block level in

the non-tradable sector. The non-tradable sector, which includes establishments such as restaurants

and retail stores, depends on local demand, and therefore may be affected by a decline in customer

traffic to the area triggered by liquidation. In column (1) we find that, on average, liquidation leads

to a decline in employment growth in the non-tradable sector. In column (2), we focus only on

bankruptcies in the non-tradable sector and find that the liquidation of non-tradable establishments

(which likely attract customers) strongly affects other non-tradable establishments in the area. In

contrast, liquidation of establishments in the services or tradable sectors has no spillover effect on

non-tradable employment.

    The finding in panel (a) that non-tradable liquidations affect non-tradable employment—but

not liquidation in other sectors—is consistent with the customer traffic channel. Indeed, the effect

is found in cases where customer traffic is likely to be reduced but only among firms that rely on

customer traffic for demand (i.e., restaurants and retail). Intuitively, the liquidation of, say, a retail

store may deter customers from driving to the area, which in turn may hurt nearby restaurants. In

addition, two other findings are supportive of this channel. First, the fact that the effect dissipates

quickly at larger geographies is consistent with the customer traffic argument, as customers who

keeping with Mian and Sufi (2014), we define the non-tradable sector as retail trade (NAICS 44-45) and accommo-
dation and food services (NAICS 72). The tradable sector consists of all remaining industries, which are essentially
manufacturing (NAICS 31-33). Our results are virtually identical if we strictly restrict the tradable sector to manu-
facturing.


                                                         23
are looking to consolidate shopping trips typically do so by concentrating shopping within a single

shopping center, which would be within a single Census block.24 Second, in Section V.E we show

that the employment losses are stronger when the bankrupt establishment remains vacant. As

shown in Bernstein et al. (2016), liquidation increases the likelihood of vacancy at a location. While

a vacancy will certainly not attract customers, it is possible that it actually deters customers due to

low maintenance, neglect, and even crime. Evidence from residential real estate shows that vacant

homes and apartments have poor maintenance (Campbell et al. (2011)) and cause higher crime in

the immediate area (Spelman (1993); Ellen et al. (2013); Cui and Walsh (2015)). Arguably, the

same may apply to commercial real estate, which could further deter customers.

    The second potential mechanism is synergies between businesses. Does liquidation reduce busi-

ness synergies among neighboring firms? Beginning with Marshall (1890), prior literature has

posited that industry agglomeration can benefit other firms by: i) increasing the transfer of knowl-

edge and skills, ii) reducing transportation costs of goods, and iii) creating larger labor market

pools. More specifically, if ideas and knowledge are more easily transmitted face-to-face, or if infor-

mal interaction creates more sharing of knowledge and skills, then geographic proximity can increase

the productivity of similar firms. Empirical evidence for this channel includes the spread of knowl-

edge in agriculture (Griliches (1958)), patents (Jaffe et al. (1993)), and high-tech firms (Saxenian

(1994)). Similarly, geographic proximity reduces transportation costs for goods when customers

and suppliers co-locate (Krugman (1991), Glaeser and Kohlhase (2004)). Finally, agglomeration

can create positive spillovers by reducing search frictions in the labor market, thereby providing a

better worker-firm match. In addition, large labor markets can provide implicit insurance against

idiosyncratic shocks on both the firm and worker side, as workers who are laid off can more easily

find a new job, while firms that lose employees face lower costs in hiring replacements (Krugman

(1991)).

    To explore these potential explanations we turn to panels (b) and (c) that explore the services

and tradable sectors. In panel (b) the dependent variable is the employment growth at the block

level in the services sector. In column (1) we find that liquidation leads to a significant decline
  24
    Note that nearly all of the bankruptcies in our sample are not those of name-brand “anchor” stores that have
been examined in previous studies (Pashigian and Gould (1998); Gould et al. (2005); Benmelech et al. (2014); Shoag
and Veuger (2014)). This suggests that even small stores play a significant role in attracting customers.


                                                       24
in employment growth in the services sector. More specifically, as illustrated in columns (2) and

(3), the decline in employment in the services sector is triggered by the liquidation of non-tradable

establishments and, especially, the liquidation of establishments in the services sector. In contrast,

column (4) shows that the liquidation of establishments in the tradable sector does not affect

employment growth in the services sector. Meanwhile, in panel (c) we find that the tradable sector

is not affected by liquidation in any sector.

    These results suggest that the liquidation spillovers we identify are unlikely to arise due to

changes in the labor market or transportation costs. First, the benefits of labor market pooling

should arguably apply to all sectors, yet we find no effect among tradable firms. Similarly, trans-

portation costs likely matter especially for producers of tradable goods, while they play a small role

in production costs for services firms. Our findings are in the opposite direction of this prediction.

Second, our effect decays quickly at larger geographies, and is essentially zero at the tract level.

Labor markets are much larger than even a Census tract, and similarly agglomeration due to trans-

portation costs likely occurs at a geographic level much larger than a Census block. Hence, it seems

unlikely that a decline in labor market pooling or increase in transportation costs may explain our

results.

    Instead, knowledge spillovers may occur on a very local level. For example, Arzaghi and Hen-

derson (2008) use data on the location of advertising agencies to show that the information benefits

of agglomeration begin to decay at a distance as small as 500 meters. This is especially sensible

if information transfers rely on informal meetings and face-to-face communication. Thus, if the

negative spillovers from liquidation are driven by a loss of business synergies, it is likely due to the

loss of knowledge transfers rather than a disruption of the supply chain or labor market of a firm.

To the extent that knowledge spillovers are especially important in services, our finding in panel

(b) that services bankruptcies affect local services employment is potentially consistent with this

mechanism.25

    The third potential mechanism is the direct local demand channel triggered by the bankrupt

firm’s employees (Moretti (2010)), which predicts that the liquidation of a bankrupt firm will reduce
  25
     Given the broad range of services, it is also possible that the customer traffic channel matters for some of these
firms. This could explain why the liquidation of non-tradable establishments has a marginally significant effect on
services firms.


                                                          25
local demand for goods and services and hence hurt non-tradable establishments. For example, if

a manufacturing plant is liquidated, employees losing their jobs at the plant may cut back on

their local grocery shopping and restaurant visits. We find no statistically significant evidence of

this mechanism. As can be seen in column (4) of panels (a) and (b), the liquidation of tradable

establishments does not significantly reduce either non-tradable or services employment. Hence,

the evidence is inconsistent with the direct local demand channel.

      In sum, while it is difficult to precisely distinguish between these different potential mechanisms,

our results appear to be most consistent with liquidation harming knowledge transfers and reducing

customer traffic to the area.


E.        Fate of the Bankrupt Establishments

Finally, in Table VIII we examine how the local spillovers of liquidation vary depending on the “fate”

of the bankrupt establishment. Broadly speaking, we distinguish between four potential outcomes

for the bankrupt establishment: (i) continuer—an establishment that remains operated by the

bankrupt firm and maintains the same operations (either in reorganization, or in the years until it

winds down in liquidation); (ii) reallocated to the same industry—an establishment that is acquired

by another company in the same 2-digit (or 3-digit) NAICS industry as the original bankrupt firm;

(iii) reallocated to a different industry—an establishment that is acquired by another company in a

different industry as the original bankrupt firm; and (iv) vacant—we observe no economic activity

at the location of the establishment.26 Intuitively, we would expect the negative externalities to be

lowest for continuers, since this outcome does not disrupt the local agglomeration network. However,

if reallocated plants are able to employ more workers, or more easily form connections to local firms,

they may be less prone to negative externalities.

      We examine this heterogeneity by regressing the change in block-level employment on a set of

indicator variables that capture the post-bankruptcy status of the bankrupt establishment. We

caution that this analysis does not necessarily warrant a causal interpretation. Indeed, while the

random assignment of bankruptcy judges provides exogenous variation in the probability of Chapter

7 liquidation or Chapter 11 reorganization, we do not have an instrument for the post-bankruptcy
     26
          We track establishments’ post-bankruptcy status using the methodology of Bernstein et al. (2016).


                                                             26
status (e.g., reallocation versus vacancy). Because of this, these specifications are estimated with

regular OLS.

   The results are provided in Table VIII. In columns (1)-(6), we include each indicator separately.

As shown, the decrease in block-level employment is smallest for continuers, while it is largest

for vacant establishments and establishments that are reallocated to a different industry. This

pattern also emerges from columns (7)-(8), where we include all indicators jointly, using vacancy

as base group. While this evidence should be interpreted cautiously, the findings indicate that

the disruption of existing operations, either by switching into another industry or full vacancy, is

associated with negative externalities. Such disruptions are more common in liquidation, rather

than reorganization, as documented in Bernstein et al. (2016).



                                     VI.     Conclusion

The results presented in this paper show that the liquidation of bankrupt firms imposes large nega-

tive externalities on the local economy, when compared to reorganization, an alternative approach

to resolve distress in courts. Using the random assignment of bankruptcy judges as a source of

exogenous variation in the probability of Chapter 7 liquidation (versus Chapter 11 reorganization),

we find that, within a five-year period, employment decreases substantially in the Census block of

the liquidated establishment. Most of the decline is due to lower growth of existing establishments

and, to a lesser extent, reduced entry into the area. This evidence is inconsistent with a “creative

destruction” argument, according to which liquidation would contribute to the revitalization of the

area and induce entry.

   We further document that the spillover effects are highly localized and concentrate in the non-

tradable and service sectors, particularly when the bankrupt firm operates in the same sector. These

results are consistent with liquidation leading to a reduction in consumer traffic to the local area

and reducing knowledge spillovers between firms.

   These findings leave a number of important areas open for future research, of which we highlight

two here. First, our study examines local spillovers from liquidation. Spillovers can be non-local

as well (e.g., the liquidation of an important customer could hurt non-local suppliers). A challenge


                                                27
for future research is to establish the relevance and magnitude of such non-local spillovers. Second,

we caution that, while our estimates are an important step towards understanding the welfare

implications of liquidation and reorganization, there are still many aspects of the welfare question

that are not included in our analysis. For example, liquidation could have ex ante benefits by

disciplining managers, and it clearly has effects on the firm’s creditors that are not considered here.

Therefore, our estimates should not be interpreted as showing that liquidation should never be

implemented. Extending our analysis to consider these aspects is a difficult, yet exciting, avenue

for future research.




                                                  28
                                         References
Acemoglu, D., U. Akcigit, and W. R. Kerr (2016). Networks and the macroeconomy: An empirical
  exploration. NBER Macroeconomics Annual 30 (1), 273–335.

Acemoglu, D., V. M. Carvalho, A. Ozdaglar, and A. Tahbaz-Salehi (2012). The network origins of
  aggregate fluctuations. Econometrica 80 (5), 1977–2016.

Aghion, P., O. Hart, and J. Moore (1992). The economics of bankruptcy reform. Journal of Law,
 Economics and Organization 8 (3), 523–546.

Ahlfeldt, G., S. J. Redding, D. M. Sturm, and N. Wolf (2015). The economics of density: Evidence
 from the Berlin Wall. Econometrica 83 (6), 2127–2189.

Arzaghi, M. and J. V. Henderson (2008). Networking off Madison avenue. The Review of Economic
  Studies 75 (4), 1011–1038.

Baird, D. G. (1986). The uneasy case for corporate reorganizations. Journal of Legal Studies 15 (1),
  127–147.

Baird, D. G. (1993). Revisiting auctions in Chapter 11. The Journal of Law & Economics 36 (1),
  633–653.

Bayer, P., S. L. Ross, and G. Topa (2008). Place of work and place of residence: Informal hiring
  networks and labor market outcomes. Journal of Political Economy 116 (6), 1150–1196.

Bebchuk, L. A. (1988). A new approach to corporate reorganizations. Harvard Law Review 101,
  775–804.

Benmelech, E., N. Bergman, A. Milanez, and V. Mukharlyamov (2014). The agglomeration of
  bankruptcy. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 20254.

Bernstein, S., E. Colonnelli, and B. C. Iverson (2016). Asset allocation in bankruptcy. U.S. Census
  Bureau Center for Economic Studies Working Paper CES-WP-16-13.

Black, D., T. McKinnish, and S. Sanders (2005). The economic impact of the coal boom and bust.
  Economic Journal 115 (503), 449–476.

Bradley, M. and M. Rosenzweig (1992). The untenable case for Chapter 11. Yale Law Jour-
  nal 101 (5), 1043–1095.

Bris, A., I. Welch, and N. Zhu (2006). The costs of bankruptcy: Chapter 7 liquidation versus
  Chapter 11 reorganization. Journal of Finance 61 (3), 1253–1303.

Caballero, R. and M. Hammour (1994). The cleansing effect of recessions. American Economic
  Review 84, 1350–1368.

Caballero, R. and M. Hammour (1996). On the timing and efficiency of creative destruction.
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 111, 805–852.

Campbell, J. Y., S. Giglio, and P. Pathak (2011). Forced sales and house prices. American Economic
  Review 101 (5), 2108–2131.

                                                29
Carrington, W. J. (1996). The Alaskan labor market during the pipeline era. Journal of Political
  Economy 104 (1), 186–218.

Carvalho, V. M. (2014). From micro to macro via production networks. Journal of Economic
  Perspectives 28 (4), 23–47.

Chang, T. and A. Schoar (2013). Judge specific differences in Chapter 11 and firm outcomes.
  Working Paper, University of Southern California.

Cui, L. and R. Walsh (2015). Foreclosure, vacancy and crime. Journal of Urban Economics 87,
 72–84.

Dobbie, W. and J. Song (2015). Debt relief and debtor outcomes: Measuring the effects of consumer
 bankruptcy protection. American Economic Review 105 (3), 1272–1311.

Doyle, J. J. (2008). Child protection and adult crime: Using investigator assignment to estimate
  causal effects of foster care. Journal of Political Economy 116 (4), 746–770.

Duranton, G. and D. Puga (2004). Micro-foundations of urban agglomeration economies. In V. J.
 Henderson and J.-F. Thisse (Eds.), Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, Volume 4, pp.
 2063–2117. Elsevier/North Holland, Amsterdam.

Echenique, F. and R. G. Fryer (2007). A measure of segregation based on social interactions.
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 122 (2), 441–485.

Ellen, I. G., J. Lacoe, and C. A. Sharygin (2013). Do foreclosures cause crime? Journal of Urban
  Economics 74, 59–70.

Ellison, G. and E. L. Glaeser (1997). Geographic concentration in U.S. manufacturing industries:
  A dartboard approach. Journal of Political Economy 105 (5), 889–927.

Federal Judicial Center (2016). How the federal courts are organized. Federal Judicial Center,
  Washington, DC.

Galasso, A. and M. Schankerman (2015). Patents and cumulative innovation: Causal evidence from
 the courts. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 130 (1), 317–369.

Gathmann, C., I. Helm, and U. Schönberg (2016). Spillover effects of mass layoffs. Working Paper,
 University College London.

Gertner, R. and D. Scharfstein (1991). A theory of workouts and the effects of reorganization law.
 The Journal of Finance 46 (4), 1189–1222.

Gilson, S. C. (1997). Transactions costs and capital structure choice: Evidence from financially
  distressed firms. Journal of Finance 52 (1), 161–196.

Glaeser, E. L. and J. D. Gottlieb (2009). The wealth of cities: Agglomeration economies and spatial
  equilibrium in the united states. Journal of Economic Literature 47 (4), 983–1028.

Glaeser, E. L. and J. E. Kohlhase (2004). Cities, regions and the decline of transport costs. Papers
  in Regional Science 83 (1), 197–228.


                                                30
Gould, E. D., B. P. Pashigian, and C. J. Prendergast (2005). Contracts, externalities, and incentives
 in shopping malls. Review of Economics and Statistics 87 (3), 411–422.

Greenstone, M., R. Hornbeck, and E. Moretti (2010). Identifying agglomeration spillovers: Evidence
  from winners and losers of large plant openings. Journal of Political Economy 118 (3), 536–598.

Griliches, Z. (1958). Research costs and social returns: Hybrid corn and related innovations. Journal
  of Political Economy 66, 419–431.

Hart, O. (2000). Different approaches to bankruptcy. National Bureau of Economic Research
  Working Paper 7921.

Hotchkiss, E. S. (1995). Postbankruptcy performance and management turnover. Journal of Fi-
  nance 50 (1), 3–21.

Imbens, G. W. and J. D. Angrist (1994). Identification and estimation of local average treatment
  effects. Econometrica 62 (2), 467–476.

Iverson, B. C. (2015). Get in line: Chapter 11 restructuring in crowded bankruptcy courts. Working
  Paper, Northwestern University.

Jaffe, A. B., M. Trajtenberg, and R. Henderson (1993). Geographic localization of knowledge
  spillovers as evidenced by patent citations. Quarterly Journal of Economics 108, 577–598.

Jarmin, R. S. and J. Miranda (2002). The longitudinal business database. U.S. Census Bureau
  Center for Economic Studies Working Paper CES-WP-02-17.

Jofre-Monseny, J., M. Sánchez-Vidal, and E. Viladecans-Marsal (2015). Big plant closures and
  agglomeration economies. SERC Discussion Paper 179.

Kling, J. R. (2006). Incarceration length, employment, and earnings. American Economic Re-
  view 96 (3), 863–876.

Kolko, J. (2000). The death of cities? The death of distance? Evidence from the geography
 of commercial internet usage. In I. Vogelsang and M. Compaine (Eds.), The Internet Upheaval:
 Raising Questions, Seeking Answers in Communications Policy, pp. 73–98. Cambridge, MA: MIT
 Press.

Krugman, P. R. (1991). Geography and Trade. Cambridge, MA: MIT press.

LoPucki, L. M. and W. C. Whitford (1993). Patterns in the bankruptcy reorganization of large
  publicly held companies. Cornell Law Review 78 (4), 597–618.

Marshall, A. (1890). Principles of Economics. New York, NY: MacMillan.

Mian, A. and A. Sufi (2014). What explains the 2007–2009 drop in employment?              Economet-
 rica 82 (6), 2197–2223.

Moretti, E. (2010). Local multipliers. American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings 100 (2),
 1–7.



                                                 31
Moretti, E. (2011). Local labor markets. In O. Ashenfelter and D. Card (Eds.), Handbook of Labor
 Economics, Volume 4, pp. 1237–1313. Elsevier/North Holland, Amsterdam.

Pashigian, B. P. and E. D. Gould (1998). Internalizing externalities: The pricing of space in shopping
  malls. The Journal of Law and Economics 41 (1), 115–142.

Pulvino, T. C. (1998). Do asset fire sales exist? An empirical investigation of commercial aircraft
  transactions. Journal of Finance 53 (3), 939–978.

Pulvino, T. C. (1999). Effects of bankruptcy court protection on asset sales. Journal of Financial
  Economics 52 (2), 151–186.

Rosenthal, S. S. and W. C. Strange (2003). Geography, industrial organization, and agglomeration.
  Review of Economics and Statistics 85 (2), 377–393.

Saxenian, A. (1994). Regional networks: Industrial adaptation in Silicon Valley and route 128.
  Working Paper, UC Berkeley.

Schumpeter, J. (1934). Depressions: Can we learn from past experiences? In D. Brown, E. Cham-
  berlin, and S. Harris (Eds.), The Economics of the Recovery Program, Volume 4. New York, NY:
  McGraw-Hill.

Shleifer, A. and R. W. Vishny (1992). Liquidation values and debt capacity: A market equilibrium
  approach. Journal of Finance 47 (4), 1343–1366.

Shoag, D. and S. Veuger (2014). Shops and the city: Evidence on local externalities and local
  government policy from big box bankruptcies. Working Paper, Harvard University.

Spelman, W. (1993). Abandoned buildings: Magnets for crime? Journal of Criminal Justice 21 (5),
  481–495.

Staiger, D. and J. H. Stock (1997). Instrumental variables regression with weak instruments. Econo-
  metrica 65 (3), 557–586.

Stock, J. H. and M. Yogo (2005). Testing for weak instruments in linear IV regression. In D. W. K.
  Andrews and J. H. Stock (Eds.), Identification and Inference for Econometric Models: Essays in
  Honor of Thomas Rothenberg, pp. 80–108. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

Strömberg, P. (2000). Conflicts of interest and market illiquidity in bankruptcy auctions: Theory
  and tests. Journal of Finance 55 (6), 2641–2692.

Thorburn, K. S. (2000). Bankruptcy auctions: Costs, debt recovery, and firm survival. Journal of
  Financial Economics 58 (3), 337–368.

U.S. Census Bureau (1994). Geographic areas reference manual. U.S. Department of Commerce,
  Economics and Statistics Administration.




                                                 32
                                                 Figure 1
               Evolution of Employment in the Liquidated Establishments’ Blocks
This figure plots the evolution of employment in the Census blocks of Chapter 7 establishments (i.e., es-
tablishments belonging to companies that are liquidated) compared to the Census blocks of Chapter 11
establishments (i.e., establishments belonging to companies that are reorganized). The y-axis indicates the
(cumulative) percentage change in employment compared to the year of the bankruptcy filing (year 0). The
x-axis indicates the year relative to the bankruptcy filing. The dashed lines plot the 95% confidence bounds.




                                                     33
                                                 Figure 2
    Evolution of the Number of Establishments in the Liquidated Establishments’ Blocks
This figure plots the evolution of the number of establishments in the Census blocks of Chapter 7 establish-
ments (i.e., establishments belonging to companies that are liquidated) compared to the Census blocks of
Chapter 11 establishments (i.e., establishments belonging to companies that are reorganized). The y-axis
indicates the (cumulative) percentage change in the number of establishments compared to the year of the
bankruptcy filing (year 0). The x-axis indicates the year relative to the bankruptcy filing. The dashed lines
plot the 95% confidence bounds.




                                                     34
                                                        Table I
                                          Summary Statistics
This table provides summary statistics for the bankrupt firms, their establishments, and non-bankrupt
establishments residing in the same Census block, Census block group, and Census tract, respectively, as
the bankrupt establishments. Statistics are reported for all bankrupt firms and separately for firms that
are liquidated (Chapter 7) and reorganized (Chapter 11). Observation counts are rounded to the nearest
thousand due to the disclosure rules of the U.S. Census Bureau.


                                         All                    Chapter 7 (Liquidation)    Chapter 11 (Reorganization)


                              N        Mean    Std. Dev.    N          Mean    Std. Dev.   N        Mean    Std. Dev.


 a. Bankrupt Establishments

 Employees                    91,000   37.0    193.5        16,000     28.0    84.4        75,000   38.8    209.3
 Payroll (000s)               91,000   977     9,169        16,000     585     2,475       75,000   1,060   10,020
 Payroll / Employees (000s)   91,000   22.2    48.0         16,000     19.6    45.8        75,000   22.7    48.5

 b. Bankrupt Firms

 Employees                    20,000   220     2,249        8,000      72      385         12,000   309     2,828
 Establishments               20,000   6.1     48.3         8,000      2.7     21.8        12,000   8.1     58.7

 c. Census Blocks

 Employees                    91,000   1,105   2,521        16,000     926     2,327       75,000   1,143   2,558
 Establishments               91,000   55.5    104.9        16,000     50.6    98.7        75,000   56.5    106.2
 Employees / Establishments   91,000   18.9    42.5         16,000     16.1    32.6        75,000   19.5    44.3

 d. Census Block Groups

 Employees                    91,000   3,453   6,706        16,000     3,455   7,014       75,000   3,453   6,640
 Establishments               91,000   165.3   266.5        16,000     171.1   283.8       75,000   164.1   262.7
 Employees / Establishments   91,000   18.3    21.3         16,000     17.4    20.8        75,000   18.6    21.4

 e. Census Tracts

 Employees                    91,000   6,581   11,079       16,000     6,862   11,553      75,000   6,522   10.976
 Establishments               91,000   330.3   456.3        16,000     348.5   475.1       75,000   326.5   452.2
 Employees / Establishments   91,000   17.8    14.6         16,000     17.3    14.3        75,000   17.9    14.7




                                                           35
                                                 Table II
                                                 First Stage
This table reports estimates from the first-stage regression. The dependent variable, liquidation, is a dummy
variable that indicates whether the establishment belongs to a company whose bankruptcy filing is converted
from Chapter 11 reorganization to Chapter 7 liquidation. Share of cases converted is the share of all other
Chapter 11 cases that a judge converted to Chapter 7. The controls are self-explanatory. All regressions
include division by year fixed effects. The regression in column (3) further includes 2-digit NAICS industry
fixed effects and a dummy indicating whether other related firms (e.g., subsidiaries of the same firm) also
filed for bankruptcy at the same time. The sample includes all establishments belonging to companies that
filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy between 1992 and 2005. Standard errors, clustered at the division-by-year
level, are reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** denotes statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%
level, respectively.

          Dependent variable:                                              Liquidation
                                                                (1)         (2)          (3)
          Share of cases converted                              0.578***    0.589***     0.588***
                                                                (0.066)     (0.066)      (0.066)
          a. Firm-level controls
          log(employees of bankrupt firm)                                   -0.032***    -0.029***
                                                                            (0.004)      (0.004)
          log(establishments of bankrupt firm)                              -0.008       -0.016***
                                                                            (0.005)      (0.006)
          b. Establishment-level control
          log(employees of bankrupt establishment)                          0.012***     0.010***
                                                                            (0.003)      (0.003)
          c. Block-level control
          log(employees at block of bankrupt establishment)                 -0.027***    -0.026***
                                                                            (0.002)      (0.002)
          Division-year Fixed Effects                           Yes         Yes          Yes
          Industry Fixed Effects                                No          No           Yes
          F-stat for instrument                                 75.73       79.34        80.01
          Adjusted R-squared                                    0.140       0.164        0.173
          Observations                                          91,000      91,000       91,000




                                                     36
                                                  Table III
                                               Randomization
This table reports randomization tests to illustrate the random assignment of bankruptcy judges within a
division. The dependent variable, share of cases converted, is the share of all Chapter 11 cases that a judge
converted to Chapter 7, excluding the current case. The right-hand side variables are self-explanatory. All
regressions include division by year fixed effects. The regressions in columns (2)-(5) further include 2-digit
NAICS industry fixed effects and a dummy indicating whether other related firms (e.g., subsidiaries of the
same firm) also filed for bankruptcy at the same time. The sample includes all establishments belonging to
companies that filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy between 1992 and 2005. Standard errors, clustered at the
division-by-year level, are reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** denotes statistical significance at the 10%,
5%, and 1% level, respectively.

 Dependent variable:                                                      Share of cases converted
                                                               (1)      (2)        (3)       (4)       (5)
 a. Firm-level controls
 log(employees of bankrupt firm)                                        0.0009     0.0009    0.0009    0.0009
                                                                        (0.001)    (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)
 log(establishments of bankrupt firm)                                   -0.0015    -0.0015   -0.0014   -0.0015
                                                                        (0.001)    (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)
 b. Establishment-level control
 log(employees of bankrupt establishment)                               -0.0001    -0.0001   -0.0001   -0.0001
                                                                        (0.001)    (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)
 c. Block-level control
 log(employees at block of bankrupt establishment)                      0.0000     0.0000    0.0000    0.0000
                                                                        (0.000)    (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)
 d. Employment change in the 3 years prior to bankruptcy
 % change in employment (block level)                                              -0.0000             -0.0000
                                                                                   (0.000)             (0.000)
 % change in employment (block-group level)                                        0.0003              0.0003
                                                                                   (0.000)             (0.000)
 % change in employment (tract level)                                              0.0001              0.0000
                                                                                   (0.001)             (0.001)
 e. Block composition
 % employment in non-tradable                                                                0.0002    0.0002
                                                                                             (0.002)   (0.002)
 % employment in tradable                                                                    0.0015    0.0015
                                                                                             (0.002)   (0.002)
 Division-year Fixed Effects                                   Yes      Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes
 Industry Fixed Effects                                        No       Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes
 F-test for joint significance of industry FE                  –        0.439      0.438     0.442     0.442
 Adjusted R-squared                                            0.777    0.777      0.777     0.777     0.777
 Observations                                                  91,000   91,000     91,000    91,000    91,000




                                                      37
                                                Table IV
                                               Main Results
In columns (1)-(2), the dependent variable is the annualized percentage change in employment in the Census
block of the bankrupt establishment (excluding employment of the bankrupt establishment) in the five years
following the bankruptcy filing. The dependent variable in columns (3)-(4) is defined similarly with respect
to the number of establishments. Liquidation is a dummy variable that indicates whether the establishment
belongs to a company whose case is converted from Chapter 11 reorganization to Chapter 7 liquidation.
The regressions in columns (1) and (3) are estimated by OLS; the regressions in columns (2) and (4) are
estimated by 2SLS using as instrument the share of cases converted. All regressions contain the full set of
controls used in column (2) of Table II. The sample includes all establishments belonging to companies that
filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy between 1992 and 2005. Standard errors, clustered at the division-by-year
level, are reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** denotes statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%
level, respectively.

               Dependent variable:              Employment                Establishments
               Model                         OLS           IV-2SLS     OLS         IV-2SLS
                                             (1)           (2)         (3)         (4)
               Liquidation                   -0.025***     -0.040**    -0.037***   -0.047***
                                             (0.002)       (0.017)     (0.002)     (0.016)
               Control variables             Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes
               Division-year Fixed Effects   Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes
               Industry Fixed Effects        Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes
               Adjusted R-squared            0.154         0.190       0.322       0.162
               Observations                  91,000        91,000      91,000      91,000




                                                      38
                                                  Table V
                                               Decomposition
The regressions in Panel A are variants of the regression in column (2) of Table IV, which is reproduced
in column (1). Columns (2) and (3) decompose the change in employment into i) employment changes
from existing establishments, and ii) employment changes from new establishments. Similarly, Panel B
contains regressions that are are variants of the regression in column (4) of Table IV, with columns (2) and
(3) decomposing the number of establishments into i) the number of establishment closures (“deaths”) and
ii) the number of establishment openings (“births”). The sample includes all establishments belonging to
companies that filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy between 1992 and 2005. Standard errors, clustered at the
division-by-year level, are reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** denotes statistical significance at the 10%,
5%, and 1% level, respectively.

                                    Panel A: Change in Employment
             Dependent variable:                                Employment
                                            All                Existing          New
                                            Establishments     Establishments    Establishments
                                            (1)                (2)               (3)
             Liquidation                    -0.040**           -0.030**          -0.010
                                            (0.017)            (0.014)           (0.010)
             Control variables              Yes                Yes               Yes
             Division-year Fixed Effects    Yes                Yes               Yes
             Industry Fixed Effects         Yes                Yes               Yes
             Model                          IV-2SLS            IV-2SLS           IV-2SLS
             Adjusted R-squared             0.190              0.025             0.012
             Observations                   91,000             91,000            91,000

                           Panel B: Change in Number of Establishments
             Dependent variable:                               Establishments
                                            All                Existing           New
                                            Establishments     Establishments     Establishments
                                            (1)                (2)                (3)
             Liquidation                    -0.047***          -0.046***          -0.002
                                            (0.016)            (0.012)            (0.010)
             Control variables              Yes                Yes                Yes
             Division-year Fixed Effects    Yes                Yes                Yes
             Industry Fixed Effects         Yes                Yes                Yes
             Model                          IV-2SLS            IV-2SLS            IV-2SLS
             Adjusted R-squared             0.162              0.129              0.061
             Observations                   91,000             91,000             91,000




                                                       39
                                                Table VI
                                               Geographies
The regressions in Panel A are variants of the regression in column (2) of Table IV, which is reproduced in
column (1). In columns (2) and (3), changes in employment are computed for the Census block group and
Census tract, respectively. The regressions in columns (4) and (5) are analogous except that employment
in the Census block group (and Census tract, respectively) is net of employment in the Census block of
the bankrupt establishment. The regressions in Panels B and C are analogous, except that the change in
employment is decomposed into i) employment changes from existing establishments, and ii) employment
changes from new establishments. The sample includes all establishments belonging to companies that filed
for Chapter 11 bankruptcy between 1992 and 2005. Standard errors, clustered at the division-by-year level,
are reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** denotes statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level,
respectively.

                                        Panel A: Overall Effect
     Dependent variable                        Employment                 Employment net of block
                                                                          of bankrupt establishment
     Geography                      Blocks     Block-groups   Tracts      Block-groups    Tracts
                                    (1)        (2)            (3)         (4)             (5)
     Liquidation                    -0.040**   -0.017         0.001       -0.006          0.005
                                    (0.017)    (0.010)        (0.007)     (0.014)         (0.008)
     Control variables              Yes        Yes            Yes         Yes             Yes
     Division-year Fixed Effects    Yes        Yes            Yes         Yes             Yes
     Industry Fixed Effects         Yes        Yes            Yes         Yes             Yes
     Observations                   91,000     91,000         91,000      91,000          91,000

                                    Panel B: Existing Establishments
     Dependent variable                        Employment                 Employment net of block
                                                                          of bankrupt establishment
     Geography                      Blocks     Block-groups   Tracts      Block-groups    Tracts
                                    (1)        (2)            (3)         (4)             (5)
     Liquidation                    -0.030**   -0.008         0.008       0.003           0.007
                                    (0.014)    (0.010)        (0.007)     (0.014)         (0.008)
     Control variables              Yes        Yes            Yes         Yes             Yes
     Division-year Fixed Effects    Yes        Yes            Yes         Yes             Yes
     Industry Fixed Effects         Yes        Yes            Yes         Yes             Yes
     Observations                   91,000     91,000         91,000      91,000          91,000

                                     Panel C: New Establishments
      Dependent variable                       Employment                 Employment net of block
                                                                          of bankrupt establishment
      Geography                      Blocks    Block-groups   Tracts      Block-groups   Tracts
                                     (1)       (2)            (3)         (4)            (5)
      Liquidation                    -0.010    -0.009         -0.007      -0.009         -0.002
                                     (0.010)   (0.007)        (0.006)     (0.008)        (0.005)
      Control variables              Yes       Yes            Yes         Yes            Yes
      Division-year Fixed Effects    Yes       Yes            Yes         Yes            Yes
      Industry Fixed Effects         Yes       Yes            Yes         Yes            Yes
      Observations                   91,000    91,000         91,000      91,000         91,000


                                                     40
                                                 Table VII
                                             Industry Sectors
This table presents variants of the regression in column (2) of Table IV, except that the dependent variable
is employment in non-tradable industries (Panel A), services (Panel B) and tradable industries (Panel C).
In each panel, column (1) considers all bankruptcies, whereas columns (2)-(4) only consider bankruptcies
in the non-tradable sector, services, and the tradable sector, respectively. Standard errors, clustered at the
division-by-year level, are reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** denotes statistical significance at the 10%,
5%, and 1% level, respectively.

                                   Panel A: Non-tradable Industries
               Dependent variable:                  Employment in non-tradable industries
               Treatment                      All            Non-tradable   Services   Tradable
                                              (1)            (2)            (3)        (4)
               Liquidation                    -0.014*        -0.040**       -0.007     -0.013
                                              (0.008)        (0.020)        (0.013)    (0.010)
               Control variables              Yes            Yes            Yes        Yes
               Division-year Fixed Effects    Yes            Yes            Yes        Yes
               Industry Fixed Effects         Yes            Yes            Yes        Yes
               Model                          IV-2SLS        IV-2SLS        IV-2SLS    IV-2SLS
               First stage F-test             81.59          19.48          39.20      49.20
               Observations                   91,000         47,000         32,000     12,000

                                             Panel B: Services
               Dependent variable:                    Employment in services industries
               Treatment                      All            Non-tradable   Services   Tradable
                                              (1)            (2)            (3)        (4)
               Liquidation                    -0.029**       -0.045*        -0.050**   -0.011
                                              (0.012)        (0.025)        (0.023)    (0.017)
               Control variables              Yes            Yes            Yes        Yes
               Division-year Fixed Effects    Yes            Yes            Yes        Yes
               Industry Fixed Effects         Yes            Yes            Yes        Yes
               Model                          IV-2SLS        IV-2SLS        IV-2SLS    IV-2SLS
               First stage F-test             81.59          19.48          39.20      49.20
               Observations                   91,000         47,000         32,000     12,000

                                      Panel C: Tradable Industries
               Dependent variable:                    Employment in tradable industries
               Treatment                      All            Non-tradable   Services   Tradable
                                              (1)            (2)            (3)        (4)
               Liquidation                    0.003          -0.007         -0.003     0.002
                                              (0.009)        (0.016)        (0.012)    (0.017)
               Control variables              Yes            Yes            Yes        Yes
               Division-year Fixed Effects    Yes            Yes            Yes        Yes
               Industry Fixed Effects         Yes            Yes            Yes        Yes
               Model                          IV-2SLS        IV-2SLS        IV-2SLS    IV-2SLS
               First stage F-test             81.59          19.48          39.20      49.20
               Observations                   91,000         47,000         32,000     12,000




                                                        41
                                                           Table VIII
                                  Fate of the Bankrupt Establishments
This table presents estimates from regressions of the annualized change in employment in the block of the
bankrupt establishment (excluding employment of the bankrupt establishment) in the five years following
the bankruptcy filing on a set of dummy variables that capture the “fate” of the bankrupt establishment.
Continuer indicates whether the establishment remains in its current operations. Reallocated in same 2-
digit NAICS indicates whether the establishment is reallocated to the same 2-digit NAICS industry. The
other reallocation indicators are defined analogously. Vacant indicates whether the establishment stays
vacant throughout the 5-year period. In columns (7)-(8), vacant is the base group. The sample includes
all establishments belonging to companies that filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy between 1992 and 2005.
Standard errors, clustered at the division-by-year level, are reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** denotes
statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

 Dependent variable:                                                              Employment
                                          (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)       (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)
 Continuer                                0.072***                                                            0.071***    0.071***
                                          (0.003)                                                             (0.003)     (0.003)
 Reallocated in same 2-digit NAICS                   -0.005**                                                 0.012***
                                                     (0.002)                                                  (0.002)
 Reallocated in different 2-digit NAICS                         -0.035***                                     -0.010***
                                                                (0.002)                                       (0.002)
 Reallocated in same 3-digit NAICS                                          -0.001                                        0.015***
                                                                            (0.002)                                       (0.002)
 Reallocated in different 3-digit NAICS                                               -0.036***                           -0.009***
                                                                                      (0.002)                             (0.002)
 Vacant                                                                                           -0.023***
                                                                                                  (0.002)
 Control variables                        Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes       Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
 Division-year Fixed Effects              Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes       Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
 Industry Fixed Effects                   Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes       Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
 Model                                    OLS        OLS        OLS         OLS       OLS         OLS         OLS         OLS
 Adjusted R-squared                       0.341      0.274      0.291       0.273     0.293       0.282       0.344       0.345
 Observations                             91,000     91,000     91,000      91,000    91,000      91,000      91,000      91,000




                                                                42
