NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

IMPLICIT CONTRACTS, LABOR
MOBILITY AND UNEMPLOYMENT

Richard Arnott
Arthur Hosios
Joseph Stiglitz

Working Paper No. 2316

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue

Cambridge, MA 02138
July 1987

The coments of two anonymous referees were extremely helpful. Arnott and Hosios
would like to thank the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada
for financial support, while Arnott and Stiglitz would like to thank the National
Science Foundation. The research reported here is part of the NBER's research
program in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2316
July 1987

Implicit Contracts, Labor Mobility and Unemployment

ABSTRACT

Firms' inability to monitor their employees' search effort forces
a tradeoff between risk-bearing and incentive considerations when

designing employment-related insurance. Since the provision of insurance
against firm-specific shocks adversely affects workers' incentives to
find better jobs, the optimal contract provides only partial insurance:
it prescribes low (high) wages and under (over) employment to encourage

workers to leave (stay) at low (high) productivity firms; and it employs
quits and layoffs as alternative means of inducing separations at low
productivity firms, with the mix depending upon the relative efficiency
of the on- and off-the-job search technologies.

Our analysis of implicit contracts with asymmetric search information
establishes that any consistent explanation for worksharing, layoffs,

severance pay, quits and unemployment must focus on questions of labor
mobility.

Richard Arnott
Queen's University
Kingston, Ontario
CANADA

Arthur Hosios
University of Toronto
Toronto, Ontario
CANADA

Joseph Stiglitz
Department of Economics
Princeton University

Princeton, NJ 08544

Wage rigidities have long played a central role in Keynesian

explanations of unemployment. Though a major aim of implicit contract
theory was to provide an explanation for these rigidities (Costas
Azariadis, 1975; Martin Baily, 1974), it has become increasingly apparent
in recent years that at least the simpler versions of this theory would
not do; though they explained real wage rigidities as a consequence of
risk-averse workers demand for insurance against variations in their

value of their marginal product, they could not explain unemployment.1
To explain unemployment, one must explain, first, why reductions
in demand take the form of layoffs rather than reduced hours
(worksharing), and second, why those on layoff do not immediately secure

employment elsewhere. Traditional implicit contract theory, however, has
ignored both issues: it has assumed that reductions in labor demand take

the form of layoffs; and it has assumed that all separated workers are

immobile, due, say, to prohibitive mobility costs. Indeed, the latter
assumption is particularly important as it implies that (i) laid-off
workers are necessarily unemployed, (ii) quits are absent, (iii)

high-demand firms cannot possibly hire newly separated workers and (iv),
when optimally determined severance pay is provided, laid-off workers are

actually better-off than retained workers. In fact, of course,
worksharing, layoffs, quits and interfirin mobility are all prominent

features of modern labor markets, and the prediction that workers prefer
to be laid off is generally accepted as counterfactual.2
We propose here a general theory of implicit contracts which

resolves most of these difficulties. Our theory is based on three simple

observationS first, the risk which individuals wish to be insured

against is not just a decrease in the value of the marginal product (VMP)
of the firm at which they are currently employed, and hence a decrease in
their wage, but rather, it is a decrease in this value together with the
failure to find an alternative job at which their VMP is high; second,
finding a job requires search, and search involves costs, though they are
generally not prohibitive; and third, wages and severance pay serve a

crucial role in this process, by influencing workers' search efforts, in
reallocating labor form uses where its VMP is low to those at which it is
high.

We follow traditional contract theory in assuming that workers

are risk-averse and firms are risk-neutral. Firms thus provide
individuals with insurance. If labor mobility were costless and
instantaneous, no insurance would be required against relative shocks
(i.e. those which change the relative values of the marginal
productivities of labor in different uses) since each worker would move

immediately to the job where his VMP is highest. By contrast, if search
were costly but perfectly monitorable, firms would provide insurance
against relative shocks, but these insurance contracts would specify the
intensity of job search.

In fact, not only is search an individually costly activity, but

it is also a private activity that is costly to monitor. Indeed, it is
frequently impossible to observe either search effort or the outcomes of

search. That is, it is difficult for the worker's current employer to
monitor outside wage offers or even to verify whether a laid-off worker

has been reemployed. In turn, because the employer is unable to observe

2

search inputs and outcomes, the following two related moral hazard
problems arise.

The first moral hazard problem results from the unobservability

of the best job offer, even when search effort is observable. If both
search effort and job offers were observable, the insurance contract
provided by the firm would: (a) specify the level of search effort; (b)

require an employed (laid-off) worker to move provided he found any job
with a wage in excess of his productivity at his current firm (in home
production);3 and (c) compensate the worker with the difference (possibly
negative) between his current wage and this alternative wage offer.
When wage offers are not observable, however, this scheme cannot

be implemented. The firm can then only provide a fixed severance payment
to workers who quit or are laid off, and a given wage to workers who are

retained. In designing these payments, however, the following trade-off
between risk and efficiency is confronted: the more insurance a firm
provides against low-VMP draws, the more likely it is that workers will

refuse outside wage offers that exceed their current VMP, but are less
than their current wage, and hence the less efficient will be quit

behavior. In other words, more efficient quit behavior requires a
departure from complete insurance.4
The second moral hazard problem results from the unobservability

of search effort or intensity. When search effort cannot be monitored
and hence cannot be specified contractually, a similar risk-efficiency
trade-off presents itself: the more insurance a firm provides against
low-VMP draws, the lower the worker's search effort, and hence the less

efficient will be quit behavior. Since it is privately (and socially)

3

costly for individuals to remain where the value of their marginal
product is low, the optimal insurance contract will again provide
incomplete insurance.

With private job-search information, the optimal implicit
contract will be shown to prescribe relatively low wages and
underemployment to encourage quits in bad times, and relatively high
wages and overemployment to discourage quits in good times.5 In this
setting, moreover, we observe that quits (induced by relatively low
wages) and layoffs are simply alternative means of creating separations
at low-VMP firms; whereas reduced insurance (lower wages for retained
workers) has the potential advantage of encouraging quits by the lowest
search cost workers, effectively discriminating among otherwise
indistinguishable workers, layoffs have the potential advantage of
forcing workers to use a different and likely more efficient off-the-job

search technology. As these two instruments are imperfect substitutes,
one expects to observe both (i.e. worksharing and quits as well as
layoffs) at individual firms.

In a limiting (and we would argue unrealistic) version of our
model, in which there is no search, we obtain the standard counterfactual

results. We therefore contend that an analysis of the role of implicit
contracts in understanding unemployment must focus on questions of labor

mobility.6 Regrettably, the simplest model which can be constructed to
remedy the difficulties we have noted in the traditional framework must
be somewhat complex: it must incorporate endogenous search; it must
allow for the possibility of severance pay; and it must provide firms

4

with a choice between layoffs and wage policy as means of encouraging the
movement of workers from low to high VMP firms.

We begin in Section I with a partial equilibrium analysis of
firms' wages, severance pay and internal distortions when workers' search

efforts are private information. Section II then presents a
stripped-down general equilibrium model of worksharing, quits, layoffs
and unemployment when workers' search costs are private information.
Section III presents concluding remarks.

I.

The Model
We develop a two-period model of a competitive economy which

is buffeted by firm-specific shocks. During the ex ante period when
there is still uncertainty, workers are free to join the firm whose
employment contract offers the highest level of expected utility. At the
beginning of the ex post period, after all random variables are realized,
a fraction of each firm's initial labor pooi is laid off as prescribed by

the contract. Subsequently, some retained workers and some laid-off

workers secure new employment elsewhere. Finally, production takes place
at the end of the ex post period. See Figure 1.
While this formulation may initially appear restrictive, it will

become clear as we procede that this is not the only possible
interpretation of our model (see footnotes 12 and 13), and that most of
our qualitative results, for instance, concerning incomplete insurance,

underemployment and the simultaneous use of layoffs and worksharing would
remain valid under alternative sequencings as well, e.g. if the firm did

5

not make its layoff decisions until after workers announced whether or
not they were quitting (see footnotes 14 and 28).

The critical informational assumption of the model is that each
worker's ex post search effort and consequent job offers (if any) are
privately known only by that worker.7
Firms are ex ante identical and risk-neutral, and labor is the

only variable input to production. The VMP of a worker who supplies

h units of labor is 9h, where 9 is the realization of a firm-specific
shock: there are two equiprobable values of

9L and

with 9L <

9H

Workers have identical tastes and technical ability. As in the
traditional literature, they are assumed to have no consumption good
endowment and savings are not allowed.

Firms offer employment contracts to attract employees during
the ex ante period, which are designed to maximize expected profits, and

workers choose among these contracts to maximize expected utility. A
typical contract will be denoted by C —

((wL,hL),r,s,(wH,h))

.

Under

this contract employed workers are paid w for h units of labor when 9 =

9.;

a worker is laid off with probability l-r in the low-VMP state

and each laid-off worker is given the fixed non-negative severance
payment s.8

The terms of employment offered by firms in the ex ante period
will depend on what alternative opportunities are available to workers in

the ex post period. We assume that there is a spot labor market
characterized by a wage distribution, but in which all jobs require the

same number of hours Ii > 0

.

Workers are of course concerned with the

highest wage they can expect to find, and this in turn depends on their
6

search intensity and whether they are employed while searching. We let

F(z,e) and G(z,e) denote the distribution functions for highest wage
offers, given search intensity e ,

for

those workers who are employed

and unemployed, respectively; f and g are the corresponding density
functions. Additionally, F and C are assumed to satisfy:
F(O,O) — C(O,O) —

Fe,Ce<

0

1;

for z > 0.

In words, a worker cannot effortlessly receive an offer of employment,

and the probability that his best offer will exceed z is an increasing
function of his search intensity.

Taking their employment status as given, workers choose the level

of search effort to maximize their expected utility. After substitution
of the optimal search effort, the resulting maximum expected utility

enjoyed by retained workers is simply a function of their wages and

hours, U(w,h) ; similarly, the maximum expected utility attained by
laid-off workers is a function only of their severance pay, V(s)
Thus, dropping the common multiplicative factor 1/2 ,

utility from contract C
W(C) —

total

expected

is1°

rU(wL,hL)

+

(l-r)V(s)

+

U(w11,h1)

Taking account of workers' optimal search and quit behavior, firms'

profits per retained employee are a function of the state 9 and of the
worker's wages and hours, ,r(w,h,9)

,

whereas the cost per laid-off

worker is exactly the severance payment, $ .

Thus, total expected

profit per employee is given by
Z(C) —

rw(wL,hL,9L)

-

(l-r)s

+

As workers are freely mobile in the cx ante market, competition among
7

firms will drive expected profits to zero. Hence the equilibrium
contract is found by solving

max W(C) s.t. Z(C) — 0.

(F)

The remaining portions of this section basically describe and interpret

the first order conditions of this problem. Among the questions we ask
are: Under what conditions will the wage in the bad state be below that
in the good state, i.e. when will there be at least partial wage

flexibility? When will those who stay with the firm feel underemployed,

i.e. when will they wish to work additional hours at the going wage. And
finally, if there are layoffs, when will laid-off workers be worse-off
than retained workers?

l.A Derivation of Extressions for Expected Utility
To answer these questions, we must first derive explicit
expressions for a worker's expected utility when he is retained and when

he is laid off. A worker's instantaneous utility funàtion is given by

a(w,h). When a worker is retained, his expected utility, u(w,h,e) ,

is

just the utility he obtains from his current job, a(w,h) , times the
probability he stays with his current employer (i.e. does not get a
better offer), plus the expected utility he gets if he quits, a(x,e),

times the probability of quitting, minus the disutility, (e,h) ,

of

searching for a better job at intensity e :11
u(w,h,e) —

where

x —

x(w,h)

a(w,h)F(x,e) + o(x,e)(l-F(x,e))

-

is the wage offer which makes the individual

indifferent between quitting and staying, and is defined implicitly by

a(w,h) —

a(x,h),

F(x,e) is the probability of drawing a wage offer less

8

than x given search intensity e, and the expected utility of a worker
who quits is

1°

a(x,e) — ( J

a(z,h)f(z,e)dz)/(l-F(x,e)).

We assume that a is a strictly concave function satisfying a,>O and
and that fi

and (O,h) — 0.

is

an increasing convex function of e satisfying Ph>O

The term (e,h) is meant to capture the cost (in

utility terms) of searching at intensity e when the present job demands
h units of labor.

12,13

It follows analogously that the expected utility of a laid-off

worker who receives severance pay s and expends e on search is equal
to

v(s,e) —

where

a(s,0)G(y,e)

+

J

a(z+s,h)g(z,e)dz -

y—y(s) is the lowest acceptable wage offer and is defined by

a(s,O) —

a(y+s,h).

In the absence of search, observe that u(w,h,0) —

a(w,h) and v(s,0) — a(s,O).
Retained and laid-off workers' optimal on- and off-the-job search
intensities are respectively described by:

e(w,h) — argmax u(w,h,e),
e(s)

— argmax v(s,e).

It follows that their corresponding equilibrium utility levels are

U(w,h) —

u(w,h,e(w,h))

and V(s) —

v(s,e(s)),

and that firms' equilibrium

quit and profit functions per retained worker are, respectively,

q(w,h) —
,r(w,h,8) —

l-F(x(w,h),e(w,h)),
(1-q(w,h))(Oh-w).
9

The quit rate is a function only of the wages and hours offered on the
job, and is equal to the probability of finding a higher utility job,

given the optimally chosen search effort, e(w,h) .

Similarly,

job-finding rate for laid-off workers, l-G(y(s),e(s)) ,

is

the

a function

only of the severance payment s •l4

I.B

Wazes and Production Efficiency
In this section, we shall show how firms' attempts to encourage

mobility in the low-VMP state leads to incomplete insurance, and under
normal conditions, to underemployment in this state as well.
From the first order conditions of problem (P), with respect

to wages and hours, we obtain

(la)

(ib)

wL,F1LOL)
U(wH,hH) w(wH,wOH)
U(wL,hL) —

Ub(wi,ht) —

whi,hi9i)

i — L,H.

U(w,hj)
The solution to (P) thus equates agents' marginal rates of substitution
between wages across states, and between wages and hours within each

state. Observe that these expressions measure the direct plus
incentives-related substitution possibilities among the terms of
employment

for workers and firms; and that the latter indirect effects

10

take into account the adjustment of workers' optimal search efforts and
quit rates.
Returning to the basic equations defining U and it, we can derive,
for i—L,H,
(2a)

U(w.,h.) —

(2b)

Uh(wi,hi) —

(2c)

,r(w.,h.,O.) —

(2d)

lrh(wi,hj,Oj) —

A. —

where

Notice

-

1

-

(lq(w,h))9

ii

(9.h

AjQ(w1,hi),
-

-w.).
3.

that A and A.L are respectively equal to workers' implicit

insurance premium and indemnity.

Immobile Labor
Workers are immobile when they simply choose to forgo search,

setting e(w,h)—O and hence q(w,h)—O. (This outcome is most likely when
workers face either a particularly skewed distribution of wage offers or

a high marginal disutility from search.) With an immobile workforce our
model generates the standard results of full insurance and production

efficiency; that is, substituting q(w1,h)—O into (2), (la,b)
respectively simplify to

—

Uh(wi,hi)
U(w.h)

—

ah(wi,hi)

—

ei

,

i — L,H.

a(wi,h)

As expected, the equilibrium contract equates workers' marginal utility
of income across states, and equates their marginal rate of substitution
and marginal product in each state; if either a is additively separable
1].

or the supply of labor is inelastic (h.—h), we then get the well-known

rigid contract wage result, WL — wH.

Mobile Labor: Incomplete Insurance

Suppose workers' equilibrium quit rates are nonzero in both

states. A higher contract wage causes searching workers to become more
selective in evaluating job offers. This reduces the expected return
to search, and so workers' optimal on-the-job search effort falls. Hence

the quit rate falls when the wage is raised, i.e. q(wh) < o.15
Thus, making use of the fact that AL < 0 < A.j ,
(3)

(la)

and (2a,c) give

wL,T) > (H,h})

That is, the marginal utility of income is higher in the low-VMP state
than in the high-VMP state, and therefore, the ottimal contract no longer
provides complete insurance when quits are sensitive to wages.
Since firms are subsidizing their workers in the low-VMP state as
part of the insurance package, they would like to encourage as many as

possible to search and quit. The problem is that workers who have
searched unsuccessfully are indistinguishable from those who make no

attempt to search at all. Hence firms must lower the wage to provide
appropriate search incentives, even though this entails a departure from

full insurance. Conversely, when positive premia are collected in
htgh-VMP states, wages are raised to discourage quits.
In particular, if the utility function a is separable, or labor

supply is inelastic, (3) gives w11 > WL In these circumstances, the
16

model generates a positive correlation between wages and VMP's.

12

Mobile Labor: Underemployment
We now examine whether our model generates underemployment.
Unfortunately, it is not immediately clear in the present search context

how this term should be defined. In particular, is there underemployment

when

Uh/U <

9

i.e. when the marginal rate of substitution between wages and hours is
less than the marginal rate of transformation, taking into account
induced search; or is there underemployment when

ah/c <

9

i.e. when the MRS between wages and hours along the instantaneous utility

function is less than the MRT? Reversing these inequalities establishes
the corresponding definitions of overemployment that account for and
ignore induced search, respectively.

From (2a,b), it is apparent that

Uh/UW —

ah/a

-

and hence these two definitions of underemployment (and of
overemployment) coincide if h — 0

,

i.e.

if increasing hours worked

does not affect the cost of searching (at any level of search effort).

Normally, however, we think of h as being positive (increasing hours
worked on the job makes search more costly), in which case,

Uh/U> %'aw
Accordingly,

when there is underemployment under the first criterion

(taking into account induced search), there is underemployment under the

second criterion; and when there is overemployment under the second
criterion (using the instantaneous utility function), there is

13

overemployment under the first criterion.

Since it is much easier to establish results concerning the
relative magnitudes of

and 9

,

we henceforth use the terms

under- and overemployment to describe situations where Uh/U < and >

respectively;

8 ,

and so production efficiency is said to result when the

two are equal. We begin by showing that so long as increasing hours
worked reduces quits, there will be underemployment in those states when
profits are negative and overemployment in those states when profits are

positive. (Analogous results concerning the relative magnitudes of
czh/a

and 9 follow straightforwardly, with some obvious caveats, and

are omitted.)

When quit rates are nonzero, (ib) and (2c,d) give
(4)

Uh(Wi,hi)
U(w. ,h.,)

(l+A.q(w. ,h)/(lq(w. ,h.)))

Earlier we noted that increasing wages reduces quit rates. Thus if, in
addition, increasing hours also reduces quit rates, so that

< 0

then
(5)

Uh(wi,hj) >

as

A.

0

<

U (w.,h.) <

W 1 1

That is, the equilibrium contract prescribes underemployment (to
encourage quits) in those states when workers are being subsidized, and
overemploytnent (to discourage quits) when profits are strictly positive.

It is possible, however, that

can be positive, even for

well-behaved utility functions. On the one hand, an increase in hours
worked (at fixed wages) makes the job less attractive, and this increases
quit rates, just as an increase in wages (for fixed hours) makes the job

more attractive, and this reduces quit rates. On the other hand,
14

however, if search is also time intensive, then a worker who works more
has less time to search, and this reduces quit rates.

Returning to (5), observe that its derivation from (4) does not
rely upon (2a,b) but depends instead upon specific derivative properties

of the quit rate function. However, by taking advantage of the simple
utility functions introduced earlier, we can now derive an even stronger

result: there will be underemployment (overemloyment) in those states
where profits are negative (positive) whenever workers' compensated quit

derivative with respect to hours is negative. To see this, we consider a

perturbation to (w.h) which keeps workers' expected utility in state
i fixed and calculate the effect on firm profits. At the optimum

—

dhU

(l-q)[9dhU

-

(9h-w)

— 0

dhU

where
— compensated quit derivative.
dh U

Recalling that

dh U

and

U1y'U

substituting, we can obtain

(6a)

th(i,hi) —
U(w.,h.)

-A

dq

(l.q) dh U

yielding the result that whenever the compensated quit derivative is

negative, underemployment occurs in those states where A < 0 and
overemployment occurs in those states where A. > 0 .
17
shown that
(6b)

—-Be
___
(l-q)

Fh
ee
Uee
15

In

turn, it can be

where B > 0 , F

e

Therefore a sufficient condition

and uee< 0 .

< 0

in our model for the compensated quit derivative to be negative is that

both Bh and Beh be positive. i.e. that increasing hours worked
increases both the total and marginal costs of search. (Since

—
where

< 0 ,

-

%B Fes8eh/Uee
note that (6b) is negative under less restrictive
<

conditions than are required for

Finally, observe that when workers' labour supply decisions

have no effect on their disutility from search, that is, h —

eh

—

0, then (2a,b) and (6) give
(7)

Uh(wi,hi)

wi 1

U (w. h.)

In

hi,hi) —

vi

i — L,H.

a (w h.)
1

this case, a worker's optimal search effort and consequent quit

probability depend only upon the level of utility a(w,h), and so do not
respond to variations in w and h on a given indifference curve.
Therefore, for any given level of utility, and hence given incentive
effects, (7) is obviously a necessary condition for profit maximization.

Three general properties of these results are noteworthy. First,
unlike most recent implicit contract models with asymmetric information,
the occurrence of under- versus overemployment in our model does not rely
upon whether firms are risk-averse or, with reference to either

u(w,h,e(w,h)) or a(w,h), whether leisure is a normal good, or finally,
whether a(w,h) has a specific functional form such as a — J4(w)

a —

,.i(w-i(h)).'8"9

-

7(h)

or

Whether there is under- or overemployment depends

instead only upon certain weak properties of the utility function
and upon the contractual availability of insurance for workers (AhO).
Second, (5) and (6) also indicate that underemployment will
16

occur only in states where workers are being subsidized, with the amount
of underemployment being proportional to the size of the subsidy; and
that overemployment will be reserved for profitable states, with the

amount of overemployment again responding to the level of profits. Thus,
as seems reasonable, underemployment occurs in bad times and
overeniployment in good times.

(By contrast, earlier models generated

either underemployment in all high-VMP states except the highest,2° or

overemployment in all j-VMP states except the lowest,21 and hence
predicted either underemployment in (most) good states or overemployment
in (most) bad states.)

Finally, (3) and (7) demonstrate that even while employment
contracts which are designed to have incentive effects will certainly
limit risk-sharing, they need not also generate production
inefficiencies.

I.C

On Severance Pay
Severance pay is oftentimes portrayed as the Achilles heel of

implicit contract theory. The original models largely ignored severance
pay, while later work introduced severance pay but obtained the
counterfactual result that workers prefer to be laid off rather than
retained22; that is, contracts which provide full insurance, equating
(expected) marginal utilities of income across all states, will result in
higher (expected) utilities among those on layoff, in which case we would

expect contracts to specify reverse seniority layoff clauses. In this
section we show, on the contrary, that under plausible conditions

concerning labor mobility and preferences, laid-off workers are indeed

17

worse off than retained workers. Before presenting our results, we
review the standard ones.

We begin by taking the layoff rate l-r as given. The first-order
conditions of problem (P) then yield
—

(8)

V(s)

whenever the optimal severance payment s is strictly positive. (Later,
we identify cases where s—O.) Observe that when both on- and
off-the-job search occur, (1), (2) and (8) give

WL,L > V(s)

> QW(wH,h& for AL < <

which is the obvious extension of our earlier partial insurance result.

Reverse Seniority

There are two versions of the reverse seniority result. First,
suppose employed and laid-off workers are both immobile (don't search) so
that (8) becomes

0w(wLJL) —

(9)

a(s,O).

The optimal (insurance) contract equates the marginal utilities of income

of retained and laid-off workers. Differentiating
a /a
n -a
wwh
ww
wh/aww and hence da/dh—a,

dw/dh — -a

,

— constant, gives

for fixed a .

w

Therefore

(9) implies that
a(wL,hL) < (>) a(s,O)

when leisure is a normal (inferior) good; and hence immobile workers
prefer to be laid off when leisure is normal.
Second, suppose employed workers are again immobile, and that

laid-off workers are now mobile but face uncertain job opportunities. To
simplify, suppose we have a separable utility function

18

e(w,h)(w)--y(h). In this case, (8) again yields the result that
retained and laid-off workers' (expected) marginal utilities of income
are equal, i.e.

i.'(wL) —

(10)

where e —

e(s).

'(s)C(y,e)

p'(s+z)g(z,e)dz

+

It can be shown that (10) implies that IL(wL) will be

greater than (equal to, less than)

p(s)G(y,e) +

as ( ) is

(s+z)g(z,e)dz

an increasing (constant, decreasing) absolute risk-aversion

utility function.23 Thus, whenever search entails zero disutility and
hours worked is not a variable, workers with decreasing absolute
risk-aversion utility functions will prefer layoffs with severance pay.

Costly Search
Once we recognize, however, that search is costly, the
presumption that laid-off workers are better-off no longer obtains.

There are two reasons for this. First, if search is costly, and these
search costs do not enter the utility function additively with income,
then providing income insurance (by equating expected marginal utilities)
may not fully compensate for the costs and risks of search; in this event

we say that search is (partially) non-pecuniary. Secondly, retained
workers will, we have argued, have their hours reduced to encourage them
to search more; in particular, hours may be reduced below the "standard"

hours at alternative employment, in which case even with full income
insurance, their expected utility will be higher than those laid off.

To see these results, first suppose every laid-off worker can

19

effortlessly (with e—O) secure a new job which pays z for h; since
there are no incentive problems here, the optimal severance payment

will satisfy

(ha)

wL'1L — a(s+z,h).

It then follows that laid-off workers will be worse-off even though
leisure is normal whenever the spot job entails more work (h >

hL).

Now,

suppose this alternative job can be secured only by exerting some fixed

effort e > 0; assuming that e is not prohibitive, retained workers are

better-off when
(lib)

a(wL,hL) > Q(S+Z,h)

-

(e,O).

Thus, whenever search costs are in part nonpecuniary, it is clear that
(11) can be satisfied without having to impose either the

inferiority of leisure or h > hL.
Thus, provided search costs are non-pecuniary (and accordingly,
severance payments cannot be used to compensate them), and provided there
are significant probabilities of being re-employed elsewhere at jobs

requiring at least as much labor as at their ex ante firms, then laid-off
workers will be worse-off than retained workers; and this will be true

even in the presence of decreasing absolute risk aversion. Moreover,
when preferences are nonseparable and workers search on the job as well,
it is clear that (8) says very little about the relative magnitudes of

U(wL,hL) andV(s).

I.D Severance Pa'y for Retained Workers

Our results are not substantially altered if firms can provide
severance pay for retained workers who quit in bad states. Such
20

severance pay would be used to encourage quits. However, so long as
reducing hours worked reduces the cost of search, firms will still wish
to reduce hours of retained workers in the face of a reduction in the
demand for their products; so long as reducing wages has some beneficial
effects in inducing search, they will not provide complete income
insurance to the retained workers; so long as search costs are not
completely additive with income, the severence pay will not fully
compensate for effort expended on search; and finally, so long as there
is imperfect information about the job offer which the individual

accepts, the distortions we described earlier with respect to quit
behavior, (5) and (6a), will remain.

24

25

II. Layoffs and Worksharin2

We now determine whether firms' layoff rates are ever positive.
Since workers in our model are technically identical, and as hours per
worker and the number of workers are perfect substitutes in production,
differential productivity and technological arguments for layoffs have

been ruled out.26 While these considerations are not unimportant, we set
them aside here to specifically study the impact of costly mobility on

layoffs. In particular, we will show that the availability of
alternative employment for laid-off workers introduces a natural
non-convexity into firms' optimization problems and, as a result,
worksharing will generally not dominate layoffs.

We are going to proceed in two stages. First, we will construct
a model in which retained workers do not quit, and in which layoffs are

the only ex post source of mobility. Then, in Sections II.C and II.D, we

21

will construct models with random search costs in which there are both
quits and layoffs.

To simplify the remaining discussion, we henceforth assume that

workers' preferences satisfy (e,h)—e; with h° we know, from (7), that
long-term and spot employment will both involve efficient production

satisfying ah/aW9.

II.A Layoffs Only
We begin by considering a situation in which there is no moral
hazard problem because search effort and outcomes are both observable,

and in which retained workers do not search. In this case, the optimal
employment contract fully insures retained workers (who don't quit), and

hence satisfies c(wL,hL)_c(wH,hH) and Qh(w,h)1aW(w,hl) — 9.
thus, with well-behaved utility functions, employees will work more in
high-productivity states.
To easily demonstrate that worksharing and layoffs are not

mutually exclusive outcomes, it will be useful at this juncture to
specialize the model further by assuming that the utility function takes

on the special form a(w,h)—i(w-h2/2) .

shall refer to w-h2/2 as

We

the "net income" of a job, that is, the wage income net of labor costs.

Given ah/cO, we can inmiediately determine that workers will supply
h.—9. hours at firms where

Let y. —

9

output, 9h , of a worker in state i , so

,

i — L,H,

denote the

that in equilibrium

For simplicity, we also consider the special case of the search
process in which a worker either expends e to become fully informed of

22

all employment opportunities, or forgoes search and remains uninformed

(and immobile). We assume that the requisite effort level e is fixed and
that it always pays an unemployed worker to search (i.e. 0 < e <

Now, with firm-specific shocks and constant returns, there will

always be a group of high-VMP firms who are willing to hire workers on
spot contracts. Since all searching workers have perfect information,
the resulting ex post equilibrium must conform to the classical

zero-profit competitive outcome: hence all spot contracts must pay ZYH

units

for h =
We

of labor. Observe that a(z,h) —

can show that, in equilibrium, retained workers do not search

(quit) while every laid-off worker searches. Therefore, retained and
laid-off workers' expected utilities are described, respectively, by:

U(w.,h.) —

V(s) —

,t(wy/2)

i—L,H,

Is(s+yH/2)e.

The equilibrium contract will therefore maximize expected utility

W —

subject

r/4(wLyL/2)

+

(lr)(p(s+yH/2)e)

+

to the zero expected profit constraint
Z —

r(y-w)

-

(l-r)s

+

(yw)

— 0.

It should be clear that employed workers will receive full insurance,

that is, p'(wLyL/2) —

'(wHyH/2).

If, as we assume here, negative

severance payments are not permitted, it can be shown that the

equilibrium value of s must be zero.27 (Negative values are examined
later below.)

The model's remaining equilibrium properties are derived as

follows: Solving Z—s—O and WLYL/2 — WHYH/2
23

gives

w.-y./2 —

(ryL+yH)/2(l+r)

—

6(r)

so that workers' expected utility W can be rewritten as

W(r,e) —

Observe

that W
<
rr

0

(l+r)s(6(r))
for 0

at r — 0

to consider: if W — 0
r

at r —

1

,

r

+
1 .

There are two corner solutions

no one is retained and if W — 0
r

everyone is retained. To determine when these solutions

occur, we define the critical effort levels, e(yL) and el(yL) by the
first-order conditions

Wr(le(yL)) — 0 —

W(Oe1(y))

It can be shown that these effort levels are both decreasing functions of

(and hence °L satisfying 'H'2
and
r —

e(y11) —

1; if e

el(yH)

e1(y)

— 0 for

r —

—

>

el(yL)

Thus, if e

0; and if el(yL) < e <

e(y)

> 0

for

<

e(y)
0<r<l where

dr/de > 0 and dr/dOL>O. See Figure 2.
The trade-off between risk-sharing considerations and search

costs is clear. When either search becomes less expensive or the low-VMP

insurance subsidy becomes larger (as eL falls), the balance tips
towards layoffs and search, and away from worksharing. For example, any
combination of e and

below (above) the shaded area in Figure 2

involves layoffs (worksharing) and no worksharing (layoffs). These
corner solutions are faniiliar: when workers are freely mobile (e—0),
one-period implicit contract models must replicate spot auctions; and

when workers are immobile (e>s(yH/2)), the concavity of

ensures that

worksharing strictly dominates layoffs. For intermediate values however.
only some workers are retained to workshare in the low-VMP state while
the remainder are laid-off with zero severance pay and undertake search.

24

11.3 On Severance Pay (Again
With constant returns in production and identical workers, one
might initially conjecture that the equilibrium employment contract will
treat all workers identically ex post, and hence that the optimal layoff

rate must be a corner solution, either zero or one. In fact, of course,

interior solutions satisfying 0 <

r

< 1

are indeed possible, as

demonstrated above. We begin this section by asking whether this result
is due to our earlier prohibition of negative severance pay.

Interior Solutions

The analysis below considers the more general case in which

laid-off workers receive job offers with net income z/2, where z need

not equal H The equilibrium contract with unrestricted severence pay
is then derived as follows. Solve the zero-profit constraint, Z — 0

and the first-order conditions for full insurance, w-y/2 = s+z/2
(i=L,H) ,

to

obtain

— s-i-z/2 —

(ry+y+(lr)z)/4

—

p(r)

then, substituting these expressions into W , we get the expected
utility function

W(re) —

2(p(r))

-

(l-r)e

Since W(r,e) is a strictly concave function of r , we can proceed as
before to verify that an interior solution will be optimal for some

values of tYL,z,e) .

(12)

Wr —

For example, if z >
+

e

which shows that there always exists an open interval of effort levels

consistent with interior optima. Therefore, while negative severance pay

25

may pose enforcement problems, it certainly does not preclude interior
layoff solutions.

The cost of laying off a worker to a firm is the severance

payment s plus the forgone profit YLWL .

Since

s +

wy/2 —

z/2

this cost equals
s +

—

(y-y/2)

-

z/2

Therefore, layoffs are profitable whenever the worker's net outside

income, z/2 , exceeds his competitive internal net income, i.e. his VMP

minus the disutility of work, LL'2 .

In

turn, when layoffs are

profitable, increasing the layoff rate increases employed workers' net

income p(r) .

Therefore,

interior solutions are possible in this model

with complete insurance because, when z >

, the

marginal benefit of

layoffs t'(p)(zyL)/2 is a positive but continuously decreasing
function of the layoff rate (due to risk aversion), while the marginal

search cost e takes on positive fixed values. More generally, interior
solutions are t,ossible with complete insurance whenever search involves

some non-pecuniary and hence uninsurable costs.

Notice, however, when search is costless, e — 0

the corner solutions r — 1
<

z/2

> z/2

when

and (12) predict

and r — 0 when

; in addition, when laid-off workers' utility is

alternatively represented by p(s+z/2-e) , so that all search costs are
pecuniary, interior equilibria are again ruled out as r — 1

LL'2 > z/2

when

-e and r — 0 otherwise. Therefore, with complete

insurance and only pecuniary search costs, the equilibrium layoff rate
simply implements the standard "first best" allocation.

26

Production Efficiency
It has been widely thought that the absence of severance pay is
the only reason that layoffs are not at a productively efficient level.

Without severance pay, firms can only provide insurance by retaining and

subsidizing workers even when their VMP is higher elsewhere. We now show
that even with optimally chosen severance pay, the layoff rate will not

generally be productively efficient. There are two parts to the
argument: first, an efficient layoff policy requires complete insurance,

not just the availability of (negative) severance pay; and second, the
moral hazard problems described in Section I preclude complete insurance
so that (as with quit behavior) production inefficiencies will again
result.

To see this, consider a set-up similar to Section I in which,

given e , a laid-off worker's best alternative option, yielding z/2
is a random draw from a nondegenerate distribution with c.d.f. G(z/2,e),

where C(.,O) — 1

.

Letting

workers who draw z/2 ,

the

s(z) denote the severance payment to

first-order condition for layoffs, at an

interior solution, yields (after some manipulation)
(13)

—

Q —

WL

-

E(s(z))

-

Q

[(wLyL/2)(Ep(s(z)+z/2).e)]/p'(WLYL2)

Hence the output gain from retaining an extra worker, his VMP, equals the
corresponding marginal cost of an extra employee, that is, the contract
wage minus the expected severance pay minus the expected (implicit)

insurance indemnity. There are three cases of interest.
First, suppose search effort is fixed and firms can monitor the

outcomes of search, i.e. each laid-off worker's z/2

27

realization is

observable. In this case, the optimal severance payment s(z) satisfies

p'(wLyL/2) —

p'(s(z)+z/2)

E(s(z))+E(z/2) ,

Therefore,

for all z .

WLYL/2 equals

equals Ep(s(z)+z/2) , so that Q-'

p(w-y/2)

e/i'(p),

and hence

— E(z/2)

-

e/p'(p)

In words, the net income from current employment equals the expected net
income from alternative employment minus the cost of search, and
therefore, the layoff rate is efficient when firms provide complete
insurance.

Second, suppose search effort is fixed but firms cannot monitor

workers' job offers. In this case, s(z) is the payment to workers who

claim to draw z/2 , and the only incentive compatible payment schedule
is the fixed non-contingent payment, s(z) — s —

E(s(z))

.

Since

E.i(s+z/2) is strictly less than p(s+E(z/2))
Q

> (w-y/2)

-

(s+E(z/2))

+

e/j'(p)

and so,

< E(z/2)

(14)

-

e/p'(p)

Therefore, when success in job search cannot be monitored, firms

overemploy workers in the low-VMP state, that is, retained workers' net
current income is strictly less than their expected net alternative
opportunity.

While this distortion obviously also results when severance pay

is prohibited (s—O) ,

earlier

research had mistakenly focused on the

absence of severance pay per se, rather than the absence of complete

insurance, as the source of the problem. We therefore conclude that the
allocative impact of severance pay vis-a-vis layoff rates is minimal

28

when, as seems plausible, workers' outside opportunities are uncertain
and unobservable: layoff rates are certainly higher when severance pay is
provided, but are still deficient relative to the productively efficient
solution.

Finally, suppose search effort is variable but unobservable,

while search outcomes can be observed. In this case, the firm can
provide complete insurance in the spot market by offering severance pay

which satisfies p'(s(z)+z/2) —

constant, for all z .

However, because

search entails disutility, when s(z)+z/2 is constant, the optimal
search effort will be zero and hence workers remain immobile. To
overcome this moral hazard problem and encourage search, an alternative
schedule of payments will be offered which, at a minimum, involves

nonconstant s(z)+z/2 .

Therefore,

complete insurance though feasible is

not desirable, and overemployment, as in (14), results in the low-VMP
state.

II.C Layoffs With On-the-Job Search
The model of section II.A was structured so that there was no

on-the-job search (and hence no quits). Thus, the model could not
accurately capture the trade-off between inducing voluntary separations
(through lower pay to retained employees) and involuntary separations

(through layoffs). To proceed in the simplest way, we extend the model
in Section II.A by assuming search costs are random; there is some
probability that search costs are low (here, for simplicity, assumed to
be zero), and some probability that search costs are high (here, for
simplicity, assumed to be sufficiently high that individuals would in

29

fact never search); and neither the worker nor the firm know what their
search costs will be before the contract is signed (and indeed, before

the layoff decision is made). In particular suppose

on-the-job

—
r Prob(e—O)
I

1. Prob(ep(yH/2)) =

f
off-the-job I

Prob(e—O) — q,
Prob(e=p(yH/2)) —

We expect that p < q

l-q.

as laid-off workers generally access a better

job-finding technology than retained workers. Given these extreme
distributions, it can be shown that firms will have no incentive to offer
contracts designed to discourage quits by highly mobile workers at high

productivity firms or encourage quits by immobile workers at low
productivity firms.

From our earlier analysis, we expect the optimal severance
payment to be a decreasing function of q, which measures the degree of

mobility available to laid-off workers. Here we simplify by setting
s—O. The resulting equilibrium layoff-worksharing mix corresponding to
any 9L and combination of job-finding technologies is depicted in
Figure 3; all points to the left (right) of the 3-D wedge yield contracts

with layoffs (worksharing) and no vorksharing (layoffs). When
off-the-job search is relatively efficient (high q/p), layoffs become the
primary vehicle for inducing separations; and when on-the-job search is

relatively efficient, worksharing with quits becomes more attractive. In
fact, layoffs can occur only if off-the-job search is more efficient,
i.e. q>p.

30

II.D Random Search Costs
In Section II.C, the optimal layoff rate was determined by the
relative efficiency of workers' on- and off-the-job search technologies,

whereas wage-hours policy had no effect on quits. By contrast, our
earlier analysis in Section I ignored layoff rates and argued that by
lowering wages (and hence reducing the effective degree of insurance)
firms could induce quits and hence movement from low-productivity to

high-productivity firms. This section shows how the firm must balance
off simultaneously the effects of all of its terms of employment, that
is, of wages and hours, layoff rates, and severance pay.

The model is the same as that of the previous section, except

that now there is a continuous distribution of search costs. The
consequence of this is that as the terms offered retained workers become

worse, more of the retained workers are induced to search. In
particular, we now suppose retained workers' requisite e's are drawn
from a distribution with continuous c.d.f. F(e), that unattached workers'

values are drawn from a distribution with continuous c.d.f. C(e), and

that F and G share the common support [O,u(yH/2)).
Assuming that retained workers search to quit (rather than quit

to search) and substituting the efficient labor supplies h. —

9.,

agents' expected utilities are again described by W(C) and Z(C) as in
Section I, except that

31

fx
U(w.,h.) —

(lF(x.))p(wy/2)

edF(e),

+ F(x.)P(y/2) c

V(s) -

(l-G(ç))(s)

+ G(c)(s+yH/2) -

- (w.-y/2) and — 1(s+yH/2)

where x —

ir(w.,h.,O.) —

-

p(s),

edG(e),
and

(l-F(x1))(Y-w).

x is the difference in utility between what the worker gets at his job
and what he would get if he is successful in finding a new job; hence

search is profitable if and only if e < x •

Similarly,

is the

difference between the utility of a laid-off worker who searches and
finds a job (exclusive of search costs) and his utility if he does not
search; hence laid-off workers search if and only if their search costs

are less than

Thus, retained workers quit with probability F(x)

and laid-off workers seek employment with probability G(ç).

In our earlier model, lowering wage WL encourages quits by
increasing search effort and hence increasing the likelihood that a

random outside offer will dominate wL; in the present model, lowering
raises the niaxilnuni search effort level XL consistent with a

profitable move, and hence increases the likelihood that a randomly drawn

search cost will be less than XL.
There are, as we have emphasized, two different ways for workers

to leave low-VMP firms, by quits or layoffs. The former has the

advantage of selecting workers with the lowest e values for search,
while the latter has the potential advantage of forcing workers to use a

relatively more efficient off-the-job search technology. To illustrate
these effects and the possibility of an interior layoff solution, we
32

evaluate the derivative of the Lagrangian, L — W+AZ

—

(15)

8r

—

U(w,h)

,

where

V(s) + A(1r(wL,hLOL) + s)

-

- [(lF(xL))xL +

IXL

-

+

edF(e)]

+

[(1-G(r))r

+ As] +

+ J0 edG(e)]

[A(1F(xL))(yLwL)].

To compare search technologies, we now identify one technology as more
efficient than another whenever the former has a lower mean effort level.

Thus, taking F( )

as

given, there exists a sequence of

increasingly efficient off-the-job search technologies such that, in the

limit, (s,G(ç)) approach (0,1), the 2nd and 3rd bracketed expressions in

(15) go to zero and 8L/8r becomes strictly negative (as s — 0

YLwL_O). On the other hand, taking G( )

as

implies

given, there exists a

sequence of increasingly efficient on-the-job search technologies such

that, in the limit, F() approaches one for all x > 0, the 1st and 4th
bracketed expressions in (15) go to zero and 8L/ôr becomes strictly
positive (as the f.o.c. A

V(s)

implies A

It follows that preferences and search technologies can be found
such that the equilibrium quit rate, layoff rate and severance payment

are all non-zero at low-VMP firms. In these circumstances, the

equilibrium rate of unemployment is (l-r)(l-G(ç))/2 where (l-r)/2

is

the workforce proportion on layoff and 1-G(ç) is the proportion of
unattached workers who draw search costs exceeding

—

and who therefore have no incentive to search.28
In the absence of cx

ante

employment contracts, the equilibrium

unemployment rate here would be zero as G(p(yH/2)) — 1.

Therefore,

implicit contracts and asymmetric job-market information are necessary
33

conditions for a positive equilibrium unemployment rate. In fact,
implicit contracts can only generate unemployment by explaining either

why laid-off workers are unwilling to search for jobs at high
productivity firms (or are unsuccessful), or why the latter firms are

unwilling to hire workers laid off elsewhere. We have pursued the former
approach.

II.E A Further Comparison Between Layoffs and Quits
To induce search, one needs to impose some risk on some

individuals. This risk can take one of two forms: it can be a risk
imposed on a few individuals in the form of layoffs, or it can be a risk
imposed on all individuals in the form of lower wages to induce

on-the-job search. Neither form in general dominates the other.
If firms are imperfectly informed concerning the search
abilities, costs, and quit propensities of different individuals, layoffs

will not discriminate between efficient and inefficient searchers. With
on-the-job search, those who have a comparative advantage in search will

do so. The firm may be able to induce all the separations it desires by
lowering the wage only slightly to induce those with very low search
costs to find employment elsewhere.

(The assumption that the firm is completely uninformed about

comparative search costs is not, however, completely correct. Younger
workers, for instance, and those who have recently been searching (the
newly hired who already have accumulated considerable information about
the labor market) may have a relatively more efficient search technology;

34

hence these are the workers which the firm should layoff. This is, of
course, consistent with observed patterns of layoffs.)

On the other hand, those who leave the firm voluntarily may
be those who are the firm's most productive workers; that is, the firm

may not be able to discriminate between high and lo productivity workers
as well as other firms may, or alternatively, those with lower search

costs may also be significantly more productive. In either event, when
the firm lays off workers, it loses a cross-section of its labor force,

but when the firm lowers its wage, it loses its best workers. These
standard efficiency-wage arguments also rely upon incomplete information
and explain why firms may be reluctant to lower the wages of retained
workers (see Stiglitz, and Weiss).

III. Concludinz Remarks
A complete theory of unemployment should answer the following

questions: How do we explain the degree of observed wage flexibility?29
How do we explain the form of unemployment, e.g. worksharing versus

layoffs? How do we explain which workers get laid off? How do we
explain the level of severance pay? Why does severance pay not fully

compensate laid-off workers? Why do workers prefer to be retained rather
than laid off? Why are some unattached workers unable or unwilling to
secure employment elsewhere?
Existing implicit contract models, while they provide

explanations for some of these phenomena, fail to provide explanations

for others and, in some instances, yield counterfactual implications. We
have argued that costly search coupled with firms inability to monitor

35

workers' search activities can provide insights into each of the
questions listed above; e.g. it can explain partial wage.

insurance, internal distortions in the form of underemployment at low-VMP
firms, layoffs and quits, sluggish interfirni mobility and equilibrium
30

unemployment.

In this paper we have presented a positive analysis of implicit

contracts with asymmetric search information. A normative analysis would
be straightforward. From the literature on equilibrium with incomplete
markets and imperfect information, it should be apparent that although
the equilibrium contracts described in this paper are "locally efficient"
(i.e. given the actions of all other firms in the economy, these

contracts maximize workers' expected utility subject to a zero-profit
constraint), the market equilibrium and the corresponding "natural rate"
31

are in fact generally not constrained Pareto efficient.
By highlighting the implications of private search information,
this paper has resolved several of the outstanding conundrums in the
implicit contract literature and has also provided a unified treatment of
worksharing, layoffs, severance pay, quits and unemployment.

The reason

why it is necessary to formulate a model which incorporates all of these
features should be apparent: without doing so, one cannot be sure that
whatever results one obtains are simply not an artifact of the artificial
restrictions one has imposed, e.g. that there is no severance pay, no
on-the-job search, etc.

Our model can be viewed as an extension of the standard theory to
take into account the fact that what is at risk is not being laid off,

but rather, being laid off and not rehired. As an extension of this

36

earlier theory, however, some common issues remain: how., for instance,

are such contracts enforced? While these problems remain important,
their resolution will not, we believe, alter the qualitative insights
provided by our analysis.

37

Footnotes

1. There are now a large number of surveys and critical reviews in this
area including George Akerlof and Hajime Miyazaki (1980), Azariadis
(1979), Azariadis and Stiglitz (1983), Oliver Hart (1983) and most
recently Sherwin Rosen (1985).

2. Though more recent developments in implicit contract theory,
particularly those based on asymmetries of information (Azariadis, 1983;
Sandford Grossman and Hart), have recognized the failure of the
traditional versions to explain unemployment, they have failed to
address the central problems raised above, and have faced some further

difficulties as well. For example, not only do these new theories
obtain unemployment only under restrictive conditions, but when they do,

they obtain it for all states of nature except the very best. In
addition, these new theories have also been criticized for their
information assumptions, both that the contracts do not employ all the
relevant and easily available information, and that they sometimes
require the use of information (eg. restrictions on the sale of assets)

which is not easily monitored. For a fuller discussion, see Stiglitz
(1986).

3. A first best (full information) socially optimal insurance contract
would provide that he move whenever he finds a job with a productivity
in excess of his current productivity.
4

The same moral hazard problem is examined by Arnott and Stiglitz (1985)

in their analysis of implicit contracts when unobservable non-pecuniary
attributes are associated with different firms.

5. Note that asymmetric information plays a key role in our analysis, but
that the particular source of informational asymmetry is different from
that discussed, say, by Azariadis (1983) or Grossman and Hart (1981).
In these papers workers cannot observe realizations of firms' revenue

functions, which leads to an adverse selection problem. In the present
paper, as in Jon Strand's, firms cannot observe workers' search efforts,

which leads to a moral hazard problem. The AzariadisGrossman-Hart kind of asymmetry can be introduced here without
substantially altering our results.

6. Related papers which also highlight labor mobility include those by
John Geanakoplos and Takatoshi Ito (1981) and Hosios (1985,1986); these
papers develop simple general equilibrium mdoels of layoffs, hiring and
unemployment in which the ex post job-finding probability is endogenous

and, as here, laid-off workers job offers are private information.
7. We also assume that each firm's technology is observable by the firm and
its workers but not by others. This gives risk-neutral firms an
informational advantage over external agents, so that job-related
insurance is provided to workers by employers rather than insurance
companies.

8. Observe that asymmetric information has ruled out compensation
conditional upon a worker's search effort or outside job offer.
Severance pay for workers who quit is prohibited here only to simplify

the discussion. See Section I.D.
9. This assumption could, of course, easily be removed at some increase in
notational complexity. We again emphasize that we are concerned with
constructing the simplest model illustrating the points at issue, rather
than the most complete.

10. Workers are assumed to not quit to search, i.e., U(w.,h1)

V(O).

This

constraint is assumed to be satisfied, and will be ignored in the
subsequent discussion.

11. The additively separable structure and the imposition of

—

0

simplify the analysis but are otherwise inessential.

12. More than one interpretation of the model is possible, and each involves
a slightly different rationale for the dependency of the search

disutility (e,h) on h .

For example, it is possible to think of

each period being divided into two parts: a job-search period and a

production period. Workers' current employers in this view are required
to tell workers at the beginning of the job-search period whether or not
they are assured a job with that employer during the production period;
and so contract design will have to account for the effect of this
announcement on workers' behavior during the initial search period.
In the subsequent analysis, we shall argue that an increase in

hours worked increases the cost of search for retained workers. The
worker presumably has less time for search (or other non-work)

activities. In the interpretation of the model just offered, however,
with search preceeding production, it is the substitutability of leisure
during the search and production sub-periods that results in the quit

rate declining as hours worked increases. An alternative
interpretation, in which search and production occur together during an

initial sub-period, and where hours worked directly affects search
disutility, is formalized in footnote 13.

Under either interpretation, however, what is crucial is that workers

believe that finns will not re-employ laid-off workers who are

unsuccessful in finding alternative employment. This commitment is
essential if the layoff announcement is to have the desired on-the-job
search incentive effects and if the actual layoff is to have the desired

off-the-job search incentive effects. Even if workers believe there is
a probability, greater than zero but less than one, of the firm reneging
on its commitment to not rehire laid-off workers, there will still
remain an attenuated search incentive effect.

13. We now formulate a slightly different interpretation of the events we
have in mind to show that whether search precedes or is concurrent with
production is not critical here.
Suppose the unit period is divided into 2 subperiods, of lengths A

and 1-A , such that workers supply labour and search during the 1st
subperiod and either quit of stay at the beginning of the 2nd subperiod,

and therefore
u(w,h,e) —
A

A

Then, defining F — A+(l-A)F
A

u(w,h,e)

— oF +

A

A

a(1-F)

and

-

That is, except for the ,A,,,

—

A

,

we get

A

, where F(O,O) —

this

1

is identical to the expression for

u(w,h,e) in the text, and hence our analysis of search and quits goes
through in exactly the same way.

14. After firms' layoff decisions have been made, retained workers quit the
pool of employed workers with probability

1-F , and laid-off workers

quit the pool of unemployed workers with probability
symmetrical structure simplifies the analysis.

1-C .

This

Nevertheless, It should

be noted that whether layoffs precede or follow quits on-the-job would

play a somewhat more important role when there are small firms with

diminishing returns technologies; then, because of the stochastic nature
of quits, the firm would be uncertain about the number of employees
during the production period, and, because of diminishing returns,
variability in employment (in a given state) is costly.

The order would also be of some importance if there were adverse

selection effects. As we have emphasized, quits have the advantage of
encouraging those with lower search costs to engage in more turnover.
There are thus some efficiency gains to having quits precede layoffs.

On the other hand, when quits precede layoffs, increasing the layoff
rate has positive on-the-job search incentive effects; moreover, our
argument for layoffs in Section II, on the grounds that off-the-job
search is generally more efficient than on-the-job search, goes through
independent of the order of quits and layoffs.

Our central concern in this paper is to establish, under fairly
general conditions, that optimal contracts will entail a mixture of

quits and layoffs. This central result will remain valid regardless of
the sequencing of quits and layoffs; making quits precede layoffs would
require a 3-period analysis and would further complicate what is already
an admittedly complex setup.
15.

q — l-F(x,e)

gives a — -(F x + F e )

xw ew

From the definition of x(w,h) , we

from the f.o.c. u(w,h,e) — 0

Ue —

a(w,h)F

,

have x — c

(w,h)/a (x,h) > 0 ; and

where

(x,e) +

and x — x(w,h), we have e — aw(w,h)Fe/uee
second-order condition u

where B —

Fx > 0 and F e > 0

where

(F/a)

-

F2/u

Assuming that the

< 0 is satisfied, we then have q, — -awB
> 0 .

16. Previous work has recognized that wages will likely be raised to
discourage quits when profits are high or turnover is costly (e.g. Steve
Salop (1979)), but fails to make the symmetrical argument when profits

are low. Separability is obviously sufficient but not necessary for
this correlation between real wages and VMP's.

17. Proceeding as in footnote 15, it can be shown that
ahB

-

(Fh/U) where
Uhah+ h
,

Uw

a

w

aw(l-q)

and therefore, substituting

and Uh/U

into

B —

q/a .

Also,

—

from (2a,b),

dv

dhU
—

aB

,

and the above expressions for

dq _q+qdw
U

gives

dhU

(6b).

18. While the discussion is often couched in terms of moral hazard,
c.f. Grossman and Hart, the question with which the earlier models with
asymmetric information are concerned is the inability of at least one
party to the implicit contract to distinguish among states of nature (an
adverse selection issue); the question with which we are concerned is
the inability of firms to monitor workers' search intensities (a moral
hazard issue).

19. See Russell Cooper (1983), Hart, and Stiglitz for a description of the
role of preferences in generating production inefficiencies.

20. See Azariadis (1983), and Grossman and Hart.

21. See V.V. Chari (1983), Cooper, and Jerry Green and Charles Kahn (1983).

22. See Rosen, and Stiglitz.

23. Whether the expected utility of income is greater or less for the
laid-off (vs. retained) worker depends upon whether utility is a concave

or convex function of marginal utility. Recognizing that s+z is a mean

this

marginal utility preserving spread of WL ,

result follows as a

corollary to Peter Diamond arid Stiglitz (1974). See also Harua Imai,
Ceanakoplos and Ito (1981).

24. Suppose firms pay b to workers who quit. In this case, only those
workers who receive an outside offer z

x(w,h)

is again defined by a(w,h) —

x-b will quit, where x =

a(x,h)

.

As a result, u(w,h,e) is

replaced by
u(w,h,e,b) —

a(w,h)F(x-b,e)

where c(x,e,b) —

f

+ c,(x,e,b)(l-F(x-b,e)) -

(e,h)

cz(z+b,h)f(z,e)dz/(l-F(x-b,e))

J x -b

Hence the optimal search intensity and resulting quit rate are given by
e(w,h,b) — argmax u(w,h,e,b) ,
where

> 0 .

Similarly,

q(w,h,b)

—

1-F(x-b,e(w,h,b)),

the resulting utility and profit functions

are given by
U(w,h,b) —

u(w,h,e(w,h,b),b),

ir(w,h,b) —

(l-q(w,h,b))(Gh-w)-q(W,h,b)b

As U and Uh are again described by (2a,b), and as r
again described by (2c,d) where A — Oh-w+b

,

it

and wh are

follows that our

earlier results on wages and production inefficiencies go through

exactly as before. See Ito (1986) and Charles Kahn (1985) for further
results on quits and severance pay.

25. A more detailed exposition of the material in this section, including
some omitted proofs, is contained in Arnott, Hosios and Stiglitz

(1983). The model in subsection II.A. resembles Baily's (1977).

26. See Ken Chan and Yannis lonannides (1982), Mark Lowenstein (1983),
Rosen, and Andrew Weiss (1980).

27. Since (yH/2)e >

t(0)

will search when s — 0

wLyL/'2wHyH/2 and

s>0 give YHwH > 0.

— 0
.

,

it turns out that every laid-off worker

To verify that s — 0

>

L

imply

>

,

note that
so that Z—0 and

YLWL

Therefore, in equilibrium, the profit per

employee at high-VMP firms with this implicit contract is greater than
or equal to zero, while the profit per employee at firms with spot

contracts is zero. Since the spot contract maximizes

p(s+w-h2/2)

subject to OHhw_O , and since the optimal implicit contract maximizes
I.L(wHhH/2)

subject to Oh1HWHt

.(s+yH/2) >

(wHyH/2). It

for some t

>0

,

s > 0

implies

follows that a non-positive s value is

required to equate retained and laid-off workers' marginal utilities of
income.
28.

It should be noted that allowing severance pay for retained workers who
quit will effectively make the on-the-job search technology relatively

more efficient than otherwise. Hence the optimal layoff rate will be
lower, but generally still positive. Also, allowing quits to precede
layoffs, to screen out low search cost workers, would have a similar
effect on layoffs.

29. The earlier implicit contract models probably explained too much: they
suggested that there would be guaranteed annual incomes (in the case of

separable utility functions). In fact, as we do observe some wage and
income flexibility, the question is, how do we explain the extent of
this flexibility, not its complete absence.

30. The assumption of limited information concerning employment status
following a layoff has, in fact, been implicit in the previous implicit

contract literature. In those models, if workers' employment status
could be monitored, all workers would prefer to be laid off, provided

the probability of

getting a job was high enough (and provided

leisure is a normal good). The "lucky" workers would be those who fail
to obtain jobs, and who are thereby fully compensated, and so the
smaller the likelihood of obtaining a job, the more would workers clamor
to be those laid off.

31. The term constrained Pareto efficient is used to remind us that in
evaluating the market solution, we must take into account the costs of

acquiring information. Arnott and Stiglitz (1985) have shown that
implicit contracts with job turnover are not constrained Pareto
efficient because of the externality exerted by firms' wage/employment
decisions, via their effect on workers' savings behavior, on other
firms' profits; this is an example of the more general class of
"seemingly unrelated events" externalities that result whenever there
are moral hazard problems (see Arnott and Stiglitz, 1986).

Two related problems should also be mentioned. Firstly, although we
have not formally modelled the micro-structure of search, it is clear
from the work of Peter Diamond (1982) and Dale Mortensen (1982) that
were we to do so, a variety of search externalities would also arise;

Hosios (1985) describes the resulting contractual inefficiencies when a
Diamond-Mortensen matching model is used to characterize the ex post

spot market. Secondly, with risk-averse individuals and more than one
commodity, the market equilibrium with limited risk markets will not in

general be contrained Pareto efficient; building on work by David
Newbery and Stiglitz (1982), Hosios (1984) describes the welfare
economics of employment contracts when risk markets are incomplete.

Re ferences
Akerloff, George A. and Miyazaki, Hajime, "The Implicit Contract Theory
of Unemployment meets the Wage Bill Argument," Review of Economic
Studies, January, 1980, 47, 321,338.

Arnott, Richard J. and Stiglitz, Joseph E., "Labor Turnover, Wage Structures
and Moral Hazard: The Inefficiency of Competitive Markets", Journal of
Labor Economics, October 1985, 3, 434-462.

_________________ and ____________________ ,

"The

Welfare Economics of Moral

Hazard," Institute for Economic Research, Queen's University,
Disc. Paper 635, 1986.

______________

Hosios, Arthur J. and Stiglitz, Joseph E., "Implicit

Contracts, Labor Mobility and Unemployment", Discussion Paper 543,
Queen's University, 1983.

Azariadis, Costas, "Implicit Contracts and Underemployment Equilibria",
Journal of Political Economy, December 1975, 83, 1183-1202.

________________

"Implicit

Contracts and Related Topics: A Survey", in

The Economics of the Labour Market. Eds. Z. Hornstein et
al. London: HMSO, 1979, 221-48.

"Employment with Asymmetric Information", Quarterly
Journal of Economics (Suppi.), 1983, 98, 157-173.

_______________ and Stiglitz, Joseph E., "Implicit Contracts and
Fixed-Price Equilibria", Quarterly Journal of Economics (Suppl.), 1983,
98, 1-22.

Baily, Martin H., "Wages and Employment under Uncertain Demand", Review of
Economic Studies, January 1974, 41, 37-50.

_______________

"On the Theory of Layoffs and Unemployment", Econometrica,

July 1977, 45, 1043-64.

Chan, Ken S. and loannides, Yannis M., "Layoff Unemployment, Risk Shifting

and Productivity," Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 1982, 97,
213-229.

Chari, V.V., "Involuntary Unemployment and Implicit Contracts," quarterly
Journal of Economics (Suppl.), 1983, 98, 107-123.
Cooper, Russell, "A Note on Overexnployment/tJnderefllPloYmeflt

in Labor Contracts

under Asymmetric Information," Economic Letters, 1983, 12, 81-89.
Diamond, Peter A., "Aggregate Demand Management in Search Equilibrium,"
Journal of Political Economy, October 1982, 90, 881-895.

______________ and Stiglitz, Joseph E., "Increases in Risk and in Risk
Aversion", Journal of Economic Theory 1974, 8, 337-60.
GeanakoplOs, John and Ito, Takatoshi, "On Implicit Contracts and Involuntary
Unemployment," Disc. Paper 81-155R, University of Minnesota,1982.
Green, Jerry and Kahn, Charles, "Wage-Employment Contracts," quarterly
Journal of Economics (Suppi.), 1983, 98, 173-89.
Grossman, Sanford J. and Hart, Oliver D., "Implicit Contracts, Moral Hazard
and Unemployment," American Economic Review, May 1981, 301-307.

Hart, Oliver D., "Optimal Labor Contracts under Asymmetric Information: An
Introduction," Review of Economic Studies, January 1983, 50, 3-36.

Hosios, Arthur J., "A Welfare Analysis of Employment Contracts with and
without Asymmetric Information," Review of Economic Studies, July 1984,
51, 471-489.

________________

"Excess Capacity, Layoffs and Efficiency," mimeo,

University of Toronto, 1985.

_______________

"Layoffs,

Recruitment and Interfirni Mobility," Journal of

Labor EconomiCs, October 1986, 4, 473-502.

Imal, Haruo, Geanakoplos, John and Ito, Takatoshi, "Incomplete Insurance
and Absolute Risk Aversion," Economic Letters, 1981, 8, 107-112.
Ito, Takatoshi, "Labor Contracts with Voluntary Quits", Disc. Paper 233,
University of Minnesota, 1986.
Kahn, Charles, M., "Optimal Severance Pay with Incomplete Information",
Journal of Political Economy, June 1985, 93, 435-451.
Lowenstein, Mark A., "Worker Heterogeneity, Hours Restrictions and Temporary
Layoffs," Econometrica, January 1983, 51, 69-78.
Mortensen, Dale T., "The Matching Process as a Noncooperative Bargaining
Game," in The Economics of Information and Uncertainty, edited by John
J. McCall, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1982.
Newbery, David M.C. and Stiglitz, Joseph E., "The Choice of Technique and
the Optimality of Market Equilibrium with Rational Expectations,"
Journal of Political Economy, 1982, 90, 223-246.
Rosen, Sherwin, "Implicit Contracts: A Survey", Journal of Economic
Literature, 1985, 23, 1144-75.

Salop, Steven C., "A Model of the Natural Rate of Unemployment," American
Economic Review, March 1979, 69, 117-125.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. ,

"Theories of Wage Rigidity," in Keynes Economic

Legacy: Contemporary Economic Theories, edited by James L. Butkiewicz,
Kenneth J. Koford and Jeffrey B. Miller, New York: Praeger, 153-206,
1986.

Strand, Jon, "Work Effort and Search Subsidies with Long-Run Equilibrium
Contracts", European Economic Review (forthcoming).
Weiss, Andrew, "Job Queues and Layoffs in Labor Markets with Flexible Wages,"
Journal of Political Economy, June 1980, 88, 526-538.

</ref_section>

PERIOD 1
Workers choose among contracts specifying:

hours to be worked in the low-productivity state;
hL
hH = hours to be worked in the high-productivity state;
payment to employed workers in the low-productivity state;
payment to employed workers in the high-productivity state;

WH
r

probability of being retained in the low-productivity state;

s =

severance payment to laid-off workers.

PERIOD 2

Realization of labor productiyjy:

ec {6L6H}

eL<eH.

Firms make their employment decisions:
if S =
if e =

eHI

worker is retained with certainty;

worker is retained with probability r and laid off with
probability l-r.

Workers make their search decisions:
retained workers choose e(w.,h.)
when 8 =
1
1

8.;

laid-off workers choose c(s).

Searching workers receive job offers:
accept their best offer quit to work elsewhere;

retained workers who<
reject their best offer remain employed at their
initial firm;
accept their best offer become re-employed elsewhere;

laid-off workers who(

reject their best offer, or who receive no offers,
remain unemployed.

Production takes place.

FIGURE 1

t
(>H'2)

FIGURE 2

I mob I i ty

1-q off-the-job

aCUity

on-the-job

FIGURE 3

