NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DEVIATIONS FROM COVERED INTEREST RATE PARITY
Wenxin Du
Alexander Tepper
Adrien Verdelhan
Working Paper 23170
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23170

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2017

First version: November 2015. The views in this paper are solely the responsibility of the authors
and should not be interpreted as reflecting the views of the Board of Governors of the Federal
Reserve System, any other person associated with the Federal Reserve System, or the National
Bureau of Economic Research. We thank Claudio Borio, Francois Cocquemas, Pierre CollinDufresne, Doug Diamond, Xavier Gabaix, Benjamin Hebert, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Robert
McCauley, Charles Engel, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, Sebastian Infante, Martin Lettau, Hanno
Lustig, Matteo Maggiori, Warren Naphtal, Brent Neiman, Jonathan Parker, Thomas Philippon,
Arvind Rajan, Adriano Rampini, Fabiola Ravazzolo, Andrew Rose, Hyun Song Shin, Jeremy
Stein, Saskia Ter Ellen, Fabrice Tourre, Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, and seminar and conference
participants at the AFA meeting in Chicago, the Bank of Canada, the Bank of England, the Bank
for International Settlements, Berkeley, Chicago, the European Central Bank, the Federal Reserve
Board, the Federal Reserve Bank at Dallas, the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, the Federal
Reserve Bank of San Francisco, Harvard, the International Monetary Fund, MIT Sloan, the
NBER Summer Institute, Northwestern, UNC Chapel Hilll, Wharton, Vanderbilt, and
Washington University for comments and suggestions. All remaining errors are our own. The
paper previously circulated under the title “Cross-currency Basis.”
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Wenxin Du, Alexander Tepper, and Adrien Verdelhan. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Deviations from Covered Interest Rate Parity
Wenxin Du, Alexander Tepper, and Adrien Verdelhan
NBER Working Paper No. 23170
February 2017
JEL No. F31,G15
ABSTRACT
We find that deviations from the covered interest rate parity condition (CIP) imply large,
persistent, and systematic arbitrage opportunities in one of the largest asset markets in the world.
Contrary to the common view, these deviations for major currencies are not explained away by
credit risk or transaction costs. They are particularly strong for forward contracts that appear on
the banks' balance sheets at the end of the quarter, pointing to a causal effect of banking
regulation on asset prices. The CIP deviations also appear significantly correlated with other
fixed-income spreads and with nominal interest rates.
Wenxin Du
Federal Reserve Board
Division of International Finance
20th Street and Constitution Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20551
wenxin.du@frb.gov
Alexander Tepper
Columbia University
Graduate School of Architecture,
Planning and Preservation
1172 Amsterdam Ave
New York, NY 10027
at3065@columbia.edu

Adrien Verdelhan
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-621
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
adrienv@mit.edu

1

Introduction

The foreign exchange forward and swap market is one of the largest and most liquid derivative
markets in the world with a total notional amount outstanding equal to $61 trillion and an
average daily turnover equal to $3 trillion (Bank of International Settlements, 2013, 2014).
The cornerstone of currency forward and swap pricing, presented in all economics and finance
textbooks and taught in every class in international finance, is the covered interest rate
parity (CIP) condition. In this paper, we document deviations from the CIP post crisis and
investigate their causes.
We show that the CIP condition is systematically and persistently violated among G10
currencies, leading to significant arbitrage opportunities in currency and fixed income markets since the 2008 global financial crisis. Our findings are a puzzle for all no-arbitrage
models in macroeconomics and finance. Since the arbitrage opportunities exist at very short
horizon, such as overnight or one-week, our findings are also a puzzle for the classic limitsof-arbitrage models that rely on long-term market risk à la Shleifer and Vishny (1997). The
systematic patterns of the CIP violations point to the key interaction between costly financial intermediation and international imbalances in funding supply and investment demand
across currencies in the new, post-crisis regulatory environment. In particular, we provide
evidence of the impact of post-crisis regulatory reforms on CIP arbitrage.
The intuition for the CIP condition relies on a simple no-arbitrage condition. For example, an investor with U.S. dollars in hand today may deposit her dollars for one month,
earning the dollar deposit rate. Alternatively, the investor may also exchange her U.S. dollars
for some foreign currency, deposit the foreign currency and earn the foreign currency deposit
rate for one month. At the same time, the investor can enter into a one-month currency
forward contract today, which would convert the foreign currency earned at the end of the
month into U.S. dollars. If both U.S. and foreign currency deposit rates are default-free and
the forward contract has no counterparty risk, the two investment strategies are equivalent
and should thus deliver the same payoffs. Therefore, the difference between U.S. dollar and
1

foreign currency deposit rates should be exactly equal to the cost of entering the forward
contract, i.e. the log difference between the forward and the spot exchange rates, with all
rates observed at the same date.
The cross-currency basis measures the deviation from the CIP condition. It is the difference between the direct dollar interest rate from the cash market and the synthetic dollar
interest rate from the swap market obtained by swapping the foreign currency into U.S.
dollars. A positive (negative) currency basis means that the direct dollar interest rate is
higher (lower) than the synthetic dollar interest rate. When the basis is zero, CIP holds.
Before the global financial crisis, the log difference between the forward and the spot rate
was approximately equal to the difference in London interbank offer rates (Libor) across
countries (Frenkel and Levich, 1975; Akram, Rime, and Sarno, 2008). In other words, the
Libor cross-currency basis was very close to zero. As is by now well-known, large bases
appeared during the height of the global financial crisis and the European debt crisis, as the
interbank markets became impaired and arbitrage capital was limited.
We show that Libor bases persist after the global financial crisis among G10 currencies
and remain large in magnitude. Our sample includes the most liquid currencies, with a total
daily turnover above $2 trillion (Bank of International Settlements, 2013): the Australian
dollar, the Canadian dollar, the Swiss franc, the Danish krone, the euro, the British pound,
the Japanese yen, the Norwegian krone, the New Zealand dollar, and the Swedish krona. The
average annualized absolute value of the basis is 24 basis points at the three-month horizon
and 27 basis points at the five-year horizon over the 2010–2016 sample. These averages hide
large variations both across currencies and across time. In the current economic environment,
the cross-currency basis can be of the same order of magnitude as the interest rate differential.
For example, the five-year basis for the Japanese yen was close to −90 basis points at the
end of 2015, which was even greater in magnitude than the difference (of about −70 basis
points) between the five-year Libor interest rate in Japan and in the United States.

2

We show that credit risk in the Libor market and the indicative nature of Libor cannot
explain away the persistence of the cross-currency basis. A common explanation for CIP
deviations is that interbank panels have different levels of credit worthiness (e.g., Tuckman
and Porfirio, 2004). If, for example, interbank lending in yen entails a higher credit risk
(due to the average lower credit quality of yen Libor banks) than interbank lending in U.S.
dollars, the lender should be compensated for the credit risk differential between yen Libor
and dollar Libor, and thus the cross-currency basis needs not be zero.1 Studying the credit
default spreads of banks on interbank panels in different currencies, we do not find much
support for this explanation of the CIP deviations.
More crucially, we document that the currency basis exists even in the absence of any
credit risk difference across countries and for actual interest rate quotes. To do so, we turn
first to general collateral repurchase agreements (repo) and then to Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau (KfW) bonds issued in different currencies. Repo contracts are fully collateralized
and thus do not exhibit any credit risk. KfW bonds are fully backed by the German government and thus exhibit very minimal credit risk, without differences in credit risk across
currencies. Repo and forward contracts highlight the CIP deviations at the short-end of the
yield curves, while KfW bonds and swaps focus on longer maturities. We find that the repo
currency basis is persistently and significantly negative for the Japanese yen, the Swiss franc
and the Danish krone, and that the KfW basis is also significantly different from zero for
the euro, the Swiss Franc and the Japanese yen, even after taking into account transaction
costs.
The CIP deviations thus lead to persistent arbitrage opportunities free from exchange
rate and credit risks. A long-short arbitrageur may for example borrow at the U.S. dollar
repo rate or short U.S. dollar-denominated KfW bonds and then earn risk-free positive profits
by investing in repo rates or KfW bonds denominated in low interest rate currencies, such
1

“Libor” rates are supposed to measure the interest rates at which Libor panel banks borrow from each
other. We use the term “Libor” loosely to refer to the benchmark unsecured interbank borrowing rate, which
can be determined by local interbank panels rather than the British Banker Association (now Intercontinental
Exchange) Libor panels.

3

as the euro, the Swiss franc, the Danish krone or the yen, while hedging the foreign currency
risk using foreign exchange forwards or swaps. The net arbitrage profits range from 9 to 20
basis points on average in annualized values. The averages may appear small, but again they
hide large time variations: the standard deviation of the net arbitrage profits range from
5 to 23 basis points. Moreover, the conditional volatility of each investment opportunity
is naturally zero and Sharpe ratios are thus infinite for the fixed investment horizon of the
strategy.
After documenting the persistence of CIP deviations and formally establishing arbitrage
opportunities, we turn to their potential explanations. We hypothesize that persistent CIP
deviations can be explained by the combination of the increased cost of financial intermediation post-crisis and persistent international imbalances in investment demand and funding
supply across currencies. If financial intermediaries were unconstrained, the supply of currency hedging should be perfectly elastic, and any CIP deviations would be arbitraged away.
Similarly, if the global funding and investment demand were balanced across currencies,
there would be no client demand for FX swaps to transform funding liquidity or investment
opportunities across currencies, and thus the cross-currency basis would also be zero regardless of the supply of currency hedging. Costly financial intermediation can explain why the
basis is not arbitraged away post crisis. The imbalances in savings and investment across
currencies can explain the systematic relationship between the basis and nominal interest
rates.
Consistent with our two-factor hypothesis, we find that the CIP deviations exhibit four
main characteristics. First, CIP deviations increase towards the quarter ends, as banks face
tighter balance sheet constraints and renewed investors’ attention due to quarterly regulatory
filings. We find that the one-month CIP deviation increases exactly one month before the
quarter ends, at the time when a one-month forward contract has to appear on the quarterend balance sheet. Likewise, the one-week CIP deviation increases exactly one week before
the quarter ends. Meanwhile, a three-month CIP trade, which has to appear on a quarter-end

4

report regardless of when it is executed, does not exhibit any particular dynamics. In this
example, the one-month or the one-week forward contracts that cross the quarter ends are
the “treated” assets, subject to higher balance sheet costs due to regulatory filings, while the
three-month forward contract is the “non-treated” asset. Our simple difference-in-difference
experiments exploits different lags before the quarter ends and different horizons of the
forward contracts. The term structure of short-term CIP deviations suggest that banking
regulations have a causal impact on asset prices.
Second, we find that a proxy for the shadow costs of banks’ balance sheet accounts
for about one third to one half of the CIP deviations. Our proxy is the spread between
the interest rates on excess reserves (IOER) paid by the Fed and the Fed Funds or the U.S.
Libor rate. In the absence of balance sheet costs, banks should borrow at the Fed Funds/U.S.
Libor rate and invest risk-free at the IOER, until the Fed Funds/Libor rate increases and
both rates are equal. Yet, a significant spread persists, and we interpret it as a proxy for
the shadow cost of leverage. Furthermore, by taking into account the better liquidity of
central bank reserve balances over private money market instruments, in part codified by
the liquidity coverage ratio requirement under Basel III, the CIP deviations can be further
reduced by comparing IOERs across major central banks.
Third, in the cross section and time series, the cross-currency basis is positively correlated
with the level of nominal interest rates. In the cross section, high interest rate currencies
tend to exhibit positive basis while low interest rate currencies tend to exhibit negative ones.
An arbitrageur should thus borrow in high interest rate currencies and lend in low interest
currencies while hedging the currency risk — this is the opposite allocation to the classic
currency carry trade. In the time series, the cross-currency basis tends to increase with
interest rate shocks, as measured in an event study of yield changes around monetary policy
announcements of the European Central Bank.
Fourth, the cross-currency basis is correlated with other liquidity spreads, especially the
KfW over German bund basis and the U.S. Libor tenor basis, the price of swapping the

5

one-month in exchange of the three-month U.S. Libor rates. The co-movement in bases
measured in different markets points to the role of financial intermediaries and correlated
demand shocks for dollar funding and other forms of liquidity.
We turn now to a short review of the existing relevant work. A large literature tests
the CIP condition before the global financial crisis and documents large CIP deviations
during the crisis. Our work focuses on the post-crisis period and is closely related to a large
literature that departs from the frictionless asset pricing benchmark.2 On the theory side,
Garleanu and Pedersen (2011) build a margin-based asset pricing model and use it to study
the deviations from CIP during the crisis. Gabaix and Maggiori (2015) provide a tractable
and elegant model of exchange rate determination in the presence of moral hazard. A variant
of their model, presented in their Appendix, encompasses CIP deviations. Our evidence on
the impact of banking regulation points towards models of intermediary-based asset pricing,
as those of He and Krishnamurthy (2012, 2013) and Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2014) in the
tradition of Bernanke and Gertler (1989) and Holmstrom and Tirole (1997). But many other
2

An early exposition of the CIP condition appears in Lotz (1889) and much more clearly in Keynes
(1923). A large literature in the 70s and 80s tests the CIP condition, notably Frenkel and Levich (1975,
1977), Deardorff (1979), Dooley and Isard (1980), Callier (1981), Mohsen Bahmani-Oskooee (1985) and
Clinton (1988). Up to the recent global financial crisis, the consensus was that the CIP condition holds in
the data. Several papers study the failure of the CIP condition during the global financial crisis and the
European debt crisis (see, e.g., Baba, Packer, and Nagano, 2008; Baba, McCauley, and Ramaswamy, 2009;
Coffey, Hrung, and Sarkar, 2009; Griffolli and Ranaldo, 2011; Bottazzi, Luque, Pascoa, and Sundaresan, 2012;
and Ivashina, Scharfstein, and Stein, 2015). All these papers focus on CIP deviations based on short-term
money market instruments. The large cross-currency basis during the crisis appears to be linked to a severe
dollar funding shortage in the presence of limits to arbitrage. The establishment of the Fed swap lines with
various foreign central banks, which alleviated the dollar shortage, significantly reduced the magnitude of
the cross-currency basis (Baba and Packer, 2009; Goldberg, Kennedy, and Miu, 2011; and McGuire and von
Peter, 2012). Building on our work, CIP deviations after the crisis have become an area of active research.
In on-going work, Advijev, Du, Koch and Shin (2016) studies the relationship between the strength of the
dollar spot exchange rate and CIP deviations. Amador, Bianchi, Bicola and Perri (2016) model exchange
rate policy at the zero-lower bound and relate it to CIP deviations. Liao (2016) examines the implications
of corporate funding cost arbitrage on CIP deviations. Rime, Schrimpf and Syrstad (2016) focuses on the
role of money market segmentation on CIP deviations. Sushko, Borio, McCauley and McGuire (2016) link
the estimated dollar hedging demand (quantities) for major currencies to the variation in CIP deviations
(prices).

6

friction-based models could potentially be relevant.3 To the best of our knowledge, however,
there is no model so far that can replicate our four main facts on CIP deviations. On the
empirical side, Adrian, Etula and Muir (2014) and He, Kelly and Manela (2015) show that
shocks to the equity capital ratio of financial intermediaries account for a large share of the
cross-sectional variation in expected returns in different asset classes. Siriwardane (2016)
shows that limited investment capital impacts pricing in the credit default swap market.
Our work is also closely related to recent papers on the interaction between the new U.S.
monetary policy implementation framework and banking regulations, as discussed in Duffie
and Krishnamurthy (2016), Klee, Senyuz, and Yoldas (2016), and Benegas and Tase (2016),
and window dressing activities in repo markets on financial reporting dates (Munyan, 2015).
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 defines and documents precisely the CIP
condition and its deviations at the short- and long-end of the yield curves. Section 3 shows
that the cross-currency basis exists in the absence of credit risk, for repo rates and KfW
bonds, leading to clear arbitrage opportunities. Section 4 sketches a potential explanation of
the CIP deviations centered on the capital constraints of financial intermediaries and global
imbalances. Consistent with such potential explanation, Section 5 presents four characteristics of the currency basis: its surge at the end of the quarters post-crisis, its high correlation
with other liquidity-based strategies in different fixed-income markets, its relationship with
the IOER, and finally its cross-sectional and time-series links with interest rates. Section 6
concludes.
3

The large theoretical literature on limits-to-arbitrage, surveyed in Grombs and Vayanos (2011), provides
useful frameworks, with the caveat that CIP arbitrages exist over very short time horizons over which market
risk and collateral constraints are very limited. Focusing on the U.S. swap market, Jermann (2016) proposes
a novel and attractive limits-to-arbitrage model based on the regulation-induced increased cost of holding
Treasuries. Likewise, models of market and funding liquidity, as in Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009), or
models of preferred habitat, as in Vayanos and Vila (2009) and Greenwood or Vayanos (2014), are potential
theoretical frameworks to account for the CIP deviations. Our findings are also related to models of the
global imbalances in safe assets, as studied in the pioneer work of Caballero, Farhi, and Gourinchas (2008,
2016).

7

2

CIP Condition and Cross-Currency Basis

In this section, we review the CIP condition and define the cross-currency basis as the
deviation from the CIP condition. We then document the persistent failure of the textbook
CIP condition based on Libor.

2.1

Covered Interest Rate Parity

$
Let yt,t+n
and yt,t+n denote the n-year risk-free interest rates in U.S. dollars and foreign

currency, respectively. The spot exchange St rate is expressed in units of foreign currency
per U.S. dollar: an increase in St thus denotes a depreciation of the foreign currency and an
appreciation of the U.S. dollar. Likewise, Ft,t+n denotes the n-year outright forward exchange
rate in foreign currency per U.S. dollar at time t. The CIP condition states that the forward
rate should satisfy:
$
(1 + yt,t+n
)n = (1 + yt,t+n )n

St
Ft,t+n

(1)

In logs, the forward premium, ρt,t+n , is equal to the interest rate difference between interest
rates in the two currencies:

ρt,t+n ≡

1
$
(ft,t+n − st ) = yt,t+n − yt,t+n
.
n

(2)

The intuition behind the CIP condition is simple: an investor with one U.S. dollar in hand
$
today would own (1 + yt,t+n
)n U.S. dollars n years from now by investing in U.S. dollars. But

the investor may also exchange her U.S. dollar for St units of foreign currency and invest
in foreign currency to receive (1 + yt,t+n )n St units of foreign currency n years from now.
A currency forward contract signed today would convert the foreign currency earned into
(1 + yt,t+n )n St /Ft,t+n U.S. dollars. If both domestic and foreign notes are risk-free aside from
the currency risk and the forward contract has no counterparty risk, the two investment

8

strategies are equivalent and should thus deliver the same payoffs. All contracts are signed
today. The CIP condition is thus a simple no-arbitrage condition.4

2.2

Definition of the Cross-Currency Basis

We define the cross-currency basis, denoted xt,t+n , as the deviation from the CIP condition:
$
(1 + yt,t+n
)n = (1 + yt,t+n + xt,t+n )n

St
Ft,t+n

.

(3)

Equivalently, in logs, the currency basis is equal to:

$
xt,t+n = yt,t+n
− (yt,t+n − ρt,t+n ).

(4)

When CIP holds, the comparison of Equations (1) and (3) immediately implies that the currency basis is zero. The cross-currency basis measures the difference between the direct U.S.
$
dollar interest rate, yt,t+n
, and the synthetic dollar interest rate, yt,t+n − ρt,t+n , obtained by

converting the foreign currency interest rate in U.S. dollars using currency forward contracts.
A negative currency basis suggests that the direct U.S. dollar interest rate is lower than the
synthetic dollar interest rate by swapping the foreign currency interest rate into dollars.
As already noted, CIP holds in the absence of arbitrage. As soon as the basis is not zero,
arbitrage opportunities theoretically appear. The cash flow diagram of this CIP arbitrage
strategy is summarized in Figure 1. In the case of a negative basis, x < 0, the dollar
arbitrageur can earn risk-free profits equal to an annualized |x| percent of the trade notional
by borrowing at the direct dollar risk-free rate, investing at the foreign currency risk-free
4

In the presence of transaction costs, the absence of arbitrage is characterized by two inequalities: arbitrage must be impossible either by borrowing the domestic currency and lending the foreign currency,
or doing the opposite, hedging the currency risk with the forward contract in both cases (see Bekaert and
Hodrick, 2012, for a textbook exposition). As a result, the bid and ask forward rates satisfy:
ask
bid
bid
ask
Ft,t+n
(1 + yt,t+n
)n
Ft,t+n
(1 + yt,t+n
)n
≥
and
≤
.
$,ask n
$,bid n
Stbid
Stask
(1 + yt,t+n
)
(1 + yt,t+n
)

9

rate and signing a forward contract to convert back the foreign currency into U.S dollars. In
the case of a positive basis, the opposite arbitrage strategy of funding in the synthetic dollar
risk-free rate and investing in the direct dollar risk-free rate would also yield an annualized
risk-free profit equal to x percent of the trade notional. With these definitions in mind, we
turn now to a preliminary look at the data.

2.3

Failure of Textbook Libor-Based Covered Interest Parity

Textbook tests of the CIP condition usually rely on Libor rates.5 We document persistent
failure of Libor-based CIP after 2007 for G10 currencies at short and long maturities. As
we just saw, at short maturities less than one year, CIP violations can be computed using
Libor rates and currency forward and spot rates. At the longer maturities (typically one
year or greater), CIP violations based on Libor are directly quoted as spreads on Libor
cross-currency basis swaps.

2.3.1

Short-Term Libor Cross-Currency Basis

We define the Libor basis as equal to:

$,Libor
Libor
xLibor
t,t+n ≡ yt,t+n − (yt,t+n − ρt,t+n ),

(5)

where the generic dollar and foreign currency interest rates of Equation (4) are replaced
with Libor rates. We obtain daily spot exchange rates and forward points from Bloomberg
using London closing rates for G10 currencies.6 Mid-rates (average of bid and ask rates) are
used for benchmark basis calculations. Daily Libor/interbank fixing rates are also obtained
5

Eurocurrency deposit rates based in London have long been used as benchmark interest rates to test
the CIP condition, starting with the work of Frenkel and Levich (1975), because eurocurrency deposits are
highly fungible and avoid many barriers to the free flow of capital, such as differential domestic interest rate
regulations, tax treatments, and reserve regulations. Akram, Rime, and Sarno (2008) confirm the high-degree
of validity of the CIP condition using bank deposit rates in the early 2000s sample.
6
In practice, since forward points are often quoted with a higher level of precision that outright forwards,
we compute the forward premium ρt,t+n directly from forward points, defined as Ft,t+n = St + F Pt,t+n .
Thus, the forward premium is: ρt,t+n ≈ (1/n)F Pt,t+n /St .

10

from Bloomberg. Figure 2 presents the three-month Libor basis for G10 currencies between
January 2000 and September 2016.
The three-month Libor basis was very close to zero for all G10 currencies before 2007.
As is well-known, during the global financial crisis (2007–2009), there were large deviations
from Libor CIP, especially around the Lehman bankruptcy announcement, with some bases
reaching −200 basis points. But the deviations from Libor CIP did not disappear when the
crisis abated. In the aftermath of the crisis, since 2010, the three-month Libor basis has been
persistently different from zero. Panel A of Table 1 summarizes the mean and standard deviation of the three-month Libor cross-currency basis across three different periods: 2000–2006,
2007–2009, and 2010–2016. Pre-crisis, the Libor basis was not significantly different from
zero; post-crisis, it is. Moreover, a clear cross-sectional dispersion in the level of the basis
appears among G10 currencies. The Australian dollar (AUD) and the New Zealand dollar
(NZD) exhibit on average a positive basis of 4 and 11 basis points at the three-month horizon, while the Swiss franc (CHF), Danish krone (DKK), euro (EUR), Japanese yen (JPY),
Norwegian krone (NOK), and Swedish krona (SEK) exhibit on average negative bases all
below −20 basis points. Among the G10 currencies, the Danish krone has the most negative
three-month Libor basis post crisis, with an average of −61 basis points, a stark contrast to
its pre-crisis average of one basis point.7

2.3.2

Long-Term Libor Cross-Currency Basis

At long maturities, the long-term CIP deviation based on Libor is given by the spread on the
cross-currency basis swap. A cross-currency basis swap involves an exchange of cash flows
linked to floating interest rates referenced to interbank rates in two different currencies, as
well as an exchange of principal in two different currencies at the inception and the maturity
of the swap. Let us take a simple example. Figure 3 describes the cash flow diagram for
7
The Danish central bank maintains a peg of its currency to the euro. Yet, the CIP deviations are larger
for the Danish krone than for the euro, in part reflecting the risk of a sudden break of the peg, similar to
the Swiss franc experience in January 2015.

11

the yen/U.S. dollar cross-currency swap on $1 notional between Bank A and Bank B. At
the inception of the swap, Bank A receives $1 from Bank B in exchange of USt . At the
Libor,$
j-th coupon date, Bank A pays a dollar floating cash flow equal to yt+j
percent on the
Libor,$
$1 notional to Bank B, where yt+j
is the three-month U.S. dollar Libor at time t + j. In
Libor,U
return, Bank A receives from Bank B a floating yen cash flow equal to (yt+j
+ xxccy
t,t+n ) on
Libor,U
the USt notional, where yt+j
is the three-month yen Libor at time t + j, and xxccy
t,t+n is the

cross-currency basis swap spread, which is pre-determined at date t at the inception of the
swap transaction. When the swap contract matures, Bank B receives $1 from Bank A in
exchange of USt , undoing the initial transaction.
The spread on the cross-currency basis swap, xxccy
t,t+n , is the price at which swap counterparties are willing to exchange foreign currency floating cash flows against U.S. cash flows.
In the case of the yen/U.S dollar cross-currency swap over the recent period, xxccy
t,t+n is often
negative. Let us assume for simplicity that Bank B is able to lend risk-free in yen at the
Libor,U
. Then, according to the cross-currency basis swap conthree-month yen Libor rate, yt+j
Libor,U
tract, Bank B has to pay to Bank A the yen cash flows (yt+j
+ xxccy
t,t+n ), which is clearly
Libor,U
less than the yen Libor rate yt+j
that Bank B collects by investing the yen it received

originally from Bank A. In this example, Bank B pockets a sure profit by lending U.S. dollars
to Bank A. In other words, if both banks can borrow and lend risk-free at Libor rates, then
the cross-currency basis should be zero. As soon as the cross-currency basis swap is not zero,
one counterparty seems to benefit from the swap, hinting at potential deviations from the
CIP condition at the long end of the yield curve.
More formally, to see how the cross-currency basis swap directly translates into deviations
from the long-term Libor-based CIP condition, let us focus on the case of zero-coupon fixedfor-fixed cross-currency swap contracts. Such contracts are similar to the swap contract
described above and in Figure 3, but no coupon payments are exchanged at the intermediary
dates. Intuitively, an investor can take three steps to swap fixed foreign currency cash flows
IRS
into fixed U.S. dollar cash flows. First, she pays the foreign currency interest rate swap, yt,t+n
,

12

to swap fixed foreign currency cash flows into floating foreign currency Libor cash flows.
Second, she pays the cross-currency basis swap, xxccy
t,t+n , to swap floating foreign currency
Libor into U.S. dollar Libor cash flows. Third, she receives the U.S. interest rate swap,
$,IRS
yt,t+n
, to swap floating dollar U.S. Libor cash flows into fixed U.S. dollar cash flows. As

Figure 4 illustrates, the combination of the three steps eliminate all floating cash flows, and
only exchanges of fixed cash flows in two different currencies at the inception and maturity
of the swap remain.
In this synthetic agreement, an investors pays $1 in exchange of St yen at the start of the

n
$,IRS
swap period, receives 1 + yt,t+n
U.S. dollars at the maturity of the contract and pays
n
n
IRS
IRS
1 + yt,t+n
+ xxccy
St yen at the end of the contract, worth 1 + yt,t+n
+ xxccy
St /Ft,t+n
t,t+n
t,t+n
U.S. dollars at that time. The cross-currency basis swap rates are priced such that:


$,IRS
1 + yt,t+n

n

IRS
= 1 + yt,t+n
+ xxccy
t,t+n

n

St
Ft,t+n

.

Equivalently, the long-term forward premium to hedge a foreign currency against the U.S.
dollar is implicitly given by:

ρt,t+n ≡

1
$,IRS
IRS
(ft,t+n − st ) = yt,t+n
+ xxccy
t,t+n − yt,t+n .
n

(6)

The cross-currency basis swap rate, xxccy
t,t+n , thus measures deviations from the CIP condition
where interest rates are Libor interest rate swap rates.
Data on cross-currency basis swaps come from Bloomberg. Figure 5 shows the five-year
Libor basis for G10 currencies between January 2001 and September 2016, while the Panel
B of Table 1 reports averages and standard deviations by sub-periods. Before 2007, the fiveyear Libor basis was slightly positive for Australian, Canadian, and New Zealand dollars
and negative for all the other currencies, but all bases were very close to zero. The five-year
Libor bases started diverging away from zero in 2008, and reached their sample peak during
the European debt crisis in 2012. The Libor bases narrowed in 2013 and early 2014, but
13

started widening again in the second half of 2014. In the post-crisis sample, the Australian
dollar and the New Zealand dollar exhibit the most positive bases, equal to 25 and 31 basis
points on average, respectively, while the Japanese yen and the Danish krone exhibit the
most negative bases, equal to −62 and −47 basis points on average, respectively. The Swiss
franc and the euro also experience very negative bases.
At short and long horizons, CIP deviations abound post-crisis. But the textbook treatment of these deviations point to potential transaction costs and default risk, not necessarily
to arbitrage opportunities.

3

CIP-Based Arbitrage Opportunities

In this section, we start with a short description of the main issues of a Libor-based investment strategy and then address those issues using repo contracts and bonds issued by
KfW and other multi-currency issuers. We demonstrate that the existence of the repo and
KfW basis implies CIP arbitrage opportunities free from currency and credit risk, even after
taking into account transaction costs.

3.1

Credit Risk in the Libor CIP Arbitrage

A potential arbitrageur, noticing for example a negative Libor CIP basis on the yen/dollar
market, would need to borrow in U.S. dollars at the dollar Libor rate, invest in yen at the
yen Libor rate and enter a forward contract to convert back yen into U.S dollars at the end
of her investment period. The investment strategy raises immediately three questions. First,
can the arbitrageur really borrow and lend at the Libor rates? Libor rates are only indicative
and do not correspond to actual transactions. The actual borrowing rate in U.S. dollars of
the arbitrageur may thus be higher than the indicative Libor rate, even in the absence of any
manipulation. More generally, transaction costs exist for both spot and derivative contracts
and may lower the actual returns. Second, is the arbitrageur taking on credit risk when

14

lending at the yen Libor rate? Libor rates are unsecured: if the arbitrageur faces a risk
of default on her loan, she should be compensated by a default risk premium, which may
then account for the CIP deviations. Third, is the arbitrageur taking on counterparty risk
when entering an exchange rate forward contract? This last concern can be ruled out, as the
impact of counterparty risk on the pricing of forwards and swaps is negligible due to the high
degree of collateralization. As specified in the Credit Support Annex of the International
Swap and Derivative Association, the common market practice is to post variation margins
in cash with the amount equal to the mark-to-market value of the swap. Initial margins are
also posted to cover the gap risk not covered by the variation margins. In the event of a
counterparty default, the collateral is seized by the other counterparty to cover the default
cost.8
The indicative nature of Libor and the potential default risk are valid concerns. Default
risk appears indeed as the recent leading explanation of the CIP deviations in the literature
(e.g., Tuckman and Porfirio, 2004). Formally, the default risk explanation of CIP deviations
relies on cross-country differences in credit worthiness of different Libor panel banks. Let us
Y
assume that the mean credit spread for the yen Libor panel is given by spJP
and the mean
t

credit spread for the U.S. dollar Libor panel is given by spUt SD . Let yt∗JP Y and yt∗U SD be the
true risk-free rates in yen and U.S. dollars and assume that CIP holds for risk-free rates.
Starting from the definition of the basis in Equation (4) and replacing each interest by the
sum of the risk-free rate and the credit spread leads to:
JP Y /U SD,Libor

xt

JP Y /U SD

Y
= (yt∗U SD + spUt SD ) − (yt∗JP Y + spJP
− ρt
t
JP Y /U SD

= [yt∗U SD − (yt∗JP Y − ρt
8

),

Y
)] + (spUt SD − spJP
).
t

(7)

Direct empirical estimates for the magnitude of counterparty risk is available for the credit default swap
(CDS) market, where counterparty risk is a more serious concern due to the possibility of losing the full
notional of the trade. Consistent with high degree of collateralization, Arora, Gandhi, and Longstaff (2011)
find that a 645 basis point increase in the seller’s CDS spreads translates only to a one basis point reduction
in the quoted CDS premium using actionable quote data. Using real CDS transaction data, Du, Gadgil,
Gordy, and Vega (2016) obtain estimates of similar magnitude.

15

In the absence of CIP deviations for risk-free rates, the term inside brackets is zero. In this
case, the Libor-based currency basis of the yen/dollar is given by the difference between
credit risk in dollar and yen Libor panels:
JP Y /U SD,Libor

xt

Y
= spUt SD − spJP
.
t

(8)

Therefore, the yen basis can be negative if the yen Libor panel is riskier than the U.S. Libor
panel. We test this hypothesis by regressing changes in the Libor basis ∆xi,Libor
for currency
t
i on changes in the mean credit default swap spreads (CDS) between banks on the interbank
panel of currency i and the dollar panel:

∆xi,Libor
= αi + β∆(cdsit − cdsUt SD ) + it .
t

(9)

We use weekly changes in five-year Libor cross-currency basis swaps and five-year CDS
of banks since 2007. The list of banks on the interbank panels included in our study is
in Appendix A. If CDS measure credit spreads perfectly, Equation (8) suggests a slope
coefficient of −1 and an R2 of 1. Table 2 reports the regression results from January 2007
to September 2016. In the pooled panel regression with currency fixed effects reported in
the first column, the coefficient on the CDS spread differential is negligible, statistically not
different from zero. Results based on individual currencies in the following columns show
that the slope coefficient is only significantly negative for the Swiss franc and euro. In all
the other cases, the slope coefficient are either insignificant or positive. Even in the case
of the Swiss franc and the euro, the negative coefficients on the CDS differential are far
from being equal to −1. In all cases, R2 are tiny. Assuming that bank CDS proxy for the
credit risk of potential CIP arbitrageurs, there is therefore some doubt that the credit spread

16

differential is the most important driver for the Libor cross-currency basis of G10 currencies
in the post-crisis period.9 We rule out credit risk by turning to repo contracts.

3.2

Repo Basis

At short maturities, one way to eliminate the credit risk associated with Libor-based CIP
is to use secured borrowing and lending rates from the repo markets. We thus use general
collateral (GC) repo rates in U.S. dollars and foreign currencies to construct an alternative
currency basis measure.
A GC repo is a repurchase agreement in which the cash lender is willing to accept a
variety of Treasury and agency securities as collateral. Since GC assets are of high quality
and very liquid, GC repo rates are driven by the supply and demand of cash, as opposed to
the supply and demand of individual collateral assets.
$,Repo
Repo
Given the U.S. dollar GC repo rate yt,t+n
and the foreign currency GC repo rate yt,t+n
,

the general definition of the basis in Equation (4) leads to the following repo basis:

$,Repo
Repo
xRepo
t,t+n = yt,t+n − (yt,t+n − ρt,t+n ).

(10)

Since the bulk of repo transactions are concentrated at very short maturities, we focus on
the repo basis at the one-week horizon.10
9

The credit spread differential, however, has a much more significant effect on the cross-currency basis of
emerging market currencies.
10
We can obtain similar results for the overnight tenor. However, since overnight forward premium needs to
be annualized (i.e., multiplied by 360/actual days) to obtain the annual forward premium, any measurement
errors or unaccounted holidays would have very large impacts on the basis. We focus on the one-week horizon
to lower measurement errors.

17

Our data cover the Swiss, Danish, Euro, Japanese, and U.S. repo markets.11 Figure 6
reports the one-week Libor and repo basis for these markets since 2009. The repo basis
tracks the Libor basis very closely for the Swiss Franc and the yen, and remains negative
throughout the sample. For the Danish krone and the euro, the repo basis was closer to zero
than the Libor basis during the peak of the European debt crisis, but it tracks the Libor
basis very closely overall. Most of the time, the Libor- and repo-based deviations from CIP
are undistinguishable from each other.
The first two columns of Table 3 report the annualized mean and standard deviation of
Libor- and repo-based bases during the January 2009 to September 2016 period. The Danish
krone exhibits the most negative mean repo basis, equal to −41 basis points if Libor-based
and −34 basis points if repo-based. The euro exhibits the least negative mean repo basis
equal to −20 basis points with repo rates and −16 with Libor rates. For the Swiss franc, the
Libor and repo rates deliver similar basis: −21 and −25 basis points. For the yen, the repo
basis is larger in magnitude for repo than for Libor rates: −27 vs −23 basis points. Clearly,
CIP deviations exist even for interest rates that are free of credit risk. The third column of
Table 3 reports the same summary statistics but conditional on a negative basis. The repo
basis is negative 99% of the days for the swiss franc, 96% for the euro and the Danish krone
and 100% for the yen. As a result, the conditional and unconditional average basis are close,
ranging from −16 basis points for the euro to −36 basis points for the Danish krone.
A negative basis entices the arbitrageur to borrow at the U.S. dollar GC repo rate and
invest in the foreign currency GC repo rate, while paying the forward premium to hedge
the foreign currency exposure. A positive basis suggests the opposite strategy, borrowing at
11

U.S. bid and ask repo rates come from the Thomson Reuters Tick History database. The mid rates are
very close to the daily GC repo quotes from JP Morgan (obtained from Morgan Markets), one of the only
two clearing banks to settle tri-party U.S. repo markets. The euro mid repo data based on German bunds as
collateral are obtained from Bloomberg. Similar series from JP Morgan are very close the Bloomberg series,
but shorter. Swiss franc mid repo and Danish krone bid and ask repo rates also come from Bloomberg. The
Japanese repo rates come from the Bank of Japan and the Japan Securities and Dealer Association. Bid and
ask rates on euro repos are available from Thomson Reuters Eikon. We do not use the Thomson Reuters
Eikon GC euro rates in our baseline calculation because eligible collateral also includes sovereign bonds in
other European countries besides the German bunds. Thomson Reuters Eikon GC repo rates are persistently
higher than the Bloomberg rates, and thus imply larger arbitrage profits than the reported results.

18

the foreign currency rate, receiving the forward premium, and investing in the U.S. dollar
rate. The arbitrage profits under the negative and positive arbitrage strategies, denoted by
π Repo− and π Repo+ , are thus:

$,Repo
Repo−
Repo
,
− (1/n) × F Pt,t+n,Ask /St,Bid ] − yt,t+n,Ask
πt,t+n
≡ [yt,t+n,Bid

(11)

Repo+
$,Repo
Repo
πt,t+n
≡ yt,t+n,Bid
− [yt,Ask
− (1/n) × F Pt,t+n,Bid /St,t+n,Ask ].

(12)

We assume that the transaction cost for each step of the arbitrage strategy is equal to one
half of the posted bid-ask spread. We take into account bid-ask spreads on all forward and
spot contracts and a conservative bid-ask spread for the U.S. dollar repo. The average bidask spread for U.S. repo used in our calculation is about 9 basis points, which is significantly
higher than the 4 basis points bid-ask spread quoted on Tullett Prebon. Transaction costs
for Danish repos are also taken into account with significantly wider average bid-ask spreads
equal to 19 basis points. The Bloomberg series used in our repo basis calculations do not
contain bid-ask spreads for the euro, Swiss franc and yen. In the case of euro repos, data
from Thomson Reuters Eikon suggest that the average bid-ask spread is about 6 basis points.
We do not have bid-ask spreads information available for the Swiss franc and the yen.
The fourth column of Table 3 reports the net profits obtained from the negative basis
arbitrage strategy, which is implemented provided that the ex-ante profits are positive. The
average annualized profits range from 11 to 19 basis points after taking into transaction
costs. The profits vary over time, with standard deviations ranging from 13 basis points to
27 basis points. The arbitrage profits are positive for the majority of the sample window. The
conditional volatility of each arbitrage strategy is again naturally zero, and the conditional
Sharpe ratio is infinite.
The magnitude of the arbitrage profits is significant given the sheer size of repo markets
in the United States, Europe and Japan. In 2015, the total size of the U.S. repo market
is estimated to be around $2.2 trillion with $1.5 trillion of repos based on GC collateral.

19

(Baklanova, Copeland, and McCaughrin, 2015). In Japan, the total size of the repo market
is about $1 trillion with $0.5 trillion GC repos (Sato, 2015). Survey results reported by the
International Capital Markets Association (ICMA, 2016) suggest that the total size of the
repo market in Europe is about $3 trillion, of which the euro accounts for about $1.8 trillion
of the cash currency and government securities account for about $2.1 trillion of collaterals.
On the other hand, the Danish krone and Swiss franc repo markets are much smaller, with
a combined size of less than $75 billion.
Repo contracts are generally characterized by their lending rates and the haircut rates
applied to the collateral. Yet, no haircuts are customary for GC repo contracts involving
Treasuries in Japan and Switzerland. In the U.S., GC repos traded under the Fixed Income
Clearing Corporation’s (FICC) GCF services also have zero haircuts. Haircuts exist on U.S.
tri-party repo contracts and euro GC repo contracts, but they appear stable and similar
across countries.12 We do not have haircut rates for the Danish Krone, but for the other
markets, the short-term CIP deviations do not appear linked to variations in haircut rates.

3.3

KfW Basis

We turn now to CIP deviations at the long end of the yield curves. GC repo contracts do
not exist for long maturities, but we can construct an alternative long-term cross–currency
basis free from credit risk by comparing direct dollar yields on dollar denominated debt
and synthetic dollar yields on debt denominated in other currencies for the same risk-free
issuer and the same maturity in years. To do so, we focus on bonds issued by the KfW,
an AAA-rated German government-owned development bank, with all its liabilities fully
12

In the U.S. tri-party repo market, haircuts have been very stable at 2% for any Treasury collateral. In
the case of the euro GC repo market, the leading electronic trading platform EUREX applies haircuts set by
the ECB in its refinancing operations. The ECB haircuts vary with the credit quality and maturity of the
collateral. Throughout our sample period, the haircuts on German bund collateral changed only slightly once
in 2013. Early in the sample, haircuts on German Treasury collateral for the remaining maturity brackets
are 0.5% (0–1 years), 1.5% (1–3 years), 2.5% (3–5 years), 3% (5–7 years), 4% (7–10 years) and 5.5% (>10
years). On July 17, 2013, the ECB changed haircuts on German Treasury collateral to 0.5% (0-1 years),
1 (1-3 years), 1.5% (3–5 years), 2% (5–7 years), 3% (7–10 years) and 5% (>10 years). Haircuts exist on
German bunds with remaining maturities of 5 to 7 years are thus comparable to the 2% haircut rate in the
U.S. tri-party repo market.

20

backed by the German government. The KfW is a very large multi-currency issuer, with an
annual issuance of around $70 billion and $370 billion of bonds outstanding. Schwartz (2015)
provides more details on the KfW bonds, comparing them to German government bonds to
study their liquidity premium. Instead, we compare KfW bonds of similar maturity issued
in different currencies.13
For the simplicity of exposition, we consider a world with zero-coupon yield curves and
swap rates. Detailed calculations involving coupon bearing bonds and additional data are
reported in the Online Appendix. Following the general definition of the basis in Equation
(2), the KfW cross-currency basis is the difference between the direct borrowing cost of KfW
in U.S. dollars and the synthetic borrowing cost of KfW in a foreign currency j:


W
$,Kf W
j,Kf W
j
xKf
=
y
−
y
−
ρ
t,t+n
t,t+n
t,t+n
t,t+n ,

(13)

$,Kf W
j,Kf W
where yt,t+n
and yt,t+n
denote the zero-coupon yields on KfW bonds denominated in U.S.

dollars and foreign currency j.
The first column of Table 4 reports summary statistics on the KfW basis during the
January 2009 to August 2016 period. The mean post-crisis KfW basis is very close to zero
for the Australian dollar (0.1 basis points) but is significantly negative for the other three
currencies: −24 basis points for the Swiss franc, −14 basis points for the euro, and −30 basis
points for the yen. The second column of Table 4 reports similar summary statistics for the
basis conditional on a positive basis for the Australian dollar and a negative basis for the
other three currencies: while the Australian dollar basis is only positive 57% of the time,
the other bases are negative at least 94% of the sample. As a result, the average conditional
basis is 7 basis points for the Australian dollar, and close to their unconditional values for
13

The euro and the U.S. dollar are the most important funding currencies for KfW, followed by the British
pound and the Australian dollar. Currently, there are about $170 billion euro-denominated KfW bonds
outstanding and $130 billion dollar-denominated bonds outstanding. Very similar results can be obtained
for the European Investment Bank, a AAA-rated supranational agency.

21

the other currencies: −24 basis points for the Swiss franc, −15 basis points for the euro, and
−31 basis points for the yen. These bases point to potential arbitrage strategies.
When the KfW basis is negative, a potential arbitrage strategy would be to invest in the
KfW bond denominated in foreign currency, pay the cross-currency swap to swap foreign
currency cash flows into U.S. dollars, and short-sell the KfW bond denominated in U.S.
dollars. When the KfW basis is positive, the arbitrage strategy would be the opposite.
Kf W −
Kf W +
Arbitrage profits under the negative and positive strategies, denoted by πt,t+n
and πt,t+n
,

are:
Kf W −
j,Kf W
IRS,j
$,Kf w
$,IRS
$
πt,t+n
≡ [(yt,t+n,Bid
− yt,t+n,Ask
) − xxccy,j
t,t+n,Ask ] − (yt,t+n,Ask − yt,t+n,Bid ) − f eet,t+n , (14)
Kf W +
$,Kf w
$,IRS
j,Kf W
IRS,j
j
πt,t+n
≡ (yt,t+n,Bid
− yt,t+n,Ask
) − [(yt,t+n,Ask
− yt,t+n,Bid
) + xxccy,j
t,t+n,Bid ] − f eet,t+n . (15)

where f ee$t,t+n and f eejt,t+n denote the short-selling fee of the dollar and foreign currency
bonds. We obtain all bid and ask prices for bond and swap rates from Bloomberg. Since
interest rate swaps and cross-currency swaps are very liquid derivatives for G10 currencies,
the total swap transaction cost is on average about 5 basis points since 2009. We obtain KfW
shorting costs from transaction-level data provided by Markit Securities Finance (formerly
known as Data Explorer).14 Post crisis, the median shorting cost fluctuates around 15 basis
points.
The last three columns of Table 4 describe the profits net of transaction costs for the
positive Australian dollar arbitrage and the negative Swiss franc, euro, and Japanese yen
arbitrages. The third column takes into account bid-ask spreads on swaps and bonds, but
not the bond short selling costs. The negative basis arbitrage strategy yields positive profits
for Swiss franc, euro, and Japanese yen for the majority of the sample, with averages ranging
14

The Online Appendix reports the time series of the KfW basis by currency as well as the 25 percentile,
median, and 75 percentile of shorting costs for U.S. dollar bonds issued by KfW. There is a significant crosssectional dispersion in terms of shorting costs across transactions. During the peak of the global financial
crisis, the 25 percentile and median shorting costs were negative, which reflects demand for U.S. dollar cash
or U.S. Treasury collateral.

22

from 10 to 22 basis points. The positive arbitrage strategy of the Australian dollar yields
positive profits only 10% of the sample. The fourth and fifth columns report similar profits
taking also into account the cost of shorting KfW bonds. The fourth (fifth) column assumes
that the costs are equal to the 25th (50th) percentile of the shorting costs for KfW bonds of
the corresponding currency on the same trading date. The negative basis arbitrage strategy
yields positive profits between 30% and 50% of the sample for the Swiss franc and the euro,
and around 75% of the sample for the Japanese yen. The positive basis arbitrage only yields
profits in less than 5% of the sample for the Australian dollar. While the Australian dollar
does not exhibit significant arbitrage opportunities net of transaction costs, the Swiss franc,
euro, and Japanese yen clearly do. Assuming that arbitrageurs incur the median shorting
fees prevalent on the day of their transaction, average profits range from 8 to 20 basis points,
with standard deviations ranging from 5 to 11 basis points. Again, the conditional volatility
of such strategies is zero and the conditional Sharpe ratio is infinite for the fixed investment
horizon of the bonds.
Can cross-country differences in the liquidity of KfW bonds explain the CIP deviations?
The answer depends on the currency pairs. For the euro and the Australian dollar, differences
in liquidity vis-a-vis the U.S. dollar cannot explain CIP deviations; for the yen and the Swiss
franc, they may. On the one hand, the liquidity of euro-denominated KfW bonds is at least
comparable to, if not better than, the liquidity of dollar-denominated bonds. Therefore,
liquidity differences cannot explain the positive arbitrage profits of going long in the euro
bonds and shorting the U.S. dollar bonds. Likewise, the Australian dollar market, with
the amount outstanding around $21 billion, is significantly less liquid than the U.S. dollar
market.15 Thus, the lower liquidity in the KfW Australian market works against finding
positive CIP arbitrage opportunities of going long in U.S. dollar-denominated KfW bonds
and shorting Australian-dollar denominated KfW bonds.
15

The Australian regulatory authority does not assign zero-risk weight to Australian-dollar-denominated
KfW bonds, citing reasons for low secondary market liquidity.

23

On the other hand, the Swiss franc and the Japanese yen markets are comparatively small
with total amounts outstanding of less than $5 billion. As a result, liquidity differential can
be a potential factor in explaining the positive profits of going long in the more illiquid yen
and Swiss franc KfW bonds and shorting the more liquid dollar KfW bonds.
Overall, deviations from CIP are present in many currency and fixed income markets, often leading to significant arbitrage opportunities. In the next section, we review the potential
causes of such arbitrage opportunities.

4

Potential Explanations

Deviations from CIP are at odds with a frictionless financial market. In this section, we
hypothesize that the persistent and systematic CIP deviations can be explained by a combination of two factors: (1) costly financial intermediation, which affects the supply of exchange
rate forwards and swaps, and (2) international imbalances in investment demand and funding
supply across currencies, which affect the demand for exchange rate forwards and swaps. The
cross-currency basis measures the cost of currency hedging subject to supply and demand
side shocks.

4.1

Costly Financial Intermediation

Before the global financial crisis, global banks actively arbitraged funding costs in the interbank markets across currencies and enforced the CIP condition. Since the crisis, a wide
range of regulatory reforms has significantly increased the banks’ balance sheet costs associated with arbitrage and market making activities. Bank regulations likely affect other
non-regulated entities, such as hedge funds, increasing the cost of leverage for the overall
financial market. We consider more specifically how the following banking regulations affect
the CIP arbitrages: (i) non-risk weighted capital requirements, or the leverage ratio, (ii)
risk-weighted capital requirements, and (iii) other banking regulations, such as the restric-

24

tions on proprietary trading and the liquidity coverage ratio. Finally, we also discuss limits
to arbitrage facing other players, such as hedge funds, money market funds, FX reserve
managers and corporate issuers.

Non-risk-weighted Capital Requirements First, non risk-weighted capital requirements are particularly relevant for short-term CIP arbitrage. The leverage ratio requires
banks to hold a minimum amount of capital against all on-balance-sheet assets and offbalance-sheet exposure, regardless of their risk. Short-term CIP arbitrage trades have very
little market risk, but still expand bank balance sheets since it involves borrowing and lending
in the cash markets and therefore makes the leverage ratio requirement more binding.16
For foreign banks, the leverage ratio did not exist before the crisis; it is now equal to 3%
under Basel III.17 For U.S. banks, even though the leverage ratio existed before the crisis,
the ratio became more stringent after the crisis with the introduction of the supplementary
leverage ratio, which equals 5-6% for systematically important financial institutions. The
leverage ratio requirement is likely to be acting as the constraint on the bank balance sheet
(Duffie, 2016). If the leverage ratio is equal to 3% and binds, a simple back of the envelope
approximation illustrates its impact: if we assume that banks need to hold 3% of their capital
against the CIP arbitrage trades and that their overall objective in terms of rates of return on
capital is around 10%, then banks need at least a 3% × 10% = 30 basis point cross-currency
basis to engage in the trade.18 In a nutshell, many of the arbitrage opportunities that are
16

Banks may arbitrage the CIP deviations as real money investors, selling dollar Treasury bills and purchasing an equivalent value of yen Treasury bills. Such trades change the composition of the assets without
affecting the total size of the balance sheet, and thus have no effects on the leverage ratio.
17
As noted by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2014), “Implementation of the leverage
ratio requirements has begun with bank-level reporting to national supervisors of the leverage ratio and its
components from 1 January 2013, and will proceed with public disclosure starting 1 January 2015. The
Committee will continue monitoring the impact of these disclosure requirements. The final calibration, and
any further adjustments to the definition, will be completed by 2017, with a view to migrating to a Pillar
1 (minimum capital requirement) treatment on 1 January 2018.” Even though there is no formal penalty
during the observation period before the rule finally kicks on January 1, 2018. The leverage ratio has been
a concern for European banks due to the close monitoring by the regulatory authority and public disclosure
requirements.
18
Even if the leverage ratio requirement does not bind, banks might prefer to maintain some buffer over
the minimum leverage ratio requirement, so the leverage ratio would still matter.

25

balance sheet intensive may not be attractive enough for banks: as balance sheet expansion
becomes expensive due to the leverage ratio requirement, banks may limit or even shy away
from CIP arbitrage.
The Basel Committee recommends the leverage ratio to be disclosed at minimum at the
quarter end. The actual calculation method of the leverage ratio differs across jurisdictions.
For European banks, effective in January 2015, the European Leverage Ratio Delegated
Act switches the definition of this ratio from the average of the month-ends over a quarter
to the point-in-time quarter-end ratio. For U.S. banks, the supplementary leverage ratio
is calculated based on the daily average balances of the quarter. Furthermore, mandatory
public disclosure of the Leverage Ratio for European banks began in January 2015. Since
European banks play an important role intermediating U.S. dollars offshore, we expect the
quarter-end dynamics to be particularly pronounced since January 2015.

Risk-weighted Capital Requirements Second, from the perspective of risk-weighted
capital, global banks face significantly higher capital requirements since the global financial
crisis. For example, for the eight U.S. globally systematically important banks (G-SIBs), the
Tier 1 capital ratio increased from 4% pre-crisis to the 9.5%–13% range under Basel III, and
the total capital ratio increased from 8% to the 11.5%–15% range.19 In addition to higher
capital ratios against the risk-weighted assets (RWA), the estimation of the RWA itself also
increased significantly due to more stringent capital rules and the higher volatility of the
cross-currency basis.
The central component of the RWA calculation for a CIP trade is the 99% Value-at-Risk
(VaR) measure based on the 10-business-day holding period returns, typically calculated
over a sample window that corresponds to the past calendar year. Since one-week arbitrage
opportunities exhibit zero VaR, constraints about RWA only matter for long-term CIP arbitrages. Basel II.5 (effective January 2013 in the United States) introduced an additional
19

The breakdown of the capital ratio under the U.S. implementation of Basel III is as follows: 4.5%
minimum common equity Tier 1 (CET1) capital, 1.5% additional Tier 1 capital, 2% Tier 2 capital, 2.5%
CET1 capital conservation buffer and 1% to 4.5% CET1 G-SIB surcharge.

26

“stress-VaR” (SVaR) calibrated for the stress period. As Figure 5 shows, the cross-currency
basis became significantly more volatile after the crisis, thus increasing the VaR on the CIP
trade.
Table 5 illustrates the increase in capital charges against a five-year Libor CIP trade in
recent years. For simplicity, we assume that only VaR and SVaR matter for RWA, while
ignoring all other add-on risk charges, and we consider a CIP trade in isolation, ignoring
the rest of the banks’ portfolio. The first column reports the 99% VaR measure for the
trade based on the 10-business-day holding period; the VaR is annualized (multiplied by
26). The VaR measure was below 5% before the crisis, but increased to 20% during the peak
of the crisis and remained elevated after the crisis. The second column reports the SVaR,
implemented in January 2013 in the United States under Basel II.5, which equals the VaR
in 2009. The third column reports the minimum total capital ratio for U.S. banks. Finally,
the fourth column presents the total capital charges against the CIP trade. It is obtained
by multiplying the sum of VaR and SVaR by the minimum capital ratio and scaling by a
factor of 12.5 times 3, as specified by the Basel rules. Capital charges against the five-year
CIP trade increase dramatically from less than 0.4% before the crisis to more than 4% of
the trade notional after both Basel II.5 and Basel III went into effect. In other words, banks
engaging in CIP arbitrages could trade a volume equal to 250 times their equity before the
crisis; now, they can only trade a volume equal to 25 times their equity. While the RWA is
likely to be very small for short-term CIP arbitrage, it appears as a significant concern for
long-term CIP arbitrage.

Other Banking Regulations Third, a host of other financial regulations have also reduced banks’ willingness to engage in CIP arbitrage. For example, the Volcker Rule (a part
of the Dodd-Frank Act) forbids banks to actively engage in proprietary trading activities.
Proprietary trading in spot exchange rates is allowed, but not in exchange rate forwards and
swaps. As a result, banks can only engage in market making or facilitate arbitrage activities

27

of their clients in the exchange rate derivative markets.20 In addition, the over-the-counter
derivatives market reform sets higher capital and minimum margin requirements for crosscurrency swaps, which are generally uncleared, further increasing the capital necessary to
implement the CIP trade.
In addition to the new risk-weighted capital rules and the leverage ratio, the Basel III
agreement also introduces the liquidity coverage ratio, which requires banks to hold High
Quality Liquidity Assets (HQLA) against potential net cash outflows during a 30-day stress
period. The expected net cash outflows are defined as expected cash outflows minus expected
cash inflows. The expected inflows are at most equal to 75% of the expected outflows. When
the 75% inflow cap is not binding, since the CIP trade goes long and short instruments of the
same tenor, expected cash outflows and inflows exactly cancel, and the CIP trade has largely
no effects on the liquidity coverage ratio. On the one hand, the CIP trade can deteriorate
the liquidity coverage ratio when the 75% inflow cap is binding: in this case, outflows are
added to the denominator of the liquidity coverage ratio without offsetting inflows, and thus
lowering the ratio. On the other hand, the CIP trade can improve the liquidity coverage
ratio if the trade involves investing in HQLAs, e.g. central bank reserves.

Limits to arbitrage facing other potential arbitrageurs We turn now to the other
potential arbitrageurs, i.e., hedge funds, money market funds, reserve managers, and corporate issuers. For each category, we review rapidly their ability to profit from, and thus
attenuate, the CIP deviations, along with their potential constraints. The persistence of CIP
deviations suggests that these potential arbitrageurs take only limited positions.
The regulatory reforms on banks certainly have some spillover effects on the cost of
leverage faced by non-regulated entities, such as hedge funds. This is because hedge funds
need to obtain funding from their prime brokers, which are regulated entities. In order to sell
the CIP arbitrage strategy to their clients, hedge funds would need to lever up the arbitrage
strategy ten or twenty times to make it attractive. When borrowing large amounts, their
20

In practice, however, the distinction between arbitrage and market making may be difficult to draw.

28

borrowing costs may increase significantly as their positions show up in their prime brokers’
balance sheets (making prime brokers’ capital requirements more binding).
U.S. prime money market funds (MMFs) hold large amounts of commercial paper (CP)
and certificates of deposits (CD) issued by foreign banks and act as an important alternative
source of dollar funding to foreign banks. The recent MMF reform has significant impact on
the intermediation capacity of the prime MMFs. The reform requires a floating Net Asset
Value for prime MMFs and allows gates and fees to limit redemptions for prime funds, which
led to large outflows of funds from prime MMFs to government MMFs. Government MMFs
do not hold bank CDs or CPs. In the run-up to the MMF reform implementation (October
14, 2016), as dollar funding from U.S. prime MMFs became scarcer and more expensive, the
cross-currency basis also widened notably.
In addition to MMFs, FX reserve managers with large dollar-denominated holdings may
arbitrage CIP deviations. For example, the People’s Bank of China reportedly increased
their holdings of Japanese Treasury bills, which, on the swapped basis, quadrupled yields on
U.S. Treasury bills (Bloomberg, August 21, 2016). There is, however, limited information
on the central bank trading positions.
Last but not the least, corporate issuers and bank treasuries can also arbitrage longterm CIP deviations by issuing long-term debt in different currencies and then swapping
into their desired currency. In the Online Appendix, we report additional evidence on the
CIP condition for bond yields of the same risky issuer denominated in different currencies.
Using a panel including global banks, multinational non-financial firms and supranational
institutions, we show that the issuer-specific basis was close to zero pre-crisis but has been
persistently different from zero post-crisis. Large differences in CIP bases appear post-crisis
across issuers. Relative to the synthetic dollar rate obtained by swapping foreign currency
interest rates, foreign banks generally borrow in U.S. dollars directly at higher costs, whereas
U.S. banks and supranational institutions generally borrow in U.S. dollar directly at lower

29

costs. As a result, the U.S. banks and supranational institutions are in the best position to
arbitrage the negative cross-currency basis, especially during periods of financial distress.
Testable hypothesis In summary, the rules and the behavior of banks have changed since
the crisis, offering a potential explanation of the CIP deviations and suggesting some simple
predictions:
Prediction #1: (i) CIP deviations are wider when the banks’ balance sheet costs are
higher, particularly towards quarter-end financial reporting dates; (ii) CIP deviations
should be of similar magnitude as the balance sheet costs associated with wholesale
dollar funding; and (iii) CIP deviations should be correlated with other near-risk-free
fixed-income spreads.
Costly financial intermediation is a likely driver of the overall increase in CIP deviations
post-crisis. In the absence of currency-specific trading costs though, frictions to financial
intermediation would likely affect all currencies similarly. Yet, large cross-currency differences exist in the data, pointing to hedging demand arising from international imbalances
in funding and investment opportunities across currencies.

4.2

International Imbalances

The second element of our two-factor hypothesis works as follows. Search-for-yield motives
create a large customer demand for investments in high-interest-rate currencies, such as
the Australian and New Zealand dollars, and a large supply of savings in low-interest-rate
currencies, such as the Japanese yen and the Swiss franc. Japanese life insurance companies,
for example, may look for high yields in the U.S. Treasury markets (instead of investing in
the low yield, yen-based Treasuries). Part of such investments is certainly currency-hedged:
e.g., Japanese life insurers sell dollars and buy yen forward to hedge their U.S. Treasury
bond portfolios. Financial intermediaries, such as foreign exchange swap market makers,
supply currency hedging, but do not want to bear the currency risk. To that effect, the
30

financial intermediaries hedge the currency exposure of their forward and swap positions in
the cash market by going long in low interest rate currencies and short in high interest rate
currencies. The profit per unit of notional is equal to the absolute value of the cross-currency
basis, compensating the intermediary for the cost of capital associated with the trade. This
hypothesis leads to the following prediction:
Prediction #2: The cross-currency basis is increasing in the nominal interest rate differential between the foreign currency and the dollar.
The intuition behind the prediction is that the lower the foreign currency interest rate
compared to the U.S. interest rate, the higher the demand for U.S. dollar-denominated
investment opportunity, which generates a greater currency hedging demand to sell U.S.
dollars and buy foreign currencies in the forward or the swap market. Since providing these
currency hedging contracts is costly for financial intermediaries, the cross-currency basis has
to become more negative to justify the higher balance sheet costs associated with larger
positions.
With the two-factor hypotheses in mind, we turn now to additional empirical evidence
on CIP deviations.

5

Characteristics of the Basis

In this section, we characterize the systematic nature of the basis and test the two predictions
outlined in the previous section, looking at (i) CIP deviations at quarter ends, (ii) a proxy
for the cost of wholesale dollar funding, (iii) the correlation of the CIP deviations with other
liquidity spreads, (iv) and the correlation with nominal interest rates.

5.1

Quarter-End Dynamics

We find that, since the 2007–2008 global financial crisis, one-week and one-month CIP deviations tend to increase at the quarter ends for contracts that would cross quarter-end
31

reporting dates. The quarter-end anomalies become more exacerbated since January 2015,
which coincides with the change in the leverage ratio calculation method and the beginning
of the public disclosure of the leverage ratio for European banks. These findings are consistent with the view that tightened balance sheet constraints at quarter ends, due to banking
regulation, translates into wider CIP deviations in the post-crisis period.
5.1.1

Quarter-end Effects on the Level of CIP Deviations

We test whether CIP deviations are more pronounced at the end of the quarters vs. any
other point in time, and especially so since the global financial crisis and since 2015. Our
simple difference-in-difference test for the one-week contract takes the following form:

|x1w,it | = αi + β1 QendWt + β2 QendWt × P ost07t + β3 QendWt × P ost15t
+ γ1 P ost07t + γ2 P ost15t + it ,

(16)

where |x1w,it | is the absolute value of the one-week basis for currency i at time t, αi is a
currency fixed effect. P OST 07t is an indicator variable equal to one after January 1, 2007
and zero otherwise, and P OST 15t is an indicator variable equal to one after January 1, 2015
and zero otherwise. The variable QendWt is an indicator variable that equals one if the
settlement date for the contract traded at t is within the last week of the current quarter
and the maturity date is within the following quarter.21 These one-week contracts crossing
the quarter ends would show up on the bank balance sheet on quarter-end reporting dates.
The regression is estimated on the daily sample from 01/01/2000 to 09/15/2016 on one-week
Libor, OIS and repo bases. Similarly, we also test the quarter-end effect for the monthly
CIP deviation as follows:

|x1m,it | = αi + β1 QendMt + β2 QendMt × P ost07t + β3 QendMt × P ost15t
+ γ1 P ost07t + γ2 P ost15t + it ,
21

FX forwards follow the T + 2 settlement convention.

32

(17)

where QendMt is a binary variable indicating if the settlement date and maturity date of
the monthly contract spans two quarters.
Table 6 reports the regression results. Columns 1 to 3 pertain to the one-week CIP deviations based on Libor, OIS, and repos. The slope coefficients β2 and β3 are positive and
statistically significant across all three instruments. The quarter-end CIP deviation relative
to the mean deviation in the rest of the quarter is on average 10 to 22 basis points higher
in the post-2007 sample than over the pre-2007 sample for the one-week contracts. Furthermore, compared to the post-2007 sample, the quarter-end weekly CIP deviation increases by
another 30-40 basis points on average since January 2015. Columns 4 to 6 pertain to the
one-month CIP deviations. Again, we find that β2 and β3 are all significantly positive except
in one case. For CIP deviation based on Libor and OIS rates, the month-end deviation relative to the rest of the quarter is on average 4 to 5 basis point higher post-crisis than the level
pre-crisis and increases by another 8 basis point in the post-2015 sample. For one-month
repo, even though β3 is not significant, β2 is highly significant and equals 13 basis points.
Furthermore, we note that coefficients on QendWt and QendMt are very small and largely
insignificant, suggesting that there is very little quarter end effect before 2007.

5.1.2

Quarter-end Effects on the Term Structure of CIP Deviations

Since a three-month forward contract always shows up in a quarterly report regardless of
when it is executed within the quarter, we should not expect discrete price movement one
week or one month prior to the quarter end. Therefore, the quarter-end balance sheet
constraint has implications for the term structure of the basis. In particular, we expect the
difference between three-month and one-month CIP deviation (tst,3M −1M ≡ |xt,3M | − |xt,1M |)
to drop significantly once the one-month contract crosses the quarter-end. Meanwhile, the
difference between one-month and one-week CIP deviation (tst,1M −1W ≡ |xt,1M | − |xt,1W |)
should first increase significantly as the one-month contract crosses the quarter end and then
decreases significantly once the one-week contract crosses the quarter end.

33

Figure 7 illustrates the case for the yen starting in 2015. The blue shaded area denotes
the dates for which one-week contracts cross quarter-end reporting dates. The grey area
denotes the dates for which the one-month contract crosses quarter-end reporting dates,
but one-week contracts stay within the quarter. The top figure plots one-week, one-month
and three-month CIP deviations in levels, and the bottom figure plots the term spreads
tst,3M −1M and tst,1M −1W . We can see that once the one-month contract crosses the quarter
end, tst,3M −1M decreases sharply and tst,1M −1W increases sharply due to spikes in the onemonth deviation. Once the one-week contract crosses the quarter end, tst,1M −1W drops
significantly due to spikes in the one-week deviation.
Table 7 confirms these observations in panel regressions. Columns 1 to 3 report regression
results using tst,3M −1M based on Libor, OIS and repo as follows, similar to Equation (17):

tst,3M −1M = αi + β1 QendMt + β2 QendMt × P ost07t + β3 QendMt × P ost15t
+ γ1 P ost07t + γ2 P ost15t + it .

(18)

We find that β1 is small and insignificant, and β2 and β3 are both significantly negative.
Compared to the pre-crisis sample, tst,3M −1M is 2.4 basis point lower relative to its mean in
the rest of the quarter when the one-month contract crosses the quarter ends in the postcrisis sample. In the post-2015 sample, the quarter-end effect corresponds to another 9.5
basis point reduction in tst,3M −1M compared to its post-crisis mean. Columns 4 to 6 report
similar tests for tss,1M −1W :

tst,1M −1W = αi + β1 IQendMt =1,QendWt =0 + β2 IQendMt =1,QendWt =0 × P ost07t
+β3 IQendMt =1,QendWt =0 × P ost15t + β4 QendWt + β5 QendWt × P ost07t
+β6 QendWt × P ost15t + γ1 P ost07t + γ2 P ost15t + it ,

34

where IQendMt =1,QendWt =0 is an indicator variable that equals 1 if a one-month contract traded
at t crosses the quarter end, but the one-week contract traded at t does not cross the quarter
end. As expected, we find significantly positive β2 and β3 coefficients and significantly
negative β5 and β6 coefficients, which suggests that the difference between one-month and
one-week CIP deviation first increases as the once-month contract crosses the quarter end,
but the one-week contract does not, and then decreases as the one-week contract crosses
the quarter end. These quarter-end effects are again larger in the post-crisis period and
especially since 2015.
In summary, consistent with the key role of banks’ balance sheets on quarter-end reporting
dates, we find that CIP deviations are systematically higher for contracts that cross quarterend reporting dates post the crisis. We compare now a proxy for the banks balance sheet
costs to the CIP deviations.

5.2

CIP Arbitrage Based on Excess Reserves at Central Banks

Under unconventional monetary policies implemented by major central banks since the global
financial crisis, global depositary institutions have held large amounts of excess reserves at
major central banks, currently including $2.4 trillion at the Fed and $0.5 trillion at the ECB.
Excess reserves are remunerated at an interest rate set by the central bank, which is referred
to as the interest rate on excess reserves (IOER).
One interesting feature of the IOER at the Fed is that it is often above interest rates
paid on private money market instruments, for example, the Fed Funds rate. The main
reason that the Fed funds rate stays persistently below the IOER in the United States is
that government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs), such as Federal Home Loan Banks, do not
have access to the IOER deposit facility and are willing to lend at rates below the IOER in
the Fed funds market. This creates the well-known IOER-Fed funds arbitrage for depositary
institutions with access to the IOER deposit facility, in which banks borrow in the Fed fund
market from the GSEs and deposit the proceeds in the forms of excess reserves at the Fed,
35

earning the IOER-Fed Funds spread. The trade is risk-free and central bank reserve balances
dominates private money market instruments in terms of liquidity and fungibility.
Figure 8 shows the IOER, one-week OIS and Libor rates for the U.S. dollar since 2009.
The IOER is always greater than the one-week OIS rate over the entire sample and is also
greater than the one-week Libor rate starting in 2011. If borrowing funds at the Fed funds
or Libor rate did not carry additional costs, banks would amass even more reserves at the
Fed in order to profit from this arbitrage opportunity, and the interest rate gap between
IOER and OIS would disappear.22
The spread earned on the IOER-Fed Fund arbitrage thus gives us a concrete measure of
the cost of balance sheet expansion for depository institutions that engage in risk-free arbitrage opportunities. This cost includes at least two components. For U.S. and foreign banks,
the cost of leverage, summarized in leverage ratios, is likely to be the most important factor
since the trade is risk-free, but still expands the size of banks’ balance sheet. For U.S. banks,
an additional cost matters: the deposit insurance fees paid on wholesale funding, which mattered after the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) widened the assessment base
for deposit insurance fees to include wholesale funding in April 2011. In other words, the
IOER is the opportunity cost of wholesale dollar funding for depository institutions, and the
synthetic dollar interest rates by swapping foreign currency investments have to be higher
than the IOER to attract banks to engage in CIP trades, instead of parking the dollars as
excess reserves at the Fed.
Therefore, instead of using the Libor (or OIS) rates as the direct U.S. dollar funding
costs when computing the cross-currency basis, we use the IOER as the dollar funding costs.
This is equivalent to assuming, for example, that banks borrow at the Libor (or OIS) rates
and that the difference between the IOER minus the Libor (or OIS) rate proxies for the
banks’ balance sheet costs. Table 8 shows the results for this alternative basis calculation.
22

The gap between the IOER and the Fed Funds rate widens at quarter ends if we use the overnight Fed
Fund rate, instead of the one-week OIS rate. This is because the IOER-Fed Fund arbitrage is typically done
for the overnight horizon,

36

Compared to the standard Libor basis reported in the first column, “funding” at the IOER
reduces the magnitude of the Libor basis by 6 basis points on average, as shown in the second
column. Similarly, compared to the standard OIS basis reported in the third column, the
basis is 12 basis point narrower when using the IOER instead of the OIS as the direct dollar
funding cost, as shown in the fourth column. Compared to the standard repo basis, the basis
is 8 basis point narrower when using the IOER as the funding cost, as shown in the sixth
column. Therefore, the gap between the IOER and OIS/Libor/repo in the U.S. can explain
about one-third of the one-week CIP deviations.
The CIP arbitrage based on Libor, OIS and repo rates have neutral impact on the
liquidity coverage ratio at best, but the IOER-Fed fund arbitrage can potentially improve
the liquidity coverage ratio.23 Also, more generally, central bank balances are considered
safer and more liquid than any private market alternatives even before being codified as the
Level-1 HQLA by the Basel liquidity coverage ratio requirement. By taking into account the
better liquidity of central bank balances, we assume that banks funds themselves at the U.S.
IOER (as above) and invest at the foreign IOER. Summary statistics for the IOER basis are
reported in the last column. The average IOER basis is −8 basis points, much closer to zero
than the Libor and OIS basis at −26 and -28 basis points, respectively.24
Using the IOER–Libor spread as proxy for the banks’ balance sheet costs and investing at
the foreign central bank deposit facility significantly reduces the size of the CIP deviations,
but it does not eliminate them. For the Danish krone, the Swiss franc, and the Japanese
23
The IOER-Fed Funds arbitrage can improve the liquidity coverage ratio in two potential ways. First,
the IOER-Fed Funds arbitrage increases the numerator and the denominator by the same amount, which
leads to a mechanical increase in the ratio, especially for large positions. Second, if the bank were to be
subject to the composition cap for eligible Level-2 HQLA (40% of total HQLAs), adding reserve balances
(Level-1 HQLA) may permit the inclusion of additional eligible level 2 assets in the LCR numerator.
24
The Online Appendix reports the time-series of the IOER basis, together with the Libor basis and the
modified Libor basis obtained by “funding” at the IOER. The bases based on the IOER can be positive, while
the Libor basis is always negative. A positive IOER basis would lead U.S. banks to park excess reserves at
the Fed, as opposed to lending out in U.S. dollars as suggested by a negative Libor basis. Increasing reserves
at the Fed further reduces the bank flows to arbitrage the Libor basis.

37

yen, the CIP deviations still range from −12 to −15 basis points on average.25 Such CIP
deviations imply risk-free arbitrage opportunity for global depository institutions that can
borrow U.S. dollars in wholesale cash funding market, and deposit at the foreign central bank
deposit facility while hedging currency risk, even after proxying for their balance sheet costs.
Banks are either factoring in higher shadow costs, or they are willing to forego some extra
yields to hold Fed balances over swapped balances at the Bank of Japan, the Swiss National
Bank or the Danish National Bank, even though these central bank reserve balances are
all risk-free HQLAs. One potential explanation is that Fed balances are more desirable to
fulfill banks dollar liquidity needs compared to swapped foreign central bank balances, even
though there is no hardwired Liquidity Coverage Ratio imposed at the individual currency
level.
In summary, by assuming that banks borrow and invest at the IOER, we proxy for
the banks’ balance sheet costs associated with the leverage ratio and take into account the
liquidity advantage of central bank reserve balances over private money market instruments.
These adjustments correspond approximately to two-thirds of the average CIP deviations.26

5.3

Correlated Spreads in Other Markets

Intermediary constraints, if present, would likely affect other asset classes beyond exchange
rates. We thus compare the dynamics of the currency bases to other types of near-arbitrage
fixed-income strategies, focusing on (1) the KfW-German Bund basis, (2) the one-versus
25

In the euro area, since the EONIA is significantly higher than the ECB deposit rate (unlike in the U.S.),
the CIP arbitrage involving euro borrowing and Fed deposits is rarely profitable despite the 8 basis point
average IOER basis for the euro.
26
In the online Appendix, we show an alternative proxy for banks’ balance sheet costs due to the leverage
ratio requirement given by the spread between the GCF and Tri-party repo rates backed by Treasury securities. As explained by Nelson (2016) “The GCF repo rate is a rate at which smaller or lower-rated dealers
borrow from larger and higher-rated dealers and the GC repo rate is a rate at which larger dealers borrow
from money funds. The spread is a measure of the premium larger dealer charge smaller dealers to borrow
in the repo market via the larger dealers’ balance sheet.” The spread largely varies between 5-20 basis points
outside quarter ends, and can reach 100 basis points at quarter ends. Same as the CIP deviations, the
quarter-end spikes in the repo-GCF spreads become very pronounced since January 2015.

38

three-month U.S. Libor tenor swap basis, (3) the CDS-CDX basis, and (4) the CDS and
corporate bond (CDS-bond) basis.27
Figure 9 plots the average of the absolute value of the five-year Libor currency basis for
G10 currencies and the four other types of bases in four different panels. The currency basis
appears highly correlated with the two liquidity-based bases, the KfW-German bund basis
and the Libor tenor basis. They all increased during the recent global financial crisis and
during the European debt crisis. Although there is no mechanical link between the CIP
deviations and the KfW-bund and Libor tenor swap bases, their co-movement is striking.
The currency basis appears less correlated with the two credit bases, the CDS-CDX basis
and the bond-CDS basis. The credit bases both increased significantly during the recent
global financial crisis, together with the cross-currency basis, but they narrowed significantly
after the crisis between 2010 and 2014, whereas the currency basis did not. In the past two
years again, the credit and currency bases appear to move in sync.
We test the link across asset classes with a simple regression of the G10 average changes
in the cross-currency bases on changes in the four other liquidity and credit bases for the
2005–2016 and the 2010–2016 samples. Table 9 reports the monthly regression results. In the
27

We review these four spreads rapidly:
• The KfW-German bund basis is the spread of a five-year euro-denominated bond issued by KfW
over the five-year German Bund yield, obtained from Bloomberg. The five-year KfW bond yield
is estimated by the Nelson-Siegel methodology on individual KfW bond prices also obtained from
Bloomberg. Since the KfW bonds are fully guaranteed by the German government, the KfW-German
Bund spread should not contain any credit risk component. As previously noted, Schwartz (2015)
uses that spread to measure the liquidity premium.
• The Libor tenor swap basis measures the premium that one party has to pay in order to receive the
one-month floating U.S. Libor in exchange of the three-month floating U.S. Libor for the five-year
duration of the contract. The tenor swap basis reflects a premium for more frequent payments or a
higher desirability of short-term liquidity.
• The CDS-CDX basis measures the difference between the average five-year CDS spreads on the 125
constituent names of the North America investment grade credit default swap index (NA.IG.CDX)
and the spread on the corresponding aggregate NA.IG.CDX index. All data on CDS and CDX spreads
are obtained from Markit.
• The CDS-bond basis measures the difference between the asset swap spread on a corporate bond
over the CDS spread on the same reference entity. We use the CDS-bond basis provided by Morgan
Markets for investment-grade bonds. Both the CDS-CDX basis and CDS-bond basis lead to popular
credit arbitrage strategies.

39

full sample that includes the global financial crisis, CIP deviations co-move significantly with
the four other spreads. In the post-crisis sample, CIP deviations still co-move significantly
with the two liquidity spreads. The correlation with the two credit spreads remains positive
but is no longer significant. Overall, the correlation between the CIP deviations and other
near-arbitrage strategies, especially the KfW-German bund basis and the Libor tenor basis,
is consistent with a key role for liquidity-providing intermediaries.

5.4

Cross-Currency Basis and Nominal Interest Rates

Consistent with Prediction #2, we find that CIP deviations are highly correlated with nominal interest rates in the cross section and in the time series.
5.4.1

Cross Section of CIP Deviations and Interest Rates

We first document a robust cross-sectional relationship between nominal interest rates and
various types of cross-currency basis. We find that low interest rate currencies tend to have
most negative bases and high interest rate currencies tend to have less negative bases or
positive bases. The cross-sectional pattern holds across Libor, OIS, Treasuries, KfW and
other multinational bonds.
Figure 10 reports the mean cross-currency basis on the vertical axis as a function of the
average nominal interest rates between 2010 and 2015 on the horizontal axis. The first two
panels show that the Libor cross-currency basis is positively correlated with Libor rates at
short and long maturities. The relationship is particularly strong at long maturities, with
the correlation between five-year Libor bases and Libor rates equal to 89 percent for G10
currencies.28 By contrast, the mean CDS spread of the interbank panel exhibits a correlation
of −33 percent with the five-year Libor basis.
Therefore, for a long-short arbitrageur, there exist arbitrage opportunities for going long
in low interest rate currencies, short in high interest rate currencies with the currency risk
28

Similarly, as shown in the Online Appendix, we obtain a very high correlation between the average level
of interest rates and the CIP deviations measured on bonds issued by KfW and other multinationals.

40

hedged using exchange rate swaps. The direction of the arbitrage trade is exactly the opposite
of the conventional unhedged carry trade of going long in high interest rate currencies and
short in low interest rate currencies.29 This finding has clear implications for carry trade
investors and multinational issuers.
For carry trade investors, the CIP deviations make the carry trade more profitable on
the forward than on the cash markets. The unhedged currency excess return is:

ft − st+1 = ft − st + st − st+1
= yt − yt$ − ∆st+1 + xt

(19)

For any investor who borrows in U.S. dollars (or yen) and invest in Australian (or New
Zealand) dollar, the CIP basis is positive (xt > 0). As a result, the carry trade excess return
obtained through forward contracts, equal to ft − st+1 , is larger than the excess return
obtained on the cash markets, equal to yt − yt$ − ∆st+1 .
For multinational issuers, the cross-sectional pattern has a robust funding cost implication
that on the currency-hedged basis, currencies with high nominal interest rates are cheaper
funding currencies, and currencies with higher nominal interest rates are more expensive
funding currencies.
We find evidence that supranational organizations do take advantage of this funding cost
arbitrage. Figure 11 plots the ratio of total issuance by KfW and supranational issuers over
total issuance by other non-financial issuers during the sample 2010–2015 period against the
mean Libor cross-currency basis.30 Data come from Dealogic. Relative to the universe of
non-financial issuers, supranational issuers issue more in high-basis and high-interest-rate
currencies, such as the Australian and New Zealand dollars, and issue less in low-basis and
29

Note that the average CIP deviations and average carry trade excess returns differ by an order of
magnitude: less than 50 basis points for the CIP deviations, and more than 500 basis points for average
carry trade excess returns.
30
Issuances in U.S. dollars and in euros are excluded from Figure 11 because some benchmark issues often
need to be maintained even though it might be economically costly to do so.

41

low-interest-rate currencies, such as the Swiss franc, the Danish Krone, and the Japanese
yen.

5.4.2

Time Series of CIP Deviations and Interest Rates

Consistent with the cross-sectional pattern, the nominal interest rate differential between
two currencies is also a significant driver of the cross-currency basis in the time series.
We establish the time series relationship between the basis and the nominal interest rate
using a high-frequency event study of a narrow window around the ECB monetary policy
announcements. The event-study approach allows us to study the effect of unexpected shocks
to the interest rate differential on the cross-currency basis. Assuming that the monetary
policy is exogenous to the basis — a reasonable assumption prior to our work, this eventstudy measures the causal impact of monetary policy on the cross-currency basis.
Our event study focuses on changes in the dollar/euro basis and changes in the yield
differential between German Bunds and U.S. Treasuries. The event window starts five minutes before the release of the monetary decision, usually at 1:45 pm Central European Time
(CET), and ends 105 minutes after the release of the statement, thus including the one-hour
press conference that usually takes place between 2:30 pm CET and 3:30 pm CET. By choosing such a narrow event window, the movements in the currency basis and government yields
can be attributed to monetary policy shocks from the ECB. Intraday data come from the
Thomson Reuters Tick History database. The currency basis corresponds to OTC quotes,
from a major European bank, for an Euribor/U.S. Libor one-year maturity basis contract.31
The event-study focuses on the ECB announcements because quotes on the currency basis
are available at high frequency for the euro.
We regress the changes in the currency basis around the i-th monetary policy announcement (∆xi ) on the changes in the German bund and U.S. Treasury two-year benchmark
31

Cross-currency bases at tenors longer than one year are not quoted frequently enough for our event
study. The three-month cross-currency basis was not actively traded as a separate derivative product until
2012. Our results, however, are robust to using the three-month basis since it became separately quoted.

42

yield differentials around the same event window (∆yiGE − ∆yiU S ):
∆xi = α + β(∆yiGE − ∆yiU S ) + i .

(20)

In the cross-section, as we saw, the currency basis tends to increase with the interest rate
differential. A similar behavior would imply a positive slope coefficient, β > 0. As Figure
12 shows, this is clearly the case: in the time-series too, the currency basis tends to increase
with the interest rate differential. The slope coefficient on the interest rate differential in
Equation (20) is equal to 0.15 with a t-statistic equal to 5.88. Therefore, a 10 basis point
reduction in the German/U.S. Treasury two-year yield differential due to an accommodative
ECB monetary policy shock leads to 1.5 basis point reduction in the one-year euro/dollar
Libor CIP deviations. A more accommodative-than-expected monetary policy by the ECB
thus results in a more negative cross-currency-basis for the euro, implying that the synthetic
dollar rate increases compared to the direct dollar rate, making the indirect dollar funding
of European banks more expensive than before the announcement.

6

Conclusion

In this paper, we examine the persistent and systematic failures of the CIP condition in
the post crisis period. After formally establishing CIP arbitrage opportunities based on repo
rates and KfW bonds, we argue that these arbitrage opportunities can be rationalized by the
interaction between costly financial intermediation and international imbalances in funding
supply and investment demand across currencies. Consistent with this two-factor hypothesis, we report four empirical characteristics of the CIP deviations. First, CIP deviations
increase at the quarter ends post crisis, especially for contracts that appear in banks’ balance
sheets. Second, proxies for the banks’ balance sheet costs account for two-thirds of the CIP
deviations. Third, CIP deviations co-move with other near-risk-free fixed income spreads.

43

Fourth, CIP deviations are highly correlated with nominal interest rates in the cross section
and time series.
Looking beyond our paper, we expect a large literature to investigate further the CIP
deviations. The deviations occur in one of the largest and most liquid markets in the world
after the crisis in the absence of financial distress, suggesting that other arbitrage opportunities exist elsewhere. While trading in exchange rate derivatives is a zero-sum game, the
CIP deviations may have large welfare implications because of the implied deadweight cost
borne by firms seeking to hedge their cash flows.Furthermore, the existence of CIP deviation
introduces wedges between the interest rates in the cash and swap markets, which affects the
external transmission of monetary policy. The welfare cost of the CIP deviation is behind
the scope of this paper; it would necessitate a general equilibrium model. Yet, even without
such model, the CIP condition is a clean laboratory to test the impact of financial frictions
in a very general framework. In this spirit, we present the first international evidence on the
causal impact of recent banking regulation on asset prices. We expect more research in this
direction in the future.

44

References
Adrian, T., E. Etula, and T. Muir (2014): “Financial Intermediaries and the CrossSection of Asset Returns,” Journal of Finance, 69(6), 2557–2596.
Akram, Q. F., D. Rime, and L. Sarno (2008): “Arbitrage in the Foreign Exchange
Market: Turning on the Microscope,” Journal of International Economics, 76, 237–253.
Amador, M., J. Bianchi, L. Bocola, and F. Perri (2016): “Exchange Rate Policies
at the Zero Lower Bound,” Working Paper.
Arora, N., P. Gandhi, and F. A. Longstaff (2011): “Counterparty credit risk and the
credit default swap market,” Journal of Financial Economics, 103(280-293).
Avdjiev, S., W. Du, C. Koch, and H. S. Shin (2016): “The dollar, bank leverage and
the deviation from covered interest parity,” BIS Working Paper No. 592.
Baba, N., R. N. McCauley, and S. Ramaswamy (2009): “US Dollar Money Market
Funds and Non-US Banks,” BIS Quarterly Review, pp. 65–81.
Baba, N., and F. Packer (2009): “Interpreting Deviations from Covered Interest Parity
During the Financial Market Turmoil of 2007-08,” Journal of Banking and Finance, 33,
1953–1962.
Baba, N., F. Packer, and T. Nagano (2008): “The Spillover of Money Market Turbulence to FX Swap and Cross-Currency Swap Markets,” BIS Quarterly Review, pp. 73–86.
Baklanova, V., A. Copeland, and R. McCaughrin (2015): “Reference Guide to U.S.
Repo and Securities Lending Markets,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report
No. 740.
Banegas, A., and M. Tase (2016): “Reserve Balances, the Federal Funds Market and
Arbitrage in the New Regulatory Framework,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series
2016-079, Federal Reserve Board.
Bekaert, G., and R. J. Hodrick (2012): International financial management. Pearson
Prentice Hall Upper Saddle River, New Jersey, NJ.
Bernanke, B., and M. Gertler (1989): “Agency Costs, Net Worth, and Business Fluctuations,” American Economic Review, pp. 14–31.
BIS (2013): “Triennial Central Bank Survey of Foreign Exchange and Derivatives Market
Activity in 2013,” Discussion paper, Bank for International Settlements.
(2014a): “Basel III leverage ratio framework and disclosure requirements,” Discussion paper, Bank for International Settlements.
(2014b): “Detailed Tables on Semiannual OTC Derivatives Statistics at EndDecember 2014,” Discussion paper, Bank for International Settlements.
45

Bloomberg (August 21, 2016): “World’s Biggest Bond Traders Undeterred by Negative
Yields,” .
Bottazzi, J.-M., J. Luque, M. Pascoa, and S. M. Sundaresan (2012): “Dollar Shortage, Central Bank Actions, and the Cross Currency Basis,” Working Paper.
Brunnermeier, M. K., and L. H. Pedersen (2009): “Market Liquidity and Funding
Liquidity,” Review of Financial studies, 22(6), 2201–2238.
Brunnermeier, M. K., and Y. Sannikov (2014): “A Macroeconomic Model with a
Financial Sector,” American Economic Review, 104(2), 379–421.
Buraschi, A., M. Menguturk, and E. Sener (2015): “The Geography of Risk Capital,”
Review of Financial Studies, 28, 1103–1152.
Caballero, R. J., E. Farhi, and P.-O. Gourinchas (2008): “An Equilibrium Model
of “Global Imbalances” and Low Interest Rates,” The American Economic Review, 98(1),
358–393.
(2016): “Global Imbalances and Currency Wars at the ZLB,” Working Paper,
Harvard University.
Callier, P. (1981): “One Way Arbitrage, Foreign Exchange and Securities Markets: A
Note,” The Journal of Finance, 36(5), 1177–1186.
Clinton, K. (1988): “Transactions Costs and Covered Interest Arbitrage: Theory and
Evidence,” Journal of Political Economy, 96(2), 358–370.
Coffey, N., W. B. Hrung, and A. Sarkar (2009): “Capital Constraints, Counterparty
Risk, and Deviations from Covered Interest Rate Parity,” Federal Reserve Bank of New
York Staff Report 393.
Deardorff, A. V. (1979): “One-Way Arbitrage and Its Implications for the Foreign Exchange Markets,” Journal of Political Economy, 87(2), 351–364.
Dooley, M. P., and P. Isard (1980): “Capital Controls, Political Risk, and Deviations
from Interest-Rate Parity,” Journal of Political Economy, pp. 370–384.
Du, W., S. Gadgil, M. B. Gordy, and C. Vega (2016): “Counterparty risk and counterparty choice in the credit default swap market,” Working Paper, Federal Reserve Board.
Du, W., and J. Schreger (Forthcoming): “Local Currency Sovereign Risk,” Journal of
Finance.
Duffie, D. (2016): “Why Are Big Banks Offering Less Liquidity To Bond Markets?,” Forbes,
March.
Duffie, D., and A. Krishnamurthy (2016): “Passthrough Efficiency in the Fed’s New
Monetary Policy Setting,” Jackson Hole Symposium of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas
City.
46

Frenkel, J. A., and R. M. Levich (1975): “Covered Interest Arbitrage: Unexploited
Profits?,” Journal of Political Economy, 83, 325–338.
Gabaix, X., and M. Maggiori (2015): “International Liquidity and Exchange Rate Dynamics,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130(3), 1369–1420.
Garleanu, N., and L. Pedersen (2011): “Margin-Based Asset Pricing and Deviations
from the Law of One Price,” Review of Financial Studies, 24, 1980–2022.
Goldberg, L. S., C. Kennedy, and J. Miu (2011): “Central Bank Dollar Swap Lines
and Overseas Dollar Funding Costs,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Economic Policy
Review, May.
Greenwood, R., and D. Vayanos (2014): “Bond Supply and Excess Bond Returns,”
Review of Financial Studies, 27, 663–713.
Griffolli, M. T., and A. Ranaldo (2011): “Limits to Arbitrage during the Crisis:
Funding Liquidity Constraints and Covered Interest Parity,” Working Paper.
Gromb, D., and D. Vayanos (2010): “Limits of arbitrage,” Annual Review of Financial
Economics, 2(1), 251–275.
He, Z., B. T. Kelly, and A. Manela (2015): “Intermediary Asset Pricing: New Evidence
from Many Asset Classes,” Working Paper, University of Chicago.
He, Z., and A. Krishnamurthy (2012): “A Model of Capital and Crises,” The Review of
Economic Studies, 79(2), 735–777.
He, Z., and A. Krishnamurthy (2013): “Intermediary Asset Pricing,” American Economic Review, 103(2), 732–770.
Holmstrom, B., and J. Tirole (1997): “Financial Intermediation, Loanable Funds, and
the Real Sector,” Quarterly Journal of economics, pp. 663–691.
ICMA (2016): “European Repo Market Survey Number 30,” International Capital Market
Association.
Ivashina, V., D. S. Scharfstein, and J. C. Stein. (2015): “Dollar Funding and the
Lending Behavior of Global Banks,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130(3), 1241–1281.
Jacob A. Frenkel, R. M. L. (1977): “Transaction Costs and Interest Arbitrage: Tranquil
versus Turbulent Periods,” Journal of Political Economy, 85(6), 1209–1226.
Jermann, U. J. (2016): “Negative Swap Spreads and Limited Arbitrage,” Available at
SSRN.
Keynes, J. M. (1923): A Tract on Monetary Reform. Macmillan.
Klee, E., Z. Senyuz, and E. Yoldas (2016): “Effects of Changing Monetary and Regulatory Policy on Overnight Money Markets,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series
2016-084, Federal Reserve Board.
47

Liao, G. Y. (2016): “Credit Migration and Covered Interest Rate Parity,” Working Paper,
Harvard Business School.
Lotz, W. (1889): Die Währungsfrage in Österreich-Ungarn und ihre wirtschaftliche und
politische Bedeutung. Duncker & Humblot.
McGuire, P., and G. von Peter (2012): “The Dollar Shortage in Global Banking and
the International Policy Response,” International Finance, 15(2), 155–178.
Mohsen Bahmani-Oskooee, S. P. D. (1985): “Transaction Costs and the Interest Parity
Theorem,” Journal of Political Economy, 93(4), 793–799.
Munyan, B. (2015): “Regulatory Arbitrage in Repo Markets,” Working Paper.
Nelson, B. (2016): “Money Market Developments and Bank Regulation,” TheClearingHouse Blog.
Rime, D., A. Schrimpf, and O. Syrstad (2016): “Segmented Money Markets and Covered Interest Parity Arbitrage,” Working Paper.
Sato, T. (2015): “Toward Further Development of the Tokyo Financial Market: Issues
on Repo Market Reform,” Keynote Speech at the Futures Industry Association Japan
Financial Market Conference 2015 in Tokyo.
Schwartz, K. (2015): “Mind the Gap: Disengtangling Credit and Liquidity in Risk
Spreads,” Working Paper.
Shleifer, A., and R. W. Vishny (1997): “The Limits of Arbitrage,” Journal of Finance,
52(1), 35–55.
Siriwardane, E. N. (2016): “Concentrated Capital Losses and the Pricing of Corporate
Credit Risk,” Harvard Business School Working Paper.
Tuckman, B., and P. Porfirio (2004): “Interest Rate Parity, Money Market Basis Swaps,
and Cross-Currency Basis Swaps,” Lehman Brothers Fixed Income Liquid Markets Research.
Vayanos, D., and J.-L. Vila (2009): “A Preferred-Habitat Model of the Term Structure
of Interest Rates,” Working Paper.
Vladyslav Sushko, Claudio Borio, R. N. M., and P. McGuire (2016): “The failure
of covered interest parity: FX hedging demand and costly balance sheets,” BIS Working
Papers No 590.

48

USD Lender

USD Lender

1 USD

1
(1

USD Arbitrageur

USD Arbitrageur
/

,

,

USD

JPY

(1

JPY Borrower

JPY

,

JPY Borrower
Time

Time
Net Cash Flow

USD

JPY

,

FX Forward Dealer
(1

$
,

0 USD

1

$
,

1

,

/

,

,

0 USD

Figure 1: Cash Flow Diagram for CIP Arbitrage with a Negative Basis (xt,t+1 < 0):
This figure plots the cash flow exchanges of an arbitrageur profiting from a negative crosscurrency basis between the Yen and the U.S. dollar. To arbitrage the negative cross-currency
$
, convert it into
basis, the USD arbitrageur borrows 1 U.S. dollar at the interest rate yt,t+n
St yen, lends in yen at the interest rate yt,t+n , and finally signs a forward contract at date t.
There is no cash flow at date t. At date t + n, the arbitrageur receives (1 + yt,t+n )n St yen,
and convert that into (1 + yt,t+n )n St /Ft,t+n U.S. dollars thanks to the forward contract. The
arbitrageur reimburses her debt in U.S. dollars and is left with a profit equal to the negative
of the cross-currency basis xt,t+1 . In essence, the arbitrageur is going long in JPY and short
in USD, with the JPY cash flow fully hedged by a forward contract.

49

50
0
Basis Points
−250 −200 −150 −100 −50
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016
AUD

CAD

CHF

DKK

EUR

GBP

JPY

NOK

NZD

SEK

Figure 2: Short-Term Libor-Based Deviations from Covered Interest Rate Parity:
This figure plots the 10-day moving averages of the three-month Libor cross-currency basis,
measured in basis points, for G10 currencies. The covered interest rate parity implies that
the basis should be zero. One-hundred basis points equal one percent. The Libor basis is
$,Libor
$,Libor
Libor
Libor
equal to yt,t+n
− ρt,t+n ), where n = three months, yt,t+n
denote the
− (yt,t+n
and yt,t+n
1
U.S. and foreign three-month Libor rates, and ρt,t+n ≡ n (ft,t+n − st ) denotes the forward
premium obtained from the forward ft,t+n and spot st exchange rates.

50

Bank A
$1

¥

Bank B
Start

Bank A
,$

Bank A
,¥

$1
Bank B

¥

$1

¥

1

,

Bank B

j-th coupon date

Maturity

Figure 3: Cash Flow Diagram for JPY/USD Cross-Currency Basis Swap: This
figure shows the cash flow exchanges of a standard yen/dollar cross-currency basis swap. At
the inception of the swap, Bank A receives $1 from Bank B in exchange of USt . At the
Libor,$
j-th coupon date, Bank A pays a dollar floating cash flow equal to yt+j
percent on the
Libor,$
$1 notional to Bank B, where yt+j
is the three-month U.S. dollar Libor at time t + j. In
Libor,U
return, Bank A receives from Bank B a floating yen cash flow equal to (yt+j
+ xxccy
t,t+n ) on
Libor,U
xccy
the USt notional, where yt+j
is the three-month yen Libor at time t + j, and xt,t+n is the
cross-currency basis swap spread, which is pre-determined at date t at the inception of the
swap transaction. When the swap contract matures, Bank B receives $1 from Bank A in
exchange of USt , undoing the initial transaction.

51

Step 1. Pay ZC Yen Fixed-Floating IRS,
¥
¥ S

¥

,

¥

¥ 1

,

Step 2. Pay ZC Yen/Dollar Cross-Currency Basis Swap,
$1
¥
$ $

$1

¥ 1

¥

Step 3. Receive ZC Dollar Fixed-Floating IRS,
$1
$ 1

,

¥

$1

,

¥ 1

$

,

$,
,

Thus,
$

,

$,
,
$,
,

$ 1

$1

$,
,

$ 1

,

1
≡

,

,

/

,

,

,

,
$,
,

$1

Figure 4: Cash Flow Diagram for Long-Term Forward Premium: This figure shows
that the long-term forward premium is equal to the zero fixed-for-fixed cross-currency swap
rate. The zero-coupon fixed-for-fixed cross-currency swap can be constructed using the
following three steps: (1) paying a zero-coupon foreign currency fixed for floating interest
rate swap indexed to the foreign currency Libor; (2) paying a zero-coupon foreign currencyLibor for USD-Libor cross-currency basis swap; and (3) receiving a USD fixed for floating
interest rate swap. By summing up cash flows of the three steps, all floating cash flows are
canceled and we are left exchanges of fixed cash flows at the inception and maturity of the
swap in two currencies.

52

50
Basis Points
−50
0
−100
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016
AUD

CAD

CHF

DKK

EUR

GBP

JPY

NOK

NZD

SEK

Figure 5: Long-Term Libor-Based Deviations from Covered Interest Rate Parity:
This figure plots the 10-day moving averages of the five-year Libor cross-currency basis,
measured in basis points, for G10 currencies. The covered interest rate parity implies that
the basis should be zero. One-hundred basis points equal one percent.

53

Basis Points
−100
−300

−300

−200

Basis Points
−200
−100

0

0

100

DKK 1−Week Basis

100

CHF 1−Week Basis

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

Libor

2014

2015

2016

2009

2010

2011

Repo

2012

2013

Libor

2015

2016

2015

2016

Repo

−400

−150

−300

Basis Points
−200
−100

Basis Points
−100 −50
0

0

50

100

JPY 1−Week Basis

100

EUR 1−Week Basis

2014

2009

2010

2011

2012

Libor

2013

2014

2015

2016

2009

Repo

2010

2011

2012

Libor

2013

2014

Repo

Figure 6: One-week Repo- and Libor-based CIP Deviations: The green line plots
the one-week Libor cross-currency basis and the orange line plots the one-week repo crosscurrency basis for the Swiss Franc (CHF), the Danish Krone (DKK), the euro (EUR) and
the yen (JPY).

54

400
300
200
100
0
12/31/14

3/31/15

6/30/15

9/30/15

1w deviation

12/30/15

3/31/16

1m deviation

6/30/16

9/30/16

3m deviation

−300

−200

−100

0

100

200

(a) Level of Yen CIP Deviations

12/31/14

3/31/15

6/30/15

9/30/15

3m−1m deviation

12/30/15

3/31/16

6/30/16

9/30/16

1m−1w deviation

(b) Term Structure of Yen CIP Deviations

Figure 7: Illustration of Quarter-End Dynamics for the Term Structure of CIP
Deviations: In both figures, the blue shaded area denotes the dates for which the settlement
and maturity of a one-week contract spans two quarters. The grey shaded area denotes
the dates for which the settlement and maturity dates of a one-month contract spans two
quarters, and excludes the dates in the blue shaded area. The top figure plots one-week,
one-month and three-month CIP Libor CIP deviations for the yen in red, green and orange,
55
respectively. The bottom figure plots the difference
between 3-month and 1-month Libor
CIP deviation for the yen in green and between 1-month and 1-week Libor CIP deviation
for the yen in red.

50
40
Basis Points
20
30
10
0
2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

IOER

OIS

2014

2015

2016

Libor

Figure 8: IOER, OIS and Libor rates for the U.S. Dollar: This figure the one-week
interest on excess reserves (IOER), overnight interest swap (OIS), and Libor rates for the
U.S. dollar from 1/1/2009 to 09/15/2016.

56

CIP deviation and KfW−Bund spread

20
5
10
15
5Y USD Libor tenor basis (bps)

50
5Y CIP deviation (bps)
20
30
40
0

0

0

0

10

20
40
60
80
5Y KfW−Bund spread (bps)

10

5Y CIP deviation (bps)
20
30
40

50

100

CIP deviation and tenor basis spread

2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016

5Y CIP deviation (bps)

2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016

5Y KfW−Bund spread (bps)

5Y CIP deviation (bps)

50

50
100
150
5Y CDS−CDX basis (bps)
0

0

0

0

10

100
200
Bond−CDS basis (bps)

5Y CIP deviation (bps)
20
30
40

50
5Y CIP deviation (bps)
20
30
40
10

200

CIP deviation and CDS−CDX spread
300

CIP deviation and bond−CDS spread

5Y USD Libor tenor basis (bps)

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

5Y CIP deviation (bps)

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2005

Bond−CDS basis (bps)

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

5Y CIP deviation (bps)

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

5Y CDS−CDX basis (bps)

Figure 9: The Cross-Currency Basis and Other Near-Riskfree Arbitrages Each
panel compares the time-series of the average currency basis to the time-series of other
fixed-income spreads. The average currency basis corresponds to the average of the absolute
value of the five-year Libor cross-currency bases of G10 currencies; its scale in basis points is
reported on the left-hand side. The scale of the other fixed-income spreads, also expressed in
basis points, is reported on the right-hand side of each panel. The other fixed-income spreads
include: (1) the KfW-Bund spread, defined as the spread of a five-year euro-denominated
KfW bonds over a five-year German Bund, obtained from Bloomberg, (2) the U.S. dollar
Libor tenor basis spread, defined as the five-year spread of exchanging one-month U.S. dollar
Libor against three-month U.S. dollar Libor, obtained from Bloomberg, (3) the bond-CDS
spread for investment grade firms, obtained from Morgan Markets, and (4) the CDS-CDX
spread, defined as difference between the average five-year CDS spreads on the 125 constituents of the NA.IG.CDX index and the spread on the NA.IG.CDX index, obtained from
Markit.

57

40

5Y Libor (corr.=89%)

20

3M Libor (corr.=59%)

NZD

NZD

20

AUD

Libor Basis
−20

GBP

Libor basis (bps)
−20
0

0

AUD

CAD

JPY
CHF

SEK
NOK

GBP
NOK
EUR
CHF

DKK

0

DKK

JPY

−60

−60

−40

−40

EUR

CAD
SEK

100

200
Libor rates (bps)

300

400

0

100

SEK

NZD

20

CAD
GBP

400

AUD

multinational basis (bps)
−10
0
10

KfW basis (bps)
−20
−10

NZD

EUR

300

Multinational (corr.=73%)

0

KfW (corr.=95%)

200
Libor IRS rates (bps)

NOK

NOK

SEK

CAD

AUD

CHF
GBP

CHF
EUR

−20

−30

JPY

0

100

200
300
KfW bond yields (bps)

400

JPY

100

200

500

5Y Treasury (corr.=86%)

20

3M OIS (corr.=83%)

300
400
Multinational bond yields (bps)

50

AUD

NZD

NZD

NOK

SEK
AUD

Tresury basis (bps)
−50
0

0
OIS Basis

CAD

CAD
GBP

−20

SEK

EUR

EUR
DKK

CHF

CHF

JPY

−100

−40

JPY

0

GBP

DKK

100

200
OIS rates (bps)

300

400

0

100

200
Treasury yields (bps)

300

Figure 10: Cross-Sectional Variations in Currency Basis (2010-2015): This figure
shows the cross-currency relationship between various cross-currency bases on the y-axis
and nominal interest rates on the x-axis. The top two panels plot the relationship for Libor
at 3-month and 5-year. The middle two panels plot the relationship for KfW and average
multinational issuers. The bottom two panels plot the relationship for 3-month OIS rates
and 5-year Treasuries. The correlation between cross-currency bases and nominal interest
rates for each interest rate instrument are indicated in the title of each panel.
58

400

Ratio of KfW+Supra. over all private issuance
0
.1
.2
.3
.4
.5

NZD

AUD
GBP
NOK

SEK

CHF
CAD
JPY

−60

DKK

−40

−20
0
Mean Libor Basis (bps)

20

40

Figure 11: SSA Relative Issuance and the Libor Cross-Currency Basis: On the
vertical axis, we plot the ratio of total issuance by KfW and suprantional issuers over the
total issuance by all non-financial firms across currencies. On the horizontal, we plot the
mean Libor cross-currency basis. The issuance data are from Dealogic and the sample period
is 2010-2015.

59

2
Changes in 1−year EUR/USD basis (bps)
−2
0
−4
−15

−10
−5
0
5
Changes in German/US 2−year yield differentials (bps)

10

Figure 12: Monetary Policy Shocks and Deviations from CIP: This figure plots
intraday changes in the two-year German bund and U.S. Treasury yield differential around
the ECB monetary policy announcements on the horizontal axis and intraday changes in
the one-year euro/dollar cross-currency basis around the same time on the vertical axis. All
intraday data are from Thomson Reuters Tick History. The sample period is from 1/1/2010
to 10/30/2015.

60

Table 1: Summary Statistics for Libor-based Covered Interest Parity Deviations
Panel A: 3-month
Panel B: 5-year
Currency Benchmark 2000-06
2007-09
2010-16 2000-06
2007-09
2010-16
AUD
BBSW
-3.7
-2.5
3.9
9.5
9.3
24.6
(4.8)
(20.5)
(10.7)
(2.8)
(11.8)
(5.5)
CAD
CDOR
1.7
-3.8
-16.1
10.7
10.9
4.4
(5.2)
(16.6)
(9.4)
(3.7)
(9.5)
(6.2)
CHF
Libor
-0.4
-17.9
-26.7
-2.2
-12.9
-39.8
(4.5)
(27.7)
(20.3)
(0.9)
(12.8)
(12.0)
DKK
Cibor
-1.0
-62.8
-60.5
-2.6
-30.2
-46.7
(4.6)
(54.6)
(23.3)
(2.4)
(30.2)
(14.1)
EUR
Euribor
1.8
-27.8
-31.7
0.1
-15.0
-28.6
(3.9)
(32.4)
(25.3)
(2.0)
(16.2)
(13.5)
GBP
Libor
-6.7
-35.1
-10.9
-0.9
-17.2
-6.6
(3.8)
(36.8)
(9.8)
(2.3)
(18.1)
(6.6)
JPY
Libor
-3.7
-15.7
-25.5
-5.3
-13.5
-62.0
(7.0)
(23.9)
(16.1)
(4.2)
(20.1)
(17.3)
NOK
Nibor
-4.1
-29.1
-28.1
-4.7
-14.8
-15.1
(6.5)
(33.7)
(21.5)
(1.9)
(12.3)
(9.0)
NZD
BKBM
-5.3
4.7
11.4
3.6
7.9
31.0
(6.8)
(15.0)
(8.5)
(2.9)
(8.6)
(8.2)
SEK
Stibor
-3.8
-26.5
-23.3
-1.8
-7.2
-2.7
(5.7)
(33.5)
(12.5)
(1.0)
(7.9)
(8.2)
Average
-2.5
-21.6
-20.6
0.6
-8.3
-14.1
(6.0)
(36.4)
(25.3)
(6.0)
(20.5)
(30.7)
Notes: This table reports the mean Libor basis for G10 currencies for three different periods in basis points. The periods are 1/1/2000–12/31/2006, 1/1/2007–12/31/2009, and
1/1/2010–09/15/2016. Standard deviations are shown in the parentheses. Panel A focuses
on the three-month currency basis, while Panel B focuses on the five-year currency basis.
$,Libor
$,Libor
Libor
Libor
The three-month Libor basis is equal to: yt,t+n
− (yt,t+n
− ρt,t+n ), where yt,t+n
and yt,t+n
1
denote the U.S. and foreign three-month Libor rates and ρt,t+n ≡ n (ft,t+n − st ) denotes
the forward premium obtained from the forward ft,t+n and spot st exchange rates. The
five-year currency basis is obtained from cross-currency basis swap contracts. The countries
and currencies are denoted by their usual abbreviations: Australia (AUD), Canada (CAD),
Switzerland (CHF), Denmark (DKK), euro area (EUR), U.K. (GBP), Japan (JPY), Norway
(NOK), New Zealand (NZD) and Sweden (SEK). For each currency, the table reports the
precise benchmark interest rates used to compute the basis.

61

Table 2: Credit Spread Differentials and Libor-based Covered Interest Parity Deviations
Pooled

AUD

CAD

CHF

DKK

EUR

∆(cdsi − cdsU SD ) -0.00786 -0.0253 -0.00714 -0.184*** -0.0199 -0.0662**
(0.0107) (0.0420) (0.0369) (0.0537) (0.0299) (0.0316)
Observations
R-squared

∆(cdsi − cdsU SD )

4,891
0.000

505
0.005
GBP

346
0.000
JPY

505
0.016
NOK

505
0.002
NZD

505
0.023
SEK

-0.0714 0.159*
0.0117 0.0267* 0.0284**
(0.116) (0.0855) (0.0112) (0.0151) (0.0120)

Observations
505
505
505
505
505
R-squared
0.002
0.010
0.002
0.011
0.013
Notes: This table shows the regression results of weekly changes in the five-year Libor crosscurrency basis of currency i on weekly changes in mean five-year CDS spreads differential
between the interbank panel of currency i and U.S. dollar Libor panel. The sample period is
01/01/2007 to 09/15/2016. Newey-West standard errors with 13-week lag are shown in the
parentheses, and one, two, and three stars denote significance levels at 10, 5, and 1 percent
confidence levels.

62

Table 3: One-week Libor- and Repo-based Basis and Repo CIP Arbitrage
Libor Basis
Full Sample
-21.4
(28.6)

Repo Basis
Full Sample
-25.2
(32.0)

Repo Basis
Repo Arbitrage
Conditional neg.
Profits
CHF
Mean
-25.5
16.3
S.D.
(32.0)
(27.4)
% sample
99%
84%
DKK
Mean
-41.3
-33.8
-35.6
19.3
S.D.
(22.7)
(25.2)
(23.5)
(23.7)
% sample
96%
67%
EUR
Mean
-19.8
-15.5
-16.3
11.5
S.D.
(16.6)
(14.7)
(14.5)
(13.7)
% sample
96%
81%
JPY
Mean
-22.3
-26.6
-26.7
17.8
S.D.
(28.7)
(29.1)
(29.1)
(22.8)
% sample
100%
93%
Notes: The first two columns report the annualized mean and annualized standard deviation
for one-week Libor and GC repo basis by currency during the 01/01/2009–09/15/2016 period.
The next column reports the same summary statistics conditional on observing a negative
repo basis. For each currency, the last row of the panel reports the percentage of observations
with a negative basis. The last column reports the arbitrage profits for the negative basis
repo arbitrage provided that the arbitrage profits are positive after taking into account the
transaction costs on the forward and spot exchange rates. Transaction costs are taken into
accounts for the U.S. and Danish krone repo rates, but not for the Swiss franc, euro, and
yen repo rates.

63

Table 4: KfW Basis and KfW CIP Arbitrage
Basis
Basis
Pos. Profits
Pos. Profits Pos. Profits
full sample conditional ex. shorting fee 25 pct fee
median fee
AUD
Mean
0.1
6.9
4.3
6.1
5.8
S.D.
(11.5)
(6.1)
(4.2)
(3.1)
(3.4)
% sample
57%
10%
4%
2%
CHF
Mean
-23.5
-24.3
15.0
5.6
15.2
S.D.
(15.7)
(15.0)
(10.7)
(10.0)
(8.9)
% sample
97%
72%
50%
33%
EUR
Mean
-13.6
-14.7
9.3
2.5
8.7
S.D.
(9.7)
(8.8)
(6.7)
(6.9)
(5.4)
% sample
94%
68%
34%
23%
JPY
Mean
-30.2
-30.8
21.6
13.1
20.2
S.D.
(15.2)
(14.6)
(13.5)
(13.1)
(11.3)
% sample
98%
90%
75%
63%
Notes: The first column reports the annualized mean, annualized standard deviation, and
number of observations for the KfW basis by currency during the 1/1/2009–08/31/2016
period. The second column reports similar statistics, conditional on observing a positive
KfW basis for the Australian Dollar (AUD) and a negative KfW basis for the Swiss franc
(CHF), the euro (EUR), and the Japanese yen (JPY). The third column reports summary
statistics for the arbitrage profits. The arbitrages (a positive basis arbitrage strategy for the
Australian Dollar and a negative basis arbitrage strategy for Swiss franc, the euro, and the
Japanese yen) are implemented provided that the profits remain positive after taking into
account the bid-ask spreads of bonds and swaps. The last two columns report similar profits
taking also into account the cost of shorting KfW bonds. The fourth (fifth) column assumes
that the costs are equal to the 25th (50th) percentile of the shorting costs for KfW bonds of
the corresponding currency on the same trading date.

64

Table 5: An Illustration of U.S. Banks Capital Charges Against a Five-year Libor CIP Trade
Year

VaR

SVaR

Capital Ratio

Capital Charge
(% of notional)
2000
4.87%
8%
0.56%
2001
3.34%
8%
0.39%
2002
3.65%
8%
0.42%
2003
3.64%
8%
0.42%
2004
3.12%
8%
0.36%
2005
2.07%
8%
0.24%
2006
1.92%
8%
0.22%
2007
3.26%
8%
0.38%
2008 19.21%
8%
2.22%
2009 20.28%
8%
2.34%
2010 12.03%
8%
1.39%
2011 12.78%
8%
1.47%
2012 14.39%
8%
1.66%
2013
8.94%
20.28%
8%
3.37%
2014
6.43%
20.28%
11.50%
4.44%
2015
9.20%
20.28%
11.50%
4.88%
Notes: This table illustrates the capital charges against a five-year Libor CIP trade. The
first column reports the 99% Value-at-Risk (VaR) measure for the trade by year. The VaR
are obtained using 10-day rolling windows and annualized (multiplied by 26). The second
column reports the 99% Stress Value-at-Risk (SVaR), which is equal to the VaR in 2009.
The third column reports the minimum total capital ratio over time. The fourth column
computes the capital charges as (VaR+SVaR)/26 × 12.5 × 3 × capital ratio.

65

Table 6: Quarter-End Effects of the Level of CIP Deviations (2000-2016)
Panel A
QendWt
QendWt × P ost07t
QendWt × P ost15t

(1)
(2)
1w Libor 1w OIS
1.585*
2.446
(0.963)
(2.851)
9.545*** 11.23***
(1.297)
(3.191)
37.30*** 31.35***
(2.257)
(3.406)

(3)
1w Repo
6.624**
(2.675)
22.42***
(3.864)
38.48***
(7.014)

QendMt
QendMt × P ost07t
QendMt × P ost15t

P ost07t
P ost15t

11.00***
(1.036)
4.344***
(1.602)

18.33***
(2.737)
4.838*
(2.554)

21.71***
(2.301)
-8.259**
(4.000)

(4)
1m Libor

(5)
1m OIS

(6)
1m Repo

-0.523
(0.598)
4.748***
(0.822)
7.561***
(1.371)

-0.397
(1.407)
4.419**
(1.748)
8.154***
(2.493)

0.331
(1.928)
13.01***
(2.689)
1.792
(5.620)

12.64***
(1.062)
6.228***
(1.706)

13.55***
(2.057)
5.795**
(2.828)

22.00***
(2.587)
3.026
(5.449)

Observations
32,102
22,664
9,921
41,577
31,765
9,262
R-squared
0.168
0.101
0.112
0.200
0.129
0.162
Notes:This table reports regression results of the absolute value of the daily one-week and
one-month Libor, OIS and GC repo bases. QendMt is an indicator variable that equals 1 if
the one-month contract traded at t crosses quarter ends and equals 0 if otherwise. QendWt
is an indicator variable that equals 1 if the one-week contract traded at t crosses quarter
ends and equals 0 if otherwise. P ost07 is an indicator variable that equals 1 if the trading
date t is on or after 01/01/2007 and equals 0 if other wise. P ost15 is an indicator variable
that equals 1 if the trading date t is on or after 01/01/2015 and equals 0 if other wise. All
regressions include currency fixed effects. Newey-West standard errors are used with 90-day
lags and one, two, and three stars denote significance levels at 10, 5, and 1 percent confidence
levels. The sample period is 1/1/2000–09/15/2016.

66

Table 7: Quarter-End Effects on the Term Structure of CIP Deviations (2007-2016)

QendMt
QendMt × P ost07t
QendMt × P ost15t

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

tsLibor
3M −1M

tsOIS
3M −1M

tsRepo
3M −1M

tsLibor
1M −1W

tsOIS
1M −1W

tsRepo
1M −1W

0.565
0.565
0.565
(0.414)
(0.414)
(0.414)
-2.390*** -2.390*** -2.390***
(0.567)
(0.567)
(0.567)
-9.476*** -9.476*** -9.476***
(0.934)
(0.934)
(0.934)
-0.625
0.543
0.827
(0.577)
(1.315)
(1.020)
4.242***
2.392
8.270***
(0.773)
(1.466)
(1.505)
12.76*** 11.05*** 19.84***
(1.226)
(1.426)
(3.635)
-3.217*** -3.782** -5.618***
(0.809)
(1.743)
(1.525)
-1.404
-5.725*** -8.307***
(1.085)
(1.950)
(2.353)
-33.39*** -25.22*** -77.10***
(1.849)
(2.057)
(6.177)

IQendMt =1,QendWt =0
IQendMt =1,QendWt =0 × P ost07t
IQendMt =1,QendWt =0 × P ost15t
QendWt
QendWt × P ost07t
QendWt × P ost15t

P ost07t
P ost15t

5.925***
(0.553)
-2.591***
(0.890)

5.925***
(0.553)
-2.591***
(0.890)

5.925***
(0.553)
-2.591***
(0.890)

0.843
(0.657)
0.444
(1.022)

-0.524
(1.097)
1.594
(1.030)

1.087
(0.912)
5.516**
(2.160)

Observations
41,553
41,553
41,553
32,045
22,491
7,337
R-squared
0.104
0.104
0.104
0.095
0.091
0.131
Notes:This table reports regression results of the absolute value of the daily one-week and
one-month Libor, OIS and GC repo bases. QendMt is an indicator variable that equals 1 if
the one-month contract traded at t crosses quarter ends and equals 0 if otherwise. QendWt
is an indicator variable that equals 1 if the one-week contract traded at t crosses quarter
ends and equals 0 if otherwise. IQendMt =1,QendWt =0 is an indicator variable that equals 1 if
QendMt = 1 and QendWt = 0 and equals 0 if otherwise. P ost07 is an indicator variable that
equals 1 if the trading date t is on or after 01/01/2007 and equals 0 if other wise. P ost15 is
an indicator variable that equals 1 if the trading date t is on or after 01/01/2015 and equals
0 if other wise. All regressions include currency fixed effects. Newey-West standard errors
are used with 90-day lags and one, two, and three stars denote significance levels at 10, 5,
and 1 percent confidence levels. The sample period is 1/1/2000–09/15/2016.
67

Table 8: One-Week Deviations from CIP and Interest Rates on Excess Reserves
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

Currency

Libor basis

IOER-Libor

OIS basis

IOER-OIS

Repo basis

IOER-Repo

IOER basis

CHF

-21.4

-15.5

-36.8

-24.8

-25.2

-16.5

-13.2

(28.6)

(29.5)

(36.9)

(37.4)

(32.0)

(34.0)

(30.3)

-41.3

-35.4

-29.1

-16.1

-33.8

-24.4

-12.0

(22.7)

(25.6)

(23.6)

(24.4)

(25.2)

(26.2)

(25.7)

-19.8

-13.9

-22.9

-11.1

-15.5

-7.1

8.8

(16.6)

(19.1)

(15.8)

(17.2)

(14.7)

(17.3)

(23.6)

-22.3

-16.4

-26.5

-14.3

-26.6

-18.2

-15.6

(28.7)

(29.1)

(30.7)

(30.9)

(29.1)

(30.9)

(29.4)

-26.1

-20.2

-28.3

-16.1

-24.7

-16.0

-7.9

(26.2)

(27.6)

(27.8)

(28.4)

(26.7)

(28.4)

(29.1)

DKK

EUR

JPY

Total

Notes: This table shows the means and standard deviations of the one-week cross-currency
basis for the Swiss franc (CHF), the Danish Krone (DKK), the euro (EUR), and the Japanese
yen (JPY). Column 1, denoted “Libor basis,” refers to the Libor cross-currency basis. Column
2, denoted “IOER-Libor,” refers to the basis obtained by borrowing at the U.S. dollar interest
rate on excess reserves (IOER) and investing at the foreign currency Libor rate and hedging
the exchange rate risk. Column 3, denoted “OIS basis,” refers to the overnight interest
rate swap (OIS) cross-currency basis. Column 4, denoted “IOER-OIS,” refers to the basis
obtained by borrowing in U.S. dollars at the IOER and investing in foreign currency at the
OIS rate. Column 5, denoted “Repo basis”, refers to the repo cross-currency basis. Column 6,
denoted “IOER-repo,” refers to the basis obtained by borrowing in U.S. dollars at the IOER
and investing in foreign currency at the repo rate. The seventh column, denoted “IOER
basis,” refers to the IOER cross-currency basis. The sample starts in 01/01/2009 and ends
in 09/15/2016.

68

Table 9: Currency Basis and Other Fixed-Income Near-Arbitrages
Panel A: 2005-2015
∆KfW-Bund
∆Libor Tenor Basis
∆CDS-CDX
∆Bond-CDS
Constant

0.160***
(0.0370)

Panel B: 2010-2015
0.168***
(0.0549)

0.535**
(0.239)

0.680*
(0.413)
0.112***
(0.0273)

0.0674
(0.111)

0.0341**
0.0555
(0.0158)
(0.0653)
0.171 0.124 0.161
0.160
0.0724 -0.0591 -0.0146 -0.00921
(0.204) (0.220) (0.214) (0.222) (0.288) (0.276) (0.313) (0.314)

Observations
134
134
129
133
74
74
74
74
R-squared
0.129 0.038 0.110
0.032
0.121 0.037 0.005 0.010
Notes: This table reports the regression results of monthly changes in average currency basis
on the changes in other fixed-income spreads. The average currency basis is obtained as the
average of the absolute value of the five-year Libor cross-currency bases of G10 currencies.
The other fixed-income spreads include: (1) the KfW-Bund spread, defined as the spread
of a five-year euro-denominated KfW bonds over a five-year German Bund, obtained from
Bloomberg, (2) the U.S. dollar Libor tenor basis spread, defined as the five-year spread of exchanging one-month U.S. dollar Libor against three-month U.S. dollar Libor, obtained from
Bloomberg, (3) the bond-CDS spread for investment grade firms, obtained from Morgan Markets, and (4) the CDS-CDX spread, defined as difference between the average five-year CDS
spreads on the 125 constituents of the NA.IG.CDX index and the spread on the NA.IG.CDX
index, obtained from Markit. The first four columns focus on the 01/01/2005–02/01/2016
sample and the last four columns on the 1/1/2010–12/31/2015 sample. Newey-West standard errors are used with 12-month lags. One, two, and three stars denote significance levels
at 10, 5, and 1 percent confidence levels.

69

Appendix
Not For Publication
The Appendix contains additional information on the Libor panels and CDS spreads for
each panel (Section A), the definition and time-series of KfW bond basis, along with the
distribution of shorting costs for U.S. KfW bonds and the volume of KfW bonds outstanding
in different currencies (Section B), the characteristics of issuer-specific bases (Section C),
and time series plots for the IOER basis (Section D) and for the GCF-triparty repo spread
(Section A7).

A

CDS Spreads for Interbank Panels

We compute the average CDS spread for banks on the interbank panel in the respective
currencies. The banks on each interbank panel are listed as follows. We obtain 5-year CDS
spreads from Markit. A few banks do not have liquid CDS quotes and hence are excluded
from the calculation. The asterisk denotes banks with CDS spreads.
• AUD: Australia and New Zealand Banking Group*, Commonwealth Bank of Australia*, National Australia Bank*, and Westpac Banking Corporation*.
• CAD: BMO Nesbitt Burns, CIBC World Markets*, HSBC Bank Canada*, National
Bank Financial, RBC Dominion Securities, Scotia Capital Inc., and TD Securities Inc.
• CHF: Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi UFJ Ltd*, Barclays Bank plc*, Citibank NA*, Credit
Suisse*, Deutsche Bank AG*, HSBC*, JP Morgan Chase*, Lloyds Banking Group*,
Société Générale*, The Royal Bank of Scotland Group*, and UBS AG*
• DKK: Danske Bank*, Deutsche Bank*, Nordea Bank*, Jyske Bank, Nykredit Bank,
Sydbank Spar, and Nord Bank.
• EUR: Belfius*, Nordea*, Pohjola, BNP-Paribas*, Crédit Agricole s.a.*, HSBC France*,
Natixis-BPCE*, Société Générale*, Commerzbank*, Deutsche Bank*, DZ Bank Deutsche
1

Genossenschaftsbank*, National Bank of Greece*, Intesa Sanpaolo*, Monte dei Paschi
di Siena*, Unicredit*, Banque et Caisse d’Épargne de l’État*, ING Bank*, Caixa Geral
De Depósitos (CGD)*, Banco Bilbao Vizcaya Argentaria*, Banco Santander Central
Hispano*, CECABANK, CaixaBank S.A.*, Barclays Capital*, Den Danske Bank*,
Bank of Tokyo - Mitsubishi*, and J.P. Morgan Chase & Co*.
• GBP: Abbey National plc*, Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi UFJ Ltd*, Barclays Bank plc*,
BNP Paribas*, Citibank NA*, Credit Agricole CIB*, Deutsche Bank AG*, HSBC*,
JP Morgan Chase*, Lloyds Banking Group*, Mizuho Corporate Bank*, Rabobank*,
Royal Bank of Canada, The Royal Bank of Scotland Group*, Société Générale* and
UBS AG*.
• JPY: Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi UFJ Ltd*, Barclays Bank plc*, Credit Agricole CIB*,
Deutsche Bank AG*, HSBC*, JP Morgan Chase*, Lloyds Banking Group*, Mizuho
Corporate Bank*, Société Générale*, Sumitomo Mitsui Banking Corporation*, The
Norinchukin Bank*, The Royal Bank of Scotland Group*, and UBS AG*.
• NOK: DNB Bank ASA*, Danske Bank*, Handelsbanken*, Nordea Bank*, Norge
ASA*, SEB AB*, and Swedbank*.
• NZD: ANZ National Bank*, ASB Bank Ltd, Bank of New Zealand Ltd, Kiwibank Ltd,
and Westpac Banking Corporation Ltd*.
• SEK: Danske Bank*, Handelsbanken*, Länsförsäkringar Bank, Nordea*, SEB*, and
Swedbank*.
• USD: Bank of America*, Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi UFJ Ltd*, Barclays Bank plc*,
BNP Paribas*, Citibank NA*, Credit Agricole CIB*, Credit Suisse*, Deutsche Bank
AG*, HSBC*, JP Morgan Chase*, Lloyds Banking Group*, Rabobank*, Royal Bank of
Canada, Société Générale*, Sumitomo Mitsui Banking Corporation*, The Norinchukin
Bank*, The Royal Bank of Scotland Group*, and UBS AG*.
2

B
B.1

KfW Bonds in Different Currencies
Basis Definition with Coupon Bonds

For each individual bond issued by KfW denominated in currency j, we denote the coupon
rate of a n-year bond by c, paid q times per year. The principal is paid at the maturity time
t + n. The price of the bond in currency j is equal to

j
Pt,t+n

=

n/q
X
i=1

c
(1 +

j,Y T M τ
yt,t+τ
)

+

1
(1 +

j,Y T M n
yt,t+n
)

,

j,Y T M
where yt,t+τ
is the yield to maturity of the bond in currency j. We first compute the z-

spread of bond over the Libor interest rate swap rate of the respective currency. Using the
j,IRS
term structure of zero-coupon interest rate swap rates yt,t+τ
in currency j, the z-spread of

the bond in currency j, sjt,t+n , is given as by the following equation:

j
Pt,t+n

=

n/q
X

c

i=1

j,IRS
yt,t+τ

(1 +

+

sjt,t+n )τ

+

1
(1 +

j,IRS
yt,t+n

+ sjt,t+n )n

,

To compare z-spreads in different currencies, we use the term structure of the cross-currency
basis swaps to convert all floating benchmarks to the U.S. dollar Libor, and define synthetic
spread of bond in currency j over the U.S. dollar Libor, s̃jt,t+n , by

j
Pt,t+n

=

n/q
X
i=1

(1 +

j,IRS
yt,t+τ

c
1
+
.
xccy
j
j,IRS
j
τ
n
+ xt,t+τ + s̃t,t+n )
(1 + yt,t+n + xxccy
t,t+τ + s̃t,t+n )

Therefore, the KfW basis between the U.S. dollar and currency j is defined as

W,j
j
$
xKf
t,t+n ≡ st,t+n − s̃t,t+n ,

3

which gives the difference between the direct dollar borrowing cost, s$t,t+n , and the synthetic
dollar borrowing cost, s̃jt,t+n , both measured as spreads over U.S. Libor interest rate swap
rates.
Figure A1 displays the KfW currency basis for the Australian dollar, the Swiss franc, the
euro, and the Japanese yen, along with the Libor-based basis. In the case of the Australian
dollar, the Libor basis is significantly positive post-crisis, but the KfW basis is closer to zero.
For the three currencies with negative Libor basis post crisis (Swiss franc, the euro, and
the Japanese yen), however, the KfW basis is also negative and tracks the Libor basis very
closely.

40
Basis Points
−20
0
20
−40
−60
−80

−80

−60

−40

Basis Points
−20
0
20

40

60

CHF

60

AUD

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016
KfW basis

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016

Libor basis

KfW basis

−80

−80

−60

−60

−40

−40

Basis Points
−20
0
20

Basis Points
−20
0
20

40

40

60

JPY

60

EUR

Libor basis

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016
KfW basis

Libor basis

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016
KfW basis

Libor basis

Figure A1: KfW Cross-Currency Basis: The red line plots the KfW crosscurrency basis: The red-line plots the cross-currency basis for KfW. The green line plots
the Libor cross-currency basis. All U.S. dollar and foreign currency KfW bonds are matched
by their maturity in years.
4

B.2

Shorting Costs

Figure A2 reports the 25 percentile, median and 75 percentile of shorting costs for U.S. dollar

−100

0

bps
100

200

300

bonds issued by KfW.

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

25 percentile

2012

2013

median

2014

2015

2016

75 percentile

Figure A2: Shorting Costs for KfW USD Bonds: This figure shows the 25 percentile, median
and 75 percentile of fees across all transactions for shorting U.S. dollar denominated KfW
bonds. Data Source: Markit Securities Finance.

B.3

KfW Basis versus Volume Outstanding

We obtain KfW volume outstanding by currencies from the KfW Investor Relations online.
Figure A3 plots the KfW basis computed in Section 3.3 against the log KfW bond volume
outstanding by currency.

5

0

USD

KfW basis (bps)
−20
−10

NZD

AUD

CAD
NOK

SEK

GBP

EUR

CHF

−30

JPY

0

.5

1
1.5
Log outstanding in billions USD

2

2.5

Figure A3: KfW Basis vs. Bond Volume Outstanding by Currency: This figure plots
the KfW basis computed in Section 3.3 against the log KfW bond volume outstanding by
currency. The correlation between the two variables is 36%. Data Source: KfW Investor
Relations.

6

B.4

KfW Basis and Interest Rates

We examine the cross-sectional differentials in synthetic dollar borrowing costs for KfW.
Since KfW bond yields are not observed for all currencies at all tenors on each trading date,
we obtain the mean KfW basis by running a fixed-effect regression controlling for the trading
date and tenor over the 2010–2015 sample:

W,j
s̃Kf
t,t+n =

X

βjKf W Dj + αt,n ,

(A1)

j6=U SD

W,j
where s̃Kf
denotes the synthetic dollar spread of a n-year KfW bond denominated in
t,t+n

currency j over the U.S. Libor interest rate swap of the corresponding maturity, Dj is a
dummy indicating currency j, and αt,j is a tenor-date pair fixed effect. Since the U.S. dollardenominated bonds are the omitted category in the regression, (minus) the coefficient −βjKf W
on currency dummy Dj gives the mean KfW basis for currency j. As shown in the middle left
panel of Figure 10, the KfW basis is strongly correlated with the nominal KfW bond yields.
For KfW, all mean bases are negative, suggesting that the KfW is better off funding in U.S.
dollars instead of any other G10 currencies. The Australian and New Zealand dollars are the
cheapest funding currencies after the U.S. dollar, despite of their high nominal yields, and
the Japanese yen and the Swiss franc are the most expensive funding currencies even though
their nominal yields are among the lowest. The cross-sectional correlation between the KfW
basis and the nominal interest rate is 95%. We note that the liquidity across currencies does
not explain the cross-sectional variation in the KfW basis. As shown in Appendix Figure
A3, the correlation between the log KfW bond outstanding by currency and the KfW basis
is much lower at 35%.
Moreover, the same relationship between basis and interest rates holds for other multicurrency issuers, as shown in the middle right panel of Figure 10: the multinational basis

7

again increases with nominal yield differentials.32 For both the KfW and multinational
basis, the gap between the most expensive and the cheapest funding currency is about 30
to 40 basis points, which is smaller than the 100 basis point cost differentials between the
Australian dollar and the Japanese yen based on Libor, but remains economically significant
nevertheless. OIS rates and Treasury lead to similar results, as shown in the bottom two
panels of Figure 10.

C

Issuer-Specific Basis for Risky Issuers

Near-arbitrage opportunities exist for bonds issued by the same risky issuer in different
currencies. Under some additional assumptions, the CIP condition can be expressed in
$
and yt,t+n correspond to yields
terms of defaultable rates. In a frictionless market, if yt,t+n

on defaultable bonds with the same default probability and recovery rates, as long as the
exchange rate process and the default process are independent, the currency basis is zero:
xt,t+n = 0 (see Buraschi, Menguturk, and Sener, 2015, or Proposition 2 in Du and Schreger,
forth.). In practice, the same default and recovery rates hold for bonds of the same issuer
under the pari passu clause and the impact of the covariance between currency and corporate
credit risk appears small.33
As for the KfW basis, we define the issuer-specific basis for any issuer k as follows:

$,k
j,k
xkt,t+n = yt,t+n
− (yt,t+n
− ρjt,t+n ),

(A2)

32
The following issuers with diverse funding currency mix are included in the regression: the European
Investment Bank, the World Bank, the four largest Australian banks (Commanwealth Bank, Westpac,
Australia and New Zealand Banking Group and National Australia Bank), Citi, JP Morgan, Goldman
Sachs and General Electric.
33
Du and Schreger (Forthcoming) give a simple calibration as follows. Assume that the foreign currency
depreciates against the U.S. dollar by α percents in the event of a corporate default compared to the nondefault state, and assume that the U.S. dollar bond yield is equal to yt∗$ + spt , where yt∗$ is the risk-free
rate in the U.S. dollar and spt is the credit spread. Then the synthetic dollar yield by swapping a foreign
currency bond into the U.S. dollar should be equal to (1 − α)st + ρt + yt∗$ . Suppose that the credit spread
is equal to spt = 100 basis points and that α = 5%, and then the deviations from CIP for the corporate
issuer should be around αst = 5 basis points. Even an exchange rate depreciation of 20% at the time of a
corporate default would only entail a CIP deviation of 20 basis points. As we shall see, the CIP deviations
are much larger than that.

8

$,k
i,k
where yt,t+n
denotes the dollar bond yield of issuer k and yt,t+n
denotes the bond yield of

currency j issued by the same issuer k. We focus on the issuer-specific basis for a panel of
global banks with active multi-currency long-term debt issuance, including three U.S. banks
(Citi, JP Morgan and Goldman Sachs), six European banks (Barclays, Deutsche Bank,
BNP Parisbas, Societe Generale, Credit Suisse and UBS), four Australian banks (National
Australia Bank, Commonwealth, Australia and New Zealand Banking Group and Westpac)
and one Japanese bank (Bank of Tokyo Mitsubishi). In addition, we also included debt
issuance by the financing arms of Honda and Toyota in the case of Japan . We construct the
issuer-specific basis by matching the maturity year and seniority of the dollar and foreign
currency bonds of issuer k. All data on bond yields in the secondary market are from
Bloomberg.
Figure A4 shows the issuer-specific bases for the Australian dollar, the Swiss franc, the
euro and the yen across different issuers, together with the Libor cross-currency basis. Issuerspecific bases were also close to zero before the global financial crisis. Since the crisis, there
has been a large cross-sectional dispersion in the basis across issuers. The sign of the crosscurrency basis for each currency depends on the specific issuer. In particular, as shown
in Figure A5, U.S. banks, on average, have a persistently lower issuer-specific basis than
foreign banks since the global financial crisis, which points to a comparative advantage of
U.S. banks over foreign banks in direct funding in dollars. The significant differences in
relative funding costs can potentially explain why foreign banks heavily rely on funding
in their local currencies and then swap into U.S. dollars rather than borrowing directly in
the U.S. dollar markets, especially during the periods of distress (Ivashina, Scharfstein, and
Stein, 2015). For U.S.-domiciled entities and AAA-rated agencies and supranationals (like
KfW described in the previous subsection), it is more advantageous, from a pure funding
cost perspective, to borrow directly in U.S. dollars. In addition, we note the average bankspecific basis can be closer to zero than the Libor basis, which suggests that bank treasuries
are engaging in funding cost arbitrage using long-term debt. However, compared to the pre-

9

crisis period, the average issuer-specific basis is significantly larger and more volatile after
the crisis, which implies a reduction in the effectiveness of the arbitrage.

200
0
−200
−400

−400

−200

0

200

400

CHF Basis

400

AUD Basis

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015
AUD banks

CITI

GS

JPMC

BAC

DB

UBS

EIB

KfW

GE

Toyota

Libor Basis

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015

CS

AUD banks

CITI

GS

JPMC

BAC

DB

CS

UBS

BNP

EIB

KfW

GE

Toyota

Libor Basis

JPY Basis

−400

−400

−200

−200

0

0

200

200

400

400

EUR Basis

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015
AUD banks

CITI

GS

JPMC

BAC

DB

CS

SG

BNP

EIB

KfW

GE

Toyota

Libor Basis

UBS

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015
AUD banks

CITI

GS

JPMC

BAC

DB

CS

BNP

EIB

KfW

GE

Toyota

Honda

Libor Basis

Figure A4: Issuer-Specific Cross-Currency Bases for Multi-currency Issuers: The
figure shows issuer-specific cross-currency bases, together with the Libor cross-currency basis.
All bonds for the same issuer are matched by the maturity year and seniority.

10

UBS

CHF

−200

−300

−200

−100

Basis Points
−100
0

Basis Points
0
100

100

200

200

AUD

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

Australian Bank

2011

2012

U.S. Banks

2013

2014

2015

2004

2005

Libor basis

2006

2007

2008

2009

Swiss banks

2011

2012

U.S. Banks

2013

2014

2015

Libor basis

JPY

−200

−200

−100

−100

Basis Points
0

Basis Points
0
100

100

200

200

EUR

2010

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

European banks

2011

U.S. Banks

2012

2013

2014

2015

Libor basis

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

Japanese financials

2009

2010

2011

U.S. Banks

2012

2013

2014

Libor basis

Figure A5: Average Issuer-Specific Basis by Issuer Type: The figure shows the average
issuer-specific cross-currency bases by issuer types, together with the Libor cross-currency
basis. All bonds for the same issuer are matched by the maturity year and seniority. “Australia Banks” include Australia and New Zealand Banking Group, Commonwealth Bank
of Australia, National Australia Bank, and Westpac Banking Corporation; “Swiss Banks”
include Credit Suisse and UBS; “European Banks” include Barclays, Deutsche Bank, BNP
Parisbas, Societe Generale, Credit Suisse and UBS; “Japanese Financials” include Bank of
Tokyo, Honda and Toyota; “U.S. banks” include Citi, Goldman Sachs and JP Morgan.

D

IOER Basis

Figure A6 plots the IOER basis, together with the Libor basis and the modified Libor basis
by “funding” in the IOER.

11

2015

EUR 1−Week Basis

−150

−100

−150 −100

Basis Points
−50
0

Basis Points
−50
0

50

50

100

100

CHF 1−Week Basis

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016
2009

Libor

IOER−Libor

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

IOER
Libor

Basis<−150 bps not shown

IOER

50
Basis Points
−50
0
−100
−150

−150

−100

Basis Points
−50
0

50

100

JPY 1−Week Basis

100

DKK 1−Week Basis

IOER−Libor

2009

2010

2011

Libor

2012

2013

2014

IOER−Libor

2015

2016

2009

IOER

2010

2011

Libor

Basis<−150 bps not shown

2012

2013

2014

IOER−Libor

2015

2016

IOER

Basis<−150 bps not shown

Figure A6: CIP Deviations using Interest on Excess Reserves: This figure plots
the one-week cross-currency basis for the Swiss franc (CHF), the euro (EUR), the Danish
Krone (DKK), and the Japanese yen (JPY). The green line, denoted “Libor,” refers to the
conventional Libor cross-currency basis. The orange line, denoted “IOER-Libor,” refers to
the basis obtained by borrowing at the U.S. IOER rate and investing in foreign currency at
the Libor rate, while hedging the currency risk. The red line, denoted “IOER,” refers to the
basis obtained by borrowing at the U.S. IOER rate and investing in foreign currency at the
IOER rate, while hedging the currency risk.

12

Repo-GCF Spreads

0

20

basis points
40
60

80

100

E

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

Figure A7: GCF-Triparty Treasury Repo Spread: This figure plots the difference
between the repo rates backed by Treasury securities traded in the GCF and the triparty
markets. The triparty repo rates are from the BNY Mellon repo index and the GCF rates
are from the DTCC GCF index. The shaded area denotes quarter ends.

13

