                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              CURRENCY MATTERS:
                   ANALYZING INTERNATIONAL BOND PORTFOLIOS

                                        John D. Burger
                                      Francis E. Warnock
                                   Veronica Cacdac Warnock

                                      Working Paper 23175
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23175


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                          February 2017, Revised November 2017




The authors thank Anderson Silva of the World Bank for GEMLOC investability data, Branimir
Grui of BIS for data on the size of local currency and USD-denominated bond markets,
McKinsey Global Institute for data on the size of global financial assets and John Rogers, Chiara
Scotti and Jonathan Wright for their unconventional monetary policy shocks data. We also thank
for helpful comments Carol Bertaut, Brent Neiman, Eric Swanson and participants at workshops
at BIS/IADB, Federal Reserve Board, George Washington University, Wake Forest University
and NBER IFM. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by John D. Burger, Francis E. Warnock, and Veronica Cacdac Warnock. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Currency Matters: Analyzing International Bond Portfolios
John D. Burger, Francis E. Warnock, and Veronica Cacdac Warnock
NBER Working Paper No. 23175
February 2017, Revised November 2017
JEL No. F3,G1

                                        ABSTRACT

Currency denomination is a prominent feature in the analysis of the structure of international
bond markets, but is largely absent from analyses of cross-border investment in debt
securities. This omission owes in part to the limitations of widely used datasets such as the
IMF’s CPIS data (on positions) and its BOP data (on flows): Neither identifies the currency
denomination of the underlying bonds and both combine bonds of various currencies in a
single data point. In this paper we show that bonds denominated in the investor’s currency
are special. We show this indirectly in a global dataset of bilateral bond holdings—indirectly
because the global holdings dataset does not differentiate by currency denomination—and
then more directly in datasets of US holdings of foreign bonds that do differentiate by
currency. We find that the share of a country’s bonds denominated in investors’ currencies is
an important determinant of the amount of cross-border investment it receives; factors
associated with greater (or less) cross-border investment in bonds differ by currency
denomination; and one phenomenon of international portfolios—the ever-present home bias
—in some cases actually disappears when bonds are denominated in the investor’s currency,
suggesting that the home bias is to some extent a home currency bias.

John D. Burger                                           Veronica Cacdac Warnock
Loyola University Maryland                               Darden Business School
4501 N. Charles Street                                   University of Virginia
Baltimore MD 21210-2699                                  Box 6550
jburger@loyola.edu                                       Charlottesville, VA 22906-6550
                                                         vwarnock@virginia.edu
Francis E. Warnock
Darden Business School
University of Virginia
Charlottesville, VA 22906-6550
and NBER
warnockf@darden.virginia.edu
1. Introduction
        Currency denomination is a prominent feature in the analysis of the structure of

international bond markets. For example, Burger and Warnock (2006), Claessens, Klingebiel and

Schmukler (2007) and the entire original sin literature (e.g. Eichengreen and Hausmann 1999,

2004; Goldstein and Turner 2004) are all based on differentiating bonds denominated in the local

currency from bonds denominated in a foreign currency. 1 And it is well understood that the

currency denomination of a country’s bonds has important implications—not the least, financial

stability implications—for a local economy. The inclusion of the currency denomination of

bonds is now standard when analyzing the structure of international bond markets.

        In sharp contrast, currency denomination is almost never featured in the analysis of

international investment in bonds for one very basic reason: Most datasets on cross-border bond

investment do not distinguish bonds by currency denomination. Neither the IMF’s Coordinated

Portfolio Investment Survey (CPIS) data on positions nor its Balance of Payments (BOP) data on

flows, both widely used, differentiate investment by the currency denomination of the underlying

bonds; both combine bonds of various currencies into a single data point. 2 As a result, papers on

international bond holdings (see, among others, Lane (2006) and Fidora, Fratzscher and Thimann

(2007)) and papers that analyze bond flows—from Chuhan, Claessens and Mamingi (1998) to

the more recent Fratzscher (2012), Fratzscher, Lo Duca and Straub (2016), IMF (2011), Lim,

Mohapatra and Stoker (2014), Cerutti, Claessens and Puy (2016) and Chari, Dilts and Lundblad

(2016)—tend to do so without differentiating by currency denomination. Indeed, we know of no

analysis of international bond flows that differentiates by currency denomination.




1
  More recent papers on the structure of bond markets that incorporate information on the currency denomination of
bonds include Du and Schreger (2016), Hale and Spiegel (2012) and Hale, Jones and Spiegel (2017), among others.
2
  The IMF has recently started to report aggregate, but not bilateral, data on currency composition in their CPIS
dataset. For an analysis, see Galstyan, Mehigan and Mercado (2017).

                                                        1
        Our main points can be made using four regional graphs (Figure 1) and the simple home

bias measure relative weight. 3 For US investors, the relative weight of asset i (for the purpose of

this example, call i a region’s bonds) is its weight in US portfolios relative to its weight in global

markets. A relative weight of less than one indicates that the investors underweight a particular

region’s bonds. Our main points are as follows:

        1. Investor-currency bonds are special. In their portfolios, investors greatly underweight

bonds not denominated in their currency. For example, US investors’ relative weights on the

local currency bonds of both advanced economies (AEs) and emerging market economies

(EMEs) are very low, in some cases near zero (Figure 1a). But portfolio weights on foreign

bonds denominated in US investors’ home currency are much closer to market weights. Relative

weights are quite high on USD-denominated bonds issued by foreign entities (Figure 1b); US

investors hold some regions’ USD-denominated bonds at market portfolio weights; and for all

regions the relative weights on USD-denominated bonds are substantially higher than those on

local currency bonds.

        2. The share of bonds issued in foreign investors’ currencies varies across countries and

through time. Figure 1c shows the share of each region’s bonds that are denominated in US

dollars. Some regions, such as Latin America and “EME Other”, issue a higher share of their

bonds in US dollars than others. 4

        3. Together, the above two points suggest that countries that issue a larger proportion of

bonds in foreign investors’ currencies will receive more foreign investment. US investors’

relative weight on all bonds (i.e., bonds of all currency denominations) from each region are



3
  There is a vast literature on home bias; see, among many others, Lewis (1999) and Cooper, Sercu and Vanpee
(2012) and cites therein.
4
  EME Other in Figure 1 is Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, Russia, South Africa and Turkey. Other AEs are
Australia, Denmark, Hong Kong, Japan, New Zealand, Singapore, Korea and Sweden.

                                                        2
shown in Figure 1d. Relative weight is higher in regions that tend to issue more

USD-denominated bonds (Latin America and ‘EME Other’) and lowest in the regions that issue

the least USD-denominated bonds. 5

        The rest of the paper provides details and supporting evidence for those main points:

Investor-currency bonds are special and the share of investor-currency bonds varies across

countries (and through time) in a way that influences top-line aggregate bond flows and

international bond positions.

        We start with a global bilateral bond holdings dataset—the IMF’s CPIS dataset—that

does not differentiate by the currency denomination of the underlying bonds. In regressions that

include two bilateral explanatory variables highlighted in the literature (trade linkages and

exchange rate volatility) as well as a full set of source country and destination country fixed

effects, the proportion of a country’s bonds denominated in the currency of the investor is

positive and highly significant. Bilateral trade linkages are still important: The greater trade is

between two countries, the greater are bilateral bond holdings (similar to the Lane and Milesi-

Ferretti (2008) finding for equities). But once the share of a destination country’s bonds

denominated in the investor’s currency is included as a control, another established result is

greatly weakened: After controlling for the strong positive impact of investor currency issuance

on bilateral holdings, we no longer find that greater exchange rate volatility is associated with

less cross-border bond investment (counter to Fidora et al. 2007). The exchange rate volatility

result does reappear if the sample is limited to AE source/AE destination pairs; perhaps hedging

costs are related to volatility in this set of countries and higher hedging costs make cross-border


5
 A few words on terminology that we use in this paper. Regarding investment levels, home bias is a bias for home
securities (and against foreign securities), as in Lewis (1999), and home currency bias is a bias for securities
denominated in the investor’s home currency. Regarding the currency denomination of bond issuance, local
currency bonds are denominated in the issuer’s currency and foreign currency bonds are denominated in other
currencies (including, possibly, the foreign investor’s currency).

                                                        3
investment less attractive. But the main finding from the CPIS analysis is that when analyzing

cross-border bond holdings for which the currency denomination of the underlying bond is not

identified, it is difficult to differentiate a preference of one country’s investors for another

country’s bonds from a propensity of a destination country to issue bonds in the investor’s

currency.

        We then turn to analysis of US investment data that do identify the bond’s currency

denomination. For reasons explained in Section 2, we use two US-based datasets. One, broad and

short, includes 40 countries (21 AEs, 19 EMEs) and spans 2006 to 2011. The other is longer

(2006 to 2015) and includes 15 EMEs. Before doing any statistical analysis, one observation is

immediately evident in both datasets: Bonds denominated in the currency of the investor are

fundamentally different than bonds denominated in other currencies. Indeed, for bonds

denominated in the investor’s currency there is little or no home bias—many such bonds enter

investors’ portfolios with market weights—while the familiar home bias is evident for foreign

currency bonds.

        In regression analysis of the US data—regressions that aim to explain US portfolio

reallocations and include a full set of local “pull” factors and global “push” factors—the most

striking results are when we lump together bonds of all currencies (as would be done in CPIS

data), in effect pretending that the bonds’ currency denomination is not identified in the holdings

dataset. In such regressions, the coefficient on the share of bonds denominated in the investor’s

currency (in the US-based datasets, this is the US dollar) is highly significant. Moreover, this

strong relationship between US investment and the currency denomination of bonds is apparent

in both AEs and EMEs and both in the cross-section (i.e., across countries) and within countries

through time. In the longer sample we are able to use a two-stage instrumental variables (IV)

approach. The instrumented share of investor-currency bonds is still positive and significant.


                                                   4
Interestingly, the IV results also suggest that the impact of US unconventional monetary policy is

primarily through an increase in the share of EME bonds denominated in USD.

       Separating bonds by currency denomination provides additional insights. In the broad,

short sample, some factors are significant determinants of the amount of US investment in both

USD and local currency bonds. For example, countries with greater trade linkages with the US

have more US investment in both local currency and USD bonds. But the effects of other factors

differ by the currency denomination of the underlying bonds. Our bond-specific measure of

financial account openness is highly significant for USD bonds, but not for local currency bonds;

perhaps US investors fear that capital controls are more likely to be imposed on foreign currency

rather than local currency bonds. The effect of US long rates also varies by currency

denomination: Lower US Treasury yields are associated with greater investment in local

currency denominated bonds but not in USD-denominated bonds.

       The simple facts depicted in Figure 1 and supported by regression analysis of three

datasets have important implications. The first is straightforward: Investor-currency bonds and

bonds denominated in other currencies seem to be fundamentally different to investors and their

shares vary across countries, implying that off-the-shelf flows and positions data mix very

different asset classes in ways (i.e. weights) that vary across countries. Empirical analysis of any

cross-border bond investment dataset that does not indicate the currency of the underlying bonds

should include a measure of the currency composition of recipient-countries’ bonds, otherwise it

risks omitting an important variable. The second implication of our analysis is also

straightforward but a bit deeper. The US data present a simple but striking fact: For foreign

bonds denominated in USD, the ever-present home bias in asset holdings often disappears. Our

results, coupled with others’ work on international bond investment—Maggiori, Neiman and

Schreger (2017) and Boermans and Vermeulen (2016a, 2016b) find that the preference for bonds


                                                 5
issued in the investor’s currency extends beyond US investors—indicate that currency

denomination is an important factor behind the home bias in international bond portfolios. 6

Coupled with the Edison and Warnock (2004) results on the effects of cross-listing on equity

portfolios, our results and those of others suggest that home bias is at least in part a home

currency bias.

         Our exploration of the role that currency denomination plays in global bond markets

begins in Section 2 with a discussion of the strengths and limitations of available data sets. In

Section 3 we briefly explore the CPIS dataset, which does not identify the currency

denomination of bilateral bond holdings, before turning in Section 4 to data on US cross-border

holdings that do identify currency denomination. Section 5 extends the analysis to model the

currency composition of bond markets, while Section 6 concludes.



2. Descriptive Analysis: The Amount and Currency Composition of Outstanding Bonds

         As a first step to understanding the relationship between currency denomination and

international portfolios we look to data on the stock of outstanding bonds. To be useful for our

purposes, such data must identify the currency denomination of the underlying bonds and should

also provide an indication of the maturity of the underlying securities. 7

         A good source for such information has been unpublished Bank for International

Settlements (BIS) data on outstanding bonds by country and currency, placed both domestically

and internationally. Methodology for the BIS bonds data bonds changed materially in 2012, so


6
  Other papers that use cross-border data on bond positions that differentiate by currency include Burger and
Warnock (2007), Burger, Warnock and Warnock (2012), Burger, Sengupta, Warnock and Warnock (2015) and
Bertaut, Tabova and Wong (2014).
7
  Maturity indication is important so that bonds (original maturity greater than one year) can be separated from
short-term debt securities such as money market instruments and commercial paper. Even if one wanted to focus on
all debt securities, including very short-term paper, a dataset that does not specify the maturity of the underlying
securities may well include just long-term debt for some countries and a mix of short- and long-term for other
countries. To avoid this, maturity should be explicitly recorded in the dataset.

                                                         6
before presenting basic analyses based on two datasets—the pre-2012 vintage and the current

vintage—we briefly describe them and some challenges.



         2.1 BIS Bond Data (pre-2012 vintage)

         Prior to 2012, BIS bond data came in two complementary datasets on domestic debt and

international bonds. The first dataset came from the BIS Quarterly Review “Table 16A. Domestic

Debt Securities”. The BIS defined domestic debt as local currency bonds issued by locals in the

local market (i.e., not placed directly abroad). To focus on debt securities with original maturity

longer than one year, one needed to request from the BIS the data underlying Table 16A to

separate bonds from short-term notes and commercial paper. 8 The complementary dataset came

from BIS Quarterly Review “Table 14B. International Bonds and Notes by Country of

Residence”, which defined international bonds as those bonds issued either in a different

currency or in a different market. The data underlying that table also had to be requested from

the BIS in order to identify issuance by currency and country, a decomposition not published in

the BIS Quarterly Review. Combined, the two datasets on long-term domestic debt and

international bonds provided a complete picture of the outstanding stock of long-term debt

securities issued by currency denomination.

         Table 1 shows the size and currency composition of bond markets in 25 advanced

economies and 21 emerging market economies for two years, 2001 and 2011, data analyzed in

Burger and Warnock (2006) and Burger et al. (2015). A number of salient facts emerge from the

pre-2012 vintage BIS data. In dollar terms, at the end of 2011 the global bond market (defined by


8
  The split between bonds/notes and short-term paper can be important. Consider, for example, Brazil. A large
proportion of Brazilian debt securities are short-term; see Leal and Carvalhal da Silva (2008) for a detailed analysis.
In the old BIS database, Brazilian debt securities were broken out by maturity (and currency denomination), and it
showed that, as of end-2011, about $1 trillion of its $1.5 trillion in domestic debt securities were short-term
instruments (e.g., money market). Using the old dataset, one can omit Brazilian short-term instruments and focus on
Brazilian domestic long-term debt securities (which totaled $0.5 trillion at end-2011).

                                                           7
this set of 46 countries) was $82.5 trillion—$75.9 trillion in AEs, $6.7 trillion in EMEs—which

is almost triple the $30 trillion in 2001. The local currency portion of these bond markets grew

faster than nominal GDP in all AEs except Switzerland and in just over half the EMEs. By 2011

most bonds in this set of countries—91% of AE bonds and 88% of EME bonds—were local

currency denominated. Local currency bond markets were, as a percent of GDP, much larger in

AEs (161% of GDP) than in EMEs (29% of GDP) but had grown faster in EMEs: EME local

currency bonds increased as a share of the total global bond market from 3.3% in 2001 to 7.1%

in 2011. With larger local currency bond markets, EMEs exhibited less reliance on foreign

currency borrowing; the share of EME bonds denominated in a foreign currency fell from 29%

in 2001 to only 12% in 2011. The development of local currency bond markets has been

particularly striking in Latin America: In 2001 nearly half of Latin American bonds were

denominated in foreign currency, but by 2011 local currency bond markets had grown such that

only one quarter of bonds in the region were denominated in foreign currency.



           2.2 BIS Bond Data (current vintage)

           BIS changed its methodology for the debt securities data in 2012; see Gruić and

Wooldridge (2012). The new methodology aims to improve data quality along some

dimensions—and indeed the current vintage of data are not consistent with earlier vintages,

precluding an expansion of the above historical analysis beyond 2011—but also impedes our

inquiry mainly because, in practical terms, it reduces the number of countries. Under the new

methodology, many countries report debt securities data without the domestic and international

breakdown and/or without the breakdown by maturity; for these countries, information on

currency denomination and maturity are concealed in the aggregated statistics. 9 For analysis like


9
    Details about countries’ reporting practices are at http://www.bis.org/statistics/coverage.pdf.

                                                             8
ours that requires currency and maturity information, the new BIS data has much fewer

countries: only 9 AEs (none from the euro area) and 15 EMEs (but not China or Brazil, the two

with the largest bond markets) provide the BIS with information on domestic debt securities by

residence, sector of issuer and original maturity. Given that there are so few AEs with complete

data in the new BIS bonds data, when using a sample that goes beyond 2011 we include only

EMEs, for which there are data for a reasonable number of countries, but not AEs.

        Table 2 present aggregate summary statistics for the 13 EMEs that have complete data for

both 2009 and 2015: the Latin American EMEs Chile, Colombia, Mexico and Peru; Asian EMEs

South Korea, Malaysia, Pakistan, Philippines and Thailand; and other EMEs Israel, Russia,

South Africa and Turkey. For these 13 countries, local currency bond markets grew from $2289

billion in 2009 to $3281 billion in 2015. As a percent of local GDP, their size increased modestly

from about 42% to 46% and their weight in the global bond market increased from 2.7% to

3.5%. 10 Foreign-currency-denominated bonds for this set of EMEs also increased, from $436

billion to $851 billion, increasing from 8.0% to 11.8% of local GDP and nearly doubling its

weight in the global bond market (from 0.5% to 0.9%). Of the foreign-currency-denominated

bonds, in 2015 most are USD denominated ($714 billion out of $851 billion).

        Figures 2a and 2b provide some country-by-country information on the evolution of EME

bond markets for the 13 EMEs in Table 2 plus India and Hungary (whose BIS data begin after

2009). Local currency bonds as a percent of GDP (Figure 2a) has increased smartly since 2006 in

Asia and Latin America (especially in Chile, Mexico, South Korea, Malaysia and Thailand).

Local currency bonds as a share of all bonds (Figure 2b) has increased (or at least maintained

high levels) in Asian EMEs. In Latin American countries and some other EMEs, the share of



10
   According to data from McKinsey Global Institute, at the end of 2015, the size of global bond markets was $95
trillion.

                                                        9
bonds denominated in the local currency has declined recently, but when compared to data in

Table 1 is still much higher than in 2001. 11

         To summarize, global bond markets have grown substantially over the past 15 years;

EME bond markets have become a larger share of the global bond market; and within EMEs the

vast majority of bonds are now local currency denominated, a recent increase in foreign currency

denominated bonds notwithstanding.


3. Currency Denomination and International Bond Portfolios: A First Glance Using
Portfolio Data that Do Not Identify Currency Denomination

         Most capital flows and international investment datasets do not differentiate by currency

denomination, so as a first pass we will use one such dataset—the IMF’s CPIS dataset—to

illustrate that currency denomination may well be important when analyzing international bond

portfolios and, by extension, bond capital flows. Our analysis, using a roughly 40-by-40 cross-

section of bilateral bond investment (i.e., the bilateral bond holdings between 40 investor/source

countries and 40 investment/destination countries), will be through simple two-way fixed effects

regressions as in Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2008) and Fidora et al. (2007). The question we ask:

Might the currency composition of outstanding bonds be an important factor to consider when

analyzing bilateral international bond investment?

         Before presenting results from the global CPIS dataset, we first highlight some

limitations. One, its bilateral holdings do not differentiate by the currency denomination of the

bond. Two, it has a well-known financial center bias, especially when residents use non-resident

intermediaries for their cross-border bond investments. Table 3 depicts this financial center bias

using 2006 CPIS data on the Eurozone. Eurozone countries whose residents tend to use foreign



11
  We note parenthetically that the decline over the past few years in local currency share in Latin America and
“other” EMEs is primarily due to an increase in foreign currency issuance by the private sector.

                                                         10
(in this case, Luxembourg) intermediaries show enormous positions in that foreign country. On

cross-border equity holdings, the CPIS reports the following shares of investors the Luxembourg

market: 122% by the French, 329% by the Germans and 381% by the Italians. In sum, eurozone

residents held 1199% of the Luxembourg market, which cannot be true. The explanation for the

reported foreign holdings being much greater than the stock of existing Luxembourg equities lies

in the following: the CPIS counts the cross-border holdings of mutual funds as “equities”, which

is technically correct, yet misleading for the purpose of mapping bilateral international

investment. Felettigh and Monti (2008) point to this third country “mutual fund effect”, focusing

on Italy and finding that more than 90% of Italian “equity” investment in Luxembourg (which

itself amounts to half of all reported Italian international equity investment) is actually in mutual

funds. Moreover, they estimate that perhaps two-thirds of those Italian mutual fund investments

is actually in bond funds. Felettigh and Monti do not provide information on where those bond

funds are invested, but guess that much are in US bonds, German bonds, Japanese bonds, and the

bonds of many other countries (and perhaps even some of Luxembourg). A common fix

implemented by Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2008) and others when working with the bilateral

CPIS data is to omit financial centers in the analysis. However, in the process, this might leave

out a large amount of bond investment (which are labeled as equities in the CPIS) of countries

whose residents tend to use third-country intermediaries.

       The above discussion argues for one choice we make: Because of its limiting features, we

examine just one particular cross-section of CPIS data, that from 2003, rather than attempting to

collect more recent data (or analyzing a panel dataset). This choice is reasonable because the

period is roughly the same vintage as Lane (2006), Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2008) and Fidora et

al (2007). Moreover, using a cross-section of CPIS data even when multiple years of data are

available has precedence. For example, Fidora et al (2007, pg. 643) stated that “[s]ince the time


                                                 11
dimension of the data is limited and, moreover, changes over time are very small and mainly

reflect valuation changes rather than cross-border investment flows we use averaged data over

the period 2001-2003 and thus estimate a pure cross-section”, and Lane and Milesi-Ferretti

(2008, pg. 540) stated the following: “We rely on data…reporting holdings at end-2001. … The

survey is now annual, with data now also available for 2002-2006. However, in contrast to the

2001 survey, subsequent data are not derived from benchmark surveys in all countries—for

instance, the United States did not conduct a comprehensive survey in all of those years. [I]n

light of the very high correlation of bilateral investment patterns across 2001-2006, we opted to

focus on the cross-section dimension.”

       Following Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2008) and Fidora et al (2007), we include a full set

of source and destination country fixed effects. Together these will account for much of the

variation, capturing (as Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2008) note) national characteristics that explain

why some countries are more attractive than others to all investors and features that explain why

some countries generally hold larger outward investment positions than others. Our dependent

variable—the share of source country foreign bond holdings issued by each destination

country—is bounded by zero and one, so we use a Tobit estimator. According to our regressions,

about 14 percent of the sample is left-censored (62% of which are EME source countries) and

none is right-censored. For bilateral variables we include two highlighted in the literature:

Volatility, emphasized in Fidora et al (2007), calculated here as the standard deviation over a 10-

year period of bilateral exchange rate changes, and Linkages, emphasized by Lane (2006) and

Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2008), calculated here as the share of imports from the destination

country in all of the investor’s country’s imports. We also include as a bilateral variable

Issuance, defined as the share of the destination country’s bonds that are denominated in the

investor’s currency. We group regression results in Table 4 by the type of the investor’s country


                                                 12
(all, AE or EME) and then, for AE and EME investors, by type of destination country (AE or

EME).

        In the full global set of countries, trade linkages are very important (Table 4, column 1).

The greater the amount of trade between two countries is, the greater the bilateral bond holdings

are. (This is the main finding, albeit in an equity setting, of Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2008)). The

share of the destination country’s bonds denominated in the investor’s currency is also positive

and significant: the more a country’s bonds are denominated in the foreign investor’s currency,

the greater are the bilateral bond holdings. The coefficient on Volatility is negative but

insignificant; if regressions were estimated with Volatility as the only bilateral explanatory

variable, but still with a full set of source and destination dummies (similar to Fidora et al. 2007),

exchange rate volatility would be negative and significant.

        Splitting the sample by type of source country sheds more light. Limiting the sample to

the bilateral bond holdings of advanced economies (shown in columns 2-4) illustrates (again)

that trade linkages and the currency denomination of bonds are very important. And it is only for

one slice of the dataset—from AE to AE (source-destination) country pairs (column 3)—that the

coefficient for Volatility is negative and significant; perhaps hedging costs are related to

exchange rate volatility in this set of countries and higher hedging costs make cross-border

investment less attractive. Finally, turning to regressions limited to EMEs as source (columns

5-7), trade linkages and the currency composition of bonds are important; exchange rate

volatility is only significant in one slice (from EME to EME), where it is positive rather than

negative.

        The Issuance results in Table 4 are not solely due to the global reserve status of the US

dollar. If we omit the US as a source country (untabulated), the only material change in the

regressions is in column 4, where the magnitude of the coefficient does not change but the


                                                 13
standard error increases enough to lose significance. If we were to omit both the US and the

entire Eurozone as source countries, Issuance is positive but not significant in the sub-split

samples (columns 3 and 4), but remains positive and significant elsewhere.

       Results in Table 4 raise the possibility that exchange rate volatility, negative and

significant in previous CPIS-based studies, may have acted as a proxy for issuance. Countries

that issue a significant fraction of their debt in a particular foreign currency have a strong

incentive to limit fluctuations in the value of the home currency relative to the currency of bond

issuance (see Devereux and Lane, 2003). Thus, bilateral exchange rate stability may serve as a

proxy for bilateral issuance, and the previous results in the literature are consistent with our

finding of an investor’s strong preference for bonds denominated in the investor’s currency.

When observing cross-border bond holdings for which the currency denomination of the

underlying bond is not identified, one cannot distinguish between a preference of one country’s

investors for another country’s bonds and a propensity of a destination country to issue bonds in

the investor’s currency. This seems especially important when considering investment from AEs.

In the next section we further explore the link between cross-border bond investment and the

currency composition of bonds in a dataset that does differentiate by the currency denomination

of the bond.



4. Currency Denomination and International Bond Portfolios: Portfolio Data that Identify
Currency Denomination

       4.1 A Usable Bond Portfolios Dataset

       While the CPIS bilateral dataset, in its current form, does not identify the currency

denomination of the underlying bonds, datasets built from security-level data can. One such

dataset is of annual data on US investors’ holdings of foreign bonds from periodic,

comprehensive benchmark surveys conducted by the Treasury Department, Board of Governors
                                                  14
of the Federal Reserve System and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. See the actual

surveys (for example, US Treasury Department et al. 2009, 2016b) or the Griever, Lee and

Warnock (2001) primer for details. Briefly, from Griever, Lee and Warnock (2001), the so-called

“asset surveys” of US holdings of foreign securities collect data from two types of reporters: US-

resident custodians and US institutional investors. Custodians are the primary source of

information, typically reporting about 97 percent of total US holdings of foreign long-term

securities. Institutional investors, such as mutual funds, pension funds, insurance companies,

endowments and foundations, report in detail on their ownership of foreign securities only if they

do not entrust the safekeeping of these securities to US-resident custodians. If they do use US-

resident custodians, institutional investors report only the name(s) of the custodian(s) and the

amount(s) entrusted (and the data are collected from the custodian, but not double counted).

Custodians are asked but not mandated to enter information on the type of investor, so in practice

the type of investor (e.g., institutional or retail) is not typically identified; where it has been

identified the bulk of holdings (90+ percent) are by institutions (mutual funds, pension funds,

etc.). Reporting on the asset surveys is mandatory, with both fines and imprisonment possible for

willful failure to report. The data are collected at the security-level, greatly reducing reporting

error; armed with a security identifier, a mapping to the currency of the bond and the residence

of its issuer is straightforward. The holdings data form the official US data on international

positions (for example, aggregating the survey’s security-level information produces the amount

of international bond holdings in the Bureau of Economic Analysis’s International Investment

Position report).

        For our purposes, we require a split (US holdings of foreign bonds by country of issuer

and by currency, including the local currency) published in the Treasury Department reports only

in 2001 and then annually from 2006 (see, for example, Table A.6 of Treasury Department et al.


                                                   15
2009). This provides our measure of US holdings of local currency bonds. Investor-currency

bonds in this US dataset are USD-denominated bonds. 12 Focusing on US investors’ cross-border

bond holdings is restrictive in the sense that we can only analyze the portfolios of one group of

investors (US investors), but this is quite a large group for which we have high quality, publicly

available data. 13 Importantly, US investors’ bond holdings are captured by the US Treasury

Department at the security level, so the exact nature of the bond is known to the data collector.

No assumptions are necessary: The bond’s security ID, when combined with an issuer’s dataset,

readily provides the country of the issuer as well as the currency denomination of the bond. The

security-level holdings data are not currently available to researchers outside the Federal Reserve

Board, but the country-level aggregates (and some splits) that are built from the security-level

data are available for over 100 countries and provide a clean dataset for year-end 2001 and each

year-end beginning in 2006. 14




12
   We are not omitting much holdings, as US investors’ holdings of third-currency bonds (i.e., not USD and not in
the currency of the issuer) are extremely small, amounting to only 2.3% of their foreign bond portfolio in 2011.
13
   Of course, preferable would be a wide and long panel dataset on all foreigners’ holdings of each country’s local
currency bonds. Included in such a dataset would be time series of foreigners’ holdings of Malaysian ringgit bonds,
Indonesian rupiah bonds, euro-denominated bonds issued by German entities and so on. Unfortunately, such time
series data for a large set of countries does not, to our knowledge, exist. Asian Bonds Online covers foreigners’
holdings of the government bonds of a handful of Asian countries, but we do not know of a source that includes all
foreigners’ holdings of all bonds (i.e., issued by government and private entities) of many countries and is available
through time.
14
   The US asset surveys are high quality, but of course one must wonder if the holdings of any non-US investors are
erroneously included in the data. This is most possible in the case of mutual funds: A foreigner could invest in a US
mutual fund that holds foreign securities, and all of the US mutual fund’s holdings of foreign securities are counted
on US asset surveys (because the mutual fund is a US entity). Carol Bertaut of the Federal Reserve provided one
way to think about the possible magnitudes. In the December 2015 claims survey, of the $9.5 trillion in foreign
securities held by US residents, mutual funds accounted for $4.4 trillion (Exhibit 18 of US Department of the
Treasury et al 2016b). US liabilities surveys indicate that foreign investors hold $1.05 trillion in US fund shares
(Table 13 and Exhibit 13 of US Department of the Treasury et al 2016a, 2017), which is only 6 percent of the
roughly $18 trillion in assets of US mutual funds, closed-end funds, money market mutual funds and ETFs (Tables
L.121-123 of Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 2016). Only a fraction of the $1.05 trillion in US
funds held by foreigners is likely in funds invested in foreign assets. We do not have a direct way to measure this
fraction, but overall about 22% of US mutual fund assets ($4.4t / $18t) are in foreign securities. If we guess that as
much as 22 percent of the $1.05 trillion in US funds held by foreigners could be in funds invested in foreign assets,
that would amount to $230 billion, or 2.4%, of the overall $9.5 trillion in foreign assets reported in US assets
surveys. Thus, foreigners could be holding US mutual funds that invest in foreign securities, but a reasonable
estimate is that such holdings are less than 3 percent of reported US foreign assets.

                                                          16
        Much, but not all, of our analysis of US investors’ holdings will focus on EMEs, for the

simple reason (discussed in Section 2) that the new BIS bonds dataset has better coverage for

EMEs. As a preview, Figure 3 presents the stark contrast between the currency composition of

EME bonds outstanding (3a) and the holdings of US investors (3b). EME local currency bonds

are far more prevalent than foreign currency bonds, but US investors’ EME bond portfolios are

primarily USD-denominated. 15 The contrast between the structure of EME bond markets and the

composition of US investors’ EME bond portfolios plotted in Figure 3 means that, relative to

market-based weights, US investors more likely overweight USD-denominated bonds (they hold

a lot and there are relatively few available) and more likely underweight local currency bonds

(they hold relatively little and there are many available). This is shown in Figure 4a, which

depicts “relative weight”, defined as the weight of a country’s bonds in US investors’ global

portfolio relative to their weight in a global size-weighted benchmark portfolio. When relative

weight equals one, the country’s weight in US investors’ portfolio and the global benchmark is

identical, whereas relative weight less than one is an underweight position (a home bias) and

relative weight greater than one indicates an overweight position. Note that Figure 4a is not

generated to highlight any particular country, but rather to show that relative weights for USD-

denominated bonds are much higher than those for local currency bonds; Figures 4b (on USD-

denominated bonds) and 4c (local currency bonds) split by region to better display country

details. US investors’ relative weights on EME local currency bonds (bottom panel of Figure 4a)

are all well below one; this is the familiar home bias in international portfolios. However,

relative weights on EME USD-denominated bonds (top panel) are quite high. For some Latin


15
  It is notable, however, that US holdings of local currency bonds increased sharply over this period from $20B in
2009 to $72B in 2015 and in 2015 represented approximately 32% of total EME bond holdings (up from 21% in
2009). The significant increase in US investor holdings of EME local currency bonds over the 2006-2015 period is
widespread across regions, and over the same period US investors dramatically increased their holdings of USD-
denominated bonds from Latin America.

                                                        17
American USD-denominated bonds (Figure 4b, top panel), US investors have an overweight

position, providing one of the rare instances in which there is no home bias. 16


4.2 A framework for analyzing international investment in bonds

         The relative weight graphs in Figure 4 reveal investors’ strong preference for investor

currency bonds, something that has important implications for the analysis of cross-border bond

investment. To the extent that investors view investor-currency bonds and bonds denominated in

other currencies as fundamentally different and their shares vary across countries, off-the-shelf

flows and positions data are mixing very different asset classes in ways (i.e. weights) that vary

across countries.

         In the following subsections we dig deeper into this by analyzing two different panel

datasets of US investment in foreign bonds. The time periods and country coverage in the two

datasets are largely dictated by BIS data on the size and structure of bond markets, discussed

above in Section 2. One is broad and shorter (40 countries, of which 21 are AEs and 19 EMEs,

for the period 2006 to 2011), whereas the other is more current with a longer time span but fewer

countries (15 EMEs for the period 2006 to 2015).

         The dependent variable in this analysis will be the Ahmed et al. (2016) measure of

portfolio weights, normalized relative weight. 17 Relative weight (depicted in Figures 1 and 4) is




16
   Figure 1, discussed in the introduction, uses 2006-2011 data from the old BIS dataset and thus includes both AE
and EME countries. The takeaway is the same: US relative weights are substantially higher for USD-denominated
bonds in every region, including AE countries.
17
   Relative weight is consistent with an international CAPM-based model of international portfolio allocation as
presented in Cooper and Kaplanis (1986). That model, described in some detail in Holland et al (2016), includes
country-specific proportional investment costs, representing both explicit and implicit costs of investing abroad, and
is designed to optimize an investor’s allocation of wealth among risky securities in n countries in order to maximize
expected returns net of costs. If there are no costs to investing, the allocation collapses to the global market
capitalization allocation; that is, the investor allocates his wealth across countries according to market
capitalizations. If costs are non-zero and non-uniform, allocations deviate from market weights. The higher the costs
in a particular foreign market, the more severely underweighted that country will be in the investor’s portfolios. The
international CAPM therefore provides a theoretical underpinning for our focus on relative weight.

                                                         18
simply a country’s weight in US investors’ portfolio relative to its weight in a benchmark

portfolio. Specifically, country i’s relative portfolio weight in US portfolios is the ratio of its

weight in US investors’ portfolio to its weight in the global market. Relative weight can be

defined as:


                      ω           i    H US      ∑H        US
                                                           i
        Re lWgtiUS   = i ,US =                   i
                                                                                                              (1)
                      ωi .m    MCapi             ∑ MCap
                                                 i
                                                                i




where H
          US
          i    is defined as US investors’ holdings of country i’s bonds and                ∑H
                                                                                             i
                                                                                                 US
                                                                                                 i    represents the


global portfolio of bonds held by US investors, while MCap i is the market capitalization of

country i’s bond market and        ∑ MCap
                                   i
                                                     i   is the market capitalization of the global bond market. If


the weight of a particular bond market in US investors’ portfolios equals its weight in the global

bond market, the relative weight for that bond market is one. In reality, US investors’ relative

portfolio weights are often far less than one—this is one dimension of the well-known home bias

in asset holdings—as over 90 percent of US investors’ bond holdings are issued by US entities.

That said, as Figures 1 and 4 showed, for some asset classes—such as bonds denominated in the

investor’s currency—relative weights can and sometimes do exceed one.

        Relative price changes will cause movements in relative weight even if investors do not

alter their positions. This relative price effect can be removed through the simple normalization

of dividing the relative weight from equation (1) by the relative weight for the home market

(which for US bonds averages roughly 2.5 over our sample):

                          ωi ,US       ωUS ,US
        norm Re lWgt =                                                                                        (2)
                          ωi ,m        ωUS ,m




                                                                    19
In our panel regressions we use this normalized relative weight measure, which has been shown

in Ahmed et al (2016) to isolate portfolio reallocations that are independent of relative price

changes (that is, it omits passive portfolio changes due to relative price changes). Normalized

relative weight is also consistent with the Bekaert and Wang (2009) adjustment of scaling by the

source country’s home bias.

        We use a common framework to analyze the evolution in US investors’ country-specific

relative portfolio weights—that is, their portfolio weights relative to a global benchmark— in

various types of foreign bonds. We include the variables featured in our global CPIS analysis—

bilateral trade linkages, bilateral exchange rate volatility and (in some specifications) the share of

a country’s bonds denominated in the investor’s currency (i.e., USD). We also include “push”

and “pull” factors. Country-specific “pull” factors include yield 18 (to proxy for expected return),

macroeconomic indicators (GDP growth rate and current account balance), institutional variables

and our de jure measure of the openness of a country’s bond market to foreign investment.

Global “push” factors include VIX (the volatility index, which measures variation in expected

volatility and risk appetite), the 10-year US Treasury rate (to capture a “reach for yield”) and a

measure of unconventional monetary policy (UMP) shocks as in Rogers, Scotti and Wright

(2016). 19 We also report but do not tabulate specifications in which we omit the global push

factors and instead include time fixed effects.

        We calculate bilateral trade linkages as the sum of a country’s imports from the US and

exports to the US as a share of the total imports and exports of that country and of the US; Lane


18
   Yield, expressed in basis points, is the annual average of monthly bond yields (yield-to-maturity from the J.P
Morgan GBI indexes). JPMorgan provided yield data through 2013; for 2014 and 2015 we gathered data from
Bloomberg and for the Philippines created yield as the average of 5-year and 10-year government bond yields.
19
   Rogers, Scotti and Wright (2016), which updates Rogers, Scotti and Wright (2014), utilizes high frequency
financial market data around Fed announcements (FOMC statements as well as major speeches) to help identify
monetary policy shocks in a VAR setting. Our UMP shocks are the sum of the Rogers et al (2016) shocks to the 10-
year Treasury yield within a particular year (so that negative values of our UMP shocks are interpreted as
expansionary monetary policy shocks).

                                                       20
and Milesi-Ferretti (2008) discusses various reasons bilateral trade might be related to portfolio

allocations, although van Wincoop and Warnock (2010) offers a different view on some of these.

Bilateral exchange rate volatility is the standard deviation of exchange rate changes calculated

using 36 months of data. USD_share is the share of a country’s bonds denominated in USD.

        The local macroeconomic indicators in our regressions represent factors that likely

impact the attractiveness of an economy as a destination for cross-border bond investment. We

include the current account to GDP ratio to proxy for financial imbalances. A country that runs a

current account deficit must attract inflows; if those inflows do not materialize, adverse financial

market outcomes (such as currency depreciation and/or a spike in bond rates) are likely. We also

include the 3-year average growth rate in real GDP per capita as an indicator of the vigor of the

destination economy.

        Our primary institutional variable is a measure of regulatory quality and creditor rights,

RegCr, calculated as a weighted average of the Regulatory Quality Index from the World Bank’s

World Governance Indicators and the Legal Rights Index from the ‘Getting Credit’ section of the

World Bank’s Doing Business report. We follow the GEMLOC Investability Indicator

Methodology (Markit 2013) by constructing a composite measure with twice the weight on

regulatory quality. 20 The measure ranges from 0 to 100.

        We also include a custom de jure measure of the openness of a country’s local currency

bond market to foreign investment, Fin_Open, provided by Markit (2013), with higher scores

indicating that a bond market is more open to cross-border investment. From an update of Markit

(2013) provided by the World Bank, we use the November observation of “Capital Control,

Convertability and Access” for each country and year and merge with the Burger et al. (2015)


20
  The regulatory quality index measures a government’s ability to formulate and implement sound policies and
regulations that promote private sector development, while the creditor rights index measures the degree to which
collateral and bankruptcy laws protect the rights of borrowers and lenders.

                                                        21
estimates of this measure for 2006 and 2007. We assume top scores (i.e., completely open) for

South Korea (which enters the Markit dataset in 2011 with score of 100) and Israel (which is not

in the Markit sample).

        Summary statistics for all of our regression samples are provided in Tables 5a-5d. For

readability of regression coefficients, we have scaled variables in the following way: all relative

weight measures are multiplied by 100 (so that a relative weight of 100 indicates no home bias,

i.e. holdings are in line with market capitalization) and USD_share, Trade, CAB, ER_Vol, Yield,

Growth, USi10 and US_UMP are in percentage points.



4.3. The Broad Shorter Sample: 40 Countries, 2006-2011

        We analyze a broad (21 AEs, 19 EMEs) but relatively short (6 year) panel for which we

have a maximum of 235 observations. The most appropriate econometric specification is not

immediately self-evident. Our baseline specification, following Claessens et al. (2007), is panel-

feasible generalized least squares (FGLS) that allow errors to be heteroscedastic across countries

and serially correlated within country. 21 FGLS, which is more efficient than OLS, pools the

cross-sectional and time variation of the panel. For completeness, we also use two other

estimators that focus more squarely on the within-country time series variation (a “within” fixed

effects estimator) and, separately, on the between-country cross-sectional variation (a “between”

estimator). The within estimator has the attractive feature that it captures time invariant country-

specific unobserved factors, but by maximizing the within-country fit (over time) it is ill suited to

estimate the effect of variables that have little time variation. The between estimator is at the

other extreme in that it focuses exclusively on the cross-sectional variation and provides OLS


21
  We model serial correlation in the error term using a common AR1 process for the entire panel. It is possible to
estimate country-specific AR1 processes but with only 6 annual observations the estimation is likely to be highly
imprecise (see Beck and Katz 1995).

                                                        22
estimation on the average values for each country (and is therefore unable to control for country-

level effects).

        Table 6a presents coefficient estimates calculated using FGLS (columns 1-4), country

fixed effects in column 5, country and time fixed effects in column 6 and between effects in

column 7. The dependent variable is normalized relative weight (as defined in equation 2) for the

portfolio allocations of US investors using annual data from 2006 to 2011. Most publicly

available datasets on bond flows and bond positions do not differentiate by currency

denomination for either the flows or the structure of the recipient country’s market, so

regressions for which the Currency of Bonds is “All” (columns 3-7) can be considered typical.

Local factors, which we will discuss first, are in the top portion of the tables; global push factors

are in the bottom portion.

        4.3.1 Local Factors

        Local factors associated with greater US investment in foreign countries’ USD-

denominated and local currency bonds differ substantially (Table 6a, columns 1 and 2, labeled

USD and LC). Yes, some factors have similar impact; for example, the coefficients on trade

linkages and regulatory/creditor rights are at least marginally significant and have the same signs

(in both columns 1 and 2). But the coefficients of most other variables differ in significance,

sign, or both. For example, countries with stronger growth receive more US investment in their

local currency bonds, but not in their USD-denominated bonds. Financial account openness is

highly significant for USD bonds, but not for local currency bonds; perhaps US investors fear

that capital controls are more likely to be imposed on foreign currency rather than local currency

bonds. And, controlling for trade linkages, US investment in USD bonds is not restricted by large




                                                 23
current account deficits; US investment is actually higher in the USD bonds of countries with

larger current account deficits. 22

         In column 3 of Table 6a, bonds of all currency denominations are included, as would be

the case with any analysis of BOP-based bond flows or CPIS data. In the background of the

column 3 results are the facts we depicted in Figure 1: US relative weights are much higher on

USD-denominated bonds and the share of bonds that are USD-denominated varies across

countries. Perhaps not surprisingly, the results in column 3 differ materially from those in

columns 1 and 2 (except for the coefficient on trade linkages, which is again positive and

significant).

         In columns 4-7 we include bonds of all currencies but control for the share of each

country’s bonds that is USD-denominated. In each regression, the coefficient on USD_share is

positive and highly significant. The specification in column 4 is as in column 3 but with the

addition of USD_share (which is highly significant). The coefficient estimates on trade linkages

are similar in columns 3 and 4, but others (such as on RegCR and CAB) differ. In column 5 we

repeat the all currencies regression using country fixed effects. Even after controlling for

country-level effects, the coefficient on USD_share is highly significant and only slightly

smaller than the estimate in column 4, suggesting a strong preference for bonds denominated in

the investor’s currency that is independent of any attraction based on some other country-specific

unobservable factor. 23,24 We then include two-way fixed effects—country and time—and the


22
   Some of these results seem to be picking up differences between AEs and EMEs, something we examine in
Tables 6b and 6c.
23
   We also estimated (but do not tabulate) columns (1) and (2) using country fixed effects and not surprisingly found
some of the variables with limited time variation (e.g. trade linkages and regulatory/credit rights) are statistically
insignificant, while growth rates become more important (US investors increased relative weights on local currency
bonds in countries that improved their economic growth rates).
24
   For completeness we also considered a random effects (RE) specification and again found the USD_share
coefficient to be highly significant. RE estimates will be biased, however, if the unobserved country level effects are
correlated with regressors; in our samples a robust Hausman test strongly rejects the RE specification in favor of
fixed effects.

                                                          24
coefficient on USD_share is again highly significant (column 6). Finally, we focus on the cross-

sectional variation and report results from the between effects estimator; once again we find

USD_share to be highly significant (column 7).

        The stability of the USD_share coefficient across different models indicates that a

preference for investor currency bonds is a powerful explanatory factor in the patterns of

investment both across countries and through time within a particular destination country. In the

cross section this relationship is depicted in Figure 5 (top panel), where all but five observations

are tightly clustered around an upward sloping fitted line (not shown). The within-country

relationship is also quite strong (Figure 5, bottom panel). Studies, whether using cross-sectional

or panel data, in which the capital flow or international investment variable includes bonds of

different currency denominations should include a measure of the currency composition of

existing bonds (specifically, the share of existing bonds that is denominated in the investor’s

currency) or risk omitting an important variable. 25

        Table 6a combined AEs and EMEs. We split these in Tables 6b (AEs) and 6c (EMEs);

the structure of these tables is identical to that in Table 6a except we do not report “between”

estimates (which would effectively have only 21 and 19 observations in these splits). For both

AEs and EMEs, the coefficient on USD_share is again highly significant, even in the two-way

fixed effects specifications (column 6 in Tables 6b and 6c). Additionally, the AE/EME splits

provide insight into to some of the full sample results. For example, the result in Table 6a that

US investment in USD bonds is higher in countries with larger current account deficits is an AE

result (Table 6b, column 1); for EMEs, the coefficient on current account is generally


25
  While we do not want to overemphasize any particular point estimate in a small sample like that in Table 6a,
consider a one standard deviation increase in USD_share from its mean (summary statistics for this sample are in
Table 5a), which in the Table 6a sample would double the percentage of USD-denominated bonds from 12.4% to
24.9%. The column 4 coefficient estimate on USD_share suggests, ceteris paribus, an impact of +4.54 on the
dependent variable (normalized relative weight). That is, a one standard deviation increase in the share of bonds
denominated in USD yields nearly a one standard deviation increase in normalized relative weight.

                                                        25
insignificant except under fixed effects estimation and in that case we find the opposite result

that US investment is higher in the bonds of EMEs with improving current account balances

(Table 6c, columns 5 and 6). The contrast in the estimated current account coefficients suggests,

intuitively, that US investors are more concerned about the potential financial instability

associated with current account deficits in emerging economies relative to advanced economies.

         4.3.2 Global Factors

         Turning to results on global factors (the bottom rows of Tables 6a, 6b and 6c), we find

that lower US Treasury yields are a significant push factor for US cross-border investment in

local currency but not USD denominated bonds. It is difficult to find evidence in the Table 6

samples that US unconventional monetary policy shocks resulted in more investment in foreign

bonds, but if one is willing to tolerate a 10 percent level of significance, one could conclude that

UMPs that lowered US long rates increased US investment in EME USD bonds and decreased it

for EME local currency bonds (Table 6c, col. 1 and 2). 26 We also estimated (but do not tabulate)

columns (1) and (2) of Table 6a using country fixed effects and, as noted above, some local

variables with limited time variation (e.g. trade linkages and regulatory/credit rights) lose

statistical significance, while country growth rates become more important. Global factors also

become important. For example, during this time span, investors responded to lower US interest

rates by increasing their allocations toward local currency bonds but not USD-denominated

bonds.




26
  We also estimated, but do not tabulate, the local currency and USD Table 6 regressions with time fixed effects
instead of the global factors. The time fixed effects on local currency bonds are positive, especially for EMEs,
suggesting that controlling for local factors there was greater US investment in EME local currency bonds over the
period 2007-2011 (relative to 2006). The time fixed effects for USD bonds tend to be negative.


                                                        26
4.4 The More Current EME Sample

         Results in Tables 6a, 6b and 6c suggest that the share of a country’s bonds denominated

in the investor’s currency is an important determinant of the amount of cross-border bond

investment the country receives. This relationship is quite robust and holds in both the cross-

section and through time. In addition, the results in Table 6 specific to local currency and USD

bonds indicate that the roles of country specific factors and global factors vary depending on the

currency denomination of the bonds.

         The sample in Table 6 ends in 2011. As noted in Section 2, a sample that is more current

than 2011 and requires information on currency composition pretty much limits the analysis to

EMEs. We do so, next, in a sample of 15 EMEs that spans the period 2006 to 2015 (Table 7).

Again, the coefficient on the share of the country’s bonds denominated in USD is positive and

highly significant throughout Table 7, even after controlling for country level fixed effects or

two-way fixed effects. Among local factors, trade linkages and regulatory quality and creditor

rights are positive and significant in all FGLS specifications in Table 7, but the effects of other

local factors differ by currency denomination. For example, there is more US investment in the

USD-denominated bonds of EMEs that are more open, but this is not significant in the local

currency regressions. For global factors, differences across specifications are striking. For the All

Currencies regressions, one would conclude that US rates do not matter—the coefficient on US

10-year yields is insignificant—but results in column 2 indicate that low US rates are associated

with significantly more investment in EME local currency bonds. Interestingly, US

unconventional monetary policy shocks are associated with less US investment in EME bonds

(especially those denominated in USD), something we return to below. 27


27
  It is important to note that some of the impact of unconventional monetary policy is captured by the level of US
long-term interest rates. Our UMP shock is calculated using the change in 10-year Treasury rates within a 2-hour
window of FOMC statements and important speeches (following Rogers, Scotti and Wright 2016), but this shock

                                                         27
5. Modeling the Structure of EME Bonds Markets

         We have argued that for the analysis of international bond investment, information on the

currency composition of the underlying bonds is vital. That information might be included in the

investment data, as it was for columns 1 and 2 (USD and LC) columns of Tables 6a, 6b, 6c and

7. But often investment data does not include information on currency denomination. For

analysis of datasets that mix bonds of all currencies, we have argued that it is important to

include a variable that captures the currency composition of the recipient country’s bond

market—in particular, the share of its bonds that is denominated in the investor’s currency. This

raises a reasonable question: What determines the foreign currency share of a country’s bonds?

         In this section we extend our relative weight analysis of the 2006-2015 EME dataset to

endogenize the share of recipient countries’ bonds denominated in the investor’s currency, which

in this sample of US investment is USD_share (the share of each countries bonds that is

denominated in USD). We include variables from the literature, in particular Claessens et al

(2007), which found that the foreign currency share was higher in smaller countries with smaller

banking systems, less exchange rate volatility and weaker institutions. 28 We also include as an

instrument a global variable that had a counterintuitive effect in Table 7: US unconventional

monetary policy shocks.

         Table 8 shows results using a two-stage instrumental variables estimator with destination

country fixed effects. We are asking a lot of a relatively small sample—a maximum of 10 annual

data points for 15 countries—but the IV estimation seems reasonably well specified. The F-test


most likely does not capture the full effect of UMP on US interest rates. Other methods of measuring UMP exist; it
is not clear, however, that any dominates our strategy of including the level of long rates and an UMP shock.
28
   The rationale behind these variables put forward in Claessens et al. (2007) is as follows. Smaller countries might
have more difficulty developing local bond markets and thus would tend to issue a greater share of foreign currency
bonds. A larger banking system means the local investor base for local bonds is likely larger, thus the foreign share
of bonds would be lower. Countries with less exchange rate volatility—a peg being the extreme—might issue more
foreign currency bonds, either as a signal of the credibility of the exchange rate regime or because foreign currency
bonds are cheaper to issue.

                                                         28
of instruments suggests that the instruments are appropriate, although using Stock and Yogo

(2005) weak instrument critical values we would only be able to marginally reject the null of

weak instruments. And first stage results are in line with the literature (Claessens et al. 2007), in

that countries with a greater USD_share have smaller banking systems and less exchange rate

volatility and are smaller (marginally, with a p-value of 0.107). And US UMP is negative and

highly significant, indicating that when UMP pushed down US long rates EMEs’ USD issuance

increased. 29 Not shown, for readability, are the coefficients on all exogenous second-stage

explanatory variables; of those, only USi10 and VIX are significant (lower US long rates and

lower VIX are associated with a higher USD_share). In the second stage regressions of Relative

Weight, the explained portion of USD_share, trade linkages and VIX are all strongly significant.

The IV results in Table 8, while from an admittedly small and specific sample (of US investment

in EMEs), provide additional evidence that USD_share helps explain US international

investment in bonds.

           Table 8 also sheds light on some results from Tables 6 and 7. In Table 7, US UMPs were

associated with lower US relative weights. Table 8 qualifies this: UMPs are associated with more

issuance of USD bonds relative to local currency bonds (i.e., a higher USD_share) and, of the

increased issuance, all else equal US investors took less than usual (the Table 7 relative weight

result). Table 8 also aids in the understanding of ER_Vol results. In regressions that focused on a

particular currency denomination (local currency or USD), ER_Vol was never negative and

significant and sometimes even positive and significant, but in Table 7 it is sometimes negative

and significant in regressions pertaining to “All” currencies. A plausible explanation, supported

by Table 8 results, is that ER_Vol helps explain the mix of a countries bonds, which in turn

influences US investment, but not the attractiveness of bonds of any particular currency


29
     In column (2) we exclude RegCR as an instrument but keep it in the second stage regression; results are similar.

                                                           29
denomination: Countries with less volatile exchange rates issue a higher share of USD-

denominated bonds and these tend to have higher relative weights in US investors’ portfolios.



6. Conclusion

       In this paper we demonstrate that studies of cross-border bond investment that lack

information about the currency denomination of the underlying bonds are omitting a critically

important variable. Our empirical analysis reveals that cross-border investors exhibit a strong

preference for bonds denominated in their home currency. Our results also suggest that when

researchers are unable to distinguish between bonds of different currencies, it will be difficult to

determine whether the data reveal a preference by cross-border investors for a particular

destination country’s bonds or a propensity of a destination country to issue bonds in the

investor’s currency.

       Our examination of a holdings dataset in which currency denomination is available

suggests that the determinants of cross-border bond investment vary significantly by the bond’s

currency denomination. Although some variables, such as trade linkages and regulator quality

and creditor rights, are relatively robust predictors of cross-border investment across various

splits of the data, other results vary by currency. The importance of currency denomination is

particularly evident when attempting to determine the impact of advanced economies’ monetary

policy on cross-border financial flows. More specifically, our analysis of investment in 15 EMEs

during the period from 2006 to 2015 demonstrates that if bonds of all currencies are lumped

together the impact of US interest rates on US investors’ EME bond allocations is insignificant.

Splitting the analysis by currency, however, reveals that US investors responded to lower US

interest rates by significantly increasing their allocations toward EME local currency bonds.




                                                 30
Further, our two-stage instrumental variables analysis suggests that unconventional monetary

policy had its impact primarily by increasing the share of total EME bonds denominated in USD.

        One result that emerges from the data is that the well-known home bias in international

portfolios seems to be at least in part a home currency bias. While our analysis focuses primarily

(but not exclusively) on US investors, other studies such as Maggiori et al (2017) and Boermans

and Vermeulen (2016a, 2016b) provide evidence that the home currency bias is more general

than just a USD bias. We note that in one sense the strong preference for home currency bonds

can be understood in standard portfolio models if investor-currency bonds alleviate currency

risk. This presumes, however, that the bonds were issued by entities that are hedged

(operationally, by having substantial USD income streams, or financially), something we cannot

discern in our datasets; one could just as easily imagine that the investor’s perceived reduction in

currency risk is offset by an increase in the issuer’s currency risk (which the investor should

recognize as an increase in default risk), something we cannot examine in our datasets. Along

other dimensions, the home currency bias is puzzling. For example, from a US investor’s

perspective, in many periods the returns characteristics—mean, variance, skewness and

correlation with the rest of the portfolio—of EME local currency bonds dominate those provided

by EME USD-denominated bonds (Burger et al 2012). We leave it to future work to shed more

light on this.




                                                 31
                                            References

Ahmed, S., S. Curcuru, F. Warnock and A. Zlate, 2016. Decomposing International Portfolio Flows.
    mimeo.
Beck, N. and J. Katz, 1995. What to do (and not to do) with Time Series Cross Section Data. American
    Political Science Review 89(3): 634-647.
Bekaert, G., and X. Wang, 2009. Home bias revisited. unpublished working paper.
Bertaut, C., A. Tabova and V. Wong, 2014. The Replacement of Safe Assets: Evidence from the US Bond
    Portfolio. International Finance Discussion Papers 1123.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 2016. Financial Accounts of the United States
    (Fourth Quarter 2015).
Boermans, M., and R. Vermeulen, 2016a. Newton meets Van Leeuwenhoek: Identifying international
    investors’ common currency preferences. Finance Research Letters 17: 62-65.
Boermans, M., and R. Vermeulen, 2016b. International investment positions revisited: Investor
    heterogeneity and individual security characteristics. DNB Working Paper 531.
Burger, J., and F. Warnock, 2006. Local Currency Bond Markets. IMF Staff Papers 53: 133-146.
Burger, J., and F. Warnock, 2007. Foreign Participation in Local-Currency Bond Markets. Review of
    Financial Economics 16: 291-304.
Burger, J., F. Warnock and V. Warnock, 2008. Financial Globalization and Local Currency Bond
    Markets. Presentation at Deutsche Bundesbank and Bundesministerium der Finanzien conference on
    Bond Markets in Emerging Market Economies and Developing Countries (31 January 2008).
Burger, J., F. Warnock and V. Warnock, 2012. Financial Analysts Journal 68(4):73-93.
Burger, J., R. Sengupta, F. Warnock and V. Warnock, 2015. US Investment in Global Bonds: As the Fed
    Pushes, Some EMEs Pull. Economic Policy 30 (84): 729-766.
Cerutti, E, S. Claessens and D. Puy, 2016. Push Factors and Capital Flows to Emerging Markets: Why
    Knowing Your Lender Matters More Than Fundamentals. Working Paper.
Chari, A., K. Dilts Stedman and C. Lundblad, 2016. Taper Tantrums: QE, its Aftermath and Emerging
    Market Capital Flows. mimeo.
Chuhan, P., S. Claessens and N. Mamingi, 1998. Equity and bond flows to Latin America and Asia: The
    Role of Global and Country Factors. Journal of Development Economics 55(2): 439-463.
Claessens, S., D. Klingebiel and S. Schmukler, 2007. “Government Bonds in Domestic and Foreign
    Currency: The Role of Institutional and Macroeconomic Factors.” Review of International Economics
    15(2): 370-413.
Cooper, I., and E. Kaplanis, 1986. Costs to cross-border investment and international equity market
    equilibrium. in J. Edwards, J. Franks, C. Mayer and S. Schaefer (eds.), Recent Developments in
    Corporate Finance. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Cooper, I., P. Sercu and R. Vanpee, 2012. The Equity Home Bias Puzzle: A Survey. Foundations and
    Trends in Finance 7(4): 289-416.
Devereux, M. and P. Lane, 2003. Understanding bilateral exchange rate volatility. Journal of
    International Economics 60: 109-132.
Du, W. and J. Schreger, 2016. Sovereign risk, currency risk and corporate balance sheets. Harvard
    Business School BGIE Unity Working Paper No. 17-024.
Edison, H,, and F. Warnock, 2004. US Investors’ Emerging Market Equity Portfolios: A Security-Level
    Analysis. Review of Economics and Statistics 86: 691 - 704.



                                                 32
Eichengreen, B., and R. Hausmann, 1999. Exchange rates and financial fragility. Proceedings, Federal
     Reserve Bank of Kansas City, pages 329-368.
Eichengreen, B., and R. Hausmann, 2004. Other People's Money: Debt Denomination and Financial
     Instability in Emerging Market Economies. University of Chicago Press.
Felettigh, A., and P. Monti, 2008. How to interpret the CPIS data on the distribution of foreign portfolio
     assets in the presence of sizeable cross-border positions in mutual funds. Evidence for Italy and the
     main euro-area countries. Banca d’Italia Occasional Paper No. 16.
Fidora, M., M. Fratzscher and C. Thimann, 2007. Home Bias in Global Bond and Equity Markets: The
     Role of Real Exchange Rate Volatility. Journal of International Money and Finance 26: 631-655.
Fratzscher, M., 2012. “Capital Flows, Push Versus Pull Factors and the Global Financial Crisis,” Journal
     of International Economics 88(2): 341-356.
Fratzscher, M., M. Lo Duca and R. Straub, 2016. On the international spillovers of US quantitative
     easing. Economic Journal (forthcoming).
Galstyan, V., C. Mehigan and R. Mercado, 2017. The Currency Composition of International Portfolio
     Assets. TEP Working Paper No. 1017.
Goldstein, M., and P. Turner, 2004. Controlling Currency Mismatches in Emerging Economies.
     Washington, DC: Institute for International Economics.
Griever, W., G. Lee and F. Warnock, 2001. The US system for measuring cross-border investment in
     securities: a primer with a discussion of recent developments. Federal Reserve Bulletin 87(10):
     633-650.
Gruić, B., and P. Wooldridge, 2012. Enhancements to the BIS debt securities statistics. BIS Quarterly
     Review (December, pages 63-76).
Hale, G. and M. Spiegel, 2012. Currency Composition of International Bonds: The EMU Effect. Journal
     of International Economics 88(1): 134-149.
Hale, G., P. Jones and M. Spiegel, 2017. Home Currency Issuance in International Bond Markets.
     Mimeo.
Holland, S., S. Sarkissian, M. Schill and F. Warnock, 2016. Global Equity Investment. Mimeo.
International Monetary Fund, 2011. International Capital Flows: Reliable or Fickle? World Economic
     Outlook (April, Chapter 4).
J.P. Morgan, 2006. Introducing the JPMorgan Government Bond Index-Emerging Markets (GBI-EM):
     Index Methodology. J.P. Morgan Emerging Markets Research and Bond Index Research, January.
Lane, P., 2006. Global Bond Portfolios and EMU. International Journal of Central Banking 2(2): 1-23.
Lane, P., and G.M. Milesi-Ferretti, 2008. International Investment Patterns. Review of Economics and
     Statistics 90(3): 538–549.
Leal, R. P. C., A.L. Carvalhal da Silva, 2008. Development of the Brazilian Bond Market. In Eduardo
     Borensztein, Kevin Cowan, Barry Eichengreen and Ugo Panizza (eds.) Bond Markets in Latin
     America: On the Verge of a Big Bang? MIT Press.
Lewis, K., 1999. Trying to Explain Home Bias in Equities and Consumption. Journal of Economic
     Literature 37: 571–608.
Lim, J.J., S. Mohapatra and M. Stoker, 2014. Tinker, Taper, QE, Bye? The Effect of Quantitative Easing
     on Financial Flows to Developing Countries. Background paper for Global Economic Prospects
     2014, Washington, DC: World Bank.
Maggiori, M, B. Neiman and J. Schreger, 2017. Unpacking Global Capital Flows. mimeo




                                                    33
Markit Indices Limited, 2013. “GEMLOC Investability Indicator Methodlogy,” February 2013,
    https://www.markit.com/assets/en/docs/products/data/indices/bond-
    indices/GEMLOC%20Investability%20Indicator%20Methodology.pdf
Rogers, J.H., C. Scotti and J. Wright, 2014. Evaluating Asset-Market Effects of Unconventional
    Monetary Policy: A Multi-Country Review. Economic Policy 749-799.
Rogers, J.H., C. Scotti and J. Wright, 2016. Unconventional Monetary Policy and International Risk
    Premia. International Finance Discussion Papers 1172.
Stock J, Yogo M., 2005. Testing for Weak Instruments in Linear IV Regression. In: Andrews DWK
    Identification and Inference for Econometric Models. New York: Cambridge University Press.
US Department of the Treasury, Federal Reserve Bank of New York and Board of Governors of the
    Federal Reserve System, 2009. Report on US Portfolio Holdings of Foreign Securities as of
    December 31, 2008.
________ 2016a. Foreign Portfolio Holdings of US Securities as of June 30, 2015.
________ 2016b. US Portfolio Holdings of Foreign Securities as of December 31, 2015.
________ 2017. Foreign Portfolio Holdings of US Securities as of June 30, 2016.
Van Wincoop, E. and F. Warnock, 2010. Can trade costs in goods explain home bias in assets? Journal of
    International Money and Finance, 29(6):1108-1123.




                                                  34
                                           Data Appendix

Bonds refer to debt instruments with original maturity greater than one year.

CPIS Bilateral Bond Holdings
The IMF’s Coordinated Portfolio Investment Survey data are available year-end 1997 and then
starting 2001, and semiannually starting June 2013. The data are residency-based. In recent years
some currency information is available, although not on a bilateral basis. In Table 4 we use data
from the 2003 CPIS.

US Bond Holdings
Data on US investors’ holdings of foreign bonds are from periodic, comprehensive benchmark
surveys conducted by the Treasury Department, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. See the actual surveys, for example, Treasury
Department et al. (2009) or the Griever et al. (2001) primer for details. Reporting on the asset
surveys is mandatory, with both fines and imprisonment possible for wilful failure to report. The
data are collected at the security-level, greatly reducing reporting error; armed with a security
identifier, a mapping to the currency of the bond and the residence of its issuer is straightforward.

Explanatory Variables

In Table 4 we include the following bilaterally defined variables:

Issuancei,j is the share of country i’s bonds that are denominated in country j’s currency as of end-
2003

Linkagesi,j is the portion of country i’s imports in 2003 that were from country j

Volatilityi,j (exchange rate volatility between country i and j, calculated from monthly percentage
changes in the nominal bilateral exchange rate from 1994 through 2003).

In Tables 5-8, we use data series from a variety of sources as documented below:

Yield, expressed in basis points, is the yield-to-maturity in the GBI indexes from J.P Morgan and
enters our regressions as an annual average of monthly data. See J.P Morgan (2006) Appendix B.
JPMorgan provided yield data through 2013; for 2014 and 2015 we gathered data from Bloomberg
and for the Philippines created yield as the average of 5-year and 10-year government bond yields.

USD_share is calculated as the share of a country’s bonds denominated in US dollars. For details,
see the discussion on BIS bonds data in Section 2.

RegCr (regulatory quality/creditor rights) is calculated as a weighted average of the Regulatory
Quality Index from the World Bank’s World Governance Indicators and the Legal Rights Index
from the “Getting Credit” section of the World Bank’s Doing Business report. The regulatory
quality index measures a government’s ability to formulate and implement sound policies and
regulations that promote private sector development, while the creditor rights index measures the
degree to which collateral and bankruptcy laws protect the rights of borrowers and lenders. We
follow the GEMLOC Investability Indicator Methodology (Markit 2013) by constructing a
composite measure with twice the weight on regulatory quality.

Trade is bilateral imports and exports between the US and the foreign country, scaled by both
countries’ nominal GDP (source: IMF).

                                                35
Fin_Open, our measure of the openness of a country’s local currency bond market to foreign
investment, is de jure and based on two sources. For most EMEs in our sample, Markit has
constructed detailed measures for 2008-2015 based on the IMF’s AREAER documents. We backfill
the series to 2006 by combining information from Markit’s data with AREAER information. The
resulting measure is 0 if a country’s local currency bond market is by law completely closed to
foreign investors and 100 if there are no impediments to foreign investment. We assume top scores
(i.e., completely open) for South Korea (which enters the Markit dataset in 2011 with score of 100),
Israel (which is not in the Markit sample) and all AE bond markets.

Most other explanatory variables are taken from Haver Analytics, including: ER_Vol (computed as
the standard deviation of three years of monthly exchange rate changes), CAB (current account
balance as a percent of GDP) and Growth (calculated as the 3-year average growth rate in real GDP
per capita).

Global variables VIX and USi10 are averages of monthly observations of the CBOE volatility index
and 10-year US Constant Maturity Treasury rate, respectively. US_UMP is the sum of the Rogers,
Scotti and Wright (2016) monetary policy shocks to the 10-year rate, constructed such that a
negative UMP shock lowers 10-year rates.

Additional instruments in Table 8 include Country Size (log of nominal GDP) and Deposits (bank
liabilities as a share of GDP, from the World Bank).

Country Groupings

The groupings of “advanced economies” (AEs) and “other emerging market and developing
countries” (shortened here to emerging market economies or EMEs) generally follow IMF
classifications as of April 2013 (http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2013/01/pdf/statapp.pdf).
In our narrow more recent sample (Tables 7 and 8) we rely on the BIS’s classification of EMEs
(which includes Korea and Israel).




                                               36
Figure 1. US investment and the Structure of Foreign Bond Markets
Relative Weight is a country’s (or, in this figure, a region’s) bonds’ share in US portfolios relative to their share in global
markets. A relative weight of less than one means US investors are underweight the country’s (or region’s) bonds.

                         a. Relative Weight: Local Currency Bonds
 0.8
 0.6
 0.4
 0.2
 0.0

                       b. Relative Weight: USD-denominated Bonds
 1.2

 1.0

 0.8

 0.6

 0.4

 0.2

 0.0

                   c. Share of USD-denominated Bonds in Total Bonds
 0.3


 0.2


 0.1


 0.0
            2006           2007           2008           2009           2010           2011


                                  d. Relative Weight: All Bonds
0.8                                                                                                          AE Eurozone
0.6                                                                                                          AE Other
0.4                                                                                                          EME Other

0.2                                                                                                          EME LatAm
                                                                                                             EME Asia
0.0




                                                                 37
Figure 2a. EME Bond Market Structure, Local Currency Bonds (as share of GDP)
The figures depict the size of local currency bond markets (expressed as a share of GDP).

                                         Latin America
   1
 0.9
 0.8
 0.7
 0.6                                                                                    Chile

 0.5                                                                                    Mexico
 0.4                                                                                    Colombia
 0.3                                                                                    Peru
 0.2
 0.1
   0
       2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015


                                               Asia
   1
 0.9
 0.8
 0.7                                                                                 South Korea

 0.6                                                                                 Malaysia

 0.5                                                                                 Thailand

 0.4                                                                                 Philippines
 0.3                                                                                 India
 0.2                                                                                 Pakistan
 0.1
   0
       2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015


                                             Others
   1
 0.9
 0.8
 0.7                                                                                 South Africa
 0.6                                                                                 Hungary
 0.5
                                                                                     Israel
 0.4
                                                                                     Turkey
 0.3
 0.2                                                                                 Russia

 0.1
   0
       2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015


                                                              38
Figure 2b. EME Bond Market Structure, Local Currency Bonds (share of total)
The figures depict the share of local currency bonds in total bonds.

                                           Latin America
   1

 0.9

 0.8                                                                      Mexico

 0.7                                                                      Chile
                                                                          Colombia
 0.6
                                                                          Peru
 0.5

 0.4
        2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015


                                                 Asia
   1

 0.9
                                                                       Thailand
 0.8                                                                   India

 0.7                                                                   Pakistan
                                                                       South Korea
 0.6
                                                                       Malaysia
 0.5
                                                                       Philippines
 0.4
        2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015


                                               Others
   1

 0.9

                                                                       South Africa
 0.8
                                                                       Israel
 0.7
                                                                       Russia
 0.6                                                                   Hungary
                                                                       Turkey
 0.5

 0.4
        2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015




                                                                39
Figure 3. EME Bonds by Currency Denomination
This figure includes data for Chile, Colombia, Mexico, Peru; South Korea, Malaysia, Pakistan, Philippines,
Thailand; and Israel, Russia, South Africa and Turkey.



                                       a. Total Bonds Outstanding
                  4500
                                Local Currency       USD
                  4000

                  3500

                  3000
    Billion USD




                  2500

                  2000

                  1500

                  1000

                   500

                    0
                         2009       2010      2011         2012        2013         2014         2015


                                             b. US Holdings
                  200
                                Local Currency         USD
                  150
    Billion USD




                  100


                   50


                    0
                         2009       2010     2011          2012        2013         2014         2015




                                                                  40
Figure 4a. US Investors’ Relative Investment Weight
At a relative weight of one there is no home bias (i.e., portfolio weights equal market weights). Israel is not shown on the upper
graph (or in Fig. 4b), as its relative weight is off the chart at roughly 4.

                                                USD-denominated Bonds
 1.6
                                                                                                                    Mexico
 1.4
                                                                                                                    Chile
                                                                                                                    Hungary
 1.2
                                                                                                                    Colombia
 1.0                                                                                                                Peru
                                                                                                                    South Africa
 0.8
                                                                                                                    Pakistan
                                                                                                                    Turkey
 0.6
                                                                                                                    Philippines
 0.4                                                                                                                India
                                                                                                                    South Korea
 0.2
                                                                                                                    Thailand

 0.0                                                                                                                Russia
         2005     2006    2007     2008     2009     2010     2011    2012     2013     2014     2015


                                                   Local Currency Bonds
 1.6
                                                                                                                    Mexico
 1.4                                                                                                                Chile
                                                                                                                    Hungary
 1.2
                                                                                                                    Colombia
 1.0                                                                                                                Peru
                                                                                                                    South Africa
 0.8
                                                                                                                    Israel

 0.6                                                                                                                Pakistan
                                                                                                                    Turkey
 0.4                                                                                                                Philippines
                                                                                                                    India
 0.2
                                                                                                                    South Korea

 0.0                                                                                                                Thailand
         2005     2006    2007     2008     2009     2010     2011    2012     2013     2014     2015




                                                                41
Figure 4b. US Investors’ Relative Investment Weight (USD-denominated bonds, country details)

                                  Latin America
 1.6
 1.4
 1.2
 1.0                                                               Mexico

 0.8                                                               Chile

 0.6                                                               Colombia

 0.4                                                               Peru

 0.2
 0.0
       2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015


                                        Asia
 1.6
 1.4
 1.2                                                            Malaysia

 1.0                                                            Philippines

 0.8                                                            South Korea

 0.6                                                            Thailand

 0.4                                                            India
                                                                Pakistan
 0.2
 0.0
       2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015


                                      Others
 1.6
 1.4
 1.2
 1.0                                                            Hungary

 0.8                                                            South Africa

 0.6                                                            Turkey

 0.4                                                            Russia

 0.2
 0.0
       2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015




                                                     42
Figure 4c. US Investors’ Relative Investment Weight (local currency bonds, country details)

                                   Latin America
 0.40
 0.35
 0.30
 0.25                                                                  Mexico

 0.20                                                                  Chile

 0.15                                                                  Colombia

 0.10                                                                  Peru

 0.05
 0.00
        2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015


                                        Asia
 0.40
 0.35
                                                                   Malaysia
 0.30
 0.25                                                              Philippines

 0.20                                                              South Korea
 0.15                                                              Thailand
 0.10                                                              India
 0.05                                                              Pakistan
 0.00
        2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015


                                       Others
 0.40
 0.35
 0.30
                                                                   Hungary
 0.25
                                                                   South Africa
 0.20
                                                                   Turkey
 0.15
                                                                   Russia
 0.10
                                                                   Israel
 0.05
 0.00
        2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015




                                                      43
Figure 5. Cross-sectional and Temporal Relationships between Relative Weight and USD_share
The scatter plots show the “between” and “within” relationships between normalized US relative weight and USD_share from
the 2006-2011 annual dataset. Labels are ISO country codes. The top graph of country means depicts the cross-sectional
relationship; the few data points that are further from a fitted line (not shown) are New Zealand, Canada, Philippines, Russia
and Hong Kong. In the bottom graph, each data point subtracts the country average and then adds the sample average, so the
cluster is around the sample average for each variable; points to the northeast of the cluster are observations for which both
variables are above the within-country average.




                                                              44
Table 1. Bonds Outstanding
The table shows, for year end 2001 and 2011, the total amount (in billions of US dollars) of bonds issued by entities resident in
each of 25 AEs and 21 EMEs, as well as the amount of local currency denominated bonds expressed as a percent of GDP and as a
percent of total bonds.


                                 Total                  Local Currency Denominated Bonds
                                 2011                     2011                     2001

                               Bil USD          % of GDP         % of Total      % of GDP        % of Total

 Advanced Economies               75,883               161                91            105               93
   US                             29,409               191                97            131               98
   Euro area AEs                  22,106               157                91             94               89
   Austria                           672               141                88             90               74
   Belgium                           765               145                98            118               96
   Finland                           193                57                77             41               72
   France                          4,397               145                91             82               91
   Germany                         4,269               105                89             96               92
   Greece                            556               190                99             74               89
   Ireland                         1,259               470                81             46               65
   Italy                           4,021               180                98            114               96
   Netherlands                     2,817               271                80            165               74
   Portugal                          400               167                99             57               89
   Spain                           2,756               181                97             53               92
   Other AEs                      24,369               134                84             82               87
   Australia                       1,216                56                64             30               55
   Canada                          1,957                88                78             69               72
   Denmark                           840               211                84            160               90
   Hong Kong SAR                     116                18                39             15               54
   Iceland                            41               132                45             78               63
   Japan                          12,331               209                99            108               99
   New Zealand                        64                29                72             22               64
   Norway                            430                45                51             27               54
   Singapore                         130                37                69             35               69
   South Korea                     1,265               100                88             85               91
   Sweden                            745                83                60             57               63
   Switzerland                       327                47                95             58               97
   United Kingdom                  4,907               115                58             46               62




                                                              45
Table 1. Bonds Outstanding, continued.

                           Total                    Local Currency Denominated
                           2011                   2011                     2001
                                               % of        % of        % of       % of
                         Bil USD
                                               GDP         Total       GDP        Total
                              6,607             29            88         20         71
   Europe                       699             24            72         25         76
   Croatia                       18             15            52          9         33
   Czech Republic                97             34            76         14         85
   Hungary                       75             28            52         28         60
   Poland                       223             31            72         20         86
   Slovakia                      36             23            61         18         68
   Turkey                       249             25            78         36         78
   Latin America              1,406             22            75         19         54
   Argentina                     93               8           40         14         29
   Brazil                       582             18            78         20         59
   Chile                        105             32            75         42         77
   Colombia                     107             26            80         19         61
   Mexico                       477             32            78         17         59
   Peru                          41             14            59         12         60
   Asia                       4,155             36            96         22         90
   China                      2,956             40            99         18         95
   India                        515             26            95         25         97
   Indonesia                    113             10            74         27         96
   Malaysia                     260             81            90         57         77
   Pakistan                      34             15            94         22         96
   Philippines                  101             28            62         21         48
   Thailand                     175             49            97         28         80
   Other EMEs                   347             11            74         10         50
   Russia                       156               5           59          2         13
   South Africa                 191             40            86         32         87
Source: Authors’ calculations from BIS data.




                                                    46
Table 2. EME Bond Markets
This table includes data for Chile, Colombia, Mexico and Peru; South Korea, Malaysia, Pakistan, Philippines and Thailand; and
Israel, Russia, South Africa and Turkey.


                                                                                      2009              2015
                Size of EME Local Currency Bond Markets
                 $ billions                                                          2289              3281
                 % of GDP                                                           41.9%             45.7%
                 % of Global Bond Market                                             2.7%              3.5%


                Size of EME Foreign Currency Bond
                Markets
                 $ billions                                                           436               851
                 % of GDP                                                            8.0%             11.8%
                 % of Global Bond Market                                             0.5%              0.9%


                Size of EME USD Bond Markets
                 $ billions                                                           357                714
                 % of GDP                                                            6.5%               9.9%
                 % of Global Bond Market                                             0.4%               0.8%

                Ratio of Local Currency to Total Bonds                              84.0%             79.4%




                                                              47
Table 3. Holdings of Luxembourg Equities, Selected Countries
The table shows the percent of each country’s foreign equity portfolio that is reported in the 2006 CPIS dataset to be held in
Luxembourg, as well as the percent of the Luxembourg equity market those holdings constitute.


                                                         % of                    % of
                                                       Foreign                Luxembourg
                                                       Portfolio                Market
                               Austria                   22                       24
                               Belgium                     41                      138
                               Finland                     14                       17
                               France                      14                      122
                               Germany                     43                      329
                               Greece                      30                        5
                               Ireland                      5                       35
                               Italy                       57                      381
                               Netherlands                  9                       66
                               Portugal                    23                        8
                               Spain                       33                       74
                               Total                                              1199


                               Memo: US                     0                       20




                                                                48
Table 4. Determinants of Bilateral Bond Investment: Global Dataset
Depicted are cross-sectional Tobit regressions, with lower limit of zero and upper limit of one, using 2003 CPIS data of bilateral
cross-border bond investment. In the full sample, there is at most 39 source countries and 44 destination countries (with fewer
than 39x44 total observations because of missing data). Following Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2008) we adopt a two-way fixed
effects specification, xij = ϕi + ϕj + β Zij + εij , where xij is the share of source-country j’s foreign bond holdings that are in bonds
issued by host-country i; ϕi + ϕj are dummy variables for each host and source country; Zij is a vector of bilateral explanatory
variables; and εij is a residual term. Zij includes factors that vary across country pairs and hence can help explain why the same
destination attracts different levels of investment from different sources; we focus on three: Issuancei,j (the share of country i’s
bonds that are denominated in country j’s currency as of end-2003), Linkagesi,j are trade linkages (the portion of country i’s
imports in 2003 that were from country j) and Volatilityi,j (exchange rate volatility between country i and j, calculated from
monthly percentage changes in the nominal bilateral exchange rate from 1994 through 2003). Robust standard errors are reported
in parentheses. ***, ** and * denote significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels, respectively.


Source:                                             From AE                                                 From EME
Destination:          All           to both           to AE           to EME             to both             to EME                to AE
                      (1)             (2)               (3)              (4)               (5)                  (6)                  (7)

Issuance          0.059***         0.051***         0.070***         0.010***            5.845***            3.850*              4.521***
                    (0.019)          (0.017)         (0.026)          (0.004)           (1.782)             (2.039)             (1.374)
Linkages          0.698***         0.607***         0.542***          0.102**            0.793***            0.209***            1.008***
                    (0.098)          (0.084)         (0.076)          (0.047)           (0.150)             (0.070)             (0.164)
Volatility          -0.210           -0.436        -3.511***          -0.015             0.658               0.888**            -0.471
                    (0.260)          (0.371)         (1.001)          (0.097)           (0.701)             (0.447)             (1.702)

N                 1,271            848              458              390              423                 161                 262
Left-
                   180              68                 6                62            112                   68                  44
censored
Right-
                      0               0                0                0                0                   0                   0
censored




                                                                   49
Table 5. Summary Statistics for Regression Samples

a. All Countries, 2006-2011
                              Obs   Mean    Std. Dev.    Min      Max
 normRelWgt                   235     5.5         5.5    0.04     27.5
 normRelWgt_USD               231    30.8        30.3    0.00    322.3
 normRelWgt_LC                235     2.2         2.7    0.00     12.7
 USD_shr                      235    12.4        12.5    0.00     56.3
 Trade                        235    0.40        0.67    0.01      3.6
 RegCr                        235      74          18      36     100
 Fin_Open                     235      90          17      25     100
 CAB                          235     0.5         6.7   -14.9     26.8
 ER_Vol                       235     2.6         1.2     0.1      5.4
 Yield                        235     5.5         3.2     1.2     22.7
 Growth                       235     2.1         2.9    -6.3     12.1
 USi10                        235     3.7         0.7     2.8      4.8
 US_UMP                       235    0.13        0.15   -0.35     0.00
 VIX                          235      24           7      13       33


b. Advanced Economies, 2006-2011
                              Obs   Mean    Std. Dev.    Min      Max
 normRelWgt                   126     5.0         5.9    0.20     27.5
 normRelWgt_USD               126    36.6        37.9    0.90    322.3
 normRelWgt_LC                126     2.0         2.7    0.11     12.7
 USD_shr                      126     9.8        10.5    0.16     43.2
 Trade                        126    0.44        0.69    0.01      3.6
 RegCr                        126      85          12       58    100
 Fin_Open                     126    100            0     100     100
 CAB                          126     0.9         7.7   -14.9     26.8
 ER_Vol                       126     2.5         0.9      0.1     4.8
 Yield                        126     4.1         2.2      1.2    22.7
 Growth                       126     0.9         2.1    -6.3      7.0
 USi10                        126     3.7         0.7      2.8     4.8
 US_UMP                       126    0.13        0.15   -0.35     0.00
 VIX                          126      24           7       13      33




                                             50
Table 5. Summary Statistics for Regression Samples, continued

c. Emerging Market Economies, 2006-2011
                          Obs      Mean    Std. Dev.     Min    Max
 normRelWgt               109        6.1         4.9     0.04   19.8
 normRelWgt_USD           105       23.9        14.9     0.00   71.6
 normRelWgt_LC            109        2.3         2.8     0.00   11.3
 USD_shr                  109       15.3        14.0     0.00   56.3
 Trade                    109       0.34        0.64     0.01   2.80
 RegCr                    109         61          15       36     87
 Fin_Open                 109         79          20       25   100
 CAB                      109        0.1         5.3     -9.7   17.1
 ER_Vol                   109        2.7         1.4      0.3    5.4
 Yield                    109        7.2         3.4      2.6   18.8
 Growth                   109        3.6         3.0     -1.8   12.1
 USi10                    109        3.7         0.7      2.8    4.8
 US_UMP                   109       0.13        0.15    -0.35   0.00
 VIX                      109         24           7       13     33




d. Emerging Market Economies, 2006-2015
                          Obs      Mean    Std. Dev.     Min     Max
 normRelWgt               132        8.1         6.1      0.5    25.9
 normRelWgt_USD           132       33.3        30.2      7.0   168.0
 normRelWgt_LC            132        2.8         3.0      0.0    13.8
 USD_shr                  132       17.8        12.4      2.2    54.2
 Trade                    132       0.30        0.57     0.02    2.85
 RegCr                    132         62          16       25      89
 Fin_Open                 132         81          16       42    100
 CAB                      132        0.7         4.9     -9.6    16.9
 ER_Vol                   132        2.4         1.2      0.6     5.9
 Yield                    132        6.5         3.2      1.3    18.8
 Growth                   132        2.8         1.9     -1.7     7.9
 USi10                    132        3.0         0.9      1.8     4.8
 US_UMP                   132      -0.08        0.20    -0.41    0.21
 VIX                      132         20           7       13      33




                                            51
Table 6. Determinants of US Investment in Foreign Bonds (AEs and EMEs)
The table shows results using three different estimators: panel-feasible generalized least squared (FGLS) regressions allowing for
heteroscedasticity and autocorrelated error structures (in columns 1-4), fixed effects “within” estimator allowing for correlated
errors within countries (in columns 5 and 6), and a random-effects “between” estimator with bootstrapped standard errors
(column 7). Included are all countries (Panel a), advanced economies (Panel b) and EMEs (Panel c). Data are annual from 2006
through 2011. Currency denomination of bonds for the dependent variable (normalized relative weight) is indicated in the top
row: USD (column 1), local currency (column 2) or all currencies (columns 3-7). The dependent variable is US investors’
normalized relative portfolio weight (multiplied by 100) for each country’s bonds. The sample includes countries listed in Table
1 with the exception of Iceland, Norway, Switzerland, Croatia and Argentina, which are excluded based on the availability of
explanatory variables. Independent variables are, in order, the share of a country’s bonds denominated in US dollars, bilateral
trade, Regulatory/Creditor Rights, openness, current account balance (scaled by GDP), exchange rate volatility, yield, real GDP
growth and global variables (US 10-year Treasury yield, US monetary policy shock and VIX). See Table 5 and Data Appendix
for summary statistics and more details on all variables. Constants and, in column 6, time fixed effects are included but not
reported. Standard errors are reported in parentheses; p-values for all Wald tests are 0.000. ** and * denote significance at the 1%
and 5% levels, respectively.


a. All Countries
   Currency                 USD           LC             All              All           All             All             All
   Estimator:               FGLS         FGLS           FGLS             FGLS          Within          Within         Between
                             (1)          (2)            (3)              (4)           (5)             (6)             (7)
   USD share                                                               0.363**        0.310**        0.317**         0.341**
                                                                          (0.022)        (0.087)        (0.084)         (0.074)
   Trade                    8.716**        0.759*          2.575**         1.674**        1.039          0.451           2.664
                              (1.299)      (0.302)        (0.487)         (0.317)        (0.869)        (0.837)          (1.360)
   RegCR                      0.131       0.028**          0.020           0.049**        0.003          0.000           0.088
                              (0.072)      (0.010)        (0.021)         (0.014)        (0.044)        (0.041)          (0.079)
   Fin_Open                 0.178**        0.002          -0.006           0.006         -0.014         -0.017          -0.069
                              (0.060)      (0.012)        (0.021)         (0.013)        (0.030)        (0.032)          (0.079)
   CAB                     -0.362**        -0.025          0.020          -0.080**        0.106          0.101          -0.125
                              (0.121)      (0.019)        (0.033)         (0.027)        (0.055)        (0.058)          (0.140)
   ER_Vol                     0.867        -0.042         -0.217           0.088         -0.035          0.418           2.368*
                              (0.563)      (0.070)        (0.149)         (0.126)        (0.230)        (0.375)          (1.203)
   Yield                      0.141        0.020           0.063           0.028         -0.090         -0.147*         -0.056
                              (0.251)      (0.030)        (0.055)         (0.046)        (0.049)        (0.066)          (0.454)
   Growth                  -0.968**        0.096*          0.048           0.010          0.185          0.116          -0.123
                              (0.285)      (0.042)        (0.071)         (0.058)        (0.099)        (0.130)          (0.326)
   USi10                     2.778*      -0.678**         -0.971**        -0.526*        -1.146**
                              (1.321)      (0.165)        (0.300)         (0.258)        (0.292)
   US_UMP                     2.346        0.868          -1.900          -0.633         -0.197
                              (8.970)      (0.845)        (1.577)         (1.565)        (1.267)
   VIX                        -0.248       -0.020         -0.120*         -0.083         -0.084
                              (0.270)      (0.025)        (0.047)         (0.046)        (0.047)
   N                          231        235             235             235            235            235             235
   # countries                 39         40              40              40             40             40              40
   Fixed Effects           none         none          none              none          country        country+time     none
   Wald χ2                    237         50              58             394
   within R2                                                                              0.34           0.37
   between R2                                                                                                            0.63




                                                                   52
Table 6. Determinants of US Investment in Foreign Bonds, continued

b. Advanced Economies

   Currency:         USD            LC          All           All           All           All
   Estimator:        FGLS          FGLS        FGLS          FGLS          Within        Within
                      (1)           (2)         (3)            (4)          (5)           (6)
   USD_share                                                  0.324**       0.239*        0.241*
                                                             (0.040)       (0.088)       (0.090)
   Trade             12.436**      1.193**       3.817**      3.344**      -0.337        -0.221
                     (2.822)      (0.308)       (0.586)      (0.410)       (0.551)       (0.693)
   RegCR              0.695**      0.069**       0.160**      0.090**       0.061         0.059
                     (0.187)      (0.013)       (0.030)      (0.027)       (0.062)       (0.062)

   CAB                -0.936**    -0.041*       -0.047        -0.138**       0.071         0.066
                      (0.313)     (0.021)       (0.045)       (0.039)       (0.042)       (0.059)
   ER_Vol              0.842      -0.013         0.047         0.987**      -0.168        -0.026
                      (2.107)     (0.092)       (0.268)       (0.340)       (0.239)       (0.394)
   Yield               0.007       0.031         0.070         0.130         0.043         0.038
                      (0.940)     (0.027)       (0.069)       (0.079)       (0.063)       (0.102)
   Growth             -0.787       0.083        -0.003         0.053         0.333**       0.327
                      (0.988)     (0.054)       (0.128)       (0.150)       (0.100)       (0.188)
   USi10               3.775      -0.466*       -0.428         0.100        -0.844*
                      (3.841)     (0.194)       (0.483)       (0.549)       (0.364)
   US_UMP             -3.468      -0.597        -3.134        -3.157        -1.266
                     (23.786)     (0.992)       (2.636)       (3.404)       (1.274)
   VIX                -0.472      -0.047        -0.126        -0.134        -0.053
                      (0.684)     (0.030)       (0.078)       (0.096)       (0.053)

   N                 126          126          126           126           126           126
   # countries        21           21           21            21            21            21
   Fixed effects   none          none        none          none          country       country+time
   Wald χ2            49           58           95           259
   within R2                                                                 0.16          0.16




                                                 53
Table 6. Determinants of US Investment in Foreign Bonds, continued

c. Emerging Market Economies

    Currency:           USD            LC          All         All          All            All
    Estimator:          FGLS          FGLS        FGLS        FGLS         Within         Within
                         (1)           (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)            (6)
    USD_share                                                  0.359**      0.350**         0.355**
                                                               (0.032)       (0.079)       (0.071)
    Trade                 7.556**      0.195        1.438*     1.350**        -0.187       -1.416
                         (1.672)      (0.334)      (0.577)     (0.298)       (2.030)       (2.266)
    RegCR                 0.028        0.024       -0.038       0.045*        -0.037       -0.034
                         (0.078)      (0.017)      (0.028)     (0.022)       (0.042)       (0.037)
    Fin_Open              0.229**      0.009       0.079**      0.023         -0.013       -0.013
                         (0.052)      (0.014)      (0.026)     (0.018)       (0.024)       (0.025)
    CAB                   0.211        0.013        0.054      -0.042       0.199**         0.206**
                         (0.186)      (0.035)      (0.065)     (0.044)       (0.066)       (0.070)
    ER_Vol                1.287*      -0.066       -0.264       0.228          0.033        0.552
                         (0.570)      (0.179)      (0.269)     (0.188)       (0.342)       (0.446)
    Yield                 0.006        0.201*       0.233*     -0.062          0.038       -0.055
                         (0.231)      (0.083)      (0.115)     (0.078)       (0.094)       (0.077)
    Growth               -0.348        0.030       -0.078      -0.038          0.164        0.154
                         (0.288)      (0.088)      (0.141)     (0.092)       (0.169)       (0.175)
    USi10                -2.444       -1.18**      -2.51**     -1.20**      -2.05**
                         (1.291)      (0.367)      (0.601)     (0.425)       (0.450)
    US_UMP              -14.629        3.922       -4.139       0.639          2.835
                         (8.317)      (2.080)      (3.459)     (2.628)       (2.561)
    VIX                  -0.812**      0.020      -0.283**     -0.097         -0.103
                         (0.239)      (0.060)      (0.100)     (0.077)       (0.077)

    N                   105          109          109         109           109           109
    # countries          18           19           19          19            19            19
    Fixed Effects     none          none        none         none        country       country+time

    Wald χ2              80          38           49         277
    within R2                                                                 0.63          0.66




                                                  54
Table 7. Determinants of US Investment in EME Bonds
The table shows results using two different estimators: panel-feasible generalized least squared (FGLS) regressions allowing for
heteroscedasticity and autocorrelated error structures (in columns 1-4) and fixed effects within estimator allowing for correlated
errors within countries (in columns 5 and 6). Data are annual from 2006 through 2015; because of data limitations, some
countries enter the panel later than 2006. Currency denomination of bonds for the dependent variable (normalized relative
weight) is indicated in the top row: USD (column1), local currency (column 2) or all currencies (columns 3-6). Independent
variables are as in Table 6; see Table 5 and Data Appendix for summary statistics and more details on all variables. Constants
and, in column 6, time fixed effects are included but not reported. Standard errors are reported in parentheses; p-values for Wald
tests are in brackets. ** and * denote significance at the 1% and 5% levels, respectively.

               Currency:       USD           LC             All              All               All                 All
               Estimator:     FGLS         FGLS           FGLS             FGLS             Within              Within
                                 (1)         (2)            (3)               (4)              (5)                  (6)
         USD_share                                                          0.280**         0.249**              0.254**
                                                                           (0.027)          (0.056)              (0.058)

         Trade               7.404**        1.334*         2.222**          2.171**         6.577**               6.035*
                               (2.071)      (0.530)        (0.851)         (0.673)          (2.150)              (2.799)

         RegCR               0.269**        0.026*         0.067*           0.079**         0.029                 0.031
                               (0.082)      (0.013)        (0.027)         (0.020)          (0.038)              (0.051)

         Fin_Open            0.191**         0.004         0.035            0.018           0.044                 0.046
                               (0.059)      (0.010)        (0.022)         (0.016)          (0.027)              (0.029)

         CAB                    0.084       -0.036        -0.063           -0.085           0.001                 0.012
                               (0.192)      (0.034)        (0.070)         (0.049)          (0.095)              (0.114)

         ER_Vol                -0.438       -0.170        -0.554           -0.314           -0.690*              -0.604
                               (0.845)      (0.175)        (0.317)         (0.241)          (0.317)              (0.329)

         Yield                 -0.281        0.141        -0.027           -0.091           0.099                 0.100
                               (0.350)      (0.081)        (0.126)         (0.094)          (0.178)              (0.186)

         Growth                -0.059       -0.049        -0.100           -0.157           -0.032                0.044
                               (0.362)      (0.077)        (0.135)         (0.105)          (0.140)              (0.202)

         USi10                  0.012     -0.569**        -0.473           -0.430           -0.392
                               (0.784)      (0.165)        (0.324)         (0.235)          (0.506)

         US_UMP              8.244**         0.516         1.879*           2.671**         2.781*
                               (2.044)      (0.475)        (0.872)         (0.661)          (0.987)

         VIX                    0.053       -0.029        -0.014            0.015           0.021
                               (0.097)      (0.020)        (0.040)         (0.030)          (0.031)


         N                     132         132           132             132              132                  132
         # countries            15           15           15               15              15                    15
         FEs                  none        none         none             None            country            country+time
         Wald χ2                82.4         33.2         38.5           192.3
                               [0.000]      [0.000]        [0.000]         [0.000]

         within R2                                                                          0.51                  0.52




                                                                 55
Table 8. IV Regressions – EMEs, All Currencies
The sample is as in Table 7: annual panel data from 2006 to 2015 and including 15 EMEs. Estimation is by GMM using Stata’s
XTIVREG2 command with fixed effects and clustering by country. First stage regressions of USD_share include the instruments
listed as well as all second stage explanatory variables (the coefficients of which are not shown for space considerations; of those,
only USi10 and VIX are significant in the first stage). Standard errors, clustered by country, are reported in parentheses. ** and *
denote significance at the 1% and 5% levels, respectively. Reported in brackets are the p-values for F-tests.

                First Stage: USD_share
                Deposits                                                  -0.058*                      -0.058*
                                                                          (0.024)                      (0.024)
                ER_Vol                                                    -2.05*                       -2.05*
                                                                          (0.793)                      (0.793)
                RegCR                                                      0.128
                                                                          (0.101)
                Country Size                                              -7.66                        -7.66
                                                                          (4.71)                       (4.71)
                US_UMP                                                    -6.94**                      -6.94**
                                                                          (1.87)                       (1.87)
                F-test of excluded instruments                             6.50                         7.40
                                                                          [0.0025]                     [0.0020]
                Second Stage: Norm_RelWgt

                USD_share                                                  0.244**                      0.220*
                                                                           (0.074)                     (0.076)
                Trade                                                      8.031**                      7.698**
                                                                           (1.864)                     (2.118)
                RegCR                                                                                   0.030
                                                                                                       (0.045)
                Fin_Open                                                   0.034                        0.035
                                                                           (0.030)                     (0.030)
                CAB                                                        0.005                        0.016
                                                                           (0.074)                     (0.077)
                Yield                                                     -0.031                       -0.038
                                                                           (0.155)                     (0.165)
                Growth                                                     0.110                        0.106
                                                                           (0.102)                     (0.105)
                USi10                                                     -0.320                       -0.340
                                                                           (0.496)                     (0.520)
                VIX                                                       -0.057*                      -0.063*
                                                                           (0.023)                     (0.022)

                Fixed Effects                                            country                      country
                R2 (within)                                                0.45                        0.45
                # countries                                               15                          15
                N                                                        132                         132




                                                                56
