                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           FIRMS' INTERNAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL ECONOMIC SHOCKS

                                       Xavier Giroud
                                      Holger M. Mueller

                                     Working Paper 23176
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w23176


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   February 2017




We thank Scott Baker, Martin Beraja, David Berger, Nick Bloom, Itamar Drechsler, Xavier
Gabaix, Ben Keys, Pat Kline, Theresa Kuchler, Andres Liberman, Atif Mian, Ben Moll, Enrico
Moretti, Daniel Paravisini, Thomas Philippon, Tomasz Piskorski, Alexi Savov, Ben Schoefer,
Johannes Stroebel, Amir Sufi, Stijn van Nieuwerburgh, Joe Vavra, Gianluca Violante, Danny
Yagan, and seminar participants at Princeton, Berkeley, MIT, Columbia, NYU, Boulder, Fed
Board, Zurich, St. Gallen, and the NBER Summer Institute for helpful comments. Any opinions
and conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the
views of the U.S. Census Bureau. All results have been reviewed to ensure that no confidential
information is disclosed. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Xavier Giroud and Holger M. Mueller. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Firms' Internal Networks and Local Economic Shocks
Xavier Giroud and Holger M. Mueller
NBER Working Paper No. 23176
February 2017
JEL No. D24,D85,E24,E32,G31,J21,J63

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper shows that firms spread the adverse impacts of local employment shocks across
regions through their internal networks of establishments. Linking confidential micro data at the
establishment level from the U.S. Census Bureau’s Longitudinal Business Database to ZIP code-
level variation in house price changes during the Great Recession, we find that local
establishment-level employment responds strongly to employment shocks in other regions in
which the firm has establishments. Consistent with theory, the elasticity of establishment-level
employment with respect to shocks in other regions is increasing with firms’ financial constraints.
Moreover, establishments belonging to more expansive firm networks exhibit smaller
employment elasticities with respect to their own local shocks. To account for the impacts of
general equilibrium adjustments, we examine aggregate employment at the county level. Similar
to what we found at the establishment level, we obtain large elasticities of county-level
employment with respect to employment shocks in other counties linked through firms’ internal
networks. Overall, our results suggest that firms play an important role in the provision of
regional risk sharing and the propagation of local employment shocks across different U.S.
regions.


Xavier Giroud
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-639
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
xgiroud@mit.edu

Holger M. Mueller
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West Fourth Street
Suite 9-190
New York, NY 10012-1126
and NBER
hmueller@stern.nyu.edu
1       Introduction
How do firms respond to local economic shocks? Do they reallocate resources away from
badly aﬀected regions and toward less aﬀected regions? Or do they smooth out local
economic shocks by spreading their impacts across multiple production units, and thus
eﬀectively across multiple regions? These are important questions, the answers to which
may improve our understanding of how risks are being shared across regions. As is well
known, incomplete markets and credit constraints make it diﬃcult to fully insure against
local economic shocks.1 And while factor mobility can, in principle, mitigate the impact
of local economic shocks, there is mounting evidence that the movement of capital and
labor across regions in the aftermath of shocks is sluggish and, at best, incomplete.2
Accordingly, economists have broadly focused on the role of public policy in alleviating
the adverse impacts of local economic shocks, including regional transfers, redistributive
taxation, and “place-based” policies that directly target disadvantaged regions.3 Little,
if anything, is known about the role of firms in the provision of regional risk sharing, or
how local shocks propagate across regions through firms’ internal networks.
    In this paper, we examine how firms respond to local economic shocks by building
a complete network of the firm’s internal organization using confidential micro data at
the establishment level from the U.S. Census Bureau’s Longitudinal Business Database
(LBD). We obtain variation in local economic shocks by exploiting regional variation in
house prices during the Great Recession. As prior research has shown, the collapse in
house prices during the Great Recession caused a sharp drop in consumer spending by
households (Mian, Rao, and Sufi (2013), Stroebel and Vavra (2014), Kaplan, Mitman,
and Violante (2016)). This drop in consumer spending, in turn, led to large employment
losses in the non-tradable industry sector: across diﬀerent U.S. regions, those with larger
declines in housing net worth experienced significantly larger declines in non-tradable
employment (Mian and Sufi (2014), Giroud and Mueller (2016)).
    1
     Beginning with Asdrubaldi, Sørensen, and Yosha (1996), a large regional risk-sharing literature
rejects the null of perfect insurance across regions.
    2
    See, e.g., Blanchard and Katz (1992), Notowidigo (2011), Autor, Dorn, and Hanson (2013, 2016),
Autor et al. (2014), and Yagan (2016).
    3
     See, e.g., Persson and Tabellini (1996a,b), Glaeser and Gottlieb (2008), Farhi and Werning (2012),
Kline and Moretti (2014), Moretti (2014), Beraja (2016), and Hurst et al. (2016).

                                                  2
   An important feature of non-tradable employment (e.g., restaurants, supermarkets,
retail stores) is that it relies on local consumer demand. This makes it an ideal outcome
variable to study the eﬀects of local consumer demand shocks, such as those originating
from falling house prices. The same feature also makes it an ideal outcome variable to
study whether local consumer demand shocks spill over to other regions through firms’
internal networks of establishments: while these shocks may directly aﬀect non-tradable
employment at the local level, they should not directly aﬀect non-tradable employment in
distant regions. Consequently, if a department store experiences a decline in employment
in response to a local consumer demand shock in some other region in which the firm has
establishments, then it is unlikely that this employment decline is due to a direct demand
eﬀect from that other region.
   We find that local demand shocks aﬀect non-tradable employment not only at the
local level but also in other regions in which the firm has establishments. Both eﬀects go
in the same direction: a drop in local house prices leads to a decline in local non-tradable
employment and a decline in non-tradable employment in other regions. We argue that
these results are consistent with a view whereby drops in consumer spending constitute
shocks to firms’ budget constraints. Firms seeking to equate the marginal returns from
investing across individual firm units respond to these shocks by spreading their impacts
across multiple units, including units located in distant regions.
   Based on our estimates, the elasticity of non-tradable employment with respect to
house prices in other regions linked through firms’ internal networks is between one fifth
and one third of the elasticity with respect to local house prices. Thus, firms provide
valuable insurance against local economic shocks. However, they do not provide full
insurance. Local elasticities are between three and five times larger than elasticities with
respect to house prices in other regions, implying that local firm units are (still) bearing
the brunt of the shocks. This may be due to frictions inside the firm’s internal resource
reallocation process, such as lobbying or rent-seeking. Alternatively, it may be because
firms view local drops in consumer spending in part also as shocks to local investment
opportunities.
   A main empirical challenge arises from separating regional spillovers through firms’
internal networks from common shocks to all regions in which non-tradable firms have

                                             3
their establishments. We account for this possibility by including regional–precisely, ZIP
code–fixed eﬀects in all our specifications. Thus, we compare non-tradable establish-
ments in the same ZIP code that are exposed to the same regional shock but that belong
to diﬀerent firms and hence to diﬀerent firm networks. A possible concern is that regional
shocks may diﬀerentially aﬀect establishments in diﬀerent industries. We address this
concern by including ZIP code × industry fixed eﬀects, where industries are measured at
the 4-digit NAICS level. Our results remain virtually identical.
   Regional shocks may diﬀerentially aﬀect establishments even within a single 4-digit
NAICS industry. For instance, diﬀerent establishments within the same ZIP code and
4-digit NAICS industry may have diﬀerent clienteles (e.g., high- versus low-end retail
stores). To account for clientele eﬀects, we control for the average income, age, and
education in other ZIP codes in which the firm has establishments. Eﬀectively, we thus
compare establishments in the same ZIP code and industry that belong to firms catering
to similar (demographic) segments of the population. Including these additional controls
has no eﬀect on our results.
   In order to capture clientele eﬀects, we additionally perform Placebo tests based on
counterfactual firm networks. The idea is that if two firms in the same industry mutually
overlap in almost all of their locations, then these firms are likely to cater to similar
clienteles. To illustrate, suppose two firms in the same 4-digit NAICS industry mutually
overlap in 90% of their ZIP codes (2 to 10), but firm A is additionally present in ZIP code
1, while firm B is additionally present in ZIP code 11. If our estimates are confounded by
common shocks to firms’ clienteles, then firm A’s establishments–i.e., those in ZIP codes
1 to 10–should also be sensitive to changes in house prices in ZIP code 11, even though
firm A itself has no presence in that ZIP code. Likewise, firm B’s establishments should
also be sensitive to changes in house prices in ZIP code 1. We find that this is not the
case, suggesting that our estimates are unlikely to be confounded by common shocks to
firms’ clienteles.
   Consumers may go to restaurants and grocery stores in neighboring regions. Thus,
another empirical challenge arises from separating regional spillovers through firms’ in-
ternal networks from potentially confounding direct demand eﬀects from nearby regions.
We find that direct demand spillovers have at best a modest eﬀect. If we control for

                                            4
proximity-weighted house price changes in other ZIP codes, our estimates become only
slightly weaker, and they remain highly significant. The same is true if we exclude all ZIP
codes within a 50, 100, 150, or 250 mile radius.
   We conclude our establishment-level analysis with some additional tests. Regional
insurance through firms’ internal networks implies that local firm units absorb some of
the impact of shocks from other regions. The flip side is that firm units in other regions
absorb some of the impact of local shocks. Accordingly, units belonging to firms with
more expansive regional networks should be less sensitive to (their own) local economic
shocks. Indeed, we find that the elasticity of employment with respect to local house prices
is smaller for establishments belonging to more expansive regional networks. Second,
theory predicts that the extent to which firms reallocate internal resources in response to
local economic shocks should depend on their financial constraints. Consistent with this
prediction, we find that establishments belonging to more financially constrained firms
exhibit larger elasticities of employment with respect to house prices in other regions.
In fact, for the least financially constrained firms in our sample, we find no evidence
that firms reallocate internal resources in response to local economic shocks. Lastly, we
examine if firm units in close proximity to headquarters are more insulated from economic
shocks. This could be due to eﬃciency (e.g., information-based) reasons, lobbying, or
simply because management feels more responsible for nearby firm units. Consistent with
this notion, we find that establishments which are located closer to headquarters exhibit
smaller elasticities of employment with respect to both local house prices and house prices
in other regions in which the firm has establishments.
   Regional spillovers through firms’ internal networks may be irrelevant in general equi-
librium if workers of multi-region firms that are laid oﬀ due to shocks in other regions are
re-employed by (local) firms which are less exposed to these regions. To see whether the
distribution of firm networks also matters in the aggregate, the final part of our paper
examines aggregate non-tradable employment at the county level. Similar to what we
found at the establishment level, we find sizable elasticities of non-tradable county-level
employment with respect to house prices in other counties linked through firms’ internal
networks. That being said, relative to local elasticities, the magnitudes are somewhat
smaller than in our establishment-level analysis, possibly reflecting the impacts of general

                                             5
equilibrium adjustments.
   To account for the possibility of common shocks at the county level–which in turn
are correlated with house price changes–we control for similarity-weighted house price
changes in other counties based on similarities in income, age, education, household debt,
and non-tradable employment shares. The idea is that counties which are more similar
are more likely to be exposed to similar county-level shocks. We also consider a subset
of counties in which house prices did not fall during the Great Recession. Linking such
counties to other counties in which house prices fell sharply makes it less likely that
spillovers across counties are the result of common county-level shocks. In all of these
cases, the elasticity of county-level employment with respect to house prices in other
counties linked through firms’ internal networks remains highly significant.
   To rule out potentially confounding direct demand eﬀects from other counties, we
proceed as in our establishment-level analysis. That is, we control for proximity-weighted
house price changes in other counties, and we exclude all counties within a 50, 100, 150,
or 250 mile radius. As in our establishment-level analysis, we find that our estimates
become only slightly weaker, and they remain highly significant.
   Lastly, we explore the possibility that local demand shocks may indirectly aﬀect non-
tradable employment in other counties via the trade channel. Specifically, they may lead
to employment losses in other counties in the tradable sector, which may spill over to the
non-tradable sector if workers that are laid oﬀ cut back on their local grocery shopping
and restaurant visits. A necessary condition for this (trade) channel to explain our results
is that changes in house prices aﬀect tradable employment in other counties. As it turns
out, however, changes in house prices have no significant eﬀect on tradable employment,
neither at the local level nor in other counties.
   Our paper contributes to several strands of literature. As mentioned earlier, a large
literature examines how public policy can mitigate the adverse impacts of local economic
shocks through redistributive taxation, regional transfers, and “place-based” policies that
directly target disadvantaged regions.4 By contrast, our paper shows that firms play an

   4
     Regional transfers may be implicit. For instance, Hurst et al. (2016) show that lack of regional
variation in mortgage rates on loans secured by government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs) constitutes an
implicit transfer to regions that are more likely to be hit by local economic shocks.

                                                  6
important role in the provision of risk sharing across regions.
   Second, our paper is related to a recent literature in macroeconomics that studies how
shocks propagate throughout the economy. This literature has focused on input-output
networks (e.g., Acemoglu et al. (2012), Acemoglu, Akcigit, and Kerr (2016), Barrot
and Sauvagnat (2016)), financial networks (e.g., Acemoglu, Ozdaglar, and Tahbaz-Salehi
(2012), Cabrales, Gale, and Gottardi (2015)), and social networks (Bailey et al. (2016)).
In contrast, little is known about whether, and how, firms’ internal networks facilitate
the propagation of local economic shocks, and how this aﬀects macroeconomic aggregates.
Also, an important benefit of using U.S. Census Bureau data is that we can completely
characterize the entire network structure: the LBD includes the ZIP codes and firm
aﬃliations of all (payroll) establishments in the U.S.
   Lastly, our paper adds to a growing literature that studies the massive collapse in
house prices in the Great Recession and its implications for consumer spending (e.g.,
Mian, Rao and Sufi (2013), Stroebel and Vavra (2014), Kaplan, Mitman, and Violante,
(2016)) and non-tradable employment (e.g., Mian and Sufi (2014), Giroud and Mueller
(2016)).5 Our paper shows that local consumer demand shocks not only aﬀect local non-
tradable employment but also non-tradable employment in other regions linked through
firms’ internal networks. Indeed, we find sizable elasticities of non-tradable employment
with respect to demand shocks in other regions, echoing a point made in Beraja, Hurst,
and Ospina (2016) that it is diﬃcult to draw inferences about aggregate economic activity
based on local elasticities alone. In our empirical setting, local elasticities and those with
respect to demand shocks in other regions have the same sign. Thus, accounting for
spillovers from other regions strengthens the role of consumer demand in explaining the
sharp decline in U.S. employment during the Great Recession.
   The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the data, vari-
ables, empirical strategy, and summary statistics. Section 3 documents how firms spread
the impacts of local economic shocks across regions through their internal networks of
establishments. Section 4 considers the implications of firm’s redistributive policies for
aggregate non-tradable employment at the county level. Section 5 concludes.

   5
     See Berger et al. (2016) for a theory model that produces large consumption responses to house
price changes in line with estimates found in empirical studies.

                                                7
2       Data, Variables, and Summary Statistics

2.1     Data
We use confidential micro data at the establishment level from the U.S. Census Bureau’s
Longitudinal Business Database (LBD). An establishment is a “single physical location
where business is conducted” (Jarmin and Miranda (2002, p. 5)), e.g., a restaurant, gro-
cery store, gas station, or department store. The LBD covers all business establishments
in the U.S. with at least one paid employee. Our data include information on employment,
location, industry aﬃliation, and firm aﬃliation.
    We focus on establishments in the non-tradable industry sector. An important feature
of non-tradable employment is that it relies on local consumer demand. As explained in
the Introduction, this makes it an ideal outcome variable to study whether local consumer
demand shocks spill over to other regions through firms’ internal networks: while these
shocks may directly aﬀect non-tradable employment at the local level, they should not
directly aﬀect non-tradable employment in distant regions. We classify industries as
non-tradable using the classification scheme in Mian and Sufi (2014), which is based on
restaurants and retail industries. Accordingly, there are 26 four-digit NAICS industries in
the non-tradable sector. Among those, the largest ones in terms of U.S. employment shares
are full-service restaurants (3.76%), limited-service eating places (3.40%), grocery stores
(2.13%), department stores (1.36%), other general merchandise stores (1.12%), clothing
stores (1.06%), automobile dealers (1.05%), health and personal care stores (0.89%), and
gasoline stations (0.73%).
    We match individual establishments to ZIP code-level house prices using house price
data from Zillow. Our sample period is from 2006 to 2009.6 Changes in house prices
from 2006 to 2009 based on Zillow data are highly correlated with the “housing net worth
shock” in Mian, Rao and Sufi (2013) and Mian and Sufi (2014), “∆ Housing Net Worth,
2006—2009.” The correlation at the MSA level is 86.3 percent. They are also highly
correlated with changes in house prices from 2006 to 2009 using data from the Federal
Housing Finance Agency (FHFA). The correlation at the MSA level is 96.4 percent.
    6
    Zillow house price data have been used in, e.g., Keys et al. (2014), Mian, Sufi, and Trebbi (2015),
Giroud and Mueller (2016), Kaplan, Mitman, and Violante (2016), and Bailey et al. (2016).

                                                  8
    In our establishment-level analysis, we focus on firms operating in multiple ZIP codes
(“multi-region” firms). Our sample consists of 385,000 non-tradable establishments ac-
counting for 64.7% of non-tradable U.S. employment in 2006.7 The high employment
share of multi-region firms is reflective of the prominent role of national restaurant and
retail chains in the non-tradable industry sector. In our county-level analysis, we consider
total non-tradable employment at the county level, that is, we include employment by
single-region firms. Our sample consists of 1,000 counties representing 85.8 percent of
non-tradable U.S. employment in 2006.
    In some of our regressions, we additionally use data from the 2000 Decennial Census
(population, age, education), the IRS (adjusted gross income per capita in 2006), and the
FRBNY Consumer Credit Panel (household debt in 2006). In one regression, we compute
measures of firms’ financial constraints using data from Compustat (firm leverage, KZ
index, WW index, all in 2006). To this end, we match establishments in the LBD to firms
in Compustat using the Compustat-SSEL bridge maintained by the U.S. Census Bureau.
As this bridge ends in 2005, we extend the match to 2009 using employer name and ID
number (EIN) following the procedure described in McCue (2003).


2.2     Variables and Empirical Specification
In our establishment-level analysis, we examine how non-tradable establishment-level em-
ployment during the Great Recession responds to changes in local house prices in the
establishment’s ZIP code as well as changes in house prices in other ZIP codes in which
the firm has establishments. We estimate the following equation:

                                                             P
 ∆ Log(Emp )07−09 =  + 1 ∆ Log(HP )06−09 +  2              6=     ∆ Log(HP )06−09 +   (1)


where ∆ Log(Emp )07−09 is the percentage change in employment from 2007 to 2009 at
establishment  of firm  in ZIP code , ∆ Log(HP )06−09 is the percentage change in
                                                  P
house prices from 2006 to 2009 in ZIP code , and 6=   ∆ Log(HP )06−09 is the
linkage-weighted percentage change in house prices from 2006 to 2009 in ZIP codes  6= .

   7
     All sample sizes in this paper are rounded to the nearest hundred following disclosure guidelines by
the U.S. Census Bureau.

                                                   9
                                                                   P
For brevity, we write ∆ Log(HP)06−09 (other) in lieu of               6=     ∆ Log(HP )06−09 in our
figures and tables. The elasticities of interest are 1 and, especially,  2  All regressions
are weighted by establishment size (number of employees) and include either industry,
ZIP code, or ZIP code × industry fixed eﬀects. Industries are measured at the 4-digit
NAICS level. In regressions that include either ZIP code or ZIP code × industry fixed
eﬀects, ∆ Log(HP )06−09 is absorbed by the fixed eﬀects–they account for any common
shock at the ZIP code or ZIP code × industry level, including those arising in general
equilibrium through spillovers from other regions (e.g., price eﬀects). Standard errors are
double clustered at the firm and county level.
   At the establishment level, the linkage weights  specify the relative weight of
house price changes in ZIP code  for an establishment of firm  in ZIP code  We im-
pose the minimal assumption that linkage weights be proportional to firms’ non-tradable
employment in a given ZIP code:

                                                       Emp
                                           = P              
                                                     6= Emp

Hence, a local economic shock in ZIP code  matters relatively more for an establishment
of firm  in ZIP code  if the firm is relatively more exposed to ZIP code  as measured
by its employment in ZIP code  relative to other ZIP codes  6= .8 Simply put, an
establishment is relatively more exposed to a given ZIP code if its firm is relatively more
exposed to that ZIP code. Naturally, a ZIP code has zero weight if the firm has no
employees in that ZIP code.
   In our county-level analysis, we examine how non-tradable county-level employment
responds to changes in a county’s own house prices as well as changes in house prices in
other counties linked through firms’ internal networks. Similar to above, we estimate the
following equation:

                                                                  P
  ∆ Log(Emp )07−09 =  + 1 ∆ Log(HP )06−09 +  2                   6=    ∆ Log(HP )06−09 +  


where ∆ Log(Emp )07−09 is the percentage change in non-tradable employment from 2007

   8
       Bailey et al. (2016) use analogous linkage weights in the context of social networks.

                                                       10
to 2009 in county , ∆ Log(HP )06−09 is the percentage change in house prices from 2006
                         P
to 2009 in county , and 6=  ∆ Log(HP )06−09 is the linkage-weighted percentage
change in house prices from 2006 to 2009 in counties  6= . Similar to above, we write
                                 P
∆ Log(HP)06−09 (other) in lieu of 6=  ∆ Log(HP )06−09 for brevity. All regressions
are weighted by county size (number of employees). Standard errors are clustered at the
state level.
   At the county level, the linkage weights  specify the relative weight of house price
changes in county  for non-tradable employment in county  They are obtained by taking
the employment-weighted average of individual establishment-level linkage weights  
within a given county:
                                                P     Emp
                                        =    
                                                     P           
                                                       Emp
          P ¡         P        ¢
where       Emp    Emp = 1 The establishment-level linkage weights   are

constructed similarly to above, except that establishments are aggregated at the firm-
county level and exposure is measured with respect to counties instead of ZIP codes.
Hence, a local economic shock in county  matters relatively more for county  if its
establishments are relatively more exposed to county  and these establishments have
relatively high employment shares within county .


2.3       Firms’ Responses to Local Economic Shocks
How should firms respond to local economic shocks? The extant literature on within-firm
resource reallocation, which is part of a larger literature in corporate finance studying
the functioning of internal capital markets, emphasizes two main aspects: firms’ financial
constraints and the precise nature of the economic shock.9


2.3.1      Shocks to Investment Opportunities

Financially unconstrained firms
   Suppose a firm has two establishments, one in region A and one in region B. Sup-
pose further that region A experiences a decline in investment opportunities such that,

   9
       See Stein (2003) for a comprehensive survey of the literature.

                                                      11
in a first-best world, it is optimal to reduce the scale of the firm’s operations. In the
firm’s internal resource allocation (or capital budgeting) process, corporate headquarters
(HQ) consequently allocates a smaller budget, and hence fewer resources (capital, labor),
to region A. Since the firm faces no binding overall resource constraint, there are no
implications for region B.

Financially constrained firms
    If the firm is financially constrained, it allocates budgets across regions A and B to
equate the marginal returns from investing across regions. This is illustrated in Panel
(A) of Figure I where, for simplicity, labor is the only input in the firm’s production
process. Importantly, because the firm faces a binding resource constraint, its scale of
operations in each region is below the first-best optimal level. If region A experiences
a decline in investment opportunities, HQ allocates a smaller budget, and hence fewer
resources, to region A, which frees up resources for region B. Hence, labor in region B
expands. Precisely, HQ shifts resources from region A to region B until the marginal
returns from investing across regions are again equalized. In equation (1), this implies a
negative coeﬃcient  2 : a decline in house prices in ZIP codes  6=  leads to an increase
in establishment-level employment in ZIP code 1011


2.3.2    Shocks to Firms’ Budget Constraints

Financially unconstrained firms
    Suppose now that region A experiences a shock to firm revenues, aﬀecting the firm’s
overall budget constraint. If investment opportunities are unchanged, the firm simply
raises new funds to make up for the budget shortfall. Nothing real changes, neither in
region A nor in region B.

Financially constrained firms
    If the firm is financially constrained, it optimally spreads the budget shock across

   10
     See Stein (1997) for a theory model in which the firm reallocates resources towards units whose
relative investment opportunities have increased and Giroud and Mueller (2015) for empirical evidence
based on idiosyncratic shocks to plants’ investment opportunities.
   11
     The null hypothesis,  2 = 0 implies that firms are either not financially constrained or, if they are,
that they do not reallocate internal resources in response to local economic shocks.

                                                     12
multiple regions. This is illustrated in Panel (B) of Figure I, where the firm not only
scales down its operations in region A but also in region B, eﬀectively shifting resources
from region B to region A (“cross-subsidization”). Consequently, employment in both
regions declines. In equation (1), this implies a positive coeﬃcient  2 : a decline in house
prices in ZIP codes  6=  leads to a decrease in establishment-level employment in ZIP
code 12


2.3.3    Local Consumer Demand Shocks in the Great Recession

Drops in local consumer spending during the Great Recession arguably tightened firms’
budget constraints. Whether, and to what extent, firms perceived these drops also as
shocks to investment opportunities is less clear. If firms view drops in local consumer
spending as fundamental shocks to investment opportunities, then even unconstrained
firms should make significant employment cuts (see Section 2.3.1). However, Giroud
and Mueller (2016) find that while financially constrained firms made large employment
cuts in response to local consumer demand shocks in the Great Recession, financially
unconstrained firms adjusted their employment only little (Table II and Panel (A) of
Figure I).13 Further, and consistent with drops in local consumer spending representing
shocks to firms’ budget constraints, the authors find that financially unconstrained firms
respond to these shocks by increasing their short- and long-term borrowing. By contrast,
financially constrained firms are unable to borrow more and thus forced to downsize,
lay oﬀ employees, and close down establishments. Ultimately, whether firms perceived
drops in local consumer spending in the Great Recession primarily as budget shocks or
as fundamental shocks to investment opportunities remains an empirical question, one
which the sign of the coeﬃcient  2 in equation (1) can be informative about.


  12
     See Inderst and Mueller (2003) for a theory model in which HQ smoothes out cash-flow shocks by
cross-subsidizing firm units with resources from other units and Lamont (1997) for empirical evidence
showing that in response to a decline in oil revenues, diversified oil companies cut investment not only in
their oil segments but also in unrelated segments, such as chemicals, railroads, and shipbuilding.
  13
     Survey evidence by Campello, Graham, and Harvey (2010) supports this view. The authors asked
574 U.S. CFOs in 2008 whether their firms are financially constrained and what they are planning to do
in 2009. Firms classified as financially constrained said they would cut their employment by 10.9% in
the following year. By contrast, firms classified as unconstrained said they would cut their employment
only by 2.7%.

                                                    13
2.4    Summary Statistics
Table I provides basic summary statistics. In the top part of Panel (A), the sample
consists of firms operating in multiple ZIP codes (“multi-region firms”) and the unit of
observation is at the establishment level, consistent with our empirical analysis in Section
3. As can be seen, non-tradable establishments have on average 28.9 employees and are
linked to 812.9 other ZIP codes through their firms’ internal networks (based on 2006
figures). This is sizable network, reflecting the prominent role of national restaurant
and retail chains in the non-tradable sector. During the Great Recession, non-tradable
establishments experience a drop in employment of 3.1 percent, while house prices at the
ZIP code level fell by 14.5 percent.
   The bottom part of Panel (A) provides basic county-level summary statistics. The
sample consists of all non-tradable firms in a county, including single-region firms, con-
sistent with our empirical analysis in Section 4. As is shown, the average county has
1,074 establishments and 18,490 employees in the non-tradable sector, accounting for
18.6 percent of total county-level employment. During the Great Recession, aggregate
non-tradable county-level employment fell by 3.6 percent, which is slightly higher than
the 3.1 percent reported above for multi-region firms.
   To get a sense of whether, and how, firms’ internal networks are correlated with
demographic and other characteristics, Panel (B) of Table I shows correlations of the
network-based linkage weights,  and  with corresponding linkage weights based on
proximity, population, income, education, age, and household debt. While most of these
correlations are insignificant, those with proximity and population are significant. Both
correlations are intuitive. For one, many non-tradable firms are regional firms. Second,
national restaurant and retail chains are likely to have a bigger presence in regions with
more potential customers. We address both correlations in our empirical analysis. As for
population, we find that (counterfactual) networks based on population weights are unable
to produce significant spillovers across regions (see Tables II and IX). As for proximity,
we show that our estimates are robust to excluding proximate regions or controlling for
proximity-weighted house price changes in other regions (see Tables V and X).




                                            14
3     Firms’ Internal Networks and Local Shocks

3.1    Main Establishment-Level Results
Figure II provides a visual impression by plotting the relationship between changes in
establishment-level employment during the Great Recession and either changes in ZIP
code-level house prices (top panel) or changes in house prices in other ZIP codes in which
the firm has establishments (bottom panel). To filter out any confounding eﬀects of
∆ Log(HP)06−09 (other) when plotting the relationship between ∆ Log(Emp)07−09 and
∆ Log(HP)06−09 , we compute the residuals from a regression of ∆ Log(Emp)07−09 on a
constant and ∆ Log(HP)06−09 (other). These residuals represent the component of ∆
Log(Emp)07−09 that is orthogonal to, and thus unexplained by, ∆ Log(HP)06−09 (other).
For each percentile of ∆ Log(HP)06−09  the plot shows the mean values of the residuals
and ∆ Log(HP)06−09  respectively. We proceed analogously in the bottom panel when
plotting the relationship between ∆ Log(Emp)07−09 and ∆ Log(HP)06−09 (other).
    As is shown in the top panel of Figure II, there is a positive relationship between
changes in establishment-level employment and changes in local house prices at the ZIP
code level. The elasticity of employment with respect to local house prices is 0.116,
implying that a ten percent decline in local house prices is associated with a 1.16 percent
decline in employment at the establishment level. (The average decline in house prices at
the ZIP code level between 2006 and 2009 is 14.5 percent; see Table I.) The bottom panel
shows the relationship between changes in establishment-level employment and changes in
house prices in other ZIP codes in which the firm has establishments. Here, the elasticity
of employment with respect to house prices in other ZIP codes is 0.029, which is about
25 percent of the elasticity with respect to local house prices. Thus, employment at the
establishment level is highly sensitive not only to local house price changes but also to
house price changes in other regions in which the firm has establishments.
    Table II confirms this visual impression using regression analysis. All regressions in-
clude industry fixed eﬀects. Industries are measured at the 4-digit NAICS level. In column
(1), the elasticity of employment with respect to local house prices is 0.109, which is only
slightly lower than in our graphical analysis. Accordingly, a ten percent decline in local


                                            15
house prices is associated with a 1.09 percent decline in employment at the establishment
level. Column (2) includes the eﬀect of changes in house prices in other ZIP codes in which
the firm has establishments. While the coeﬃcient associated with changes in local house
prices, ∆ Log(HP)06−09  drops slightly, the coeﬃcient associated with changes in house
prices in other ZIP codes, ∆ Log(HP)06−09 (other), is highly significant. The elasticity
of employment with respect to house prices in other ZIP codes is 0.028, which is about
30 percent of the elasticity with respect to local house prices. Both elasticities have the
same sign, consistent with the graphical analysis in Panel (B) of Figure I, where firms
reallocate resources from less aﬀected regions to badly aﬀected regions. Accordingly, firms
provide valuable insurance against local economic shocks. However, they do not provide
full insurance. The elasticity of employment with respect to local house prices is more
than three times larger than the elasticity with respect to house prices in other regions,
implying that local firm units are (still) bearing the brunt of the shocks. This may be
due to frictions inside the firm’s internal resource reallocation process, such as lobbying
or rent-seeking. Alternatively, and consistent with the graphical analysis in Panel (A) of
Figure I, it may be because firms view drops in local consumer spending in part also as
shocks to local investment opportunities.
   Perhaps employment at the establishment level responds generically to house price
changes in other regions? To examine this possibility, we perform a number of Placebo
tests. In column (3), we assign equal weight to all other ZIP codes. In columns (4) to (6),
we replace the linkage weights  with corresponding linkage weights based on population,
income, and household debt.14 Lastly, in column (7), we randomly select other ZIP codes.
Precisely, for each establishment, we replace all ZIP codes the establishment is currently
linked to (  0) with randomly selected ZIP codes. We then estimate equation (1) and
store the coeﬃcients and standard errors. We repeat this process 1,000 times. The results
in column (7) display the average coeﬃcients and standard errors, respectively, based on
the 1,000 Placebo regressions. As can be seen, in all of the Placebo tests, the eﬀect of
house price changes in other regions is small and insignificant.


  14
    Mian and Sufi (2011, 2014), Mian, Rao, and Sufi (2013), Keys et al. (2014), Berger et al. (2015),
and Baker (2015) all emphasize the role of household debt in the Great Recession.

                                                 16
3.2    Common Regional Shocks
A main empirical challenge arises from separating regional spillovers through firms’ in-
ternal networks from common shocks to regions in which non-tradable firms have their
establishments. Such common regional shocks–if they are correlated with house price
changes–could potentially explain why the elasticity of employment with respect to lo-
cal house prices has the same sign as the elasticity with respect to house prices in other
regions in which the firm has establishments.
   Table III addresses confounding eﬀects due to common regional shocks. In column (1),
we include ZIP code fixed eﬀects. These fixed eﬀects account for any shock at the regional
level as well as spillovers from one region to another, e.g., due to price or other general
equilibrium adjustments. We thus compare non-tradable establishments in the same ZIP
code that are exposed to the same regional shock but that belong to diﬀerent firms and
hence to diﬀerent firm networks. As can be seen, the elasticity of employment with
respect to house prices in other ZIP codes in which the firm has establishments is almost
identical to our previous estimate in column (2) of Table II. A potential concern with
this strategy is that regional shocks may diﬀerentially aﬀect establishments in diﬀerent
industries. In column (2), we address this concern by including ZIP code × industry fixed
eﬀects. Industries are measured at the 4-digit NAICS level. As can be seen, our results
remain virtually identical.
   Regional shocks may diﬀerentially aﬀect establishments even within a single 4-digit
NAICS industry. For instance, diﬀerent establishments within the same ZIP code and
4-digit NAICS industry may have diﬀerent clienteles (e.g., high- versus low-end retail
stores). To account for clientele eﬀects, we control in columns (3) to (6) for the weighted
average income, age, and education in the other ZIP codes in which the firm is present.
All regressions include ZIP code × industry fixed eﬀects. Eﬀectively, we thus compare
establishments in the same ZIP code and industry that belong to firms catering to similar
(demographic) segments of the population. As can be seen, including these additional
controls does not aﬀect our results.
   In Table IV, we account for clientele eﬀects by conducting Placebo tests based on
counterfactual firm networks. The idea is that if two firms in the same industry mutually


                                            17
overlap in almost all of their locations, then they are likely to cater to similar clienteles.
This is illustrated in Figure III. Firm A has establishments in locations 1 to 10, while firm
B has establishments in locations 2 to 11. Suppose firms A and B are in the same industry.
Given that the two firms overlap in 90% of their locations, the counterfactual assumption
is that–based on the firms’ common clienteles–firm A could have been in location 11,
while firm B could have been in location 1. Thus, if our estimates are confounded by
common shocks to firms’ clienteles, then firm A’s establishments–i.e., those in locations
1 to 10–should also be sensitive to changes in house prices in location 11, even though
firm A itself has no presence in that location. Likewise, firm B’s establishments should
also be sensitive to changes in house prices in location 1.
    In our Placebo tests, we identify all non-tradable firms in the same industry that
mutually overlap in at least either 75% or 90% of their locations. Location is defined either
at the ZIP code or county level. Industries are measured either at the 3- or 4-digit NAICS
level.15 In the spirit of the above example, we estimate the elasticity of employment at
the establishment level with respect to house prices in (counterfactual) locations in which
the firm could have been. As can be seen, regardless of which specification we use, this
elasticity is small and insignificant. Hence, our estimates are unlikely to be confounded
by common shocks to firms’ clienteles.


3.3        Direct Demand Spillovers
Consumers may go to restaurants and grocery stores in neighboring regions. Thus, an-
other empirical challenge arises from separating regional spillovers through firms’ internal
networks from potentially confounding direct demand eﬀects from nearby regions.16 That
is, falling house prices in ZIP code  may aﬀect non-tradable establishment-level employ-
ment in ZIP code  not because of firms’ internal networks but rather because consumers
in ZIP code  cut back on their restaurant visits and grocery shopping in ZIP code 


   15
     To obtain strong counterfactuals, we restrict our sample to “pure industry” firms that have all of
their establishments in a single industry. As it turns out, this sample restriction does not impose a serious
limitation. In the non-tradable sector, 94.6% (90.9%) of multi-region firms have all of their establishments
in a single 3-digit (4-digit) NAICS industry (based on 2006 figures).
   16
        Likewise, house prices may be spatially correlated.

                                                      18
   Table V addresses potentially confounding direct demand eﬀects from nearby regions.
In column (1), we directly control for proximity-weighted changes in house prices in other
ZIP codes. While the coeﬃcient associated with this control is (marginally) significant,
the coeﬃcient associated with ∆ Log(HP)06−09 (other) drops only slightly and remains
highly significant. Hence, direct demand spillovers have at best a modest eﬀect. In
columns (3) to (5), we exclude all ZIP codes within a 50, 100, 150, or 250 mile radius
based on the ZIP codes’ geographical centroids. As is shown, the coeﬃcient associated
with ∆ Log(HP)06−09 (other) remains highly significant in all regressions.


3.4       Scope of Firms’ Regional Networks
Regional insurance through firms’ internal networks implies that local firm units absorb
some of the impact of shocks from other regions. The flip side is that firm units in other
regions absorb some of the impact of local shocks. Accordingly, if firms provide insurance
across regions, units belonging to firms with more expansive regional networks should be
less sensitive to (their own) local economic shocks.
   We test this prediction in Table VI using diﬀerent measures of the scope of firms’
regional networks. In column (1), we use a dummy indicating whether a firm operates in
multiple ZIP codes (“multi-region firm”). In column (2), we use the number of ZIP codes
in which the firm operates. Lastly, in column (3), we use a firm-level Herfindahl-Hirschman
Index (HHI) measuring the firm’s geographical concentration based on its employment
at the ZIP code level. (We use one minus the HHI to allow all three measures to have
the same economic interpretation.) In column (1), our sample includes both multi- and
single-region firms. In columns (2) and (3), we use our original sample of multi-region
firms given that diﬀerences between single- and multi-region firms have already been
captured in column (1). As is shown, regardless of how we measure the scope of firms’
regional networks (RN), the interaction term ∆ Log(HP)06−09 × RN is always negative
and highly significant. Thus, consistent with firms providing insurance across regions,
establishments belonging to firms with more expansive regional networks exhibit lower
elasticities of employment with respect to local house prices.17

  17
       Firms with more expansive regional networks are typically larger. To account for the eﬀects of firm

                                                    19
3.5       Financial Constraints
Theory predicts that the extent to which firms reallocate internal resources in response
to local economic shocks depends on their financial constraints (see Section 2.3). In
Table VII, we take this prediction to the data using diﬀerent measures of firms’ financial
constraints. In column (1), we use firm leverage. This measure is based on Giroud and
Mueller (2016), who argue that firms with higher leverage in 2006, at the onset of the Great
Recession, were more financially constrained during the Great Recession. In columns (2)
and (3), we use the Kaplan-Zingales index (Kaplan and Zingales (1997)) and the Whited-
Wu index (Whited and Wu (2006)), respectively. Both indices are widely used in the
finance literature. All three measures are only available for public firms. Accordingly, we
restrict our sample to firms that have a match in Compustat.
    As can be seen, regardless of how we measure firms’ financial constraints (FC), the
interaction term ∆ Log(HP)06−09 (other) × FC is always positive and highly significant.
Hence, establishments of more financially constrained firms exhibit larger elasticities of
employment with respect to house prices in other ZIP codes in which the firm has es-
tablishments. In fact, for the least financially constrained firms in our sample, we find
no evidence that firms reallocate internal resources in response to local economic shocks.
Finally, we find that establishments of more financially constrained firms exhibit larger
elasticities of employment with respect to local house prices. Altogether, these results
suggest that financial constraints matter, both for how firms respond locally to shocks
and how they smooth out the impacts of these shocks across regions.


3.6       Proximity to Headquarters
An interesting question is whether firm units in close proximity to headquarters (HQ)
are more insulated from economic shocks. For instance, it may be easier for such units
to successfully lobby HQ, or management may simply interact more with, and hence feel
more socially responsible for, units that are located closer to HQ.18 But proximity may

size, we have re-estimated columns (1) to (3) controlling for firm size (number of employees) in 2006 as
well as its interaction with ∆ Log(HP)06−09 . While the coeﬃcient associated with ∆ Log(HP)06−09 ×
RN drops slightly, it remains highly significant in all regressions.
  18
       Glaeser, Laibson, and Sacerdote (2002) study the relation between proximity and social capital.

                                                    20
also facilitate information flows and monitoring, leading to higher marginal returns.19
Accordingly, it may be eﬃcient to be “protective” of proximate firm units.
     Table VIII examines if establishments that are located closer to HQ are less sensitive
to house price changes. We use three diﬀerent measures of proximity. In columns (1) and
(2), we use a dummy indicating whether the establishment and HQ are located in the
same ZIP code and county, respectively. In column (3), we use the (inverse) geographical
distance between the establishment and HQ. Two results stand out. First, establishments
that are located closer to HQ exhibit smaller elasticities of employment with respect to
local house prices. Second, establishments that are located closer to HQ also exhibit
smaller elasticities of employment with respect to house prices in other ZIP codes in
which the firm has establishments. Together, these results suggest that firm units in close
proximity to HQ are more insulated from local economic shocks.



4        Aggregate Employment at the County Level
Regional spillovers through firms’ internal networks may be irrelevant in general equi-
librium if workers of multi-region firms that are laid oﬀ due to shocks in other regions
are re-employed by (local) firms which are less exposed to these regions. In principle,
such general equilibrium adjustments may be impaired by wage and price stickiness. In
addition, the extent of labor reallocation may depend on search and matching frictions
in the labor market as well as labor adjustment costs. Empirical evidence suggests that
labor market frictions were particularly severe during the Great Recession (e.g., Davis,
Faberman, and Haltiwanger (2013), Şahin et al. (2014)). Notably, Foster, Grim, and
Haltiwanger (2014) find that the intensity of labor reallocation fell rather than rose dur-
ing the Great Recession, in contrast to previous recessions. They conclude that “job
reallocation (creation plus destruction) is at its lowest point in 30 years during the Great
Recession and its immediate aftermath” (p. 10).
     To see whether the distribution of firm networks also matters in the aggregate, we ex-
amine aggregate non-tradable employment at the county level. We consider non-tradable

    19
    Using data on manufacturing plants from the U.S. Census Bureau, Giroud (2013) finds that proximity
to HQ positively aﬀects plant-level productivity.

                                                 21
employment by all firms in a county, including single-region firms. Hence, our setting
accounts for the possibility that workers laid oﬀ due to shocks in other regions are re-
employed either by other multi-region firms or by (local) single-region firms. Linkages
across counties are based on firms’ internal networks as described in Section 2.2.


4.1    Main County-Level Results
Figure IV provides a visual impression by plotting the relationship between changes in
non-tradable county-level employment during the Great Recession and either changes in
county-level house prices (top panel) or changes in house prices in other counties linked
through firms’ internal networks (bottom panel). As is shown in the top panel, the
elasticity of employment with respect to a county’s own house prices is 0.129. This
is slightly larger than the corresponding elasticity in the top panel of Figure II as our
sample now also includes small single-region firms. In the bottom panel, the elasticity of
employment with respect to house prices in other counties linked through firms’ internal
networks is 0.030. Accordingly, non-tradable county-level employment is highly sensitive
to changes in house prices in other counties, suggesting that spillovers through firms’
internal networks also matter for aggregate employment.
   Table IX confirms this visual impression using regression analysis. All regressions
include demographic controls (income, age, education) as well as the county-specific em-
ployment shares of all 2-digit NAICS industries to account for the possibility that counties
with exposure to certain industries are harder hit during the Great Recession (Mian and
Sufi (2014)). In column (1), the elasticity of non-tradable county-level employment with
respect to a county’s own house prices is 0.122, which is only slightly lower than in our
graphical analysis. Column (2) includes the eﬀect of changes in house prices in other
counties linked through firms’ internal networks. While the coeﬃcient associated with
changes in a county’s own house prices, ∆ Log(HP)06−09  drops slightly, the coeﬃcient as-
sociated with changes in house prices in other counties, ∆ Log(HP)06−09 (other), is highly
significant. The elasticity of non-tradable county-level employment with respect to house
prices in other counties is 0.024, which is about 20 percent of the elasticity with respect
to a county’s own house prices. This is somewhat less than in our establishment-level


                                            22
analysis, possibly reflecting the impacts of general equilibrium adjustments.
   A quick back-of-the-envelope calculation suggests that consumer demand shocks can
explain a significant portion of the drop in non-tradable employment during the Great
Recession. As the summary statistics in Table I show, non-tradable employment at the
county level dropped by 3.6 percent, while county-level house prices fell by 14.5 percent.
Given the elasticities of 0.115 and 0.024 in column (2), a drop in house prices of 14.5
percent implies a drop in non-tradable employment of (0115 + 0024) × 145% = 195%
which is more than half of the overall decline in non-tradable employment during the Great
Recession. Notably, a substantial fraction of the decline in non-tradable employment
explained by consumer demand shocks (00240139 = 0173) is due to shocks originating
in other counties linked through firms’ internal networks.
   To address concerns that non-tradable county-level employment may be generically
sensitive to house price changes in other counties, we perform the same Placebo tests
as in Table II. In column (3), we assign equal weight to all other counties. In columns
(4) to (6), we replace the linkage weights  with corresponding linkage weights based on
population, income, and household debt. Lastly, in column (7), we randomly select other
counties. In all of these Placebo tests, the eﬀect of house price changes in other counties
is small and insignificant.


4.2    Common County-Level Shocks
As in our establishment-level analysis, a main empirical challenge arises from common
shocks at the county level that are correlated with house price changes. In Table X, we
account for this possibility by controlling for similarity-weighted house price changes in
other counties. Similarity weights place more weight on other counties that are more
“similar” (i.e., smaller absolute diﬀerence) to a given county. The underlying idea is
that counties which are more similar are more likely to be exposed to similar county-
level shocks. In columns (1) to (3), we examine similarities based on income, education,
and age. In column (4), we examine similarities based on household debt. Lastly, in
column (5), we examine similarities based on the share of non-tradable employment in a
county. As is shown, in all of these regressions, the coeﬃcient associated with house price


                                            23
changes in “similar” counties is small and insignificant. By contrast, our main coeﬃcient
of interest–that associated with ∆ Log(HP)06−09 (other)–is always highly significant.
Thus, our estimates are unlikely to be confounded by common shocks at the county level
that are correlated with house price changes.
   In Table XI, we account for the possibility of common shocks at the county level in a
diﬀerent way. Precisely, we exploit the fact that not all counties experienced a collapse in
house prices during the Great Recession. Linking such counties to other counties in which
house prices fell sharply makes it unlikely that spillovers across counties are the result
of common county-level shocks that are correlated with house price changes. In column
(1), we focus on counties in which house prices increased during the Great Recession.
In column (2), we focus on counties in which house prices changed only little, defined
as changes of less than ±25 percent. In both cases, the coeﬃcient associated with ∆
Log(HP)06−09 (other) is highly significant. Thus, even though these counties did not
experience house price shocks of their own, their employment is highly sensitive to house
price changes in other counties linked through firms’ internal networks.


4.3    Direct Demand Spillovers
Another empirical challenge arises from potentially confounding direct demand eﬀects
from nearby counties. Similar to our establishment-level analysis, we account for such
direct demand eﬀects by controlling for proximity-weighted changes in house prices in
other counties and excluding counties within a certain radius. Table XII presents the
results. In column (1), we control for promiximity-weighted changes in house prices in
other counties. While the coeﬃcient associated with this control is (marginally) signif-
icant, the coeﬃcient associated with ∆ Log(HP)06−09 (other) drops only slightly, and it
remains highly significant. Hence, direct demand spillovers from nearby counties have at
best a small eﬀect. In columns (2) to (5), we exclude all counties within a 50, 100, 150, or
250 mile radius based on the counties’ geographical centroids. This rules out any direct
demand spillovers from these counties by construction. As can be seen, the coeﬃcient
associated with ∆ Log(HP)06−09 (other) is always highly significant.




                                            24
4.4     Trade Channel
We found no evidence that our results may be driven by direct demand spillovers from
nearby counties. However, local demand shocks may also indirectly aﬀect non-tradable
employment in other counties, namely, through the trade channel. Intuitively, falling
house prices in county  may lead to employment losses in county ’s tradable sector,
which in turn may spill over to county ’s non-tradable sector if workers that are laid oﬀ
cut back on their local grocery shopping and restaurant visits.20
    We approach the trade channel hypothesis in two ways. We first test a necessary
condition for this (trade) channel to explain our results: changes in county-level house
prices must aﬀect tradable employment in other counties. Figure V provides a visual im-
pression. As can be seen, there is no association between changes in tradable county-level
employment and either changes in a county’s own house prices (top panel) or changes in
house prices in other counties (bottom panel). Table XIII confirms this visual impression
using regression analysis. As column (1) shows, neither changes in a county’s own house
prices nor changes in house prices in other counties have a significant eﬀect on tradable
employment at the county level.
    The second approach considers a slightly more complex variant of the trade channel
hypothesis. Accordingly, falling house prices in county  may lead to employment losses
in county ’s tradable sector, which in turn may spill over to county ’s tradable sector
via tradable firms’ internal networks, which eventually may spill over to county ’s non-
tradable sector if workers that are laid oﬀ cut back on their local grocery shopping and
restaurant visits. We find no support for this hypothesis. As column (2) shows, changes
in house prices in other counties linked through tradable firms’ internal networks have no
significant eﬀect on tradable employment at the county level. Ultimately, all of the results
in Table XIII are reflections of the “tradable Placebo” in Mian and Sufi (2014), which
posits that county-level variation in housing net worth shocks is unrelated to county-level
variation in tradable employment.




  20
     An industry is classified as as tradable if imports plus exports exceed $10,000 per worker or $500M
in total (Mian and Sufi (2014)). Tradable industries are essentially manufacturing industries.

                                                  25
5     Conclusion
Local labor market shocks are diﬃcult to insure against. Accordingly, economists have
broadly focused on the role of public policy in mitigating the impacts of local shocks,
including regional transfers, redistributive taxation, and “place-based” policies. Using
confidential micro data from the U.S. Census Bureau’s Longitudinal Business Database
and exploiting ZIP code-level variation in house price changes during the Great Recession,
we document that firms spread the adverse impacts of local employment shocks across
regions through their internal networks of establishments. At the establishment level, we
find that the elasticity of non-tradable employment with respect to house prices in other
ZIP codes in which the firm has establishments is about one third of the elasticity with
respect to local house prices. Similarly, at the county level, we find that the elasticity
of non-tradable county-level employment with respect to house prices in other counties
linked through firms’ internal networks is about one fifth of the elasticity with respect to a
county’s own house prices. The smaller magnitudes at the county level are likely a reflec-
tion of the impacts of general equilibrium adjustments. Overall, our results suggest that
firms play an important role in the provision of regional risk sharing and the propagation
of local employment shocks across diﬀerent U.S. regions.
    Our work is consistent with prior literature arguing that firms provide valuable in-
surance to workers against idiosyncratic shocks, especially if the shocks are transitory
(e.g., Guiso, Pistaferri, and Schivardi (2005), Ellul, Pagano, and Schivardi (2014)). Our
research shows that one particular mechanism through which firms can provide insur-
ance is regional diversification. If firms are regionally diversified, they can spread the
adverse impacts of local employment shocks across multiple production units, and thus
eﬀectively across multiple regions. While we find that firms provide partial insurance to
their workers, our results suggests that they do not provide full insurance: employment
elasticities with respect to local shocks are between three and five times larger than elas-
ticities with respect to shocks originating in other regions, suggesting that local workers
are still bearing the brunt of local shocks.




                                               26
6   References
Acemoglu, Daron, Vasco Carvalho, Asuman Ozdaglar, and Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi, 2012,
    Network Origins of Aggregate Fluctuations, Econometrica, 80, 1977-2016.

Acemoglu, Daron, Asuman Ozdaglar, and Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi, 2012, Systemic Risk
    and Stability in Financial Networks, American Economic Review 105, 564-608.

Acemoglu, Daron, Ufuk Akcigit, and William Kerr, 2016, Networks and the Macroecon-
    omy: An Empirical Exploration, NBER Macroeconomics Annual 30, 276-335.

Asdrubali, Pierfederico, Bent Sørensen, and Oved Yosha, 1996, Channels of Interstate
    Risk Sharing: United States 1963—1990, Quarterly Journal of Economics 111, 1081-
    1110.

Autor, David, David Dorn, and Gordon Hanson, 2013, The China Syndrome: Local La-
    bor Market Eﬀects of Import Competition in the United States, American Economic
    Review 103, 2121-2168.

Autor, David, David Dorn, and Gordon Hanson, 2016, The China Shock: Learning from
    Labor Market Adjustment to Large Changes in Trade, forthcoming, Annual Review
    of Economics.

Autor, David, David Dorn, Gordon Hanson, and Jae Song, 2014, Trade Adjustment:
    Worker Level Evidence, Quarterly Journal of Economics 129, 1799-1860.

Bailey, Mike, Ruiqing Cao, Theresa Kuchler, and Johannes Stroebel, 2016, Social Net-
    works and Housing Markets, NBER Working Paper No. 22258.

Baker, Scott, 2015, Debt and the Consumption Response to Household Income Shocks,
    mimeo, Northwestern University.

Barrot, Jean-Noël, and Julien Sauvagnat, 2016, Input Specificity and the Propagation of
    Idiosyncratic Shocks in Production Networks, Quarterly Journal of Economics 131,
    1543-1592.

Beraja, Martin, 2016, Robust Policy Counterfactuals (with an Application to Fiscal
    Unions), mimeo, University of Chicago.



                                         27
Beraja, Martin, Erik Hurst, and Juan Ospina, 2016, The Aggregate Implications of
    Regional Business Cycles, NBER Working Paper No. 21956.

Berger, David, Veronica Guerrieri, Guido Lorenzoni, and Joseph Vavra, 2015, House
    Prices and Consumer Spending, NBER Working Paper No. 21667.

Blanchard, Olivier, and Lawrence Katz, 1992, Regional Evolutions, Brookings Papers
    on Economic Activity, 1-75.

Cabrales, Antonio, Douglas Gale, and Piero Gottardi, 2015, Financial Contagion in
    Networks, in: Oxford Handbook on the Economics of Networks, edited by Yann
    Bramoullé, Andrea Galeotti, and Brian Rogers. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Campello, Murillo, John Graham, and Campbell Harvey, 2010, The Real Eﬀects of
    Financial Constraints: Evidence from a Financial Crisis, Journal of Financial Eco-
    nomics, 97, 470-487.

Davis, Steven, Jason Faberman, and John Haltiwanger, 2013, The Establishment-Level
    Behavior of Vacancies and Hiring, Quarterly Journal of Economics 128, 581-622.

Ellul, Andrew, Marco Pagano, and Fabiano Schivardi, 2014, Employment and Wage
    Insurance within Firms: Worldwide Evidence, CEPR Discussion Paper No. 10711.

Farhi, Emmanuel, and Ivan Werning, 2012, Fiscal Unions, NBER Working Paper No.
    18280.

Foster, Lucia, Cheryl Grim, and John Haltiwanger, 2014, Reallocation in the Great
    Recession: Cleansing or Not? NBER Working Paper 20427.

Gertner, Robert, David Scharfstein, and Jeremy Stein, 1994, Internal versus External
    Capital Markets, Quarterly Journal of Economics 109, 1211-1230.

Giroud, Xavier, 2013, Proximity and Investment: Evidence from Plant-Level Data, Quar-
    terly Journal of Economics 128, 861-915.

Giroud, Xavier, and Holger Mueller, 2015, Capital and Labor Reallocation within Firms,
    Journal of Finance 70, 1767-1804.

Giroud, Xavier, and Holger Mueller, 2016, Firm Leverage, Consumer Demand, and
    Employment Losses during the Great Recession, forthcoming, Quarterly Journal of
    Economics.

                                         28
Glaeser, Edward, David Laibson, and Bruce Sacerdote, 2002, An Economic Approach to
    Social Capital, Economic Journal 112, F437—F458.

Glaeser, Edward, and Joshua Gottlieb, 2008, The Economics of Place-Making Policies,
    Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 155-239.

Guiso, Luigi, Luigi Pistaferri, and Fabiano Schivardi, 2005, Insurance within the Firm,
    Journal of Political Economy 113, 1054-1087.

Hurst, Erik, Benjamin Keys, Amit Seru, and Joseph Vavra, 2016, Regional Redistribu-
    tion through the U.S. Mortgage Market, American Economic Review 106, 2982-3028.

Inderst, Roman, and Holger Mueller, 2003, Internal versus External Financing: An
    Optimal Contracting Approach, Journal of Finance 58, 1033-1062.

Jarmin, Ron, and Javier Miranda, 2002, The Longitudinal Business Database, CES
    Working Paper 02-17.

Kaplan, Steven, and Luigi Zingales, 1997, Do Financing Constraints Explain Why Invest-
    ment Is Correlated with Cash Flow? Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, 169-215.

Kaplan, Greg, Kurt Mitman, and Giovanni Violante, 2016, Non-durable Consumption
    and Housing Net Worth in the Great Recession: Evidence from Easily Accessible
    Data, NBER Working Paper No. 22232.

Keys, Benjamin, Tomasz Piskorski, Amit Seru, and Vincent Yao, 2014, Mortgage Rates,
    Household Balance Sheets, and the Real Economy, NBER Working Paper No.
    20561.

Kline, Patrick, and Enrico Moretti, 2014, People, Places and Public Policy: Some Simple
    Welfare Economics of Local Economic Development Programs, Annual Review of
    Economics 6, 629-662.

Lamont, Owen, 1997, Cash Flow and Investment: Evidence from Internal Capital Mar-
    kets, Journal of Finance 52, 83-109.

McCue, Kristin, 2003, Matching Compustat Data to the SSEL, mimeo, Center for Eco-
    nomic Studies.




                                           29
Mian, Atif, and Amir Sufi, 2011, House Prices, Home Equity-Based Borrowing, and the
    US Household Leverage Crisis, American Economic Review 101, 2132-2156.

Mian, Atif, and Amir Sufi, 2014, What Explains the 2007-2009 Drop in Employment?
    Econometrica 82, 2197-2223.

Mian, Atif, Kamalesh Rao, and Amir Sufi, 2013, Household Balance Sheets, Consump-
    tion, and the Economic Slump, Quarterly Journal of Economics 128, 1-40.

Mian, Atif, Amir Sufi, and Francesco Trebbi, 2015, Foreclosures, House Prices, and the
    Real Economy, Journal of Finance 70, 2587-2634.

Moretti, Enrico, 2014, Local Labor Markets, in: Handbook of Labor Economcis, edited
    by David Card and Orley Ashenfelter. Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Notowidigdo, Matthew, 2011, The Incidence of Local Labor Demand Shocks, NBER
    Working Paper No. 17167.

Persson, Torsten, and Guido Tabellini, 1996a, Federal Fiscal Constitutions: Risk Sharing
    and Moral Hazard, Econometrica 64, 623-646.

Persson, Torsten, and Guido Tabellini, 1996b, Federal Fiscal Constitutions: Risk Sharing
    and Redistribution, Journal of Political Economy 104, 979-1009.

Şahin, Ayşegül, Joseph Song, Giorgio Topa, and Giovanni Violante, 2014, Mismatch
    Unemployment, American Economic Review 104 3529-3564.

Stein, Jeremy, 1997, Internal Capital Markets and the Competition for Corporate Re-
    sources, Journal of Finance 52, 111-133.

Stein, Jeremy, 2003, Agency, Information and Corporate Investment, in: Handbook of
    the Economics of Finance, edited by George Constantinides, Milton Harris, and
    René Stulz. Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Stroebel, Johannes, and Joseph Vavra, 2014, House Prices, Local Demand, and Retail
    Prices, NBER Working Paper No. 20710.

Whited, Toni, and Guojun Wu, 2006, Financial Constraints Risk, Review of Financial
    Studies 19, 531-559.



                                          30
Yagan, Danny, 2016, Is the Great Recession Really Over? Longitudinal Evidence of
    Enduring Employment Impacts, mimeo, UC Berkeley.




                                      31
                                             Figure I
           Shocks to Investment Opportunities versus Shocks to Firms’ Budget Constraints

This figure illustrates how a financially constrained firm with establishments in regions A and B adjusts employment in
response to a given shock. For simplicity, labor (L) is the only input in the firm’s production function. Profits at the
establishment level are denoted by π. In Panel (A), region A experiences a decline in investment opportunities. In Panel (B),
region A experiences a shock to firm revenues affecting the firm’s overall budget constraint.



                                    Panel (A): Shocks to investment opportunities
π                                                             π




                                                          L                                                              L
                    LA′   LA                                                           LB         LB′

                 Region A                                                               Region B


                                    Panel (B): Shocks to firms’ budget constraints
π                                                             π




                                                          L                                                              L
              LA′         LA                                                 LB′       LB

               Region A                                                       Region B
                                                               Figure II
                                            Non-Tradable Establishment-Level Employment

This figure plots the relationship between changes in non-tradable establishment-level employment, Δ Log(Emp)07-09, and
either changes in house prices in the establishment’s ZIP code, Δ Log(HP)06-09, or changes in house prices in other ZIP
codes in which the firm has establishments, Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other). To filter out any confounding effects of Δ Log(HP)06-09
(other) when plotting the relationship between Δ Log(Emp)07-09 and Δ Log(HP)06-09, we compute the residuals from a
regression of Δ Log(Emp)07-09 on a constant and Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other). For each percentile of Δ Log(HP)06-09, the plot in
the top panel shows the mean values of the residuals and Δ Log(HP)06-09, respectively. We proceed analogously in the
bottom panel when plotting the relationship between Δ Log(Emp)07-09 and Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other).



                                            0.06        slope = 0.116


                                            0.04


                                            0.02
                         Δ Log(Emp)07-09




                                            0.00


                                           -0.02


                                           -0.04


                                           -0.06
                                                -0.60     -0.50     -0.40   -0.30   -0.20   -0.10     0.00     0.10   0.20
                                                                              Δ Log(HP)06-09

                                           0.05
                                                         slope = 0.029



                                           0.03
                         Δ Log(Emp)07-09




                                           0.01



                                           -0.01



                                           -0.03



                                           -0.05
                                                -0.50       -0.40        -0.30    -0.20       -0.10          0.00     0.10
                                                                           Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other)
                                                                            Figure III
                                                                   Counterfactual Firm Networks

This figure illustrates the counterfactual firm networks used in the Placebo tests in Table IV. Firm A has establishments in locations 1 to 10, while firm B has establishments
in locations 2 to 11. Moreover, firms A and B are in the same industry. Given that the two firms overlap in 90% of their locations, the counterfactual assumption is that, based
on the firms’ common clienteles, firm A could have been in location 11, while firm B could have been in location 1.




                                                                                    Firm
                                                                                       A
                                                                                                                        Location                 Location




                      1                       2                                      …                                       10                       11




                Location                Location

                                                                                      B
                                                                                   Firm
                                                               Figure IV
                                                  Non-Tradable County-Level Employment

This figure is similar to Figure I, except that it plots the relationship between changes in non-tradable county-level
employment, Δ Log(Emp)07-09, and either changes in county-level house prices, Δ Log(HP)06-09, or changes in house prices
in other counties linked through firms’ internal networks, Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other).



                                          0.06
                                                       slope = 0.129

                                          0.04


                                          0.02
                        Δ Log(Emp)07-09




                                          0.00


                                          -0.02


                                          -0.04


                                          -0.06
                                               -0.50     -0.40    -0.30    -0.20    -0.10    0.00    0.10   0.20
                                                                          Δ Log(HP)06-09



                                          0.03
                                                       slope = 0.030

                                          0.02


                                          0.01
                        Δ Log(Emp)07-09




                                          0.00


                                          -0.01


                                          -0.02


                                          -0.03
                                               -0.30     -0.25    -0.20   -0.15    -0.10     -0.05   0.00   0.05
                                                                       Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other)
                                                                    Figure V
                                                         Tradable County-Level Employment

This figure is similar to Figure IV, except that it describes tradable county-level employment.



                                            0.09
                                                         slope = 0.008

                                            0.06


                                            0.03
                          Δ Log(Emp)07-09




                                            0.00


                                            -0.03


                                            -0.06


                                            -0.09
                                                 -0.50      -0.40   -0.30    -0.20   -0.10      0.00    0.10   0.20
                                                                             Δ Log(HP)06-09



                                            0.06
                                                         slope = 0.002

                                            0.04


                                            0.02
                          Δ Log(Emp)07-09




                                            0.00


                                            -0.02


                                            -0.04


                                            -0.06
                                                 -0.30      -0.25    -0.20   -0.15    -0.10     -0.05   0.00   0.05
                                                                          Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other)
                                                    Table I
                                                Summary Statistics

Panel (A) provides basic summary statistics. The establishment-level statistics pertain to non-tradable firms operating in
multiple ZIP codes (“multi-region firms”). Employees is the number of employees in 2006. Δ Log(Emp)07-09 is the
percentage change in employment from 2007 to 2009. Δ Log(HP)06-09 is the percentage change in house prices in the
establishment’s ZIP code from 2006 to 2009. # Linkages is the number of other ZIP codes in which the firm has
establishments. The county-level statistics pertain to all non-tradable firms in a county, including single-region firms.
Establishments and Employees is the number of establishments and employees, respectively, in 2006. Employment share is
the ratio of non-tradable county-level employment to total county-level employment in 2006. Δ Log(Emp)07-09 is the
percentage change in non-tradable county-level employment from 2007 to 2009. Δ Log(HP)06-09 is the percentage change in
county-level house prices from 2006 to 2009. All percentage changes are employment-weighted. Panel (B) reports pairwise
correlations of the network-based linkage weights ω and λ with corresponding linkage weights based on proximity,
population, income, education, age, and household debt. The network-based linkage weights are described in Section 2.2.
Proximity is the inverse of the geographical distance between regions’ centroids. Population is recorded in 2000. Income is
adjusted gross income per capita in 2006. Education is the percentage of adults in a county with a bachelor’s degree or
higher in 2000. Age is the median age among county residents in 2000. Household debt (mortgage, auto, and credit card
debt) is per capita in 2006. *, **, and *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.



                                         Panel (A): Basic summary statistics


                                                       N                    Mean                 Std. Dev.


         Establishment level (multi-region firms)

         Employees                                 385,000                  28.9                    47.0
         Δ Log(Emp)07-09                           385,000                 -0.031                  1.614
         Δ Log(HP)06-09                            385,000                 -0.145                  0.193
         # Linkages                                385,000                  812.9                 1,085.9

         County level (all firms)

         Establishments                              1,000                 1,074                  2,174
         Employees                                   1,000                 18,490                 38,227
         Employment share                            1,000                 0.186                  0.531
         Δ Log(Emp)07-09                             1,000                 -0.036                  0.883
         Δ Log(HP)06-09                              1,000                 -0.145                  0.189
                                Table I
                              (continued)


         Panel (B): Correlation with network-based linkage weights


                                   Correlation with  Correlation with
                                 establishment-level   county-level
                                  linkage weights ω linkage weights λ
                                      (p -value)        (p -value)


Proximity                             0.106***            0.103***
                                       (0.000)             (0.009)
Population                            0.061***             0.073*
                                       (0.001)             (0.068)
Income                                   0.018               0.028
                                       (0.283)             (0.210)
Education                               -0.027              -0.030
                                       (0.139)             (0.201)
Age                                     -0.019              -0.027
                                       (0.195)             (0.220)
Household debt                          -0.006              -0.024
                                       (0.419)             (0.467)
                                                                             Table II
                                                                 Main Establishment-Level Results

The dependent variable is the percentage change in non-tradable establishment-level employment from 2007 to 2009, Δ Log(Emp)07-09. Δ Log(HP)06-09 is the percentage change in
house prices in the establishment’s ZIP code from 2006 to 2009. Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other) is the linkage-weighted percentage change in house prices from 2006 to 2009 in the other
ZIP codes in which the firm has establishments. The establishment-level network-based linkage weights ω are described in Section 2.2. In column (3), these linkage weights are
replaced with equal weights. In columns (4) to (6), they are replaced with Placebo weights based on population, income, and household debt. In column (7), ZIP codes are
randomly assigned using 1,000 bootstrap samples. All regressions are weighted by establishment-level employment. Standard errors (in parentheses) are double clustered at the
firm and county level. *, **, and *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.




                                                                                                    Δ Log(Emp)07-09


                                                                                                                        Placebo tests


                                                                                        Equal          Population           Income            HH debt           Random
                                                                                       weights          weights             weights           weights          ZIP codes

                                                    (1)                (2)               (3)               (4)                (5)               (6)                (7)


   Δ Log(HP)06-09                               0.109***           0.091***          0.109***           0.109***          0.110***           0.109***          0.107***
                                                  (0.020)           (0.023)            (0.020)           (0.020)            (0.020)           (0.020)           (0.020)
   Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other)                                          0.028***
                                                                    (0.006)
   Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other, placebo)                                                      0.001             -0.001            -0.003             0.001             0.003
                                                                                       (0.017)           (0.014)            (0.014)           (0.015)           (0.010)

   Industry fixed effects                           Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes                Yes

   R-squared                                      0.02               0.02              0.02               0.02              0.02               0.02              0.02
   Observations                                  385,000            385,000           385,000            385,000           385,000            385,000           385,000
                                                                              Table III
                                                                        Common Regional Shocks

This table presents variants of the specification in column (2) of Table II with alternative fixed effects and demographic controls. Average income (education, age) is the weighted
average income (education, age) in the other ZIP codes in which the firm has establishments. All regressions are weighted by establishment-level employment. Standard errors (in
parentheses) are double clustered at the firm and county level. *, **, and *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.




                                                                                                      Δ Log(Emp)07-09


                                                               (1)                (2)               (3)                (4)               (5)                (6)


             Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other)                        0.026***           0.025***           0.024***          0.024***           0.025***          0.024***
                                                             (0.006)           (0.006)            (0.006)            (0.006)           (0.006)            (0.006)
             Average income                                                                       0.004*                                                  0.004*
                                                                                                  (0.002)                                                 (0.002)
             Average education                                                                                       0.006*                               0.005
                                                                                                                     (0.004)                              (0.004)
             Average age                                                                                                                0.001             -0.001
                                                                                                                                       (0.003)            (0.004)


             Industry fixed effects                           Yes                 –                  –                 –                  –                  –
             ZIP code fixed effects                           Yes                 –                  –                 –                  –                  –
             ZIP code × industry fixed effects                 No                Yes               Yes                Yes                Yes               Yes


             R-squared                                        0.09               0.29              0.29               0.29               0.29              0.29
             Observations                                    385,000           385,000            385,000           385,000            385,000           385,000
                                                                               Table IV
                                                                     Counterfactual Firm Networks

The dependent variable is the percentage change in non-tradable establishment-level employment from 2007 to 2009, Δ Log(Emp)07-09. Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other, placebo) is the
average percentage change in house prices from 2006 to 2009 in (counterfactual) locations in which peer firms have establishments but the given firm has no establishments.
Location is defined either at the county or ZIP code level. Peer firms are in the same 3- or 4-digit NAICS industry as the given firm and mutually overlap with the given firm in at
least 75% or 90% of their locations. See Section 3.2 for a full description of the Placebo test. All regressions are weighted by establishment-level employment. Standard errors (in
parentheses) are double clustered at the firm and county level. *, **, and *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.




                                                                                                    Δ Log(Emp)07-09


                                                                   County                                                                   ZIP code


                                     ≥ 75% county ≥ 75% county ≥ 90% county ≥ 90% county                   ≥ 75% ZIP code ≥ 75% ZIP code ≥ 90% ZIP code ≥ 90% ZIP code
                                    overlap & same overlap & same overlap & same overlap & same            overlap & same overlap & same overlap & same overlap & same
                                    3-digit NAICS 4-digit NAICS 3-digit NAICS 4-digit NAICS                 3-digit NAICS 4-digit NAICS 3-digit NAICS 4-digit NAICS

                                          (1)              (2)                (3)             (4)                 (5)               (6)                  (7)             (8)


Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other, placebo)         0.002            -0.002             0.002           0.001               -0.002             0.001               0.001           0.002
                                       (0.009)           (0.011)            (0.011)        (0.016)             (0.015)            (0.017)              (0.018)        (0.020)

ZIP code × industry fixed effects        Yes               Yes               Yes             Yes                 Yes                Yes                 Yes             Yes

R-squared                               0.40              0.65               0.57           0.62                0.77               0.79                0.65            0.65
Observations                           39,900            28,600             16,200          9,900               4,500              2,900               2,500           1,200
                                                                                Table V
                                                                        Direct Demand Spillovers

This table presents variants of the specification in column (2) of Table III. Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other, proximity) is similar to Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other), except that the network-based
linkage weights ω are replaced with weights based on the geographical distance between ZIP codes’ centroids. Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other, ZIP ≥ X miles) is similar to Δ Log(HP)06-09
(other), except that the network-based linkage weights ω are set to zero for ZIP codes within an X-mile radius. All regressions are weighted by establishment-level employment.
Standard errors (in parentheses) are double clustered at the firm and county level. *, **, and *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.




                                                                                                            Δ Log(Emp)07-09


                                                                            (1)                 (2)                 (3)                 (4)                 (5)


            Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other, proximity)                             0.011*
                                                                          (0.007)
            Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other)                                       0.020***
                                                                          (0.006)
            Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other, ZIP ≥ 50 miles)                                           0.022***
                                                                                              (0.005)
            Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other, ZIP ≥ 100 miles)                                                             0.022***
                                                                                                                  (0.005)
            Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other, ZIP ≥ 200 miles)                                                                                 0.020***
                                                                                                                                      (0.004)
            Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other, ZIP ≥ 250 miles)                                                                                                     0.019***
                                                                                                                                                         (0.004)

            ZIP code × industry fixed effects                               Yes                Yes                 Yes                 Yes                 Yes

            R-squared                                                      0.29                0.29                0.29                0.29                0.29
            Observations                                                 385,000             385,000             385,000             385,000             385,000
                                                       Table VI
                                          Scope of Firms’ Regional Networks

This table presents variants of the specification in column (2) of Table III in which Δ Log(HP)06-09 is interacted with measures of
the scope of firms’ regional networks (RN) in 2006. In column (1), RN is a dummy variable indicating whether the firm operates
in multiple ZIP codes (“multi-region firm”). The sample consists of all non-tradable firms in a county, including single-region
firms. In column (2), RN is the number of ZIP codes in which the firm operates. In column (3), RN is one minus the Herfindahl-
Hirschman index (HHI) measuring the extent of the firm’s geographical concentration based on its non-tradable employment at
the ZIP code level. All regressions are weighted by establishment-level employment. Standard errors (in parentheses) are double
clustered at the firm and county level. *, **, and *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.




                                                                           Δ Log(Emp)07-09


                                                         Multi-ZIP               # ZIP               RN-HHI

                                                             (1)                   (2)                  (3)


              Δ Log(HP)06-09 × RN                        -0.027***             -0.013***            -0.522***
                                                           (0.008)               (0.002)              (0.063)
              RN                                          0.008***             0.005***               0.058**
                                                           (0.001)               (0.001)              (0.024)

              ZIP code × industry fixed effects              Yes                  Yes                   Yes


              R-squared                                      0.20                 0.29                  0.29
              Observations                                 910,300              385,000               385,000
                                                         Table VII
                                                    Financial Constraints

This table presents variants of the specification in column (2) of Table III in which Δ Log(HP)06-09 and Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other) are
each interacted with measures of firms’ financial constraints (FC) in 2006. In column (1), FC is firm leverage, which is the ratio
of the sum of debt in current liabilities and long-term debt to total assets. In column (2), FC is the financial constraints index of
Kaplan and Zingales (1997). In column (3), FC is the financial constraints index of Whited and Wu (2006). Both indices are net
of their minimum values. In all columns, the sample consists of firms that have a match in Compustat. All regressions are
weighted by establishment-level employment. Standard errors (in parentheses) are double clustered at the firm and county level.
*, **, and *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.




                                                                            Δ Log(Emp)07-09


                                                        Leverage06             KZ-index06             WW-index06

                                                            (1)                     (2)                    (3)


            Δ Log(HP)06-09 × FC                          0.130***                0.003**                0.051***
                                                          (0.045)                 (0.001)                (0.014)
            Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other)                         0.009                  0.008                   0.010
                                                          (0.012)                 (0.010)                (0.016)
            Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other) × FC                  0.038**                 0.001**                0.013**
                                                          (0.015)                 (0.000)                (0.006)
            FC                                          -0.038***               -0.003**                -0.008**
                                                          (0.006)                 (0.001)                (0.004)

            ZIP code × industry fixed effects               Yes                    Yes                     Yes


            R-squared                                       0.42                   0.42                   0.42
            Observations                                  124,100                124,100                 124,100
                                                      Table VIII
                                               Proximity to Headquarters

This table presents variants of the specification in column (2) of Table III in which Δ Log(HP)06-09 and Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other) are
each interacted with measures of geographical proximity to headquarters (HQ). In columns (1) and (2), Proximity to HQ is a
dummy variable indicating whether the establishment and HQ are located in the same ZIP code and county, respectively. In
column (3), Proximity to HQ is one divided by one plus the geographical distance between the establishment’s and HQ’s ZIP
codes’ centroids. All regressions are weighted by establishment-level employment. Standard errors (in parentheses) are double
clustered at the firm and county level. *, **, and *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.




                                                                                  Δ Log(Emp)07-09


                                                           Same ZIP code           Same county           Inverse distance

                                                                  (1)                    (2)                    (3)


      Δ Log(HP)06-09 × Proximity to HQ                         -0.022**               -0.020**               -0.019**
                                                                (0.010)                (0.010)                (0.009)
      Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other)                                   0.031***               0.032***               0.029***
                                                                (0.008)                (0.008)                (0.010)
      Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other) × Proximity to HQ                 -0.013**               -0.011**               -0.013**
                                                                (0.006)                (0.006)                (0.005)
      Proximity to HQ                                          0.017***               0.014***               0.023***
                                                                (0.003)                (0.003)                (0.002)

      ZIP code × industry fixed effects                           Yes                    Yes                    Yes


      R-squared                                                  0.29                   0.29                    0.29
      Observations                                              385,000                385,000                385,000
                                                                       Table IX
                                                         Aggregate Employment at the County Level

The dependent variable is the percentage change in non-tradable county-level employment from 2007 to 2009, Δ Log(Emp)07-09. Δ Log(HP)06-09 is the percentage change in
county-level house prices from 2006 to 2009. Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other) is the linkage-weighted percentage change in house prices from 2006 to 2009 in other counties linked
through firms’ internal networks. The county-level network-based linkage weights λ are described in Section 2.2. The placebo tests in columns (3)-(7) are analogous to those
in Table II. Demographic controls include income, education, and age at the county level. Industry controls are the county-specific employment shares of all 23 two-digit
NAICS industries in 2006. All regressions are weighted by county-level employment. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the state level. *, **, and *** denotes
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.




                                                                                        Δ Log(Emp)07-09


                                                                                                                      Placebo tests


                                                                                     Equal           Population          Income            HH debt           Random
                                                                                    weights           weights            weights           weights           counties

                                                  (1)               (2)                (3)               (4)               (5)                (6)               (7)


Δ Log(HP)06-09                                0.122***          0.115***           0.123***          0.118***           0.122***          0.122***           0.122***
                                               (0.006)           (0.012)            (0.006)            (0.006)           (0.006)           (0.006)            (0.006)
Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other)                                          0.024***
                                                                  (0.007)
Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other, placebo)                                                      0.007              0.009             0.002             0.001              0.002
                                                                                    (0.041)            (0.010)           (0.015)           (0.013)            (0.028)

Demographic controls                             Yes                Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes
Industry controls                                Yes                Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes

R-squared                                       0.17               0.17              0.17               0.17              0.17              0.17               0.17
Observations                                    1,000              1,000             1,000              1,000             1,000             1,000              1,000
                                                                              Table X
                                                                      Common County-Level Shocks

This table presents variants of the specification in column (2) of Table IX. Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other, *) is similar to Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other), except that the network-based linkage
weights λ are replaced with “similarity weights” that place more weight on counties that are more similar to the given county. Similarity is the absolute difference in either income,
education, age, household debt, or the county-level share of non-tradable employment. All regressions are weighted by county-level employment. Standard errors (in parentheses)
are clustered at the state level. *, **, and *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.




                                                                                                           Δ Log(Emp)07-09


                                                                            (1)                (2)                (3)               (4)                (5)


                    Δ Log(HP)06-09                                       0.112***           0.114***          0.108***           0.115***           0.114***
                                                                          (0.012)            (0.012)            (0.012)           (0.012)            (0.013)
                    Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other)                               0.025***           0.024***          0.029***           0.024***           0.022***
                                                                          (0.007)            (0.007)            (0.008)           (0.007)            (0.006)
                    Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other, income)                         0.003
                                                                          (0.015)
                    Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other, education)                                         0.004
                                                                                             (0.010)
                    Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other, age)                                                                 0.003
                                                                                                                (0.013)
                    Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other, household debt)                                                                         0.001
                                                                                                                                  (0.013)
                    Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other, non-tradable share)                                                                                        0.003
                                                                                                                                                     (0.012)


                    Demographic controls                                    Yes               Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes
                    Industry controls                                       Yes               Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes

                    R-squared                                              0.17               0.17               0.17               0.17              0.17
                    Observations                                           1,000              1,000             1,000              1,000              1,000
                                                    Table XI
                                   Counties in Which House Prices Did Not Fall

This table presents variants of the specifications in columns (1) and (2) of Table IX in which the sample is restricted to counties
in which house prices either increased (columns (1) and (2)) or changed only little, defined as changes of less than ±2.5 percent
(columns (3) and (4)). All regressions are weighted by county-level employment. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at
the state level. *, **, and *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.




                                                                          Δ Log(Emp)07-09


                                                 Δ Log(HP)06-09 > 0                         Δ Log(HP)06-09 ± 0.025


                                                (1)                 (2)                     (3)                (4)


         Δ Log(HP)06-09                       0.018               0.014                  0.003               0.003
                                             (0.050)             (0.051)                (0.012)             (0.012)
         Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other)                                  0.020**                                    0.022**
                                                                 (0.010)                                    (0.010)


         Demographic controls                  Yes                 Yes                      Yes               Yes
         Industry controls                     Yes                 Yes                      Yes               Yes


         R-squared                             0.18                0.19                     0.22              0.23
         Observations                          200                 200                      200               200
                                                                                   Table XII
                                                                           Direct Demand Spillovers

This table presents variants of the specification in column (2) of Table IX. Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other, proximity) is similar to Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other), except that the network-based
linkage weights λ are replaced with weights based on the geographical distance between counties’ centroids. Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other, counties ≥ X miles) is similar to Δ Log(HP)06-09
(other), except that the network-based linkage weights λ are set to zero for counties within an X-mile radius. All regressions are weighted by county-level employment. Standard
errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the state level. *, **, and *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.




                                                                                                         Δ Log(Emp)07-09


                                                                     (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)              (6)


               Δ Log(HP)06-09                                     0.110***         0.115***         0.116***         0.116***         0.116***         0.116***
                                                                   (0.012)          (0.012)          (0.012)          (0.012)          (0.012)          (0.012)
               Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other, proximity)                    0.012*
                                                                   (0.007)
               Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other)                             0.019***
                                                                   (0.007)
               Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other, counties ≥ 50 miles)                         0.019***
                                                                                    (0.006)
               Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other, counties ≥ 100 miles)                                         0.019***
                                                                                                     (0.006)
               Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other, counties ≥ 150 miles)                                                          0.018***
                                                                                                                      (0.006)
               Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other, counties ≥ 200 miles)                                                                           0.018***
                                                                                                                                       (0.006)
               Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other, counties ≥ 250 miles)                                                                                            0.017***
                                                                                                                                                        (0.006)


               Demographic controls                                  Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes
               Industry controls                                     Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes

               R-squared                                             0.17             0.17             0.17             0.17             0.17             0.17
               Observations                                         1,000            1,000            1,000            1,000            1,000            1,000
                                                         Table XIII
                                                       Trade Channel

This table presents variants of the specification in column (2) of Table IX. In column (1), the dependent variable is the percentage
change in tradable county-level employment from 2007 to 2009, Δ Log(Emp)07-09. In column (2), Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other, tradable
network) is similar to Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other), except that the network-based linkage weights λ are replaced with corresponding
linkage weights based on tradable firms’ internal networks. All regressions are weighted by county-level employment. Standard
errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the state level. *, **, and *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level,
respectively.




                                                                                   Δ Log(Emp)07-09


                                                                         Tradable             Non-tradable

                                                                             (1)                     (2)


                   Δ Log(HP)06-09                                          0.011                0.120***
                                                                          (0.010)                 (0.006)
                   Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other)                                  0.003
                                                                          (0.014)
                   Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other, tradable network)                                       0.004
                                                                                                  (0.010)


                   Demographic controls                                     Yes                      Yes
                   Industry controls                                        Yes                      Yes


                   R-squared                                                0.13                     0.17
                   Observations                                            1,000                  1,000
