                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           THE RETURNS TO NURSING:
                   EVIDENCE FROM A PARENTAL LEAVE PROGRAM

                                     Benjamin U. Friedrich
                                     Martin B. Hackmann

                                      Working Paper 23174
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23174


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2017




We thank seminar participants at Aarhus University and Penn State, conference participants at the
Junior Health Economics Summit, MHEC, NBER SI Health Care 2016 and AEA HERO Session
2017 as well as Joseph Altonji, John Asker, Craig Garthwaite, Francois Geerolf, Jonathan
Gruber, Amanda Kowalski, Adriana Lleras-Muney, Costas Meghir and Mark Pauly for their
comments and suggestions. We thank the Labor Market Dynamics Group (LMDG), Department
of Economics and Business, Aarhus University and in particular Henning Bunzel and Kenneth
Soerensen for invaluable support and making the data available. LMDG is a Dale T. Mortensen
Visiting Niels Bohr professorship project sponsored by the Danish National Research
Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Benjamin U. Friedrich and Martin B. Hackmann. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Returns to Nursing: Evidence from a Parental Leave Program
Benjamin U. Friedrich and Martin B. Hackmann
NBER Working Paper No. 23174
February 2017
JEL No. D22,H75,I10,I11,J13

                                         ABSTRACT

Nurses comprise the largest health profession. In this paper, we measure the effect of nurses on
health care delivery and patient health outcomes across sectors. Our empirical strategy takes
advantage of a parental leave program, which led to a sudden, unintended, and persistent 12%
reduction in nurse employment. Our findings indicate detrimental effects on hospital care
delivery as indicated by an increase in 30-day readmission rates and a distortion of technology
utilization. The effects for nursing home care are more drastic. We estimate a persistent 13%
increase in nursing home mortality among the elderly aged 85 and older. Our results also
highlight an unintended negative consequence of parental leave programs borne by providers and
patients.


Benjamin U. Friedrich
Kellogg School of Management
Strategy Department
Donald P. Jacobs Center
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
benjamin.friedrich@kellogg.northwestern.edu

Martin B. Hackmann
Department of Economics
University of California, Los Angeles
8283 Bunche Hall
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER
mbhackmann@gmail.com
1      Introduction
Nurses comprise the largest health profession. In the U.S., 3.4 million employed licensed
nurses in 2014 represented about 30% of all health professionals.1 Nurses play an important
role in the delivery of health care services in hospital, primary, and nursing home care and
are important to the success of emerging patient-oriented care models. Hence, quantifying
the effects of nurses on patient health and testing whether nurses are employed in the sectors
with the greatest returns is important for patients, providers, and policymakers.
    In this paper, we measure the effect of nurses on health care delivery and patient health
outcomes using a natural experiment in Denmark, which led to a sudden and persistent
12% reduction in nurse employment. In 1994, the Danish government introduced a feder-
ally funded parental leave program, which offered parents the opportunity to take up to
one year’s absence per child aged 0-8. The large program take-up among women led to a
substantial unintended reduction in nurse employment because nurses are a predominantly
female, licensed profession with regulated training and wages that health care providers, on
net, were not able to replace.
    An important advantage of our empirical context is that we can combine the detailed
employment data of health care providers with individual patient records on diagnoses, pro-
cedures, and health outcomes for the entire Danish population. This allows us to quantify
the mechanisms through which nurses affect the delivery of care for different patient popula-
tions and to measure heterogeneous effects on patient health outcomes across different health
care sectors. Comparing the returns to nursing between sectors allows us to test whether
this important occupation is allocated towards sectors with the greatest returns. This is of
particular relevance to policymakers, who affect the allocation of nurses to health providers
through sector specific minimum nurse-to-patient ratios (Cook et al. 2010 and Lin 2014),
and regulated provider prices (Hackmann 2016) or regulated nurse salaries (Propper and
Van Reenen 2010). Quantifying potentially differential returns to nursing is also of growing
importance as the population ages and the demand for health care services rises and a sizable
proportion of the nurse workforce approaches the retirement age.
    Using detailed employer-employee matched data for the years 1990-2000, we first quantify
program take-up decisions for three different occupations: nurses who hold a B.Sc., nursing
assistants who have completed up to 24 months of practical training, and doctors, who
hold an M.D. Exploring variation in eligibility, based on the age distribution of children,
we find that a large fraction of eligible nurses and nursing assistants take advantage of the
    1 http://www.bls.gov/spotlight/2015/employment-and-wages-in-healthcare-

occupations/pdf/employment-and-wages-in-healthcare-occupations.pdf last accessed 12/10/16.



                                                   2
parental leave program. For example, the fraction of previously employed nurses with 0-1
year old children on leave increases by 15-20 percentage points following the introduction of
the parental leave program. On the other hand, we find only very small take-up rates for
doctors.
    Despite the substantial program take up rates for both nurses and nursing assistants, the
net employment effects for health care providers are very different. We find that hospitals
and nursing homes, on net, are not able to replace nurses on leave, leading to a persistent
12% reduction in the stock of working nurses. We also document differential effects on net
employment among health care sectors and counties, based on differences in the demographic
composition of those sectors’ respective workforces. This indicates that the labor market for
nurses is at least partially segmented at the health sector and county levels.
    This is not true for nursing assistants. We find that hospitals and nursing homes are able
to fully replace nurse assistants on leave by hiring nursing assistants from other occupations
and by hiring newly-trained nursing assistants. We do not see an increase in nurse assistant
employment, indicating that health care providers cannot substitute nursing assistants for
nurses. Therefore, we focus on nurses in the remainder of the paper.
    We next exploit the exogenous variation in nurse employment at the health sector-county
level to quantify the effects of nurses on the delivery of care and patient outcomes in a
difference-in-differences analysis. Combining the employment data with detailed informa-
tion from hospital patient records and mortality data, we find detrimental effects on hospital
quality as evidenced by a persistent increase in 30-day hospital readmission rates for new-
borns as well as the general inpatient population. However, we find neither evidence for
changes in hospital inpatient mortality nor do we detect changes in access to care.
    We contrast these findings with the evidence from nursing homes where the consequences
are more drastic. In the first three years following the reform, we notice a 13% increase in
nursing home mortality among the elderly aged 85 and older. In absolute numbers, we find
that the parental leave program reduced the number of nurses by 1,200 and raised mortality
by 1,700 elderly per year. The absolute increase in mortalities is muted in the years 1998-
2000, in part, because of an endogenous exit of nursing home residents who have access to
outpatient long term care alternatives in the community. Taking selection into account, our
findings indicate a persistent increase in the nursing home mortality rate over the entire
post-reform period.
    We then study the mechanisms behind these differential effects across health care sec-
tors, through the lens of a theoretical hierarchy model of hospital and nursing home health
production. A key feature of the model is that nurses have a lead role in nursing homes
with only limited interactions with physicians, and hold responsibility for all residents, in-


                                              3
cluding the sickest. This is not true in hospitals, where in particular the most complicated
cases are diagnosed and treated by doctors. Nurses assist doctors in a hierarchical struc-
ture by administering medication, monitoring and coordinating care and they have more
responsibility for healthier patients. The reduction of nurses deteriorates the quality of care
for different patient populations across sectors reconciling the differential mortality effects
observed in the data. The model formalizes a second mechanism through which the nurse
reduction may increase nursing home mortality. Nurses monitor the resident health risks and
influence the discharge decision of the seemingly sickest residents to a hospital. Shortened
nurse-resident interactions reduce the monitoring accuracy and thereby reduce the hospital
discharge probability for the sickest nursing home residents, who may forgo more appropriate
hospital treatment.
    This mechanism is supported in the data by a noticeable increase in nursing home mor-
tality caused by circulatory and respiratory diseases that could have been treated in the
hospital. Furthermore, we document a reduction in the hospitalization rate among the sick-
est nursing home residents and provide evidence for an improvement in the risk composition
of hospitalized nursing home residents. These observations are consistent with the model pre-
dictions. Comparing changes in mortality rates between hospitalized and non-hospitalized
nursing home residents, we find that a substantial fraction of nursing home deaths might
have been delayed, had these residents been treated in the hospital.
    Finally, we investigate additional mechanisms that can reconcile the differential mortal-
ity effects between sectors. For hospitals, we detect three mechanisms that mitigate the
detrimental consequences of the reduction in nurses. First, hospitals postpone the adoption
of new technologies that can bind significant resources in the short term. Second, hospitals
partially manage their patient mix by moving non-acute patients to less affected hospitals,
which allows them to focus on local acute care patients. Third, hospitals effectively coordi-
nate leave-taking decisions of their workforce, which allows them to avoid peak shortages,
which can be particularly harmful to the patient population.
    Overall, our findings indicate that nurses play a particularly important role in the delivery
of nursing home care, suggesting that nursing homes are constrained in hiring nurses to meet
their urgent staffing needs.
    This paper makes two main contributions. First, we add to the literature on the role
of nurses in the health production function. A large number of studies has investigated
the effect of nurses on patient health outcomes, see Kane et al. (2007) for a review. These
studies have focused on one sector at a time and relied on cross-sectional variation in nurse
employment with limited attention to the endogeneity concerns regarding nurse employment.
Notable exceptions are Cook et al. (2010) and Lin (2014), who exploit variation from changes


                                               4
in minimum nurse staffing regulations in hospitals and nursing homes, respectively. Gruber
and Kleiner (2012) study the effect of nurses’ strikes on patient health, using data from
the State of New York, and find a large increase in in-hospital mortality for heart attack
patients. Propper and Van Reenen (2010) and Stevens et al. (2015) exploit the effect of local
labor market variation on nurse staffing ratios and their effects on heart attack mortalities
and nursing home mortalities, respectively. Hackmann (2016) estimates a structural model
of the nursing home sector in Pennsylvania using variation in Medicaid reimbursement rates
and finds a marginal benefit of $126,000 of an additional nurse on staff.
    Our analysis contributes to this literature in four important ways. First, we exploit a
sudden, sizable, and persistent reduction in nurse employment, which allows us to assess the
timing and the dynamics of changes in the delivery of care and patient health outcomes.
Second, the unintended nature of our quasi-experimental variation indicates that our esti-
mates may tell us more about the returns to nursing than aforementioned approaches. While
changes in local labor market conditions and minimum staffing regulations are subject to
selection on ability in the nurse workforce, the parental leave program selects by age of chil-
dren and does not affect outside options of employees. Selection effects imply that business
cycle variation may yield an upper bound on the marginal effect of nurses, while minimum
staffing regulations may provide a lower bound. Third, we combine detailed administrative
data for the entire Danish population served in different health care sectors, which allows
us to quantify differences in the effect of nurses on health care delivery and patient health
outcomes among health care sectors. While there is substantial mobility between the private
sector and the health sector for nursing assistants, we find little evidence of such mobility
for nurses. Instead, the margin between health care providers is crucial for the allocation
of nurses. Fourth, we exploit data on causes of death, hospital patient records and nurs-
ing home residents to analyze the mechanisms that underpin nurses’ effects on health care
delivery across providers and across patient groups.
    In addition to quantifying the return of a key input in the health production function,
we also contribute to the literature on parental leave programs. Over the past 50 years,
parental leave programs have become a prevalent and important feature of labor markets
in developed countries (see Dahl et al. 2016). Previous studies have largely focused on the
labor market effects for affected parents and on outcomes for children but the empirical
evidence remains mixed.2 In this paper, we argue that publicly-funded parental leave pro-
   2 On  one hand, several studies find positive effects on health, educational, and earning outcomes for
children (see e.g. Ruhm (2000), Rossin (2011), Carneiro et al. (2015)) and positive or only slightly negative
effects on parental labor force participation (see e.g. Ruhm (1998), Waldfogel et al. (1999), Baker and
Milligan (2008), and Schönberg and Ludsteck (2014)). On the other hand, other studies find no evidence for
positive health or educational attainments for children (see e.g., Rasmussen (2010), Liu and Skans (2010),



                                                     5
grams can have significant negative externalities for employers and, ultimately, consumers
if the program affects imperfectly substitutable employees in limited supply. This applies
to employees who hold firm-or industry-specific human capital and occupations that require
a licensed degree in particular. The specifics of the parental leave program may exagger-
ate the employment effects. Employers are required to guarantee the same position for the
returning leave taker. Therefore, the employer may leave the position vacant if she cannot
find a temporary replacement. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to quantify
this externality. We evaluate this externality in a particularly important context, given that
women are more likely to take advantage of the parental leave program and that more than
97% of Danish nurses are female.
    The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides institutional
background on nurses in health care production, the Danish health care sector, and the
policy reform that we study. In Section 3 we describe our econometric approach. In Section
4, we discuss the data and we present our empirical findings in Section 5. Section 6 analyzes
underlying mechanisms of the results. Finally, we conclude in Section 7.


2     Institutional Background
This section discusses the role of nurses in the health care production and describes important
regulatory features of the Danish health care sector as well as the parental leave program.
The goal of this section is to provide relevant background information to allow for a discussion
of external validity and to motivate the empirical analysis at the regional (county) level. For
additional details on the Danish health care sector see Pedersen et al. (2005).


2.1     Nurses and Health Production
As the largest group of workers in hospitals, licensed nurses have an important impact on the
quality of the patient’s hospital stay. Nurses monitor the patient’s recovery process, identify
patient needs, and catch medical errors. On the other hand, several studies indicate that
patients may be over-treated at least in U.S. hospitals (Fisher et al. 2004 and Baicker and
Chandra 2004) suggesting that a minor change in nurse staffing may only have minor effects
on health care delivery and patient health in hospitals.
   This stands in contrast to the general verdict on the quality of nursing home care which
has been a notorious problem in various countries, including the US (Harrington et al.
Dustmann and Schönberg (2012), and Dahl et al. (2016)) and suggest negative net employment effects (see
Dahl et al. (2016)).



                                                  6
2012). The quality of nursing home care hinges heavily on licensed nurses, who are primarily
responsible for monitoring and coordinating the delivery of care given the limited presence
of a physician in the nursing home.3 For example, nurses provide counseling and medication,
start intravenous infusions, administer oxygen, or monitor blood sugar levels for example.
Nurse also provide an important input to the hospitalization decisions, see (Polniaszek et al.
2011).
    This is different in hospitals, where nurses leave a bigger portion of responsibilities,
diagnosis, and decision making to doctors, who ultimately have to approve the tasks carried
out by nurses.4


2.2        The Danish Health Care Sector
Similar to other Scandinavian countries, Denmark’s heath care system applies the “Bev-
eridge” model. Health care expenses are primarily tax financed and most health care
providers are publicly owned. In contrast to most other European countries, however, the
Danish health care system is decentralized. For the period we study, the country was divided
into 13 counties and three municipalities with county status, which are politically respon-
sible for the financing, capacity planning and delivery of key health care services including
hospitals.5 Hospital financing is based on a system of politically fixed budgets, which pro-
vides cost control as a function of heterogeneous patient mix. The main objective of public
hospitals is equal and free access to health care with a focus on professional quality and
efficiency, patient safety, and satisfaction. Private hospitals account for less than 1% of the
total number of hospital beds in the 1990s. Long term care services, including nursing home
services, are organized at an even more granular level: the municipality level.6 Overall, this
suggests that health care systems are largely integrated at the county level.
    Moreover, counties constitute separate labor markets for health care workers. 20% of
nurses and 16% of nursing assistants switch jobs every year, but only 2% of assistants and
4% of nurses start a job in a different county. 88% of nurses and nursing assistants live and
work in the same county and this share increases to 96% when excluding the counties related
   3 For example, less than 25% of nursing homes in Pennsylvania employ a full-time or a part-time physician
between 1996 and 2000. In Denmark, general practitioners supervise the health care delivery and act as the
gatekeeper for more intensive care. However, their decisions largely depend on the recommendations of
nurses who outnumber doctors by a ratio of 300 compared to a ratio of only 3.3 in hospitals.
   4 Survey based evidence from the US indicates that most nurses assess their professional relationship with

doctors in hospitals as collaborative but with a clear hierarchical understanding putting the doctor on top
(Schmalenberg and Kramer (2009)).
   5 See Figure 17 in the Appendix.
   6 The number of municipalities was reduced from 271 in our sample period to 100 in 2007. This reform

reduced the number of regions from 16 to only 5.



                                                     7
to the capital city.7
    Finally, wage setting and working conditions are highly regulated in the Danish health
sector, with a long tradition of cooperation between health worker unions and health care
providers. Nursing assistants are members of the Danish Union of Public Employees (FOA)
with almost universal membership; the Danish Council of Nurses (DNO) organizes more than
90% of nurses over the sample period. Wages depend on seniority and only differ slightly
across counties and municipalities but not across health providers within geographic area.
There is modest wage growth for nurses over the sample period. Real entry-level wages for
nurses were increased by 3.3% in 1994 and again by 4.9% in 1998. Individual hospitals were
unable to deviate from these industry agreements to attract more workers. Regulation also
limits the patient responsibilities that can legally be performed by health workers other than
nurses.
    Our empirical analysis takes advantage of these institutional and geographic features and
explores variation in the effects of the parental leave program across counties.
    Our main findings, discussed below, indicate a substantial increase in nursing home mor-
tality because of the negative nurse employment effects of the parental leave program. To
put these findings into perspective, we compare elderly demographics and nursing home
characteristics between Denmark and the U.S., that have similar systems for elder care in
place: “provide access to nursing homes when needed, payment subsidized by tax or insur-
ance, comparable cultural conditions, and a national system for monitoring nursing home
quality”, see Nakrem et al. (2009).
    We provide additional details in Table 1. Both the share of elderly people in the popula-
tion and the average age and share of elderly people living in nursing homes are very similar
in Denmark and in the U.S. in 1993. This similarity in nursing home relevance is observed
towards the end of a transition away from institutional care and towards community-based
care in Denmark between 1983 and 1995. Ribbe et al. (1997) report that in 1993, there are
1,075 nursing homes in Denmark offering 39,000 beds. Their study implies that the average
nursing home size in the U.S. is about twice as large as in Denmark.8 We find an average
nurse-to-resident staffing ratio in Denmark of 0.32 in 1993, which exceeds the tighter staffing
ratio in the U.S. by about 28%.9 We also compare the annual hospitalization rates of nurs-
  7 These  figures are for the period 1990-1993 before the reform. We introduce the data in more detail in
section 4 below.
   8 For the US, Ribbe et al. (1997) report 21,000 nursing homes and 256.6 million*12.7% elderly people.

Based on the first row in Table 1, this implies 53/1000*( 256.6 million *12.7%)=1.7 million beds. Hence,
about 82 beds per nursing home.
   9 Based on the estimated elderly fraction in nursing homes from Table 1, we conclude that the Dan-

ish nurse staffing ratio in nursing homes equals 11,000 nurses divided by 4% of 850,000 elderly people:
11,000/(0.04*850,000)=0.32. We use data from Long Term Focus from the U.S. to construct the average



                                                    8
        Table 1: Elderly Demographics and Nursing Homes in Denmark and the US
                                                                     Denmark          U.S.
             NH beds/ per 1k elderly(a)                                  48            53
             Fraction elderly in nursing home(a)                        4%             5%
             Fraction of population older than 65(a)                  15.4%          12.7%
             Fraction of population older than 80(a)                   3.9%           2.9%
             Average age in nursing home                              82.2(b)        82.2(c)
             Avg Nursing home size in beds(d)                          36.3            82
             Nurse to resident ratio                                   0.32           0.25
             Annual Hospitalization rate of NH residents(e)            21%           30%
             Doctor to Nurse Ratio in NH(f )                           0.003         0.008
                Sources: (a) Ribbe et al. (1997) for the year 1993, (b) Nursing home sur-
                vey for Denmark 1994, Statistics Denmark, (c) Nursing home survey for
                Pennsylvania, US 1996, (d) Ribbe et al. (1997) for the year 1993 and own
                calculations, (e) Freiman and Murtaugh (1993). (f) We compare the county
                average in Denmark from 1993 and Pennsylvania, US from 1996.


ing home residents, to illustrate that transitions between nursing homes and hospitals are
a pervasive practice across countries. We find a slightly smaller hospitalization rate of 21%
in Denmark, when compared to the estimate from Freiman and Murtaugh (1993) who use
data from 1987. Finally, we find a very similar doctor to nurse ratio in nursing homes of
less than 1/100 in Denmark and the US, which emphasizes the important role of nurses in
the nursing home production function (when compared to doctors). In contrast, the doctor
to nurse ratio equals 0.3 in Danish hospitals, which exceeds the ratio in nursing homes by a
factor of 100.


2.3     Parental Leave Programs in Denmark
Denmark has a long tradition of maternity leave support going back more than 100 years,
see Rasmussen (2010). After several extensions over the 1970s and 1980s, the status quo in
the early 1990s was an 18-week maternity leave starting four weeks prior to birth, with full
job security and generous income dependent support.10 In addition, fathers were offered a
compensated 2-week leave immediately after childbirth. Finally, parents could extend the
post-birth leave time to 24 weeks, with the additional 10 weeks of parental leave to be taken
by the mother or the father.
number of skilled nurse hours per resident day. Considering registered and licensed practical nurses, we find
a staffing ratio of 1.44 hours per resident day. Assuming that nurses work 2,080 hours per year (52 40h
weeks), we find a nurse to resident ratio of 1.44*365/2,080=0.25.
  10 The minimum of 90% of income and DKK 2,008 (about $335 in 1983-1985) per week. Most mothers

received 90% of their salary, so the income effects of leave taking were relatively minor, see Rasmussen
(2010).


                                                     9
    Motivated at least in parts by high unemployment rates, the newly elected social demo-
cratic Danish government introduced several policies in 1993 that became effective in 1994
and were aimed at rotating the workforce, see Westergaard-Nielsen (2002). Most impor-
tantly, the government introduced an educational, a sabbatical, and an additional parental
leave program.11 The hope was that these programs would give unemployed people the
opportunity to fill the open positions and to gain valuable work experience. The analysis in
Westergaard-Nielsen (2002) suggests that the parental leave program had the largest overall
impact on labor market participation, while the sabbatical and educational leave had much
lower take-up rates.12 Our approach uses eligibility rules of the parental leave program to
analyze the effects of this program.
    The federally funded parental leave program offers a parent the opportunity of taking
up to one year of absence if the child is aged 8 or younger.13 The program guarantees job
security14 and offers a compensation of 80% of unemployment benefits, see Jensen (2000).
Unemployment benefits equal 90% of previous wages up to a maximum of $46315 per week,
see Westergaard-Nielsen (2002). Soon after the reform, policy makers noticed that the reform
led to a “bottleneck” problem in the public sector in particular, where licensed professionals
could not be replaced easily (e.g., teachers and nurses). As a result, policymakers gradually
cut back on the generosity of the program. Guaranteed coverage length was reduced in 1995
for children older than 1 year of age. Benefits were reduced to 70% of unemployment benefits
in 1995 and subsequently to 60% in 1997 before the program was abolished in 2002, in the
context of a comprehensive reform of the parental leave policies, see Pedersen et al. (2005)
and Andersen and Pedersen (2007).


3         Empirical Strategy
In this section, we develop a simple empirical strategy that allows us to quantify the effects
of the parental leave program on program take-up, net employment, health care delivery,
  11 Inaddition, transition pay for unemployed workers between the ages of 50 and 60 was offered over 1992-
1995. The offer included 82% of the highest UI benefits if the worker left the labor force and went into early
retirement and further reduced the available worker pool.
  12 Using data on social benefit receipts from 1995-2000, we find that these leave programs jointly account for

23 % of total paid leave time among nurses, while parental leave accounts for 77 percent, see Appendix Table
9. Moreover, a large share of education leave among nurses is due to participation in short-term continuing
training, see Figure 18, and both education and sabbatical leave always require employer approval.
  13 The program guaranteed 26 weeks, see Jensen (2000). However, employees could take up to one year

conditional upon employer support, see Pedersen et al. (2005).
  14 At least for publicly-employed individuals, the vast majority of individuals in our sample, see Pylkkänen

and Smith (2003).
  15 DKK 2,940 at an annual average exchange rate of 6.35 DKK per USD in 1994.




                                                      10
and patient health outcomes. We first investigate the parental leave program take-up using
variation in program eligibility across workers and over time. Second, we aggregate the
take-up rates by county and health sector and investigate the effects on health outcomes in
a difference-in-differences analysis.


3.1    Program Take-up at the Worker Level
We start with an analysis of parental leave program take up in year t in the sample of
individuals that were employed in the previous year t − 1. We focus on the previously
employed because we can assign these health care professionals to a specific health care
sector using the employer data from the previous year.
    Specifically, we analyze the employment decision of parent i, whose youngest child is a
years old, before and after the reform:


                    8
                    X                                          8
                                                               X
       Yita = α +         αa · 1(ageCHa ) + αpost · P ostt +         βa · 1(ageCHa ) · P ostt + it .   (1)
                    a=0                                        a=0

Here, the dependent variable, Yita , is an indicator variable that takes the value 1 if person i
is not employed in year t. 1(ageCHa ) refers to a series of indicator variables that take the
value 1 if the youngest child is of age a. Post is an indicator variable that takes the value 1
for post-reform years. Our key parameters of interest are β0 -β8 , which indicate the take-up
effects for eligible parents.
    We estimate equation 1 for different sample populations. First, we separately investigate
the immediate take-up effects for doctors, nurses, and nursing assistants by focusing on the
sample years 1993 and 1994. In a separate set of regressions, we investigate the effects of the
program in 1995 compared to 1993. These effects may be smaller, as the program became
less generous over time and because parents can only once take advantage of the program
for an eligible child.


3.2    Employment, Health Care Delivery and Outcomes at the County
       Level
To quantify the effects of the parental leave program on net employment, health care de-
livery, and patient health outcomes, we aggregate the estimated takeup decisions at the
county-health-sector-year level. Counties define segmented health care markets as evidenced
by few labor and patient movements between counties and because the financing and the
coordination of health care delivery is organized at the county or even more granular levels,

                                                   11
see Section 2.2. We also find quite different employment effects among hospitals and nursing
homes in a given county, suggesting that health care markets are further segmented at the
sector level. This is consistent with disconnected regulatory boards for hospital and nursing
home care, which coordinate the delivery of care at the county and the municipality level,
respectively.
    Specifically, we cross-multiply the take-up parameters, β0 , .., β8 , in 1995 by the number
of eligible workers in any given health sector and county in the last pre-reform year, 1993,
to construct a conservative proxy for program take-up that varies among health sectors and
counties. Focusing on eligible workers in the last pre-reform year provides a time-invariant
measure of program take-up, which is not affected by endogenous job transitions in the
post-reform years. We use the estimated take-up parameters in 1995 which are smaller than
the immediate take-up probabilities and relatively stable over the following years. We refer
to these as steady state take-up probabilities. Finally, we divide the product of take-up
probabilities and stock of eligible nurses (predicted number of employees on parental leave)
by the total number (eligible and ineligible) of employed nurses in 1993 at the county-health-
sector level, and refer to this measure as “Exposure”:

                               Eligible nursessc ∗ Estimated take-up parameters
                Exposuresc   =                                                  .
                                                    All nursessc

    Similar to Finkelstein (2007) and Clemens and Gottlieb (2014), we then estimate the
effect of exposure on outcomes by year as follows::

                                                           2000
                  Ycts = µsc + µst + φ ∗ log (popct ) +            λst · Exposuresc + usct .
                                                           X
                                                                                               (2)
                                                          t=1990

Here, Ycts denotes the respective outcome measure in county c, year t, and health sector
s. We distinguish between three sectors: nursing homes, hospitals, and all other industries
combined. We are primarily interested in the coefficients {λst } that show the pattern of the
outcome variable over time across counties with different exposure to the reform. Hence,
any structural break of the λ’s around the reform year 1993 will be attributed to the reform
effect. We include log population as well as county fixed effects µsc and year fixed effects µst as
controls. This specification allows graphical inspection of potential pre-trends across counties
and will guide the subsequent difference-in-difference estimation of the average reform effect
on employment and mortality rates.




                                                   12
4     Data
An important advantage of our empirical context is that we can combine a variety of admin-
istrative data sources including employer-employee match data, patient registry data, and
cause of death registers covering the entire Danish population over the period 1990-2000.
We discuss these data sources in detail below.
    The Danish integrated database for labor market research (IDA) covers the universe of
firms and workers in Denmark over 1980-2011. The data contain information about primary
employment in November each year, including plant and firm identifiers, location and indus-
try of the establishment, and detailed worker characteristics such as gender, age, education,
experience, tenure, hourly wages, and annual earnings. We add additional household char-
acteristics such as municipality of residence, marital status, number of children, and the age
of the youngest child from the population register. The latter will be particularly useful to
measure eligibility of workers for the parental leave program since only parents with children
aged 8 years or younger can apply for these benefits.16
    The education variable reports the highest degree that a person has achieved from school-
ing, vocational training, or university education. In particular, the variable contains detailed
categories of health workers that allow us to distinguish between medical doctors, nurses and
nursing assistants. We define doctors as all individuals with an M.D. or Ph.D. in medicine.
Nurses are defined as all individuals with a bachelor’s degree or equivalent training of theory
and clinical practice in nursing or midwifery, as well as nurses who completed additional
specialization training as home nurses, health visitors, head nurses, nurse teachers or who
participated in post-graduate training (Nursing diploma, Master in Nursing Science).17 Fi-
nally, we define unskilled nurses or nursing assistants as social and health care aides and
health care assistants with 14 months of theoretical and practical training.18
    Next, we use industry information from the respective plant to identify hospitals and
nursing homes. Our definition of nursing homes includes residential institutions for the
elderly and for adults with disabilities. We summarize all other employment as the outside
sector.19 Moreover, workers without establishment affiliation in a given year are reported as
  16 From  1995, social benefits records report the beginning and end date of parental leave and other welfare
receipts. We use these data to complement our annual employment indicator in November and to analyze
timing and duration of leave.
   17 Nursing is a licensed profession in Denmark and only workers authorized by the National Board of Health

can practice as nurses. The Act on Certified Nurses 1933 establishes “Sygeplejerske” (certified nurse) as a
reserved title.
   18 The relevant professions include “Plejer”, “Social- og sundhedshjaelper”, “Sygehjaelper”, “Plejehjemsas-

sistent”, “Social- og sundhedsassistent”.
   19 There are three structural changes in industry classifications in Denmark over the time period that we

study. These changes occur in 1993, 2003 and 2007. We define health sectors sufficiently broadly to be



                                                     13
             Figure 1: Employment of Nurses and Nursing Assistants in Denmark
                                                                          Nurses                                                          Nurses




                                                                                                            13000
              28000 29000 30000 31000 32000 33000




                                                                                                            12000
                                                                                                            11000
                                                                                                            10000
                                                    1990   1992    1994               1996    1998   2000           1990   1992    1994            1996       1998   2000
                                                                            Year                                                           Year

                                                                          Hospitals                                               Nursing Homes       Other



                                                                  Nursing Assistants                                              Nursing Assistants
              25000




                                                                                                            40000
              20000




                                                                                                            35000
              15000




                                                                                                            30000
              10000




                                                                                                            25000
                                                                                                            20000
              5000




                                                    1990   1992    1994               1996    1998   2000           1990   1992    1994            1996       1998   2000
                                                                            Year                                                           Year

                                                                    Hospitals         Other                                          Nursing Homes




unemployed or non-participating. Because of the wide age range in the data, this group of
individuals includes young workers in training as well as retired individuals.
    Figure 1 reports aggregate trends for employment of nurses and nursing assistants in
different health care sectors and the private sector over time. Nurses primarily work in
hospitals; their employment share in hospitals increases over time, whereas a large and
increasing share of nursing assistants work in nursing homes. The aggregate trend for nurses
shows a striking drop in employment in all sectors in 1994; the drop is consistent with
a labor supply shock from the leave program. In contrast, the change in employment is
less pronounced for nursing assistants, where the structural break is most visible outside of
hospitals and nursing homes. One interpretation of these trends is that nursing assistants
in the health sector are easily substitutable from the private sector and therefore we do
not observe a structural break in aggregate health care employment. Health care providers
simply replace leaving nursing assistants by hiring additional nursing assistants from other
occupations and by hiring newly trained nursing assistants. As a result, our analysis will
mainly focus on the labor supply shock for skilled nurses.
    We combine employer-employee data with information on the universe of inpatient hos-
able to provide a consistent definition of institutions over time. This prevents us from separately measuring
other health care providers such as physicians, home nurses, and midwives. We rely on imputing industry
information for a share of plants before 1993, but the time series of employment in different sectors do not
suggest that this is a major concern.


                                                                                                       14
pitalizations between 1990-2000 from the Danish National Patient Register.20 The patient
register provides information on admission and discharge dates, potential wait times, de-
tailed diagnosis and procedure codes. We can also link the patients between the patient
register, the employer-employee match data, and population registers, providing rich demo-
graphic information on the patient population. We leverage the information to measure the
effect of nurses on access and quality of hospital care, e.g., the 30-day hospital readmission
rate. We use the diagnosis code information to study patient subpopulations, e.g., acute
care patients, and explore procedure code information to quantify the effect of nurses on
technology substitution and adoption. One limitation of the diagnosis and procedure codes
is that Denmark changed its classification system from ICD9 to ICD10 in 1994. We use ex-
tensive documentation sources to construct accurate time series. However, we also construct
other patient populations, using additional data, that do not rely on the procedure code
information, e.g. newborns.
    Finally, we add mortality information from the Danish Register of Causes of Death at the
person level for the years 1991-2000. The death register provides information on the death
date, the cause of death, and location of death. The death location information allows us to
distinguish between mortality originating from a hospital, a nursing home, and a patient’s
home.21 We use this information to construct unconditional nursing home mortalities (here
we do not condition on being in the nursing home). We then construct the nursing home
population by matching location information for nursing homes with individual addresses
from the population register. This allows us to study conditional nursing home mortalities
and patient selection as well.


5     Results
In this section, we provide graphical and regression-based evidence on parental leave take-up
and the subsequent effects on employment, health care delivery, and patient health.


5.1       Program Participation
We first analyze the immediate take-up rates of the parental leave program. The first row of
Figure 2 displays the fraction of leave takers for different health care workers by the age of
their youngest child. Leave takers are defined as workers who were employed in the previous
  20 We also observe outpatient data starting in 1994. Since we require a balanced time series for the pre-
and the post-reform years, we focus on inpatient data in our baseline analysis.
  21 Mortality rates in nursing homes are recorded from 1991. This is why we restrict the sample period for

mortality outcomes to 1991-2000.


                                                    15
                                      Figure 2: Immediate and Steady State Program Take-Up
                                                                       Nurses                                                                                        Nursing Assistants




                     .25




                                                                                                                            .4
                     .2




                                                                                                                                  .3
              Share on leave




                                                                                                                   Share on leave
                       .15




                                                                                                                         .2
                .1




                                                                                                                            .1
                     .05
                     0




                                                                                                                            0
                               0                      5                  10                      15           20                       0                      5                  10                      15           20
                                                                Age of youngest child                                                                                   Age of youngest child

                                                          Reform 1994                     Pre-reform 1993                                                         Reform 1994                     Pre-reform 1993
                               Grey lines denote corresponding 95% confidence intervals                                                Grey lines denote corresponding 95% confidence intervals



                                                                       Nurses                                                                                        Nursing Assistants
                     .3




                                                                                                                            .4    .3
              Share on leave




                                                                                                                   Share on leave
                          .2




                                                                                                                         .2
              .1




                                                                                                                            .1
                     0




                                                                                                                            0
                               0                      5                  10                      15           20                       0                      5                  10                      15           20
                                                                Age of youngest child                                                                                   Age of youngest child

                                                     Pre-reform 1993                       Reform 1994                                                       Pre-reform 1993                       Reform 1994
                                                     Post-reform 1995                      Post-reform 1996                                                  Post-reform 1995                      Post-reform 1996




year but are non-participating in the current year. The black dashed line documents the
fraction of leavers in the pre-reform year, 1993, while the solid line shows the fraction of
workers that take one year off in the first post-reform year, 1994.22
    For both nurses and nursing assistants, we find that eligible parents, parents with a
child aged 8 or younger, are much more likely to be on leave in the post-reform year in
particular if they have young children aged 0 or 1. We attribute the differential effects for
parents with children aged 8 or younger to the introduction of the parental leave program.
Quantitatively, we interpret the vertical difference between the solid and the dashed line,
relative to the difference for children aged 9 or older, as the program’s take up effect. The
effects are substantial. The evidence suggests that the fraction of nurses who take one year
of absence increases from 3% in 1993 to about 23% in 1994, if they have a child less than
one year old, see Table 10 for details. We also find evidence of bunching for children aged
6-8. This is reasonable given that this is the last chance for parents with an 8-year-old child
to take advantage of the program.
    The pattern is very similar for nursing assistants; here we find an increase of 16 and 24
percentage points for children in the first and second year of life, respectively. We also notice
  22 All figures pool both male and female employees. Separate analysis by gender reveals that a large share

of the effect is driven by mothers, whereas fathers do not usually participate in long-term leave taking. Note
that 95% of nursing assistants and 97% of nurses in the labor market are female throughout the 1990s. For
doctors, the share of women steadily increases from 28% in 1990 to 36% in 2000.


                                                                                                               16
a slight increase in leave taking among ineligible nursing assistants with children aged 9 or
older, suggesting that nursing assistants are more likely to take advantage of the education
and or sabbatical program, also introduced in 1994, which do not condition on the age of the
child. Yet these changes in leave taking are small compared to the increase in leave taking
for young parents. Finally, we find only very small increases in leave taking among doctors
of about 2 percentage points for a child younger than one year old. There is no evidence for
an increase in leave taking for older children, see Table 10 for details. Facing different career
dynamics, doctors may risk potential career advancements if they take a leave of absence or
they might have better access to child care facilities.
    We next turn to the take-up rates in the following years to describe take-up in steady
state. The immediate program take-up includes considerable bunching around the age
threshold for program eligibility. We expect these initial effects to fade over subsequent
years because many parents with older children have already taken advantage of the pro-
gram in previous years. The second row of Figure 2 illustrates the convergence of take-up
rates after the immediate surge in program participation in 1994 to what we consider “steady
state” levels in the years 1995 and 1996. The left panel provides evidence for nurses and
the right panel presents analogous evidence for nursing assistants respectively. Compared
to immediate program take-up, the evidence suggests smaller steady-state take-up rates for
parents with children aged 2 or older. We provide the analogous regression-based evidence
for 1995 in column (4)-(6) of Table 10.
    Overall, we find large reform effects on individual leave taking for nurses and nursing
assistants. Yet health care providers are able to replace nursing assistants on leave as in-
dicated by the smooth aggregate time trends presented in Figure 1. In contrast, Figure 1
indicates a substantial and persistent decline in nurse employment in the post-reform years.
As a result, we expect the largest labor supply shock from the reform for nurses and focus
our subsequent analysis on these workers.


5.2    Aggregate Effects on Employment
To reconcile the time series evidence from Figure 1 and the program take-up estimate from
the previous section, we now turn to the effects of the parental leave program on net employ-
ment. Following the strategy outlined in Section 3.2, we aggregate the estimated take-up
probabilities at the county and health care sector level, based on the demographic composi-
tion in 1993 and the estimated take-up parameters from 1995.
    We first illustrate the statistical relationship between this reform exposure measure and
immediate changes in employment after the reform in Figure 3. We compute the log change


                                               17
in employment by county between 1993 and 1994 for each health worker type and sector
and plot these changes relative to exposure by county in 1993. There is a stronger decline
in employment for counties with greater exposure to the reform. Many counties with high
exposure lose more than 5% of nurses in hospitals and more than 10 % in nursing homes
in the first year of the reform. The effects are even larger if we take the positive trend
in nurse employment into account. On the other hand, counties with small exposure face
considerably smaller reductions in nurse employment of less than 5% in nursing homes and
even increases, in the case of hospitals. Overall, our conservative exposure measure can
reconcile about 30.5% (13.5%) of the substantive variation in employment changes in nursing
homes (hospitals) between counties. Furthermore, we find a negative correlation between
employment changes in hospitals and nursing homes by county of −0.1835. This suggests
that labor markets are at least partially segmented at health care sector and county level.

    We next turn to the λ estimates of the main specification, outlined in equation (2). The
first row of Figure 4 shows estimates using total employment and employment in both health
sectors respectively. The second row shows employment effects of exposure separately for
hospitals and nursing homes. For all specifications, there is an initial upward trend in the
coefficient estimates, indicating that counties with greater exposure in 1993 grew faster in
the years before the reform. This pre-trend is more pronounced at the individual health care
sector level, in particular for nursing homes. All figures show a strong structural break in
this growth path in 1994 when the reform starts and persistent effects in subsequent years.23
The negative λ estimates in the post-reform years confirm the negative effect of exposure on
net employment.
    We report the net employment effects in Table 2. Following the structure in Figure
4, we present the effects on total employment in column 1, and columns 2-4 display more
detailed effects for employment in the health care sector, hospitals, and nursing homes,
respectively. The first row of Table 2 reports the average effect of exposure on aggregate
employment for nurses in the post-reform years. Specifically, we estimate a difference-in-
differences regression model with separate county and year fixed effects for the years 1991-
1996, and report that the effect of exposure interacted with a post-reform indicator variable.24
We also control for linear county time trends to address potential pre-trends at the county
level. The point estimates suggest negative net-employment effects for total employment
as well as employment in nursing homes and hospitals. To put the point estimates into
  23 Allcorresponding regressions are reported in Table 11 in the Appendix.
  24 We focus on a symmetric sample period with three pre- and post-reform years. We only observe nursing
homes’ mortality outcomes from 1991 onwards. Therefore, we omit the year 1990 (1997) to construct a
consistent time window for our main findings.


                                                   18
                                       Figure 3: Reform Exposure and Employment Change 1993-1994
                                                                          Total Employment                                                                                                                                                   Hospitals and Nursing Homes
                                                                               Nurses, 1993-1994                                                                                                                                                             Nurses, 1993-1994




                             -.02




                                                                                                                                                                                                       -.02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         RS

                                               RS                                                                                                                                                                             FR                   ST



                                      -.03
              log(empl1994)-log(empl1993)




                                                                                                                                                                                         log(empl1994)-log(empl1993)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 FY
                                                FR




                                                                                                                                                                                                           -.04
                              -.04

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              VS
                                                                                                                                     KH                                                                                                                                                    KH                  RK SJ
                                                                    ST                                                                                                                                                                   BO                                                        VB
                      -.05




                                                                                                                                                    KH_FR_Munic




                                                                                                                                                                                              -.06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        VJ
                                                                                                                                                            SJ
                                                                                                                                                           RK
                                                                 BO                                                                            VB
                                                                 VS
              -.06




                                                                                                                                                                         RB                                                                                                                          NJ            RB
                                                                                        FY
                                                                                                                              AR                                                                                                                                                                 KH_FR_Munic
                                                                                                                                                         VJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         AR
                             -.07




                                                                                                                                                                                                       -.08
                                                                                                                                                    NJ

                                                    .02        .022                .024         .026                                                     .028                 .03                                         .022           .024         .026          .028         .03                           .032
                                                                                  Total Exposure                                                                                                                                          Exposure in Hospitals and Nursing Homes


                                                                                   Hospitals                                                                                                                                                                 Nursing Homes
                                                                               Nurses, 1993-1994                                                                                                                                                             Nurses, 1993-1994
                                                                           FY




                                                                                                                                                                                                       0
                                                                            ST
                             0




                                                          RS
                                                                                                                                                    VB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    SJ
              log(empl1994)-log(empl1993)




                                                                                                                                                                                         log(empl1994)-log(empl1993)
                                                          BO                                                                                                                                                                            FR
                                  -.02




                                                               FR




                                                                                                                                                                                                            -.05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        RS                              VS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              KH_FR_Munic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             RK
                                                                                                                                                              VJ
                        -.04




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 KHST
                                                               VS                                                        KH               RK
                                                                                                                                                RB




                                                                                                                                                                                               -.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   NJ
                                                                                                                                                               SJ                                                                                                                  VJ BO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    AR
                -.06




                                                                                                                                          NJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  RB
                                                                                  AR                                                                                                                                                                                          FY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           VB

                                                                                                        KH_FR_Munic
                             -.08




                                                                                                                                                                                                       -.15



                                             .025                        .03                        .035                                                                      .04                                      .005                  .01                   .015                    .02                 .025
                                                                               Exposure in Hospitals                                                                                                                                                    Exposure in Nursing Homes


                                                                                                                                                                         Nurse Employment
                                                                                                           0
                                                                                         Employment change in nursing homes




                                                                                                                                                                    SJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   FR
                                                                                                               -.05




                                                                                                                                                                                    VS                                                                  RS
                                                                                                                                     KH_FR_Munic
                                                                                                                                                                                    RK

                                                                                                                                                                                    KH                                                                          ST
                                                                                                 -.1




                                                                                                                                                              NJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                   VJ                                    BO
                                                                                                                                                     AR
                                                                                                                                                                               RB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 FY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   VB
                                                                                                           -.15




                                                                                                                              -.08                        -.06               -.04              -.02                                                      0
                                                                                                                                                                    Employment change in hospitals
                                                                                                                               R-squared = 0.0337




perspective, we quantify the average reform effect by multiplying the point estimates with the
average reform exposure in the respective sector, see the last row of Table 2. The estimates
suggest a net reduction in nurse employment of 13% (3,800 nurses) and 11% (1,200 nurses)
in hospitals and nursing homes, respectively. This suggests that the parental leave exposure
can fully account for the observed net reductions in nurse employment outlined in Figure
1.25
  25 Note that the point estimates for exposure are less than -1. A coefficient of minus 1 is an interesting
benchmark because it indicates that nurses on parental leave reduce net employment one-to-one, suggesting
that employers are, on net, unable to replace any leaver. A coefficient of less than one in absolute value would
suggest that employers can at least partially replace nurses on parental leave, for example, by reactivating
nurses outside the labor force. Our point estimates suggest the opposite: employment decreases by more
than the number of predicted leavers. However, our exposure measure is likely to understate the amount of
leave taking for several reasons. First, our take-up estimates measure the probability of leave conditional on
working in the previous year and do not consider take-up among the previously unemployed. Second, based
on the maximum program duration of 12 months, we implicitly assume that nurses return after one year of


                                                                                                                                                                                19
          Figure 4: Lambda Estimates for Employment Effects by Sector Exposure
                                  Total Employment                                    Hospitals and Nursing Homes




              5




                                                                      5
              0




                                                                      0
              -5




                                                                      -5
              -10




                                                                      -10
              -15




                                                                      -15
                    1990   1992    1994          1996   1998   2000         1990   1992     1994          1996   1998   2000
                                          Year                                                     Year


                                     Hospitals                                              Nursing Homes
              5




                                                                      5
              0




                                                                      0
              -5




                                                                      -5
              -10




                                                                      -10
              -15




                                                                      -15




                    1990   1992    1994          1996   1998   2000         1990   1992     1994          1996   1998   2000
                                          Year                                                     Year




   We revisit the role of pre-trends in rows 2-4 of Table 2. Following the methodology in
Finkelstein (2007), we construct deviations from pre-trends captured by the time series of
lambda coefficient in Figure 4. Specifically, we construct the average effect over τ = 1, 2, 3
years as follows:
                              τ h
                           1X                                                i
                     ∆τ =         (λs1993+t − λs1993 ) − (λs1993 − λs1993−t ) .           (3)
                           τ t=1
Each summand in equation (3) compares the change in trends relative to the reference year
1993 for t periods before and after the reform. This specification implies that the pre-
trends would have continued at the same rate after the reform. We find significant negative
effects in all specifications, both for total employment and for sectoral employment changes.
Interestingly, the effects increase over time, indicating a cumulative reduction in employment
that is consistent with low re-entry rates of leave takers and negative spillover effects on co-
workers. The size of the average effect over three years is larger than the exposure effects
for the post-reform period estimated in the first two rows, which may indicate that the
assumption of persistent pre-trends in (3) provides an upper bound to the effect.
absence. However, less than 70% of nurses on parental leave return to the same county and sector within
five years. If 30% of leavers do not return, the stock of leavers after five years with an equal number of
leavers per year increases by a factor of 2.5. Third, we use leave taking behavior in 1995, which understates
the immediate reform outcomes as shown in the first row of Figure 2. Another explanation for the large
coefficients is a negative externality on co-workers, who might have to fill in the missing hours/shifts. This
may encourage some co-workers to leave the employer.


                                                                 20
                          Table 2: Net Employment Effects for Nurses
                                      (1)              (2)               (3)               (4)
                                    Total       Hosp and NH            Hosp                NH
        λ                           -2.355         -4.034∗∗∗         -3.952∗           -6.698∗∗∗
                               [-5.724,1.014]    [-6.649,-1.42]    [-8.311,.407]   [-11.018,-2.378]
        ∆1                        -2.918∗∗∗         -4.96∗∗∗            -4∗            -7.904∗∗
                               [-4.65,-1.187]   [-7.288,-2.633]    [-8.266,.266]    [-15.521,-.287]
        ∆2                        -6.785∗∗∗        -7.696∗∗∗         -7.651∗∗         -10.325∗∗∗
                             [-11.922,-1.649] [-12.246,-3.147] [-15.283,-.019] [-18.095,-2.555]
        ∆3                        -9.416∗∗∗        -6.479∗∗          -7.768∗            -9.844∗
                              [-14.393,-4.44]   [-12.075,-.883] [-16.948,1.413]       [-20.489,.8]
        Pre-Reform Value            52443            40886             29761              11125
        Avg. Effect                  -.059            -.111            -.127              -.109
        The 95% confidence interval is displayed in brackets.
        Standard errors are clustered at the county level. The specifications control for
        county and year fixed effects, log population, and linear county trends.
        ∗ p < 0.10 ∗∗ p < 0.05 ∗∗∗ p < 0.001




   In sum, we find large effects of the parental leave program on aggregate employment of
nurses, in particular in counties and subsectors with high exposure at the start.


5.3    Health Outcomes in Hospitals
Next, we turn to the effects of the net reduction in nurse employment on hospital health
outcomes by exploring variation in hospital exposure between counties. We start with an
analysis of hospital mortality. Confounding changes in the patient population are a canonical
challenge for the identification of mortality effects. We respond in several ways. First, we
link health outcomes based on the patient’s county of residence, as opposed to the county
of the hospital’s address, to purge potential variation from hospital selection. Second, to
address selection at the extensive margin (overall hospital utilization), we consider the 1-year
mortality rates among acute care patients. Specifically, we follow Propper and Van Reenen
(2010) and focus on heart attack patients, which we identify using detailed ICD diagnosis
codes. The top left graph of Figure 5 presents the analogous λ coefficients for the one-year
hospital mortality rate of heart attack patients. We find no evidence for a systematic change
in the 1-year mortality rate. The corresponding average λ and ∆ estimates are presented in
the first column of Table 3. We repeat the analysis for inpatients whose primary diagnosis
is pneumonia. We also find no evidence for a systematic change in the 1-year mortality rate.
    One potentially confounding factor could be the change in the ICD classification in 1994,
to the extent that differential changes in measurement across counties are also correlated
with our exposure measure. In a placebo check, we find no evidence for changes in acute
care visits, which provides evidence against this concern. Nevertheless, we also revisit 1-year

                                                    21
           Figure 5: Lambda Estimates for Mortality Effects by Sector Exposure
                                  1 Year Mortality Rate                                                         1 Year Mortality Rate
                               Ischemic Heart Disease Inpatients                                                  Newborns<=2,500g




            2




                                                                                           5
            0
            -2




                                                                                           0
            -4
            -6




                                                                                           -5
                 1990   1992          1994             1996         1998          2000          1990    1992       1994           1996   1998   2000
                                             Year                                                                          Year


                                      Pr. Readmitted                                                               Pr. Readmitted
                                         All Inpatients                                                              All Newborns
            4




                                                                                           3
            3




                                                                                           2
            2




                                                                                           1
            1




                                                                                           0
            0
            -1




                                                                                           -1




                 1990   1992          1994             1996         1998          2000          1990    1992       1994           1996   1998   2000
                                             Year                                                                          Year


                                                                          Pr. Readmitted with Jaundice
                                                                                   All Newborns
                                                1
                                                .5
                                                0
                                                -.5




                                                      1990         1992          1994            1996    1998       2000
                                                                                         Year




mortality among newborns, which we observe in a different database and do not depend on
the ICD classification. Specifically, we focus on babies at risk with a birth weight of less than
2,500g. We observe 44k babies at risk (about 4k per year) with an average 1-year mortality
rate of 5.3%. We find no systematic evidence for changes in the 1-year mortality rate as
evidenced by the top right graph of Figure 5. Finally, we also consider the unconditional
annual mortality among the elderly aged 65 and older as an alternative approach to mitigate
biases arising from selection at the intensive or extensive margin. Here we simply divide the
overall number of deaths by the county population aged 65 and older and investigate the
statistical relationship with hospital exposure. Again, we find no evidence for a change in
the annual mortality rate.
    Next we turn to a less drastic quality outcome measure, the 30-day hospital readmission
rate, which is commonly assumed to be a signal of negative hospital quality, see e.g. the


                                                                                        22
Readmission Reduction Program (HRRP) as part of the Affordable Care Act.26 We display
the corresponding λ coefficients for the universe of inpatient visits and all newborns in
the second row of Figure 5, respectively. In both figures, we see a persistent increase in
readmission rates following the reduction in nurse employment in 1994, which is consistent
with the persistent nurse employment effects. The corresponding average λ and ∆ estimates
are presented in the third and the fourth column of Table 3. The average λ effect for the
three post-reform years 1994-1996 is statistically significant for both patient populations, see
the first row, and implies a 21% and a 45% increase for inpatients and newborns, respectively,
see the the last two rows.27 We return to the mechanisms leading to increases in readmission
rates in Section 6.

                                   Table 3: Hospital Outcomes
                                  (1)                (2)              (3)                (4)
                        Mortality Acute Mortality Newborns     Readmission     Readmission Newborn
   λ                            -.061              1.105          1.101∗∗∗            .517∗∗
                           [-1.241,1.12]      [-1.096,3.306]    [.305,1.897]       [.029,1.005]
   ∆1                          -1.198              -.254          1.055∗                .356
                           [-3.535,1.14]      [-4.753,4.244]   [-.031,2.142]       [-.274,.986]
   ∆2                           -.313               .329           .834∗∗               .397
                          [-2.244,1.618]      [-3.158,3.815]    [.074,1.594]       [-.128,.923]
   ∆3                           -.076               .524          1.022∗∗∗              .335
                            [-1.351,1.2]      [-1.723,2.771]    [.268,1.775]        [-.209,.88]
   Pre-Reform Value              .241               .053             .169               .038
   Avg. Effect                  -.002               .036             .035               .017
   The 95% confidence interval is displayed in brackets.
   Standard errors are clustered at the county level.
   ∗ p < 0.10 ∗∗ p < 0.05 ∗∗∗ p < 0.001




5.4     Health Outcomes in Nursing Homes
Next we turn to the effects on nursing home health outcomes using variation in nursing
home exposure. We first investigate unconditional mortality rates, the overall number of
mortalities in a given year, which originate from a nursing home, divided by the county
population. While we do not condition on nursing home residence explicitly, we focus on the
elderly population, aged 85 and older, who are likely to demand institutional nursing home
care, see Table 1. We present the corresponding λ coefficients in the top left graph of Figure
7. There are no pre-trends of exposure on mortality rates, but there is a striking increase
  26 https://www.cms.gov/medicare/medicare-fee-for-service-payment/acuteinpatientpps/readmissions-

reduction-program.html, last accessed 12/26/16.
  27 The findings remain qualitatively and quantitatively almost unchanged if we control for observable

patient characteristics, see Table 13 for details.


                                                  23
    Figure 6: Mortality Effects of Nurse Shortages in Nursing Homes: Age 85 and older
                                                                 Nursing Home                                                                                            Total




                              .01




                                                                                                                             .01
                                                                                       AR   VB

                                                                                                                                                                                                   RK
                                                                                                  RK
                                                                                                                                                                                                        RB




                                                                                                             Mortality Post - Mortality Pre
              Mortality Post - Mortality Pre
                                        .005




                                                                                                                                       .005
                                                                                      NJ
                                                                                                                                                                                       AR
                                                                  KH_FR_Munic                          RB
                                                                            VS        VJ

                                                                                                                                                                        ST                   VB
                                                                                                                                                                    KH_FR_Munic       VJ
                            0




                                                                                                                           0
                                                                      ST               SJ
                                                                                                                                                     RS
                                                                                 FY
                                                                                                                                                                              VS FY   NJSJ
              -.005




                                                                                                             -.005
                                                                     KH
                                                                                                                                                     FR                KH
                                                      FR
                                                       RS
                              -.01




                                                                                                                             -.01
                                               .005     .01              .015               .02    .025                                       .005        .01              .015              .02    .025
                                                              Exposure in Nursing Homes                                                                         Exposure in Nursing Homes




in mortality rates in nursing homes in the post-reform years. The average λ estimate is
statistically significant at the 1% level as indicated by the first row in the first column of
Table 4. The point estimate suggests a 1 percentage point (12.8%) increase in the mortality
rate, see the last two rows. To put this estimate into perspective, we multiply the mortality
effect with the elderly population aged 85 and older, which equals 0.01x90,000=900. This
suggests that the 12% reduction in nurse employment (about 1,200 nurses per year) increases
the number of deaths by 900 elderly people per year (this increases to 1,700 if we consider
the elderly aged 65 and older). The point estimate increases by only 7.5% if we further
control for previous hospitalizations and age-gender fixed effects, see Table 14 for details.
    We revisit differences in the mortality effects between counties in the left graph of Figure
6, where we plot the average change in nursing home mortality between the post-reform
years 1994-1996 and the pre-reform years 1991-1993 on the vertical axis against nursing
home exposure on the horizontal axis. Consistent with the previous evidence, we see a
larger increase in nursing home mortality in counties with greater exposure in the nursing
home sector. This evidence emphasizes the importance of nurses in nursing homes, and
is consistent with the results in Hackmann (2016), who finds that nursing home residents
highly value the number of skilled nurses per resident.28
    We also quantify the average reform effect over τ = 1, 2, 3 years as follows:
                                                                                               τ h
                                                                                            1X                       i
                                                                            ∆τ =                  λs1993+t − λs1994−t .                                                                                      (4)
                                                                                            τ t=1
Motivated by the graphical evidence, we consider a more parsimonious specification without
   28 Using data from Pennsylvania, Hackmann (2016) estimates that residents jointly value an additional

skilled nurse at about $126,000 per year. Assuming that dying residents lose only one year of the residual
life time and that residents only value life expectancy, we find an upper bound on the value of the last year of
a nursing home resident of about $126,000*1,200/1,700=$89,000, which is in the ballpark of estimates from
the literature. Cutler et al. (1997), for example, find a “quality-adjusted-life-year” (QALY) factor of 0.62
for an 85-year-old person in 1990. This suggests a value of a year of life of about $62,000 for an 85-year-old
based on a value of $100,000 in the best possible health state.


                                                                                                            24
pre-trends. The point estimates are presented in rows 2-4 and are quite similar to the average
lambda estimate, providing evidence for relatively constant adverse mortality effects in the
years 1994-1996. However, the effects reverse back to zero in the later post reform years
1997-2000. We will return to this observation below.
   Next, we consider total deaths at the county level, see the top right graph of Figure 4.
Again, we see a quantitatively similar increase in mortalities in the first three post-reform
years. The average λ estimate is statistically significant at the 1% level and falls short of
the former estimate by only 23%, see the second column of Table 4. For a comparison of the
mortality effects between counties see the right graph of Figure 6. This result emphasizes
that nurse reductions in nursing homes lead to an overall increase in mortality and do not
merely shift the incidence of mortality from private homes and hospitals into nursing homes.
Consistent with this assessment, we find no evidence for a systematic link between nursing
home exposure and hospital mortality among the elderly, see the left graph in the second
row of Figure 7 and the third column of Table 4.

    Table 4: Health Outcomes in Nursing Homes Among the Elderly Aged 85 and older
                               (1)            (2)           (3)             (4)                 (5)
                       NH (uncond.)         Total         Hosp     NH Pop Share           NH (cond.)
  λ                         .626∗∗∗        .485∗∗∗        -.087        -1.738∗∗∗            3.113∗∗∗
                          [.297,.956]    [.188,.781]  [-.439,.264]  [-3.051,-.425]       [1.619,4.607]
  ∆1                        .661∗∗∗          .552         -.216        -1.046∗                1.937
                         [.276,1.046]  [-.382,1.486] [-.721,.289]    [-2.131,.039]       [-.869,4.743]
  ∆2                         .52∗∗∗          .265         -.166           -.875             2.441∗∗∗
                          [.151,.889]   [-.095,.625] [-.516,.185]    [-2.715,.965]        [.724,4.159]
  ∆3                        .646∗∗∗        .506∗∗∗        -.081          -1.482             3.108∗∗∗
                         [.264,1.027]     [.14,.872]  [-.451,.288]   [-3.867,.902]       [1.573,4.644]
  Pre-Reform Value            .078            .16          .055            .249                .322
  Avg. Effect                  .01           .008         -.001           -.028                .051
  Note: The dependent variable in columns (1)-(3) is mortality relative to the county population,
  column (4) the population share of NH residents, column (5) mortality relative to NH residents.
  The 95% confidence interval is displayed in brackets. Standard errors are clustered at the county level.
  ∗ p < 0.10 ∗∗ p < 0.05 ∗∗∗ p < 0.001



    Finally, we return to the middle run effects on nursing home mortality for the years
1997-2000. One possibility for the reduction in the unconditional nursing home mortalities is
reduced nursing home attendance. To address this possibility, we match location information
for nursing homes with individual addresses to measure nursing home residents.29 Next, we
investigate the effect of nurse reduction on nursing home attendance. The right graph in the
  29 In practice, we face some limitations in the administrative data set to define nursing home addresses.
At the moment we define nursing home addresses based on individuals who die in a nursing home. We will
be able to refine this definition after we receive the revised address data on establishments from Denmark
Statistics.


                                                    25
                                  Figure 7: Health Outcomes in Nursing Homes
                                  Nursing Home Deaths                                                           Total Deaths
                            Age 85 and older, Nursing Home Exposure                                 Age 85 and older, Nursing Home Exposure




              1.5




                                                                                     1.5
              1




                                                                                     1
              .5




                                                                                     .5
              0




                                                                                     0
                                                                                     -.5
              -.5




                    1990   1992        1994           1996      1998        2000           1990    1992        1994           1996      1998   2000
                                              Year                                                                     Year


                                      Hospital Deaths                                               Population Share of NH Residents
                            Age 85 and older, Nursing Home Exposure                                 Age 85 and older, Nursing Home Exposure
              1




                                                                                     2
              .5




                                                                                     0
                                                                                     -2
              0
              -.5




                                                                                     -4
              -1




                                                                                     -6




                    1990   1992        1994           1996      1998        2000           1990    1992        1994           1996      1998   2000
                                              Year                                                                     Year


                                                             Nursing Home Mortality of NH Residents
                                                                Age 85 and older, Nursing Home Exposure
                                                8
                                                6
                                                4
                                                2
                                                0
                                                -2




                                                     1990      1992        1994             1996    1998        2000
                                                                                   Year




second row of Figure 7 shows the corresponding λ coefficients. The time series indicates an
11% reduction in nursing home attendance on average over 1994-96, see the fourth column
of Table 4. A simple back-of-the-envelope calculation indicates that roughly 66% of this
decrease in attendance can be explained by nursing home mortality.30 The remaining 34%
largely reflects seniors who decide to exit the nursing home in favor of alternative (potentially
informal) forms of long-term care support. We will come back to this point in the the
mechanism section.
    Taking the change in nursing home attendance into account, we also investigate the
conditional mortality rate among nursing residents, see the bottom graph of Figure 7. We
  30 If
      mortality in nursing homes increases by 5.2%, on average, over 1994-96, and initially 24.9% of elderly
age 85 and older live in a nursing home, this NH share decreases to 22.1% after three years if mortality
outside of nursing homes remains unchanged.



                                                                                  26
now see a smaller reduction in the mortality rate after 1996, which suggests persistent adverse
mortality effects even 7 years after the introduction of the parental leave program. The
corresponding point estimates are summarized in the fifth column of Table 4.


6     Mechanisms
In this section, we provide details on mechanisms that can reconcile differential effects on
health care delivery and patient health between hospitals and nursing homes. We first present
a theoretical model of hospitals and nursing homes and evaluate its testable predictions in
the following subsections. Finally, we turn to additional mechanisms that can mitigate the
effects of nurse reductions on patient health in hospitals.


6.1    Theory: A Model of Hospitals and Nursing Homes
Patients A health care sector k is characterized by a fixed mass of patients M k who differ
in their patient risk type s, representing the severity of their illness or difficulty of treatment.
For simplicity, let s ∈ {n, r} with normal patients n and high risk patients r. We assume a
probability distribution across patient types that is specific to a health care sector, with
population share pk of risky patients in sector k. In particular, we distinguish hospitals hosp
and nursing homes nh with phosp > pnh .

Health Care Workers The production at health care providers requires two tasks: diag-
nosis and treatment. Health workers provide a fixed unit of time as labor supply and they
allocate their time across these two tasks and across different patients. Providers can hire
two different types of workers for these tasks who differ in their ability to diagnose and treat
patients: nurses and doctors.
    Diagnosis follows a top-down approach. The most skilled workers are responsible for
diagnosis and delegate certain patient-related tasks to lower hierarchy levels if available.
However, doctors and nurses differ in their expertise with respect to patient diagnosis. In
particular, for every unit of time that a doctor spends with a patient, she extracts a more
precise signal of patient health than a nurse could. For simplicity, we assume that doctors
perfectly recognize a patient’s health status with a fixed time input d,  ¯ whereas nurses only
receive a noisy signal
                                        v ∼ G (s, σ (d))

with mean at the true health status s and variance σ (d) decreasing in the diagnosis time d
spent with the patient.

                                                27
    Treatment occurs in the remaining time of health care professionals. Doctors have an
absolute advantage in treatment over nurses for all patients. Yet in the presence of doctors,
nurses are also more effective in treating high risk patients. Nurses can assist doctors in
the operating room using complementary capital to have a larger impact on patient health.
Without doctors, nurses treat all patients more similarly by providing monitoring, coun-
seling and medication for example. These assumptions follow the highly regulated health
care system with respect to patient-related tasks as reflected by education, training and
occupational licensing among health care workers.

Patient Health Outcomes The survival probability of patients is a function of a patient’s
current risk type s and treatment time from doctors tdoc and from nurses tnurse ,

                                     y = f (s, tdoc , tnurse )

which is the main objective of health care providers. We make the following assumptions
about the health production function:

(A1) For given time input, health outcomes are worse for riskier patients, fs < 0.

(A2) For given risk type, health outcomes improve in time investment, ft > 0, with dimin-
    ishing returns, ftt < 0.

(A3) Without doctors, the marginal value of nursing time is equal across patients, fst,nurse =
    0. If doctors are present, nursing time has a larger impact on sicker patients, fst,nurse >
    0, and returns diminish more quickly for sicker patients, fstt,nurse < 0, i.e. the treatment
    function has more curvature.

(A4) For any patient, treatment time from doctors is more valuable than from nurses,
    ft,doc > ft,nurse , but doctors have a comparative advantage in treating high risk pa-
    tients, fst,doc > fst,nurse ≥ 0.

Organization of Health Production and the Provider’s Problem Providers face
a basic tradeoff: Hiring doctors can be considered a fixed cost that may be associated
with additional investment in capital and equipment as well. However, doctors improve the
precision of diagnosis and the subsequent allocation of treatment time across patient risk
types, and they provide better treatment especially to high risk patients under (A4).
   For this discussion, we assume that hospitals are willing to pay this fixed cost because
they treat more high risk patients. First, there is a larger share of high risk patients in
hospitals that need adequate treatment to prevent death. Second, hospitals treat a larger

                                                28
number of patients such that doctors can leverage their skills across a larger number of
patients.
   A provider (sector) k maximizes patient health by choosing the task allocation across
health care workers conditional on organizational structure and on the patient population
M k . In particular, hospitals solve
                                                                             
                                              f hosp sm , ts,doc , ts,nurse
                                      X
                      max
            {tn,h ,tr,h }h∈nurse,doc m∈M hosp
                                           h                                    i
                              s.t.M hosp        1 − phosp tn,doc + phosp tr,doc = Ndoc T − M hosp d¯
                                           h                                        i
                                  M hosp        1 − phosp tn,nurse + phosp tr,nurse = Nnurse T.

The assumptions of fixed diagnosis time from doctors and full information about patient risk
type mean that the allocation of treatment time can be specified according to true health
status.
    This is not true in nursing homes, where the diagnosis from nurses leaves some (more)
uncertainty about the true risk type of a patient. For simplicity we model nurse visits to
patients as combining patient treatment and monitoring.31 Instead of hiring doctors, nurses
in nursing homes have the option to transfer patients to a hospital at a fixed cost c. We
interpret c as the expected increase in mortality from the transport to the hospital for any
patient.32 High risk patients benefit differentially from hospital care. In contrast, if a normal
patient is transferred to a hospital, they will be diagnosed and then sent back to the nursing
home.33
    We nest the hospitalization decision into the nursing home objective function in a tractable
way by imposing the following timing structure. First, nursing homes choose the nurse time
spent per resident tnurse , which has an immediate impact on resident health captured by a
health transition matrix P r(s → s0 ) = p(tnurse , s). Second, nurses receive a noisy signal v as
a function of new health status s0 and diagnosis time d = tnurse , which informs the hospital
discharge decision. Finally, mortality is determined based on health status s0 and follow-up
treatment in the hospital or nursing home described by function f (·).34
  31 This  simplification emphasizes the relationship between screening time and hospitalizations. We can
easily relax this assumption to allow for separate diagnosis and treatment time of nurses and adjustment in
time allocation across these tasks, see the comments below.
  32 This increase could be directly related to the transfer or result from financial costs of hospitalizations

that divert nursing home funds from patient care, see Castle and Mor (1996).
  33 The hospital faces a capacity constraint and does not provide care to normal patients who can be treated

in nursing homes. Other normal hospital patients do not have access to these other sources of care. This
assumption can easily be made explicit in a model with heterogeneous patient types across hospitals and
nursing homes at the cost of additional notation.
  34 The pre-hospitalization treatment in nursing homes allows for the possibility that negative nursing home




                                                          29
    The nursing home chooses nurse time per residents and hospital transfers, T r(v, tnurse ) ∈
{0, 1}, optimally to maximize patient health:
                                                                               
                                        1 − T r(vm , tnurse ) f nh s0m , tnurse
                                 X
                 max
              tnurse ,T r(·)
                               m∈M nh

                               + T r(vm , tnurse ) ∗ 1{s0m = r} · f hosp r , thosp
                                                                  h                             i
                                                                                       hosp
                                                                              r,doc , tr,nurse − c
                                                                  h                       i
                               + T r(vm , tnurse ) ∗ 1{s0m = n} · f nh (n, tnurse ) − c
                       s.t.M nh tnurse = Nnurse T,

where 1{} is an indicator variable that turns on if the event is true. We simplify the resource
constraint in nursing homes by ignoring capacity incentives of hospitalizations. This seems
plausible because of ethical considerations and the goal of these public providers to grant
full access to health care for the population.

Closing the model Note that despite these differences in nursing tasks across hospitals
and nursing homes, wage regulation prevents competition for workers across providers. We
assume that the supply of nurses and doctors by sector is exogenous and we consider al-
location of tasks within each sector conditional on available resources. For policy analysis,
one could think about wage interventions that change the relative supply of nurses across
sectors.


Model Implications
We next characterize the main implications of the model. All proofs can be found in the
Appendix.

Lemma 1: Time Allocation Under assumptions (A1)-(A3), health workers in hospitals
optimally spend more time treating riskier patients, tn < tr . Nurses in nursing homes spend
the same amount of time t = NMT on all patients.

Proposition 1: Hospital Patients Under assumptions (1)-(3) and fttt ≤ 0, if the number
of patients per nurse in hospitals increases, the time spent on a regular patient decreases more
than the time spent on a risky patient. Health outcomes for regular patients deteriorate more
than health outcomes for risky patients.
treatment affects health outcomes among hospitalized residents, ignoring the selection effect.




                                                         30
   Intuitively, this result shows that the regular hospital patient is the marginal patient
whose health care inputs are more sensitive to staffing supply shocks than inputs for sicker
patients. This result suggests that patients with moderate health risks suffer the largest
adverse effects in hospitals, while health effects for sick patients will be small.

Lemma 2: Hospitalization Cutoff The nursing home chooses a cutoff signal v ∗ above
which a patient will be transferred to a hospital.

    The signal cutoff for hospitalizations sets the marginal cost of hospitalizations, c, equal
to the marginal benefit, given by the health advantage from hospital treatment for a high
risk patient, ∆y, weighted by the probability of discharging a sick patient at the margin v ∗
expressed as the ratio of probability densities at the cutoff,35

                            pnh · gr (v ∗ )
                                                     · f hosp r, thosp
                                                      h                                            i
                                                                           hosp        nh
            c=                                                    r,doc , tr,nurse − f    (r, tnurse ) .   (5)
                                             
                 pnh · gr (v ∗ ) + 1 − pnh · gn (v ∗ ) |                     {z                      }
                                                                             ∆y

If the cost is sufficiently high and the share of high risk patients sufficiently low, the cutoff
will lie strictly above the median signal for healthy patients, v ∗ > n. This condition holds in
the data because we only observe about 21% of nursing home patients being discharged to
a hospital per year.

Proposition 2: Nursing Home Residents A decrease in nurse staffing in nursing
homes leads to the following predictions about nursing home patients:
    1) Lower treatment time per patient leads to a deterioration of health status for all nursing
home patients (care effect).
    2) Lower diagnosis time per patient reduces signal quality and increases the share of high
risk patients who remain in the nursing home instead of receiving adequate care in a hospital
(screening effect).
    3) With less time per patient, total hospitalizations and patient risk mix among hospital
transfers increase through the care effect and decrease through the screening effect.
    4) If total hospitalizations remain unchanged after a decrease in the time per patient, an
improvement in patient risk among hospital transfers suggests that the elasticity of screening
quality with respect to nurse-patient time is higher than the elasticity of patient risk type.

   Hospitalization is costly and the information content of the signal has decreased as nurses
spent less time with each patient. Hence, a stronger signal is required to trigger hospital-
  35 Here pnh denotes the fraction of risky residents based on the interim health profile s0 but before hospi-
talization.


                                                           31
ization. As a consequence, a larger share of high risk patients will forego necessary hospital
treatment and is exposed to higher mortality risk. Overall, hospitalizations will decrease as
the signal becomes noisier to prevent unnecessary transfers. At the same time, conditional
on hospitalization, the patient mix becomes more positively selected as the share of high risk
patients decreases.
    The counteracting force is an overall reduction in patient health among nursing home
residents through the “care effect”. If there are more sick patients overall, hospitalization
becomes more attractive for the average resident and the nursing home has an incentive to
increase total hospitalizations. A deterioration in overall patient health will also negatively
affect the patient mix of hospital discharges, counteracting the positive selection from noisier
signals. The overall outcome for hospitalizations and risk profiles of hospitalized residents
will depend on the relative strength of care and screening effects.


6.2    Evidence from Hospitals
The previous evidence from Section 5.3 indicates a significant increase in the 30-day hospital
readmission rate for different patient populations following the reduction in nurse employ-
ment. However, we find no evidence for an increase in hospital mortality rates. These
findings are consistent with the predictions from the theoretical model, see Proposition 1,
which suggests relatively minor adverse consequences for the sickest patients as doctors, who
are not affected by the parental leave program, can still adequately diagnose and allocate
treatment resources towards the sickest patients. Hence, the adverse consequences of nurse
reductions are largely borne by healthier patients as evidenced by the increased readmission
rates.
    To provide more details on the underlying mechanisms leading to increased readmission
rates, we revisit the previous evidence within a more narrowly defined and homogeneous
sub-population among newborns. Specifically, we focus on neonatal jaundice, which is the
most common primary diagnosis among readmitted babies, and a driving force behind the
observed increase in 30-day hospital readmissions among newborns, see the the last row of
Figure 5. Neonatal jaundice (yellowing of the skin) is a common and typically harmless
condition among newborns and a result of elevated bilirubin levels, see Maimburg et al.
(2010) for details. However, exposure to high serum bilirubin levels, hyperbilirubinemia, is
neurotoxic and can lead to severe brain damage or even death. One mechanism that can
tie the decrease in nurses on hospital staff to increased newborn readmissions for jaundice is
that the reduced nurse patient time deteriorates the nurse’s ability to detect symptoms that
are indicative of high bilibrium levels, thereby increasing the number of falsely discharged


                                              32
newborns (Ebbesen 2000). While we cannot measure nurse-patient time directly, we can
test for changes in the babies’ length of stay in the hospital stay related to birth. However,
we find no evidence for a decrease in the length of stay among newborns in general and
newborns at risk (birthweight above 2,500g) who are more likely to develop jaundice.
    Finally, we turn to the severity of the underlying causes leading to increased readmissions,
which is relevant for a comparison of the returns to nursing between hospitals and nursing
homes. Specifically, we test for negative long-term effects on the newborns cognitive skills
given that high serum bilirubin levels are neurotoxic. One severe but also rare type of
brain damage, which may be caused by high serum bilirubin levels exposure, is kernicterus.
According to Ebbesen (2000) there have not been any cases of kernicterus in Denmark in
the 20 years leading up to 1994. Between 1994 and 1998, however, six cases were diagnosed
providing first evidence for a potentially harmful and long-lasting effect of the nurse reduction
on newborn health. While we cannot track these individuals in our sample population, we
follow Maimburg et al. (2010) and test for an increase in autism and mental disorders, which
may also be caused by high serum bilirubin levels. To this end, we track newborns between
the age of 3 and 17 and test for an increase in hospital admissions whose primary diagnosis
is either autism or a mental disorder more generally. However, we do not find conclusive
evidence for systematic changes in the prevalence of autism or mental disorders. Therefore,
we cannot conclude that the increase in readmissions has a persistent negative effect on
newborn health.


6.3    Evidence from Nursing Homes
The first prediction from Proposition 2 postulates adverse health outcomes for all nursing
home residents. For example, the reduced number of nurses on staff may reduce the quality
of resident monitoring, which may increase the response time to emergencies but may also
reduce the ability to detect and treat health conditions at an early stage (e.g., a respiratory
infection), thereby affecting relatively sick as well as relatively healthy residents. To tie this
prediction more directly to the empirical evidence, we first decompose the large mortality
effects outlined in Section 5.4 by cause of death, leveraging detailed information from the
cause of death register. We distinguish between cardiovascular and respiratory causes, infec-
tions, cancer, and causes related to degenerative brain diseases, see Figure 8 for the graphical
evidence and Table 5 for the corresponding regression results. We find that the increase in
nursing home mortality rates is mainly driven by cardiovascular diseases, brain diseases, and
respiratory diseases. These three categories account for 70 percent of the overall increase in
mortality among the elderly aged 85 and older. Brain diseases include dementia and senility


                                               33
and are most common among the oldest and weakest residents in nursing homes, suggesting
a disproportionately large mortality effect for this group. However, the effect on cardiovas-
cular related mortality is twice as large and may include healthier residents as well. Overall,
this suggests substantial increases in mortality among healthy and sick residents, which is
consistent with the predictions from the theoretical model.36

  Figure 8: Lambda Estimates for Mortality Effects by Cause of Death in Nursing Homes
                              Circulatory                                                     Respiratory
                            Age 85 and older                                                 Age 85 and older




                                                                       .4
       1




                                                                       .2
       .5




                                                                       0
                                                                       -.2
       0




                                                                       -.4
       -.5




                                                                       -.6

              1990   1992   1994            1996    1998    2000             1990    1992    1994           1996   1998   2000
                                   Year                                                              Year


                               Infection                                                       Neoplasm
                            Age 85 and older                                                 Age 85 and older
       .1




                                                                       .3
                                                                       .2
       .05




                                                                       .1
       0




                                                                       0
       -.05




                                                                       -.1
                                                                       -.2
       -.1




              1990   1992   1994            1996    1998    2000             1990    1992    1994           1996   1998   2000
                                   Year                                                              Year


                                                                  Brain
                                                           Age 85 and older
                                     .6
                                     .4
                                     .2
                                     0
                                     -.2




                                           1990    1992    1994               1996    1998    2000
                                                                   Year




  36 Finally,we find very similar effects regarding the cause of death when considering overall mortality at
the county level. This suggests again that the increase in nursing home mortality does not primarily reflect
patient reallocation between hospitals and nursing homes. The corresponding tables and figures are available
upon request.

                                                                  34
    Table 5: Mortality Effects by Cause of Death in Nursing Homes: Age 85 and older
                            (1)           (2)         (3)          (4)           (5)                 (6)
                            All           Cir       Neop           Inf          Res                 Bra
 λpost                   .626∗∗∗       .256∗∗∗      -.023           0           .074              .145∗∗
                       [.297,.956]   [.097,.415] [-.15,.104]  [-.049,.05] [-.047,.194]         [.016,.274]
 ∆1                      .661∗∗∗       .301∗         .049         .014          .068              .141∗
                      [.276,1.046] [-.038,.64] [-.083,.181] [-.043,.071] [-.104,.239]         [-.021,.303]
 ∆2                       .52∗∗∗         .083        .043        -.007        .105∗                .18∗∗∗
                       [.151,.889] [-.177,.343] [-.084,.169] [-.069,.055] [-.008,.219]           [.05,.31]
 ∆3                      .646∗∗∗       .263∗∗∗      -.019         .001          .069               .15∗
                      [.264,1.027] [.092,.434] [-.166,.128] [-.052,.053] [-.076,.213]         [-.006,.306]
 Pre-Reform Value          .078          .046        .007           0           .008                .007
 Avg. Effect                .01          .004          0            0           .001                .002
 Causes of death are: Cir-Circulatory, Neop-Neoplasms, Inf-Infections, Res-Respiratory, Bra-brain diseases.
 The 95% confidence interval is displayed in brackets. Standard errors are clustered at the county level.
 ∗ p < 0.10 ∗∗ p < 0.05 ∗∗∗ p < 0.001




    Next, we test the theoretical predictions regarding the hospitalization rates of nursing
home residents. The increase in cardiovascular and respiratory mortality raises the concern
that some residents forgo more appropriate treatment in hospitals. One possible explana-
tion, formalized in the theoretical model, is that the reduced nurse-patient time reduces the
ability of nurses to diagnose acute resident conditions that should be treated in the hospital.
Specifically, the second prediction of Proposition 2 postulates a decrease in the hospitaliza-
tion rate among sick residents, whereas a model without screening would suggest an increase
hospitalization rates, see the third prediction of Proposition 2. To test the screening mecha-
nism, we characterize the risk type of a resident by the remaining life expectancy, measured
by the time to death. Precisely, we focus on very sick residents with a residual life expectancy
of less than one month, who have disproportionately high hospitalization rates as indicated
in the top left graph of Figure 9. We also conduct separate analyses for the subgroup of
residents whose cause of death is either related to a circulatory disease or pneumonia. We
choose these specific resident populations for three reasons. First, these conditions are pri-
marily treated in a hospital. Second, we can track these populations consistently over time
despite classification changes in ICD codes. And third, we see evidence for increased mor-
tality among these patient groups. The top right graph and the graphs in the second row
in Figure 9 show the corresponding λ coefficients for hospitalization rates in the last month
before death. Overall, we see a statistically significant decrease in the post-reform years in
each sample population, suggesting that the reduction of nurses in nursing homes decreases
important access to hospitals among residents with high mortality risks, see columns 2-4
from Table 15 for details. This confirms the second prediction of Proposition 2 and the
crucial role of patient monitoring in nursing homes.

                                                   35
                                 Figure 9: Hospitalizations of Nursing Home Patients
                         Monthly Fraction Hospitalized by Time to Death                            Any Hospital Visit in Last Life Month
                                                                                                                 All Residents




            .2




                                                                                     5
            .15




                                                                                     0
            .1




                                                                                     -5
            .05




                                                                                     -10
            0




                   1         2        3          4-6         6-12    12-24   24-36          1990   1992       1994          1996        1998   2000
                                       Time to Death in Months                                                       Year


                              Any Hospital Visit in Last Life Month                                Any Hospital Visit in Last Life Month
                                     Cause of death: Circulatory                                          Cause of death: Pneumonia




                                                                                     50
            10
            0




                                                                                     0
            -10




                                                                                     -50
            -20




                                                                                     -100




                  1990        1992       1994          1996         1998     2000           1990   1992       1994          1996        1998   2000
                                                Year                                                                 Year


                                      Any Hospital Visits                                                     TTD< 1 Month
                                           All Residents                                                   All hospitalized Residents
            4




                                                                                     5
            2




                                                                                     0
            0




                                                                                     -5
            -2




                                                                                     -10
            -4




                  1990        1992       1994          1996         1998     2000           1990   1992       1994          1996        1998   2000
                                                Year                                                                 Year




    We analyze the overall hospitalization rate in the bottom left graph but find no evidence
for a systematic change in hospitalizations. From the perspective of the theoretical model,
this suggests that the incentives for hospitalization stemming from a reduction in the signal
precision and the reduction in resident health cancel out on average, see the third prediction
of Proposition 2. Next, we turn to the risk selection of hospitalized nursing home residents.
To this end, we construct the one-month mortality rate among hospitalized residents and test
for systematic changes in the risk composition following the introduction of the parental leave
program. The λ coefficients from the bottom right graph in Figure 9 indicate that the nurse
reduction in nursing home leads to a positive selection of hospitalized nursing home residents,
see column 5 of Table 15 for the respective point estimates. Considered through the lens of
the model, this suggests that the effect of reduced signal precision dominates the negative
treatment effect with respect to patient selection for hospital transfer. With less information


                                                                                36
                         Figure 10: Hospitalizations and Nursing Home Mortality
                                    Mortality Jan-Jun                                            Mortality Jul-Dec
                                    Hospitalized Jan-Jun                                          Hospitalized Jul-Dec




                                                                            20
            10




                                                                            10
            5




                                                                            0
            0




                                                                            -10
            -5




                                                                            -20
            -10




                  1992      1994            1996              1998   2000         1992   1994            1996              1998   2000
                                            Year                                                         Year


                                    Mortality Jan-Jun                                            Mortality Jul-Dec
                                   Not Hospitalized Jan-Jun                                     Not Hospitalized Jul-Dec




                                                                            15
            4




                                                                            10
            2
            0




                                                                            5
            -2




                                                                            0
            -4




                                                                            -5




                  1992      1994            1996              1998   2000         1992   1994            1996              1998   2000
                                            Year                                                         Year




about true health status, the nursing home accidentally transfers more healthy patients
although their share in the total resident population has declined. This dominant effect of
screening results in an unintended positive selection in hospitalized residents, consistent with
the fourth prediction of Proposition 2.
    Finally, we return to the congruent increase in nursing home mortality and the reduction
in hospitalizations conditional on patient risk. Specifically, we investigate whether hospi-
talizations simply prevent the elderly from negative nursing home exposure and thereby
raise life expectancy. Alternatively, hospitals may address the patient complications and
thereby undo the negative nursing home exposure. To distinguish between these alternative
mechanisms, we exploit variation in nursing home exposure and hospitalizations between
residents. Specifically, we focus on newly admitted residents only and distinguish between
residents that spent more or less than 6 months in the nursing home and were or were not
discharged to a hospital. The left graphs from Figure 10 contrast the mortality rate over the
first two quarters between residents that were discharged to a hospital (first row) and resi-
dents that were not (second row). We find no evidence for a significant change in mortality,
see Table 16 for details. This suggests that nursing home exposure of less than 6 months has
no effect on mortality.
    We build on this finding in the second column, where we compare elderly individuals who
spent the first two quarters of the year in the nursing home but were (were not) discharged


                                                                       37
to a hospital in the second half of the year. The evidence from the first column suggests
that both populations were roughly equally exposed to negative nursing home exposure,
given that extra treatments of less than 6 months have no significant impact on the 6 month
mortality rate. Despite comparable nursing home exposure, we find quite different effects on
mortality. On the one hand, we find a statistically significant increase in mortality among
residents who are not discharged to a hospital, bottom right graph. On the other hand,
we find no statistically significant effect on mortality for residents who were discharged to
a hospital, top right graph. Ignoring patient selection, this suggests that hospitals can at
least partially undo the negative consequences of adverse nursing home exposure. Overall,
these findings are consistent with a negative effect of nursing home exposure on mortality as
evidenced in the bottom right graph. Ignoring selection, the evidence also suggests that the
mortality increase could have been reduced had high risk nursing home residents had access
to hospital care, emphasizing the important role of hospital discharges as a mechanism to
improve patient health. We notice that advantageous risk selection in hospitals can mask
potentially negative mortality effects, if the amount of selection increases with nursing home
treatment. Therefore, we interpret the findings displayed in Figure 10 as suggestive evidence
for an important link between hospitalizations and mortality.


6.4     Other Mechanisms
6.4.1   Technology Adoption and Substitution in Hospitals

An additional mechanism, not captured in the theoretical model, that can reconcile differen-
tial effects of nurse reduction on patient health between nursing homes and hospitals is the
role of technology adoption and substitution. Specifically, hospitals may substitute technolo-
gies that share fewer complementarities with nurses and to postpone the adoption of new
technologies that can bind significant resources in the short term in order to mitigate the
adverse consequences of nurse reductions. We investigate these hypotheses in the context
of two conditions that each allow for a traditional invasive surgical treatment option and a
technology-intense non-invasive treatment option.
    The first treatment decision applies to patients whose blood flow is compromised or even
completely blocked due to built-up plague inside coronary arteries. The invasive treatment
option is to connect a healthy artery or vein to the blocked artery to bypass the blocked part
of the coronary artery, commonly referred to as a Coronary Artery Bypass Graft (CABG).
The non-invasive angioplastic treatment option is to introduce a collapsed balloon to the
artery and move it via a catheter to the clogged portion of the coronary artery, where it is
inflated to widen the artery. Both treatments are applied at similar frequency in our sample


                                             38
                               Figure 11: Technology Substitution and Adoption
                                                                                                                                           Gallbladder Removal




                  .8
                                                                                                                                  % Inpatients with Non-Invasive Treatment
                                                                                                                            RS




                                                                                                      .4
                  .6
                                                                                                                                 BO




                                                                                         1995/1994 - 1993/1992
            Percent




                                                                                                           .3
              .4
                                                                                                                                      FR                               RK
                                                                                                                                            FY
                                                                                                                                                             KH




                                                                                                 .2
                  .2




                                                                                                                                                            KH_FR_Munic
                                                                                                                                                                             RB     VJ
                                                                                                                                                                       NJ




                                                                                        .1
                                                                                                                                                                                     SJ
                                                                                                                                                                              VB
                                                                                                                                      VS         ST
                  0




                       1990   1991            1992          1993          1994   1995




                                                                                                      0
                                                     Year                                                                                             AR

                                                                                                                     .025                  .03                        .035                 .04
                                     Angioplasty      Non-Inv. Gallbl. Remov                                                                     Exposure in Hospitals


                                        Gallbladder Removal                                                                                Gallbladder Removal
                              % Inpatients with Non-Invasive Treatment                                                      % Hospitals which Adopted Non-Invasive Treatment
            20




                                                                                                                                 BO




                                                                                                      1
            10




                                                                                                                .8
                                                                                          1995/1994 - 1993/1992
                                                                                                        .6
            0




                                                                                                                            RS
            -10




                                                                                                .4
                                                                                                                                      FR                               RK
                                                                                                                                                      AR     KH

                                                                                        .2
            -20




                                                                                                                                            FY

                                                                                                                                                                       NJ
                                                                                                                                                            KH_FR_Munic
                                                                                                                                      VS         ST                          RBVB   VJSJ
                                                                                                      0
            -30




                  1992                 1993                     1994             1995                                .025                  .03                        .035                 .04
                                                     Year                                                                                        Exposure in Hospitals




population, as indicated by the top left graph of Figure 11. The blue triangles indicate
the annual share of non-invasive angioplasty relative to the total number of invasive and
non-invasive treatments. Using the detailed procedure code information from the National
Patient Register for the years 1990-1995, we investigate whether hospitals with a larger
decline in their nurse workforce are more likely to substitute the non-invasive angioplastic
treatment option. However, we find no evidence to support this hypothesis, see the online
appendix for details.
    The second treatment is applied to patients who develop gallstones, which can irritate
the gallbladder and thereby induce intense tummy pain. The invasive treatment (open
cholecystectomy) requires a larger incision to the tummy in order to access and remove the
gallbladder. The non-invasive treatment option (laparoscopic cholecystectomy) requires only
very small cuts, as fine surgical instruments are used to remove the gallbladder. The latter
treatment option was effectively non-existent in 1990 and 1991, as indicated in the top left
graph of Figure 11, which again measures the ratio of the non-invasive over both treatment
options on the vertical axis. Hospitals started to adopt this technology in 1992 and it gained a
market share of almost 70% by 1995. We test whether hospitals with the largest reductions in
nurse employment delay the adoption of this new technology in the top right graph of Figure
11. Here, we plot the change in the fraction of laparoscopic treatments against the exposure
in hospitals. The negative slope supports our hypothesis, indicating smaller increases in


                                                                                   39
laparoscopic treatments in counties with the largest reductions in nurse employment. The
left graph in the second row plots the corresponding λ coefficients for the two relevant pre-
and post-reform years 1992-1995. The significant decline in the λ coefficients in 1994 further
corroborates the negative effect of hospital exposure on technology adoption.
    The presented patterns combine adjustments along the intensive margin, the number
of patients being treated, as well as the extensive margin, any patient being treated. To
decompose this pattern, we analyze the extensive margin separately in the bottom right
graph of Figure 11. Here, we measure the fraction of hospitals in the county that have
adopted the non-invasive technology as indicated by treating at least one patient in the given
year. To address potential specialization of hospitals, we restrict the analysis to hospitals
that treat at least one patient with either the invasive or the non-invasive procedure in each
year of our sample period. Next, we construct averages in the pre- and post-reform period
and plot the change for each county on the vertical axis of the bottom left graph of Figure
11. We find a clear negative pattern, suggesting that hospitals are less likely to adopt the
non-invasive technology in counties with higher hospital exposure.37

6.4.2      Patient Management

An additional margin along which health care providers can mitigate the adverse health
outcomes resulting from a net reduction of nurses on staff is tho adjust the volume and the
risk composition of incoming patients.

Hospitals

We first turn to changes in access to hospital care. We find no evidence for systematic changes
in overall access to care measured by the number of visits per person in the population or
the number of wait days prior to treatment, see the online Appendix Figure 23 for details.
We also find no evidence for changes in overall number of hospital days per person in the
population, which combines access to care and the length of stay, see the top left graph of
Figure 12. We present the average λ coefficient in the first column of Table 6. Next, we
consider patient switching between counties. To this end, we quantify the fraction of patients
who choose a hospital outside their county of residence and test whether patients from highly
exposed counties, based on exposure in hospitals, are more likely to switch counties. The
top right graph presents the λ coefficients which provide first suggestive evidence in favor of
  37 One concern is that several counties already reach 100 % adoption rates in the pre-reform period, which
would imply by construction a weakly negative change in the adoption rate. To address this concern, we
drop counties with 100 % adoption rates in 1992 or 1993. The result is presented in Figure 22, which implies
a qualitatively and quantitatively similar relationship.


                                                    40
                                               Figure 12: Patient Management in Hospitals
                                                               Days                                                                          Pr. Switch County




                                                                                                       6
            20




                                                                                                       4
            10




                                                                                                       2
            0




                                                                                                       0
            -10




                                                                                                       -2
            -20




                  1990           1992            1994                  1996         1998        2000          1990             1992            1994                  1996         1998        2000
                                                               Year                                                                                          Year


                                               Pr. Switch Non-Acute                                                                            Pr. Switch Acute




                                                                                                              .025
                  .08




                                                                                                                                                                                 RB
                                                     ST                                                                                                         KH_FR_Munic
                                                                                                                                        VS




                                                                                                              .02
                  .06




                                                                                                                                        FR

                                                                                                                                                   ST




                                                                                                                .015
                                                                                          VJ
            Post - Pre




                                                                                                        Post - Pre
                  .04




                                                                              RK                                                                                                         SJ
                                                                                                                                   BO
                                                                                                                                                                    KH
                                                                              NJ   RBVB




                                                                                                       .01
                                                                      KH
                  .02




                                          VS                                                                                  RS
                                                                                                                                              FY
                                RS                                KH_FR_Munic

                                                                                                              .005
                                                                                           SJ
                                                FY        AR                                                                                                                      VB
                                                                                                                                                                            NJ         VJ
                                                                                                                                                        AR
                  0




                                     BO                                                                                                                                     RK
                                          FR
                                                                                                              0



                         .025                  .03                        .035                  .04                    .025                  .03                        .035                  .04
                                                     Exposure in Hospitals                                                                         Exposure in Hospitals




this hypothesis, however the effects are relatively small in economic magnitude. The pooled
λ estimate suggests an average increase in county switching of only 1.1 percentage points,
see the fourth column of Table 6.
    We revisit this hospital switching in the second row of Figure 12, where we split the sample
population into non-acute and acute patients in the left and right graph, respectively. The
graphical evidence suggests a positive relationship for non-acute patients and a negative
relationship between acute patients, indicating that hospitals located on the most affected
counties focus their resources on the less mobile acute care population. The average effects
are not statistically significant, however, we can reject the null hypothesis of a equal slopes
for non-acute patients at the 5% level which corroborates our main conclusion regarding
selective patient management. Overall, this evidence provides a mechanism though which
hospitals mitigate adverse patient health outcomes.

Nursing Homes

Next we turn to resident selection in nursing homes. The evidence from Figure 7 indicates
a decline in the nursing home population in the later post-reform years, 1997-2000, which
can partially explain the reduction in the unconditional mortality rate in these years. In
this section, we provide more details on patient selection, which allows us to identify sub-
populations that are less affected by the nurse reductions to the extent that they have access

                                                                                                  41
                            Table 6: Patient Management in Hospitals
                                          (1)           (2)             (3)             (4)
                                       Visits         Days          Wait Days         Switch
              λpost                      -.23          -.62            -.16            .353
                                   [-1.081,.621] [-3.012,1.772] [-4.609,4.289]    [-.648,1.355]
              ∆1                        -.065          .011          -1.142            .406
                                    [-.617,.488] [-1.938,1.961] [-3.384,1.101]     [-.183,.996]
              ∆2                        -.166          .078           .133             .594
                                    [-.981,.649] [-1.904,2.059] [-3.507,3.772]    [-.254,1.441]
              ∆3                        -.236         -.604            -.15            .494
                                    [-1.11,.639] [-3.106,1.898] [-4.767,4.466]     [-.752,1.74]
              Pre-Reform Value           .159         .742              .37            .118
              Avg. Effect               -.007          -.02           -.005            .011
              The 95% confidence interval is displayed in brackets.
              Standard errors are clustered at the county level. We control for
              log population. The delta estimates take pre-trends into account.
              ∗ p < 0.10 ∗∗ p < 0.05 ∗∗∗ p < 0.001




to alternative informal sources of long term cares. Selection increases over time, which
suggests learning about the deterioration in health care provision in nursing homes.
    Our analysis distinguishes between entry decisions of elderly individuals who do not cur-
rently live in a nursing home and exit decisions of nursing home patients. Table 7 reports
the results.38 Panel A shows a decrease in entry into nursing homes across the entire popu-
lation, but the decline is not precisely estimated. For the full population aged 85 and older,
we estimate a reduction by 0.4 percentage points over the first three years after the reform,
which corresponds to a moderate reduction in the share of nursing home residents by 4%.
Using the ∆ estimates following equation 2 to account for pre-existing trends, we estimate
slightly larger reductions in entry rates over time. These results on entry behavior are similar
across gender and marital status. Individuals who currently live on their own, either with or
without family support, have access to alternative sources of care using home nursing and
informal care arrangements. This patient selection might also help explain the increase in
hospital mortality rates in counties with greater exposure in nursing homes as illustrated in
Figure 7 if sick patients live at home longer.
    The situation changes when we consider exit decisions for current nursing home residents
in Panel B. Given the extent of irreversibility in deciding to live in a nursing home, both a
sufficiently good health status and family support may be necessary to leave. The results
illustrate higher exit rates in nursing homes with greater nurse shortages after the reform.
But this increase is entirely driven by widowed and divorced women, who constitute more
than 70% of women age 85 and older. Nursing home residents in this group are more than
 38 We   provide the corresponding graphical evidence in Appendix Figures 24 and 25.



                                                    42
40% more likely to leave the nursing home over the entire period 1994-2000 after the reform.
In contrast, married women whose spouse is still alive and single women do not change their
propensity to move out of the nursing home. This finding is consistent with the role of family
support and differential health selection into nursing homes. The average health of women
who live in a nursing home despite their partner still being alive is likely worse than for other
groups. Single women who were never married are less likely to have children to support
them. We find that only women, but not men, increase their exit rate from nursing homes;
this result holds even when comparing only the groups of widowers. This difference could be
explained by age differences of children, for example, because at a given age, women have
older children who are more likely to be retired and whose informal care provision is less
likely to be affected by their job. Women might also be more likely to move in with their
children. As a result, separated women are the marginal residents who show the strongest
response to worsening conditions in nursing homes.

6.4.3    Employee Management

Finally, we investigate whether hospitals and nursing homes differ systematically in terms of
the staffing fluctuations that they face due to the reform, which may also reconcile differential
effects on patient health between these sectors.

Staffing management

Better capacity management may be an important reason why hospitals prevent adverse
mortality effects. In order to compare fluctuations in leave taking across providers with dif-
ferent staffing levels, we construct the coefficient of variation for leave taking at the individual
provider level based on the exact timing of leave taking, reported by social benefit data for
1995-2000. Since both hospitals and nursing homes face strong seasonality in leave taking,
we analyze capacity management of health care providers within months.39 In particular,
we take the standard deviation of leave takers per day within each month, relative to the
average monthly number of leavers. Figure 13 shows the distribution of monthly coefficients
of variation for hospitals and nursing homes.40 Months without any inflow or outflow are
common in nursing homes, but, at the same time, these providers face very high fluctuation
in other months. Overall, this evidence suggests that hospitals are more likely to avoid peak
shortages which might have large adverse effects.
  39 Appendix  Figure 13 illustrates these seasonal differences in leave taking. In general, the number of
nurses on leave peaks in June and July and decreases during the winter months.
  40 We focus on all individual providers with at least two skilled nurses and set the coefficient of variation

to zero for months without leavers. We group coefficients larger than 1 in the last bin.


                                                      43
                                                Table 7: Patient Selection: Entry and Exit Decisions
                               (1)             (2)              (3)                  (4)             (5)              (6)
     Panel A: Entry           Total          All Men        All Women        Women by Marital Status
                                                                                 Married        Separated              Single
     λ94−96                      -.24            -.032            -.346             .065           -.289               -1.128
                           [-1.446,.966]   [-1.199,1.136]    [-1.586,.894]     [-1.94,2.07]   [-1.554,.975]        [-2.653,.396]
     λ97−00                     -.024            -.656             .222           -1.095            .547               -1.079
                          [-1.111,1.062]    [-1.706,.394]    [-.952,1.396]    [-2.974,.784]   [-.553,1.647]       [-3.326,1.167]
     ∆1                        -1.673           -1.509           -1.845            1.987          -2.355                -1.75
                          [-4.435,1.089]   [-5.341,2.322]   [-4.817,1.127]   [-1.798,5.772]  [-6.048,1.338]       [-6.884,3.384]
     ∆2                        -1.859           -1.017           -2.295          -2.613∗          -1.616             -7.087∗∗∗
                          [-5.876,2.158]    [-5.18,3.146]   [-6.412,1.821]    [-5.599,.373]    [-6.4,3.168]      [-11.914,-2.26]
     ∆5                        -2.599           -3.358           -2.334         -3.745∗∗          -1.354             -8.151∗∗∗
                          [-6.356,1.158]    [-7.581,.866]   [-6.093,1.425]   [-7.427,-.063]  [-5.714,3.006]     [-12.639,-3.662]
     Pre-Reform Value           .103             .107              .095             .093            .107                 .117
     Avg. Effect, 94-96         -.004            -.006            -.001             .001           -.005                -.018
     Avg. Effect, 97-00            0              .004            -.011            -.018            .009                -.018




44
     Panel B: Exit            Total          All Men        All Women     Women by Marital Status
                                                                              Married           Separated            Single
     λ94−96                     1.28             -.21           1.597          -3.735            1.995∗                .622
                          [-1.348,3.909] [-4.327,3.908]    [-.736,3.929]   [-9.366,1.897]     [-.286,4.276]      [-3.673,4.917]
     λ97−00                    1.948            .593           2.235∗           2.226            2.334∗               1.696
                           [-.486,4.382]   [-2.553,3.74]    [-.101,4.57]   [-1.287,5.739]     [-.108,4.775]      [-2.195,5.588]
     ∆1                        2.543            -.767            3.56          -9.827            4.969∗∗∗            -2.201
                          [-2.369,7.455] [-10.278,8.744]      [-.78,7.9]   [-22.694,3.04]     [1.126,8.813]     [-13.669,9.267]
     ∆2                         -.42         -6.743∗∗           1.394          -9.993            3.228∗              -6.502
                          [-5.117,4.278] [-13.438,-.048] [-2.847,5.635] [-28.135,8.149]        [-.533,6.99]     [-18.496,5.492]
     ∆5                        2.707           -2.801         4.412∗∗          -4.803            5.868∗∗∗            -2.034
                           [-1.31,6.724]  [-8.663,3.061]    [.529,8.295]  [-19.383,9.777]     [2.408,9.328]     [-13.689,9.621]
     Pre-Reform Value           .079            .076             .093             .08              .076                .077
     Avg. Effect, 94-96         .021             .026            -.003          -.061              .032                 .01
     Avg. Effect, 97-00         .032             .036             .01            .036              .038                .028
     The 95% confidence interval is displayed in brackets. Standard errors are clustered at the county level.
     Separated includes divorced and widowed. Married is based on the partner being still alive.
     ∗ p < 0.10 ∗∗ p < 0.05 ∗∗∗ p < 0.001
                     Figure 13: Parental Leave and Staffing Management
                                                                 Variation in Leave Taking




                               8
                               6
                            Density
                              42
                               0
                                      0                .2                .4             .6                   .8           1
                                                                         Coefficient of Variation

                                                                     Hospitals                    Nursing Homes
                                      All observations with a coefficient larger than 1 are summarized in the last bin.




    Next, we further use the data on benefit spells to analyze whether health care providers
differ in their influence on take-up and leave duration. To this end, we display the OLS
regression coefficient of exposure on a leave taking indicator variable that turns on whether
the eligible nurse is on leave in the given year, and a leave duration indicator variable among
leave takers that turns on whether the leave exceeds 26 weeks, in odd and even columns
of Table 8, respectively. The first two columns present the coefficients for the full sample
of hospitals and nursing homes before we split the sample into hospitals, columns (3) and
(4), and nursing homes, columns (5) and (6). The table shows two main results. First,
both hospitals and nursing homes cannot affect the extensive margin of leave taking among
eligible parents. Columns (1), (3) and (5) show that higher exposure does not affect the
probability of leave taking among eligible parents. The parental leave reform entitled all
parents with children up to 8 years of age to take 26 weeks of leave without employer
approval. In line with the policy design, leave taking depends on worker preferences and
cannot be influenced by employers. Second, columns (2), (4) and (6) analyze the intensive
margin of leave taking among leavers. Even though parents are entitled to leave, employers
can influence the duration of leave because extended leave of up to 52 weeks needed employer
approval. As a result, the probability of extended leave reflects employer preferences. We
find that hospitals that are more exposed to the reform are more likely to prevent extended
leave taking of their nurses, as indicated by the statistically significant negative coefficient in
column (4). Yet, while hospitals with average exposure reduce the probability of extended
leave among leavers by 18.3 percentage points, there is no significant reduction in nursing
homes with higher exposure. One explanation for the differences in behavior across providers
could be that hospitals have greater bargaining power in their efforts to retain employees,
if necessary. As a result, hospitals may be better able to retain qualified workers and to
stabilize the workforce overall.


                                                                                45
                        Table 8: Employer Approval for Extended Leave
                         (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)           (5)           (6)
                        leave    >26 wks | l=1     leave    >26 wks | l=1     leave     >26 wks | l=1

    exposure            0.140      -1.696***      -0.522      -5.547***      -0.0485        -0.531
                       (1.323)      (-3.959)     (-1.145)      (-4.618)      (-0.348)      (-0.655)

    Observations       91,218       12,854        71,100         11,003       13,024        1,216
    R-squared           0.232        0.045         0.242         0.044         0.181        0.090
    Share of Leavers    0.137        0.289         0.155          0.275       0.0923        0.366
    Av. Effect         0.00400      -0.0540       -0.0170        -0.183      -0.00100      -0.0110
                                    Robust t-statistics in parentheses
                                     *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1


    These adjustment mechanisms in combination with the differences in mortality effects
across hospitals and nursing homes suggest an important role for nonlinearities in the health
production function. Specifically, we hypothesize that large exposures lead to disproportion-
ately drastic negative consequences, if left unaddressed. We revisit the employer efforts to
mitigate the adverse staffing implications of large policy exposures in Figure 14, where we
present nonparametric Epanechnikov kernel estimates and 95% confidence intervals for the
conditional probability of extended leave among leavers. We find that the share of extended
leave takers is much lower at providers with high exposure. Yet hospitals proportionately
reduce the share of extended leave according to the overall fraction of leavers, whereas the
share of extended leave in nursing homes is stable across a wide range of exposure and
only declines for facilities with very high exposure levels.41 Figure 14 also emphasizes the
level differences in extended leave taking across hospitals and nursing homes, with hospitals
avoiding extended leave much more frequently. In sum, providers with the largest exposure
show the strongest endogenous response to prevent large nurse shortages and adverse health
outcomes for patients. Hospitals are more effective in avoiding staffing fluctuations and in
preventing extended leave. As a result, the relationship between exposure and patient health
outcomes is weaker and noisier for these providers.

Human capital and workforce composition

Secondly, we analyze the relative change in average experience of nurses in hospitals and
nursing homes. Nurses acquire industry-specific human capital over time, for example, by
treating similar types of patients repeatedly. The large mortality effects in nursing homes
  41 Ingeneral, estimates of health effects at the provider level will be biased if endogenous adjustments
are strongest at providers with greatest exposure because this response leads to a nonlinear relationship
between exposure and health outcomes. Our aggregation at the county level mitigates this potential bias at
the provider level.

                                                   46
                                                                          Figure 14: Nonlinearities in Employer Responses
                                                                                                 Hospitals                                                                                                                        Nursing Homes




                                   .5




                                                                                                                                                                          .5
            Extended Leave among Leavers




                                                                                                                                                   Extended Leave among Leavers
                                .4




                                                                                                                                                                      .4
                   .3




                                                                                                                                                         .3
                                   .2




                                                                                                                                                                          .2
                                                           0            .01                  .02                 .03             .04         .05                                                  0          .02            .04         .06           .08              .1        .12
                                                                                                      Exposure                                                                                                                        Exposure




 Figure 15: Industry Experience and Changes in Human Capital among Nurses 1993-1994
                                                                                                 Experience                                                                                                                        Experience
                                                                                      Nurses in Hospitals 1993                                                                                                            Nurses in Nursing Homes 1993




                                                                                                                                                                          .25
                                   .4




                                                                                                                                                                          .2
                                   .3




                                                                                                                                                         .15
            Density




                                                                                                                                                    Density
              .2




                                                                                                                                                   .1
                                   .1




                                                                                                                                                                          .05
                                   0




                                                                                                                                                                          0




                                                               0                        5                       10                           15                                                       0                      5                       10                          15
                                                                                   Health Sector Experience in Years                                                                                                    Health Sector Experience in Years

                                                                                             Leavers                   Stayers                                                                                                    Leavers              Stayers



                                                                   Hospitals: Sector Experience of Nurses                                                                                                 Nursing Homes: Sector Experience of Nurses
                                                                                                   1993-1994                                                                                                                         1993-1994
                                                                                                                                                                                            .1
                                                    .08




                                                                                                 AR
             log(experience 1994)-log(experience 1993)




                                                                                                                                                    log(experience 1994)-log(experience 1993)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      NJ                    RK
                                                                                                                                                                                  .08




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            BO
                                          .06




                                                                                                                       NJ                                                                                                                                                        RB
                                                                              FR                                            RB
                                                                                                                                        SJ
                                                                                                                                       VJ                                                                                                              SJ
                                                                              VS
                                                                                                                                                                       .06




                                                                                            ST
                               .04




                                                                   BO                                                                                                                                              RS                                  AR
                                                                                                             KH
                                                                                                           KH_FR_Munic                                                                                                                                VJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 FY
                                                                                        FY
                                                                                                                                                              .04




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            VS
                     .02




                                                                                                                                                                                                               FR                 KH_FR_Munic                    VB
                                                                                                                       RK
                                                                                                                             VB
                                                                                                                                                   .02
            0




                                                                   RS                                                                                                                                                                KH

                                                          .025                        .03                        .035                        .04                                                 .005               .01                .015                      .02         .025
                                                                                            Exposure in Hospitals                                                                                                           Exposure in Nursing Homes




could be explained by a stronger reduction in this human capital stock compared to hospitals.
Our main analysis focuses on the number of nurses and abstracts from this channel. In order
to assess the importance of this mechanism, this section takes the relative change in nurse
experience into account.
   Specifically, we measure experience of each nurse by health care sector as the number of
years the person has been employed in hospitals or nursing homes respectively. In practice,
the distribution of total experience is truncated because we only observe individuals from
1980 onwards. The first row of Figure 15 illustrates differences in industry experience between
parental leave takers, who take a leave of absence in 1994 and were eligible for the child leave
program at that time, and stayers who continuously work in the sector in 1993 and 1994.


                                                                                                                                               47
Figure 16: Industry Experience and Changes in Human Capital among Nursing Assistants
1993-1994
                                                                                                      Experience                                                                                                                Experience
                                                                                       Nursing Assistants in Hospitals 1993                                                                                     Nursing Assistants in Nursing Homes 1993


                                        .5




                                                                                                                                                                                .2
                                        .4




                                                                                                                                                                                .15
                       .3
                 Density




                                                                                                                                                      Density
                                                                                                                                                        .1
                .2




                                                                                                                                                                                .05
                                        .1
                                        0




                                                                                                                                                                                0
                                                                    0                            5                       10                     15                                                      0                   5                       10                        15
                                                                                            Health Sector Experience in Years                                                                                          Health Sector Experience in Years

                                                                                                   Leavers                Stayers                                                                                             Leavers              Stayers



                                                                    Hospitals: Sector Experience of Nursing Assistants                                                                               Nursing Homes: Sector Experience of Nursing Assistants
                                                                                                       1993-1994                                                                                                                 1993-1994
                                                           .15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ST




                                                                                                                                                         log(experience 1994)-log(experience 1993)
                   log(experience 1994)-log(experience 1993)




                                                                                                                                                                                              .04
                                                                                       AR                                                                                                                                           VJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  NJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           BO                                 KH_FR_Munic
                                                  .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                VS                           AR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       VB




                                                                                                                                                                                 .02
                                                                                                  BO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      SJ
                                      .05




                                                                                                      RS
                                                                                  VB
                                                                                  NJ                                                                                                                                                                             KH
                                                                        VJ                                                                                                                                                                        FY                           RB
                                                                             ST                                                                                                                                                                             RK
                                                                                              VSRB
                                                                             FY RK                                                  KH                               0
                                                                                               FR                                                                                                                 FR
                             0




                                                                                                 SJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                       RS
                                                                                                                                                 KH_FR_Munic
                -.05




                                                                                                                                                      -.02




                                                                 .006         .008               .01          .012           .014        .016                                                        .012               .014                   .016                    .018
                                                                                                  Exposure in Hospitals                                                                                                   Exposure in Nursing Homes




The vertical lines in the figure represent average experience of stayers and leavers in the two
sectors. We find that leavers in nursing homes are less experienced than those in hospitals,
both in levels and relative to stayers.42 As a result, a composition effect will lead to a
stronger increase of average experience in nursing homes than in hospitals after the reform.
This channel is reflected in the second row of Figure 16, which shows a stronger increase in
average experience of nurses in counties with higher exposure to the reform and this patterns
is particularly pronounced for nursing homes. Based on this evidence, we conclude that the
increase in mortality rates in nursing homes is not mainly caused by a loss in the average
human capital stock of nurses but rather the result of the strong reduction in the number of
nurses.
    Another alternative explanation could be compositional changes in the stock of nursing
assistants. The previous evidence on nursing assistants showed that takeup rates among
this group are high but providers are able to replace these workers through new hires. As
a result, average experience among assistants may also decline more in counties with higher
exposure that need to recruit more job switchers and newly educated assistants. In general,
  42 Overall,the age distribution of leavers with children age 8 or younger is very similar for hospitals and
nursing homes, see Figure 20. Nursing home staff is older, on average, but many have less nursing home
industry experience because they have worked in other sectors for part of their career. As a result, average
experience of stayers in nursing homes is lower than in hospitals.



                                                                                                                                                 48
this pattern could contribute to adverse patient health effects in counties with greater expo-
sure. Yet, as the second row of Figure 16 illustrates, average experience is only negatively
correlated with exposure in hospitals. Nursing homes in counties with greater exposure do
not systematically lose a larger fraction of their human capital stock among nursing assis-
tants. The reason for this difference is the much lower experience distribution among nursing
assistants in nursing homes. The first row of Figure 16 shows that the majority of leave tak-
ers have fewer than five years of experience. Hence the experience composition is hardly
affected by replacing these leavers with inexperienced job switchers or entrants. In sum, this
evidence suggests that the large health effects in nursing homes are unlikely to be driven by
systematic loss of experience among nursing assistants.


7     Conclusion
Nurses make up the largest health profession and play a critical role in the delivery of health
care services. In this paper, we take advantage of a natural experiment in Denmark to
quantify the effect of nurses on health care delivery and patient health across health sectors.
Specifically, we investigate the consequences of a parental leave program which led and
unintended, sudden, and persistent 12% reduction in nurse employment. We find evidence
for modest detrimental effects on hospital care delivery as indicated by an increase in 30-day
readmission rates and a distortion of technology utilization. Our findings for nursing homes
are more drastic indicating a 13% increase in nursing home mortality among the elderly aged
85 and older.
    Our results suggest a larger return of nurses on health care delivery in nursing homes,
which we can reconcile through a theoretical hierarchy model that illustrates the greater
responsibility of a nurse in the nursing home. The theoretical model also formalizes the
resident monitoring role of the nurse, which is an integral input to the hospitalization decision
of the sickest nursing home residents. The model predicts that the reduced nurse-resident
time deteriorates the monitoring quality, which results in a reduced hospitalization rate of
the most needy residents. This prediction holds true in the data. In fact, our findings
suggest that a substantial fraction of nursing home deaths might have been postponed, had
the needy residents had access to the hospital.
    Overall, our estimates provide evidence for a mis-allocation of nurses between sectors.
This is a topic of growing policy relevance as the demand for health care services increases
and a large fraction of nurses reach the retirement age in developed countries. While policy
makers have primarily considered instruments to raise the overall supply of nurses including
education and immigration programs, less is known about how nurses are allocated between

                                               49
sectors. Understanding how policy instruments, including minimum nurse-to-patient ratios
or wage subsidies, can increase nurse employment in nursing homes in particular is therefore
of policy interest in the context of an aging population and disproportionately growing
demand for long term care services, and subject of future research.


References
Andersen, Jørgen Goul and Jacob Jepsen Pedersen (2007). Continuity and Change in Danish
   Active Labour Market Policy: 1990-2007: The Battlefield Between Activation and Work-
   fare. Centre for Comparative Welfare State Studies (CCWS), Department of Economics,
   Politics and Public Administration, Aalborg University.
Baicker, Katherine and Amitabh Chandra (2004). “Medicare Spending, the Physician Work-
   force, and Beneficiaries’ Quality of Care”. Health Affairs 23.3, pp. 291–291.
Baker, Michael and Kevin Milligan (2008). “How Does Job-Protected Maternity Leave Affect
   Mothers’ Employment?” Journal of Labor Economics 26.4, pp. 655–691.
Carneiro, Pedro, Katrine V. Løken, and Kjell G. Salvanes (2015). “A Flying Start? Maternity
   Leave Benefits and Long-Run Outcomes of Children”. Journal of Political Economy 123.2,
   pp. 365–412.
Castle, Nicholas G. and Vincent Mor (1996). “Hospitalization of nursing home residents: a
   review of the literature, 1980-1995”. Medical Care Research and Review 53.2, pp. 123–
   148.
Clemens, Jeffrey and Joshua D. Gottlieb (2014). “Do Physicians’ Financial Incentives Affect
   Medical Treatment and Patient Health?” American Economic Review 104.4, pp. 1320–49.
Cook, Andrew, Martin Gaynor, Melvin Stephens Jr, and Lowell Taylor (2010). “The Ef-
   fect of Hospital Nurse Staffing on Patient Health Outcomes: Evidence from California’s
   Minimum Staffing Regulation”. NBER Working Paper.
Cutler, David M., Elizabeth Richardson, Theodore E. Keeler, and Douglas Staiger (1997).
   “Measuring the Health of the US Population”. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity.
   Microeconomics 1997, pp. 217–282.
Dahl, Gordon B, Katrine V. Løken, Magne Mogstad, and Kari Vea Salvanes (2016). “What
   is the case for paid maternity leave?” Review of Economics and Statistics 98.4, pp. 655–
   670.
Dustmann, Christian and Uta Schönberg (2012). “Expansions in Maternity Leave Coverage
   and Children’s Long-Term Outcomes”. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics
   4.3, pp. 190–224.



                                            50
Ebbesen, F (2000). “Recurrence of kernicterus in term and near-term infants in Denmark”.
   Acta Paediatrica 89.10, pp. 1213–1217.
Finkelstein, Amy (2007). “The Aggregate Effects of Health Insurance: Evidence From the
   Introduction of Medicare”. Quarterly Journal of Economics 122.1, pp. 1–37.
Fisher, Elliott S., David E. Wennberg, Thérèse A. Stukel, and Daniel J. Gottlieb (2004).
   “Variations in the longitudinal efficiency of academic medical centers”. Health Affairs,
   VAR 19-32.
Freiman, Marc P. and Christopher M. Murtaugh (1993). “The determinants of the hospital-
   ization of nursing home residents”. Journal of Health Economics 12.3, pp. 349–359.
Gruber, Jonathan and Samuel A. Kleiner (2012). “Do Strikes Kill? Evidence from New York
   State”. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 4.1, pp. 127–57.
Hackmann, Martin (2016). “Incentivizing Better Quality of Care: The Role of Medicaid and
   Competition in the Nursing Home Industry”. Working Paper.
Harrington, Charlene, Jacqueline Choiniere, Monika Goldmann, Frode Fadnes Jacobsen,
   Liz Lloyd, Margaret McGregor, Vivian Stamatopoulos, and Marta Szebehely (2012).
   “Nursing home staffing standards and staffing levels in six countries”. Journal of Nursing
   Scholarship 44.1, pp. 88–98.
Jensen, Per H. (2000). The Danish Leave-of-Absence Schemes: Origins, Functioning and
   Effects from a Gender Perspective.
Kane, Robert L., Tatyana A. Shamliyan, Christine Mueller, Sue Duval, and Timothy J.
   Wilt (2007). “The association of registered nurse staffing levels and patient outcomes:
   systematic review and meta-analysis”. Medical Care 45.12, pp. 1195–1204.
Lin, Haizhen (2014). “Revisiting the Relationship Between Nurse Staffing and Quality of Care
   in Nursing Homes: An Instrumental Variables Approach”. Journal of Health Economics
   37, pp. 13–24.
Liu, Qian and Oskar Nordstrom Skans (2010). “The Duration of Paid Parental Leave and
   Children’s Scholastic Performance”. The BE Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy 10.1.
Maimburg, Rikke Damkjær, Bodil Hammer Bech, Michael Væth, Bjarne Møller-Madsen, and
   Jørn Olsen (2010). “Neonatal Jaundice, Autism, and Other Disorders of Psychological
   Development”. Pediatrics, peds–2010.
Nakrem, Sigrid, Anne Guttormsen Vinsnes, Gene E. Harkless, Bård Paulsen, and Arnfinn
   Seim (2009). “Nursing sensitive quality indicators for nursing home care: international
   review of literature, policy and practice”. International Journal of Nursing Studies 46.6,
   pp. 848–857.




                                             51
Pedersen, Kjeld Møller, Terkel Christiansen, and Mickael Bech (2005). “The Danish Health
   Care System: Evolution-Not Revolution-in a Decentralized System”. Health Economics
   14.S1, S41–S57.
Polniaszek, Susan, Edith G. Walsh, and Joshua M. Wiener (2011). Hospitalizations of Nurs-
   ing Home Residents: Background and Options. US Department of Health and Human
   Services.
Propper, Carol and John Van Reenen (2010). “Can Pay Regulation Kill? Panel Data Ev-
   idence on the Effect of Labor Markets on Hospital Performance”. Journal of Political
   Economy 118.2, pp. 222–273.
Pylkkänen, Elina and Nina Smith (2003). “Career Interruptions Due to Parental Leave: A
   Comparative Study of Denmark and Sweden”. OECD Working Paper.
Rasmussen, Astrid Würtz (2010). “Increasing the Length of Parents’ Birth-Related Leave:
   The Effect on Children’s Long-Term Educational Outcomes”. Labour Economics 17.1,
   pp. 91–100.
Ribbe, Miel W., Gunnar Ljunggren, Knight Steel, Eva Topinkova, Catherine Hawes, Naoki
   Ikegami, Jean-Claude Henrard, and Palmi Jónnson (1997). “Nursing homes in 10 nations:
   a comparison between countries and settings”. Age and Ageing 26.S2, pp. 3–12.
Rossin, Maya (2011). “The Effects of Maternity Leave on Children’s Birth and Infant Health
   Outcomes in the United States”. Journal of Health Economics 30.2, pp. 221–239.
Ruhm, Christopher J (1998). “The Economic Consequences of Parental Leave Mandates:
   Lessons from Europe”. Quarterly Journal of Economics 113.1, pp. 285–317.
— (2000). “Parental Leave and Child Health”. Journal of Health Economics 19.6, pp. 931–
   960.
Schmalenberg, Claudia and Marlene Kramer (2009). “Nurse-Physician Relationships in Hos-
   pitals: 20 000 Nurses Tell Their Story”. Critical Care Nurse 29.1, pp. 74–83.
Schönberg, Uta and Johannes Ludsteck (2014). “Expansions in Maternity Leave Coverage
   and Mothers’ Labor Market Outcomes after Childbirth”. Journal of Labor Economics
   32.3, pp. 469–505.
Stevens, Ann H., Douglas L. Miller, Marianne E. Page, and Mateusz Filipski (2015). “The
   Best of Times, the Worst of Times: Understanding Pro-cyclical Mortality”. American
   Economic Journal: Economic Policy 7.4.
Waldfogel, Jane, Yoshio Higuchi, and Masahiro Abe (1999). “Family Leave Policies and
   Women’s Retention after Childbirth: Evidence from the United States, Britain, and
   Japan”. Journal of Population Economics 12.4, pp. 523–545.
Westergaard-Nielsen, Niels (2002). “20 Years of Labour Market Policies in Denmark”. To-
   wards Higher Employment, Helsinki: Government Institute for Economic Research.


                                           52
Online Appendix
A   Institutions and Policy Reform

                  Figure 17: Counties of Denmark 1970-2006




                             Description                     Our Code
       1+2   Copenhagen and Frederiksberg Municipalities   CPH-FR Munic
        3               Copenhagen County                      KH
        4              Frederiksborg County                    FR
        5                 Roskilde County                       RS
        6              West Zealand County                      VS
        7                Storstrom County                       ST
        8                  Funen County                        FY
        9              South Jutland County                     SJ
        10                  Ribe County                        RB
        11                 Vejle County                         VJ
        12              Ringkjobing County                     RK
        13                Viborg County                        VB
        14             North Jutland County                     NJ
        15                Aarhus County                        AR
        16                   Bornholm                          BO




                                       53
                                                            Table 9: Leave Program Take-Up
                                              Number of full-time equivalent leavers among nurses
                                                 Parental leave Education leave Sabbatical leave
                                           1995      2108               516               129
                                           1996      1606               575               <10
                                           1997      1296               517               <10
                                           1998      1114               317                <5
                                           1999      1133               282                <5
                                           2000      1130               205                <5




Figure 18: Duration of Leave Benefits: Education and Parental Leave
                                                   Child Care Leave                                                                              Child Care Leave
                                                      Nurses 1995-1999                                                                       Nursing Assistants 1995-1999




                                                                                                               .015
               .02
               .015




                                                                                                               .01
 Density




                                                                                                 Density
  .01




                                                                                                               .005
               .005
               0




                                                                                                               0




                              0             100             200             300            400                                0            100           200                300            400
                                                           Days                                                                                         Days


                                                   Education Leave                                                                               Education Leave
                                                      Nurses 1995-1999                                                                       Nursing Assistants 1995-1999
               .03




                                                                                                               .03
               .02




                                                                                                               .02
 Density




                                                                                                 Density
               .01




                                                                                                               .01
               0




                                                                                                               0




                              0             100             200             300            400                                0            100           200                300            400
                                                           Days                                                                                         Days




                                                  Figure 19: Timing of Parental Leave Taking
                                                        Hospitals                                                                                Nursing Homes
                                                                                                               300
               1200
 Nurses on Child Care Leave




                                                                                                 Nurses on Child Care Leave
                    1100




                                                                                                                     250
          1000




                                                                                                      200
 900




                                                                                                               150
               800




                                  1996m7     1997m7        1998m7        1999m7   2000m7                                          1996m7    1997m7      1998m7       1999m7       2000m7
                                                            Time                                                                                         Time




                                                                                             54
            Figure 20: Age Distribution of Leavers and Stayers 1993-1994
                                   Age Distribution                                                                   Age Distribution
                                Nurses in Hospitals 1993                                                          Nurses in Nursing Homes 1993




                                                                                         .1
    .1




                                                                                         .08
    .08




                                                                                          .06
      .06
  Density




                                                                                      Density
                                                                                    .04
.04




                                                                                         .02
    .02
    0




                                                                                         0
            20        30            40              50              60       70                   20        30          40              50              60    70
                                              Age                                                                                 Age

                                    Leavers                   Stayers                                                   Leavers               Stayers



                                   Age Distribution                                                                   Age Distribution
                           Nursing Assistants in Hospitals 1993                                             Nursing Assistants in Nursing Homes 1993




                                                                                         .08
    .1




                                                                                            .06
Density




                                                                                    Density
                                                                                     .04
.05




                                                                                         .02
    0




                                                                                         0

                 20        30            40              50             60    70                       20        30          40          50             60   70
                                              Age                                                                                 Age

                                    Leavers                   Stayers                                                   Leavers               Stayers




                                                                                   55
B     Estimation Results and Robustness
B.1     Regression Results for Program Takeup


                                   Table 10: Program Take-Up
                              (1)           (2)         (3)        (4)             (5)        (6)
                             Nurses      Assistants  Doctors      Nurses       Assistants   Doctors
                                       1993 vs 1994                          1993 vs 1995
    Age0 x Post-Reform     0.2000***    0.1607***   0.0173**     0.1877***     0.1068***    0.0161**
                            (0.006)       (0.010)    (0.007)      (0.006)        (0.009)     (0.007)
    Age1 x Post-Reform     0.1706***    0.2445***    -0.0024     0.1142***     0.1885***    0.0126*
                            (0.006)       (0.010)    (0.007)      (0.006)        (0.010)     (0.007)
    Age2 x Post-Reform     0.0982***    0.1029***    -0.0004     0.0253***       0.0090      -0.0072
                            (0.007)       (0.010)    (0.007)      (0.006)        (0.011)     (0.007)
    Age3 x Post-Reform     0.0734***    0.0686***    -0.0112     0.0352***       0.0102      0.0003
                            (0.007)       (0.010)    (0.008)      (0.007)        (0.010)     (0.008)
    Age4 x Post-Reform     0.0636***    0.0611***     0.0047     0.0251***     0.0281***     -0.0060
                            (0.008)       (0.010)    (0.009)      (0.007)        (0.010)     (0.008)
    Age5 x Post-Reform     0.0452***    0.0336***    -0.0093     0.0355***      0.0206**     -0.0060
                            (0.008)       (0.010)    (0.009)      (0.008)        (0.010)     (0.009)
    Age6 x Post-Reform     0.0401***    0.0589***    -0.0028     0.0335***      0.0219**     -0.0061
                            (0.009)       (0.011)    (0.009)      (0.008)        (0.010)     (0.009)
    Age7 x Post-Reform     0.0508***    0.0469***     0.0006     0.0264***      0.0251**      0.0007
                            (0.009)       (0.011)    (0.009)      (0.008)        (0.010)     (0.009)
    Age8 x Post-Reform     0.0425***    0.0499***    -0.0007       0.0025        0.0179*     -0.0023
                            (0.009)       (0.011)    (0.009)      (0.008)        (0.011)     (0.009)
    Post-Reform            0.0132***    0.0274***     0.0021     0.0167***     0.0371***     -0.0002
                            (0.003)       (0.004)    (0.003)      (0.003)        (0.003)     (0.003)

    Observations             58,532       52,517      17,358       56,363       50,445       17,420
    R-squared                 0.088        0.064      0.008         0.073        0.043       0.008
    Standard errors in parentheses, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                  56
B.2    Details on Estimation Results

                        Table 11: Regression Results for Employment
                              (1)               (2)                (3)               (4)
                             Total        Hosp and NH             Hosp              NH
            λ1990          -3.322∗∗           -0.820             -2.833            -5.699
                       [-5.811,-0.834]    [-6.417,4.776]     [-10.10,4.438]    [-16.19,4.787]

            λ1991          -1.822∗∗           -2.098∗            -2.113            -5.395
                       [-3.535,-0.110]    [-4.496,0.300]     [-6.644,2.419]    [-12.67,1.875]

            λ1992          -0.393             -1.152∗            -0.869            -3.023
                       [-1.635,0.848]     [-2.404,0.100]     [-3.035,1.296]    [-8.467,2.421]

            λ1994         -2.525∗∗∗          -3.808∗∗∗           -3.131           -4.881∗∗
                       [-4.263,-0.786]    [-5.816,-1.801]    [-7.220,0.959]   [-9.058,-0.704]

            λ1995         -4.963∗            -5.599∗∗           -5.538∗           -4.929∗∗
                       [-10.69,0.768]     [-10.28,-0.920]    [-11.89,0.812]   [-9.835,-0.0240]

            λ1996         -6.094∗∗            -5.658∗∗           -4.935            -4.145
                      [-12.16,-0.0279]    [-9.764,-1.553]    [-11.48,1.614]    [-10.16,1.873]

            λ1997          -5.429             -5.745∗∗           -3.993            -6.117
                       [-14.17,3.308]    [-11.48,-0.00469]   [-12.37,4.388]    [-14.02,1.784]

            λ1998          -5.095             -3.450             -2.064            -4.647
                       [-13.90,3.712]     [-9.854,2.953]     [-11.90,7.775]    [-13.04,3.744]

            λ1999          -4.972             -4.138             -2.632            -4.936
                       [-14.34,4.395]     [-11.24,2.961]     [-13.11,7.849]    [-16.01,6.141]

            λ2000         -8.304∗             -5.868             -5.220            -3.692
                       [-18.17,1.558]     [-13.36,1.624]     [-16.55,6.108]    [-16.70,9.313]
            Controls
            N                 165                165          165                   165
            95% confidence intervals in brackets
            Note: Standard errors are clustered at the county
            level.
            ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




B.3    Robustness to Differences in Mortality Risks
We address potential differences in mortality risks between counties and over time in addi-
tional robustness checks. To this end, we combine age and gender information from IDAP
with information on inpatient acute care hospitalizations from the Danish National Patient
Register. Specifically, we calculate the number and the total length of this and the pre-
vious year’s hospital visits for each elderly person. To leverage the rich demographic and
health utilization information in our analysis we proceed in three steps. First, we regress a

                                                  57
mortality indicator variable on age-gender fixed effects, county-year fixed effects, as well as
current and last year’s length and number of hospital visits at the person-year level. Sec-
ond, we keep the predicted county-year fixed effects which capture differences in mortalities
between counties and over time conditional on differences in the mortality risks as measured
by the age-gender composition and the frequency of hospitalizations. Finally, we use these
residualized mortality rates in our following county-year level regression analysis.

             Table 12: Mortality by Nursing Home Exposure: Age 85 and older
                     (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)             (5)             (6)
                    Tot             Tot           Hosp           Hosp             NH             NH
     λ1991         -0.084          -0.38          -0.10          -0.30         -0.00044         -0.080
                [-0.86,0.69]   [-1.24,0.49]   [-0.70,0.49]   [-0.80,0.20]    [-0.59,0.59]    [-0.71,0.56]

     λ1992          0.47           0.24           0.12          -0.038           0.10           0.049
                [-0.67,1.61]   [-0.82,1.31]   [-0.59,0.83]   [-0.63,0.55]    [-0.88,1.09]    [-0.91,1.01]

     λ1994          0.55           0.56           -0.22          -0.21          0.66∗∗∗         0.64∗∗∗
                [-0.47,1.57]   [-0.31,1.44]   [-0.77,0.34]   [-0.66,0.24]     [0.24,1.08]     [0.25,1.04]

     λ1995          0.45           0.52          0.0038         0.040            0.48∗           0.49∗
                [-0.37,1.26]   [-0.22,1.26]   [-0.27,0.28]   [-0.17,0.25]    [-0.067,1.03]   [-0.072,1.05]

     λ1996         0.90∗∗        0.90∗∗          -0.017         -0.069          0.90∗∗          0.90∗∗
                [0.051,1.76]   [0.13,1.68]    [-0.39,0.36]   [-0.36,0.22]     [0.24,1.56]     [0.23,1.58]

     λ1997         0.062          0.095           0.14           0.11            0.23            0.24
                [-0.65,0.78]   [-0.60,0.79]   [-0.42,0.70]   [-0.45,0.66]    [-0.46,0.92]    [-0.50,0.97]

     λ1998        0.98∗∗          0.85∗∗        0.52∗∗∗         0.36∗∗           0.54            0.51
                [0.16,1.80]    [0.032,1.66]   [0.16,0.89]    [0.053,0.68]    [-0.15,1.23]    [-0.18,1.20]

     λ1999          0.20          0.077           0.45            0.27          -0.047          -0.048
                [-0.57,0.97]   [-0.57,0.72]   [-0.25,1.14]   [-0.082,0.62]   [-0.65,0.56]    [-0.81,0.71]

     λ2000           0.51          0.18         0.44          0.11            0.20          0.17
                 [-0.62,1.63] [-0.72,1.07] [-0.12,1.00] [-0.10,0.31]      [-0.50,0.91]  [-0.59,0.93]
     Controls         7              3            7             3              7             3
     N               150            150         150            150            150           150
     95% confidence intervals in brackets
     Note: Standard errors are clustered at the county level. In columns 2, 4, and 6 we added
     further controls including previous hospitalizations and age-gender fixed effects.
     ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




                                                     58
B.4       Robustness to Patient Characteristics

                            Table 13: Hospital Outcomes: Robustness
                                (1)                 (2)                (3)                  (4)
                       Mortality Acute Mortality Newborns Readmission Readmission Newborn
  λ                            .395               1.022            1.137∗∗∗              .534∗∗
                          [-.888,1.677]       [-.807,2.851]      [.398,1.876]          [.048,1.02]
  ∆1                          -.908                 .22            1.263∗∗∗                .388
                         [-3.049,1.233]      [-3.089,3.528]      [.501,2.025]        [-.257,1.033]
  ∆2                           .144               -.149             .849∗∗∗                 .41
                         [-1.127,1.415]      [-2.705,2.407]      [.176,1.523]           [-.11,.93]
  ∆3                            .29                .637            1.055∗∗∗                .357
                         [-1.034,1.614]       [-1.03,2.304]      [.416,1.695]         [-.183,.896]
  Pre-Reform Value             .254                 .06               .187                 .036
  Avg. Effect                  .013                .033               .037                 .017
  The 95% confidence interval is displayed in brackets.
  Standard errors are clustered at the county level. For babies, we flexibly control for birth
  weight.
  ∗ p < 0.10 ∗∗ p < 0.05 ∗∗∗ p < 0.001




                         Table 14: Nursing Home Outcomes: Robustness

                              (1)              (2)             (3)            (4)             (5)
                          NH (uncond.)        Total           Hosp        NH Pop Share     NH (cond.)
      λ                        .673∗∗∗        .702∗∗∗          0.036         -1.521∗∗∗        3.286∗∗∗
                             [.335,1.01]    [.417,.987]    [-.189,.262]   [-2.745,-.298]    [1.753,4.82]
      ∆1                       .644∗∗∗         0.564          -0.211          -.956∗            2.167
                            [.285,1.003]   [-.232,1.36]    [-.624,.203]     [-2.022,.11]   [-.488,4.822]
      ∆2                       .542∗∗∗        .423∗∗∗         -0.066           -0.753         2.671∗∗∗
                             [.165,.918]    [.159,.688]    [-.337,.205]   [-2.524,1.018]   [1.046,4.297]
      ∆3                       .688∗∗∗        .708∗∗∗          0.032           -1.283         3.284∗∗∗
                            [.317,1.059]    [.421,.995]    [-.207,.271]     [-3.51,.943]    [1.71,4.857]
      Pre-Reform Value         0.079          0.165           0.058          0.256            0.328
      Avg. Effect              0.011          0.011           0.001          -0.025           0.053
      Note: The dependent variable in columns (1)-(3) is mortality relative to the county popu-
      lation, column (4) the population share of NH residents, column (5) mortality relative to
      NH residents. The 95% confidence interval is displayed in brackets. Standard errors are
      clustered at the county level. We control for previous hospitalizations and age-gender fixed
      effects.
      ∗ p < 0.10 ∗∗ p < 0.05 ∗∗∗ p < 0.001




                                                      59
C         Model Proofs
C.1       Proof of Lemma 1
In the nursing home, health status of patients is unknown when nurses commit to the time
spent per patient. As a result, nurses distribute their time budget equally.43
    For hospital workers, assume a worker faces some distribution of cases with probability
p for high risk patients r and 1 − p for normal patients n < r. The worker maximizes patient
health subject to a time constraint,



                                  maxtn ,tr (1 − p) f (n, tn ) + pf (r, tr )
                                         s.t. (1 − p) tn + ptr = T.

The first order condition implies

                                           ft (n, tn ) = ft (r, tr )

but by definition n < r and using ftt < 0 and fts > 0 in hospitals this yields

                                                  tn < t r .


C.2       Proof of Proposition 1
Suppose for simplicity that nurse and doctor treatment time are additively separable. Then
the only change for hospital patients is due to changes in nursing time.
   To see optimal adjustment of nurses, substitute the time budget constraint into the FOC,
                                                                       !
                                                       T     p
                                 ft (r, tr ) − ft n,       −   tr = 0
                                                      1−p 1−p
                                                                 !
                                                        T 1−p
                                     ft (n, tn ) − ft r, −     tn = 0
                                                         p   p
  43 If
      we allow for treatment based on diagnosis information, the assumption of fts = 0 implies equal treat-
ment time across patients. If nurses are more effective in treating higher risk patients, then patients with a
higher signal will receive more treatment subsequently.




                                                     60
and use the implicit function theorem to yield
                              1
               dtr           1−p ftt (n, tn )                    ftt (n, tn )
                   =                 p              =                                     >0
               dT    ftt (r, tr ) + 1−p ftt (n, tn ) pftt (n, tn ) + (1 − p) ftt (r, tr )
                             1
              dtn            p ftt (r, tr )                    ftt (r, tr )
                  =                 1−p          =                                     >0
              dT    ftt (n, tn ) + p ftt (r, tr ) pftt (n, tn ) + (1 − p) ftt (r, tr )

which implies that
                              dtn dtr
                                   >      ⇔ ftt (r, tr ) < ftt (n, tn ) .
                              dT       dT
Since the second derivative is negative, this result implies that the value at the optimal
treatment time for normal patients is less negative. Assumption (3) describes the curvature
of the health function by patient type, with more curvature for sicker patients conditional
on time used. As a result,ftt (r, tr ) < ftt (n, tr ) . But since tn < tr , the third derivative with
respect to time will also matter. For the result to hold, fttt has to be sufficiently small
(cannot be too positive). Note that fttt ≤ 0 is a sufficient condition because then the second
derivative is more negative for larger values of time input, ftt (n, tr ) < ftt (n, tn ) .
    Finally, changes in health outcomes are a linear function of changes in time input,

                                          dyn                dtn
                                              = ft (n, tn )
                                          dT                 dT
                                          dyr               dtr
                                              = ft (r, tr )
                                          dT                dT

and using the FOC,
                                  dtn dtr       dyn dyr
                                       >     ⇔      >     .
                                   dT     dT    dT     dT
    Note that if nursing and doctor time are complements, the reallocation of time towards
high risk patients may be more pronouced because doctors have a comparative advantage in
treating high risk patients and this treatment requires nurse input as well.


C.3     Proof of Proposition 2
In nursing homes, a reduction in nursing staff leads to an adjustment in diagnosis time.
As the total time budget of nurse staff decreases, time spent with each resident decreases
proportionally,
                                         dt    T
                                            = .
                                        dN     M
   The reduction in time per patient has several implications. First, the overall share p of
                                                                      ∂
high risk patients among nursing home residents will increase because ∂t pn,r < 0. Intuitively,


                                                   61
regular patients receive less attention and become more likely to develop complications. At
the same time, high risk patients are less likely to recover with lower treatment intensity,
 ∂
∂t pr,n < 0.
    Second, the reduction in the recovery rate of high risk patients is exacerbated by a
deterioration in diagnosis. Less time per patient implies that nurses will receive noisier
health signals,σ 0 (t) < 0, about all patients. As a consequence, a larger share of high risk
patients will not receive hospital treatment.
    Note that in general, the probability of patients with risk type s staying in the nursing
home is given by
                                                            v∗ − s
                                                                   !
                                        ∗            ∗
                              P r (v < v | s) = Gs (v ) = Γ
                                                              σ
where the signal v ∼ Gs (s, σ (t)) and Γ is the normalized signal distribution with mean zero
and variance equal to one. Allowing for a change in the hospitalization cutoff, the change in
this probability for patient type s ∈ {n, r} as the diagnosis time changes is given by

                                                                                  dv ∗     ∗
                                               v∗ − s 0
                                                                      !
                      d
                         P r (v < v ∗ | s) = γ        σ (t) ·                     dσ σ − [v − s] .
                      dt                         σ                                      σ2
We illustrate the effect of a noisy signal on the separation of patient types during diagnosis:
More sick types are sent to the hospital while normal patients are more likely to stay in the
nursing home: dtd
                  P r (v < v ∗ | r) < 0 and dtd
                                                P r (v < v ∗ | n) > 0. This is equivalent to showing
that
                                       v ∗ − n dv ∗ v ∗ − r
                                               >       >          .
                                           σ      dσ         σ
   Rewriting equation (5) with the standardized density functions yields

                                              v ∗ −r
                                                   
                                            γ    σ          1−p     c
                                              ∗ 
                                              v −n
                                                        −       ·        = 0.
                                            γ σ              p    ∆y − c

Using the implicit function theorem for this condition yields

                              v ∗ −r   v ∗ −r      v ∗ −n       v ∗ −n    0 v ∗ −n γ v ∗ −r
                                                                                          
                 dv ∗           σ2        σγ0  γ      σ     −     σ 2   γ      σ        σ
                      =          1 0 v ∗ −r
                                               ∗ 
                                                   v −n        1 0 v ∗ −n
                                                                            ∗ 
                                                                                 v −r
                 dσ                            γ σ − σγ
                                 σγ       σ                            σ    γ σ
                                                      ∗   ∗ 
                          v∗ − r
                                                n−r
                                                 σ      γ 0 v σ−n γ v σ−r
                     =           +        ∗
                                                     ∗
                                                                    ∗   ∗ 
                            σ       γ 0 v σ−r γ v σ−n − γ 0 v σ−n γ v σ−r
                                                             ∗             ∗         ∗             ∗   ∗
where the second line adds and subtracts v σ−r  2   γ 0 v σ−n γ v σ−r . As a result, dv  v −r
                                                                                     dσ > σ
if the second term in the last line is positive. If we assume that G is normally distributed,


                                                              62
then the condition is always satisfied with v ∗ > n,
                                                             ∗                       ∗       2              ∗       2
                                        v −n    v −n
        dv ∗ v ∗ − r              − n−r
                                      σ   σ exp   σ   exp v σ−r
            =        +            ∗ 2     ∗ 2
        dσ      σ         ∗                         ∗
                                                           ∗      ∗ 
                       − v −r exp v −r exp v −n + v −n exp v −n exp v −r
                                 σ           σ                         σ                        σ                    σ                σ
                 v∗ − r        ∗
                              v −n       dv ∗          v∗ − r
             =            +          ⇔        >                    .
                   σ           σ         dσ                σ

There exist parameter combinations of costs and benefits of hospitalization such that this
condition is satisfied. These assumptions are reasonable because in the data the hospitaliza-
tion rate is about 21%.
    The analogous derivation based on the probability of normal patients staying in the
nursing home is given by

                                                                               v ∗ −r               v ∗ −n
                                                                                                        
                                                           r−n         0
                    dv ∗ v ∗ − n            σ   γ      σ    γ σ
                        =        +  v∗ −n   v∗ −r        ∗   ∗ .
                    dσ       σ    γ0        γ      σ   − γ 0 v −r γ v −n
                                                                       σ                            σ                σ

    Suppose n < v ∗ < r. Then the numerator is strictly positive, but the denominator is
strictly negative and overall, we find that

                                dv ∗ v ∗ − n  d
                                    <        ⇔ P r (v < v ∗ | n) > 0.
                                dσ       σ    dt

In contrast, suppose n < r < v ∗ . Then the numerator is strictly negative, while the sign of
the denominator is strictly positive if γ is a concave function with γ 00 < 0 in the relevant
range. Yet this is a contradiction. In sum, we characterize conditions under which a noisier
signal leads to a higher share of healthy types and a lower share of high risk types being
transferred to the hospital.
    In the next step, we add information about the patient mix among nursing home residents
to analyze total hospitalizations,

                            v∗ − r             v∗ − n    v ∗ − (pr + (1 − p) n)
                                        !                                           !                                                     !
        P r (v < v ∗ ) = pΓ        + (1 − p) Γ        =Γ                        .
                              σ                   σ                σ


                                       ! dv ∗     ∗
                                                                                                                 ! dv ∗
      d                     v∗ − m       dσ σ − [v − m] dσ                         v∗ − m                          dp − [r − n] dp
         P r (v < v ∗ ) = γ                                                ·    +γ                                                        ·        .
      dt                       σ                       σ2                    dt       σ                                        σ              dt
                          |                   {z                                    }       |                            {z                    }
                                     ≡A: noisy diagnosis                                                ≡B: complications

                                                                                                                              dσ
A is the composition change due to a noisier signal of true health status,                                                    dt   < 0 and the sub-


                                                               63
                                                                             ∗
sequent change in hospitalizations. Using the result for dv
                                                         dσ under the normality assumption
from above, we can show that this mechanism leads to systematically fewer hospitalizations
if the initial cutoff is sufficiently large,

                                                v ∗ > (1 − p) r + pn.

B indicates a change in the probability of high risk patients among nursing home residents
as treatment time per patient changes; in particular, complications become less likely and
the healthy state becomes more frequent with more treatment time, dp   dt < 0. This implies a
strictly larger share of hospitalizations among nursing home patients because r > n and from
equation (5),
                                                              ∗ 2
                                                1      c      v −n
                   dv ∗                         p2 ∆y−c
                                                           γ     σ
                           =−1        ∗ −r
                                                  ∗ −n
                                                                  ∗   ∗ 
                                                                   v −r
                                                                                              < 0.
                    dp
                             σ γ 0   v
                                        σ     γ   v
                                                     σ     −  1
                                                              σ γ    σ  γ 0 v σ−n

Intuitively, for any signal the share of high risk patients has increased and therefore the
threshold should be lowered to offer hospital treatment to a larger part of these patients.
The relative size of these counteracting effects depends on the underlying model parameters
for the distribution of patient types and the cost and benefit structure of hospitalization.
    Finally, we combine the previous insights to analyze the overall composition of hospital
patients and to characterize changes in patient selection. Using Bayes’ theorem, we get

                                                          p · [1 − P r (v < v ∗ | r)]
                                   P r (r | v > v ∗ ) =                               .
                                                               1 − P r (v < v ∗ )

The change in the share of high risk patients among discharged residents is given by
                               h                                                          i
      d                ∗
                            [1 − P r (v < v ∗ | r)] dp       d            ∗                    ∗
                                                    dt − p · dt P r (v < v | r) [1 − P r (v < v )]
         P r (r | v > v ) =
      dt                                                P r (v > v ∗ )2
                               d
                               dt P r (v    < v ∗ ) p · [1 − P r (v < v ∗ | r)]
                           +                                                      .
                                                P r (v > v ∗ )2

In the data, we find   d
                       dt P r (v    < v ∗ ) ≈ 0, so the risk composition improves in treatment time t
if
                                                    dp       d
                       [1 − P r (v < v ∗ | r)]          − p · P r (v < v ∗ | r)           > 0.
                       |               {z           dt}   | dt    {z          }
                           change in patient mix           change in patient separation




                                                           64
Rewriting this condition yields

                            v ∗ −n    v ∗ −r                                                                                                                                                       v ∗ −nv ∗ −r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
                                     ·γ                                                                          v∗ − n                                           v∗ − r                                      ·γ
                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                               σ         σ                                                     p,t                                                                                                   σ     σ
          p,t > σ,t ·              ∗ 
                                     v −r
                                                                                     ⇔              <                                              ·γ                                        <          ∗ 
                                                                                                                                                                                                        v −r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .
                                 1−Γ σ                                                         σ,t                       σ                                                 σ                       1−Γ σ

Intuitively, the elasticity of the share of sick patients with respect to treatment time has to be
sufficiently small compared to the elasticity of signal variance with respect to treatment time.
As less treatment time increases the share of high risk types among nursing home residents
in general, a larger p,t worsens the risk composition among preexisting hospital discharges
more. The screening effect according to σ,t works in the opposite direction through the
reduction in signal strength. Lower treatment time leads to noisier signals and a higher
share of high risk types who remain in the nursing home. As a result the risk composition
among hospital discharges improves. If the ratio of elasticities is sufficiently small, the second
effect will dominate and the patient selection in hospitals will improve.


D      Details on Mechanisms
D.1     Technology Substitution and Adoption


                                  Figure 21: Angioplastic Substitution Patterns
                                                                                                               Angioplasty
                                                            .15




                                                                                                                                                   NJ
                                                                     .1
                                                 1995/1994 - 1993/1992




                                                                                     RS
                                                          .05




                                                                                                                                                   RK
                                                                                                               AR              KH
                                                                                                     FY                                                      VB
                                                                                                                                                                       SJ
                                                0




                                                                                                                          KH_FR_Munic
                                                                                               FR                                                        RB
                                                                                                                                                                  VJ
                                                                                          BO              ST
                                                            -.05




                                                                                               VS

                                                                          .025                      .03                        .035                                                    .04
                                                                                                          Exposure in Hospitals


                                      Angioplasty                                                                                                                                    Wound Care
                                                                                                                               .0004
             15




                                                                                                                                                                  VS
             10




                                                                                                                                                                                        AR   KH_FR_Munic
                                                                                                                    1995/1994 - 1993/1992
                                                                                                                                   .0002
             5




                                                                                                                                                                                  ST          KH
                                                                                                                                                             BO
                                                                                                                                                        RS
                                                                                                                                                                                                        NJ           SJ
             0




                                                                                                                       0




                                                                                                                                                                                                              RB
             -5




                                                                                                                                                                  FR
                                                                                                                                                                                                               VB

                                                                                                                                                                                                        RK
             -10




                                                                                                                                                                                FY
                                                                                                                               -.0002




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    VJ

                   1990   1991       1992                                 1993            1994             1995                             .025                            .03                        .035               .04
                                            Year                                                                                                                                  Exposure in Hospitals




                                                                                                                65
                             Figure 22: Robustness Technology Adoption
                                                                                      Non-Inv. Gallbl. Remov
                                                                            BO




                                                  1        .8
                                     1995/1994 - 1993/1992
                                                   .6
                                                                       RS




                                          .4
                                                                                 FR                                RK

                                                                                                  AR     KH




                                                  .2
                                                                                 VS          ST                            SJ




                                                  0
                                                                .025                   .03                        .035           .04
                                                                                             Exposure in Hospitals




D.2     Hospitalizations of Nursing Home Residents and Mortality


         Table 15: Hospitalizations of Nursing Home Residents Ages 85 and older
                          (1)               (2)                                                      (3)                                      (4)                (5)
                          All       Last Life Month                                      Last Life Month: Pneu                   Last Life Month: Circ    TTD<1Mo
λpost                   -.716             -2.236                                                 -24.933                                 -7.332∗∗           -1.949∗∗
                    [-3.562,2.13]     [-4.995,.522]                                         [-68.649,18.782]                        [-13.562,-1.101]     [-3.721,-.178]
∆1                      1.034               -.09                                                  -32.26                                   -4.116              -.457
                   [-1.091,3.159]      [-2.07,1.89]                                          [-70.959,6.439]                         [-15.511,7.279]     [-4.855,3.941]
∆2                       .435            -.711∗∗                                                 -27.334                                   -3.359            -.136∗
                   [-7.504,8.374]    [-1.326,-.097]                                         [-83.999,29.331]                         [-11.703,4.985]       [-.284,.012]
∆3                       .179             -1.619                                                 -20.081                                   -3.357              -.627
                    [-1.952,2.31]      [-3.648,.41]                                         [-55.656,15.495]                          [-8.582,1.869]     [-2.451,1.197]
Pre-Reform Value          .21              .158                                                     .627                                     .462               .238
Avg. Effect             -.023              -.072                                                   -.802                                    -.236              -.063
The 95% confidence interval is displayed in brackets.
Standard errors are clustered at the county level. Column 1 presents the effect on overall hospitalizations.
Columns 2-4 document the probability of a hospital visit in the last life month, for all residents, and
residents dying from pneumonia or ischemic diseases, respectively. Column 5 displays the probability
that the time to death is less than one month among hospitalized residents.
∗ p < 0.10 ∗∗ p < 0.05 ∗∗∗ p < 0.001




            Table 16: Hospitalizations of Nursing Home Residents and Mortality
                               (1)                                                 (2)                                               (3)                     (4)
                   Hosp Mortality Jan-Jun                               NH Mortality Jan-Jun                             Hosp Mortality Jul-Dec   NH Mortality Jul-Dec
λpost                        4.489                                             -2.993∗                                             6.794                 4.817∗∗
                       [-1.207,10.184]                                       [-6.312,.326]                                   [-3.346,16.935]           [.613,9.021]
∆1                           2.655                                                .581                                             3.742                   3.573
                       [-5.582,10.891]                                      [-2.171,3.333]                                   [-8.182,15.666]         [-2.907,10.054]
∆2                           1.261                                                .899                                             7.755                 2.488∗∗
                        [-3.408,5.929]                                    [-28.658,30.457]                                 [-301.678,317.188]          [.275,4.702]
∆3                           2.485                                                .039                                             -.725                 4.605∗∗∗
                          [-4.06,9.03]                                      [-2.474,2.552]                                    [-9.515,8.065]           [.769,8.442]
Pre-Reform Value              .344                                                .182                                              .478                    .197
Avg. Effect                   .144                                               -.096                                              .218                    .155
The 95% confidence interval is displayed in brackets.
Standard errors are clustered at the county level..
∗ p < 0.10 ∗∗ p < 0.05 ∗∗∗ p < 0.001




                                                                                                  66
D.3   Access to Care

                                            Figure 23: Access to Hospital Care
                                           Visits                                                     Wait Days




                                                                          10
        2
        1




                                                                          5
        0




                                                                          0
        -1




                                                                          -5
                                                                          -10
        -2




             1990      1992         1994            1996    1998   2000         1990   1992         1994           1996    1998   2000
                                            Year                                                            Year




D.4   Patient Selection in Nursing Homes

                    Figure 24: Nursing Home Patients: Entry and Exit Decisions
                              Pr(Entering a Nursing Home)                                     Pr(Leaving a Nursing Home)
                                            All                                                             All
        2




                                                                          6
        1




                                                                          4
        0




                                                                          2
        -1




                                                                          0
        -2




                                                                          -2
        -3




                                                                          -4




             1990      1992         1994            1996    1998   2000         1990   1992         1994           1996    1998   2000
                                            Year                                                            Year


                              Pr(Entering a Nursing Home)                                     Pr(Leaving a Nursing Home)
                                            Men                                                             Men
        2




                                                                          5
        0




                                                                          0
        -2




                                                                          -5
                                                                          -10
        -4




             1990      1992         1994            1996    1998   2000         1990   1992         1994           1996    1998   2000
                                            Year                                                            Year


                              Pr(Entering a Nursing Home)                                     Pr(Leaving a Nursing Home)
                                           Women                                                           Women
        2




                                                                          6
        1




                                                                          4
        0




                                                                          2
        -1




                                                                          0
        -2




                                                                          -2
        -3




             1990      1992         1994            1996    1998   2000         1990   1992         1994           1996    1998   2000
                                            Year                                                            Year




                                                                     67
            Figure 25: Nursing Home Patients: Entry and Exit Decisions
                      Pr(Entering a Nursing Home)                                           Pr(Leaving a Nursing Home)
                       Single Women, Age 85 and older                                        Single Women, Age 85 and older




                                                                        10
2
0




                                                                        5
-2




                                                                        0
-4




                                                                        -5
-6




                                                                        -10
-8




     1990      1992           1994          1996          1998   2000         1990   1992           1994          1996          1998   2000
                                     Year                                                                  Year


                      Pr(Entering a Nursing Home)                                           Pr(Leaving a Nursing Home)
                      Separated Women, Age 85 and older                                     Separated Women, Age 85 and older
4




                                                                        8
                                                                        6
2




                                                                        4
0




                                                                        2
-2




                                                                        0
-4




     1990      1992           1994          1996          1998   2000         1990   1992           1994          1996          1998   2000
                                     Year                                                                  Year


                      Pr(Entering a Nursing Home)                                           Pr(Leaving a Nursing Home)
                       Married Women, Age 85 and older                                       Married Women, Age 85 and older
                                                                        20
4
2




                                                                        10
0




                                                                        0
-2




                                                                        -10
-4




                                                                        -20
-6




     1990      1992           1994          1996          1998   2000         1990   1992           1994          1996          1998   2000
                                     Year                                                                  Year




                                                                   68
