                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    IMPACT OF VIOLENT CRIME ON RISK AVERSION:
                      EVIDENCE FROM THE MEXICAN DRUG WAR

                                         Ryan Brown
                                       Verónica Montalva
                                        Duncan Thomas
                                       Andrea Velásquez

                                      Working Paper 23181
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23181


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2017




We are grateful to Ben Crost, Erica Field, Elizabeth Frankenberg, Robert Garlick, Amar
Hamoudi, Nick Ingwersen, Hani Mansour, Owen Ozier, Marcos Rangel, Hitoshi Shigeoka, Xiao
Yu Wang, Richard Zeckhauser, and participants at the the Northeastern Universities
Development Conference (2015), the Latin American and Caribbean Economic Association
Annual Meeting (2015), the Southern Economic Association Annual Meeting (2015), and NBER
Economics of National Security Working Group (2016) for their valuable comments and for
financial support from NIA R01AG030668 and NICHD R01HD047522. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Ryan Brown, Verónica Montalva, Duncan Thomas, and Andrea Velásquez. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Impact of Violent Crime on Risk Aversion: Evidence from the Mexican Drug War
Ryan Brown, Verónica Montalva, Duncan Thomas, and Andrea Velásquez
NBER Working Paper No. 23181
February 2017
JEL No. D81,I3,O15

                                          ABSTRACT

Whereas attitudes towards risk are thought to play an important role in many decisions over the
life-course, factors that affect those attitudes are not fully understood. Using longitudinal survey
data collected in Mexico before and during the Mexican war on drugs, we investigate how an
individual’s risk attitudes change with variation in levels of insecurity and uncertainty brought on
by unprecedented changes in local-area violent crime due to the war on drugs. Exploiting the fact
that the timing, virulence and spatial distribution of changes in violent crime were unanticipated,
we establish the changes can plausibly be treated as exogenous in models that also take into
account unobserved characteristics of individuals that are fixed over time. As local-area violent
crime increases, there is a rise in risk aversion that is distributed through the entire local
population.

Ryan Brown                                       Duncan Thomas
University of Colorado Denver                    Department of Economics
Department of Economics                          Duke University
1380 Lawrence Street                             Box 90097
Denver, CO 80217                                 Durham, NC 27708
ryan.p.brown@ucdenver.edu                        and NBER
                                                 d.thomas@duke.edu
Verónica Montalva
Inter-American Development Bank                  Andrea Velásquez
1300 New York Ave NW,                            University of Colorado Denver
Washington, DC 20577                             Department of Economics
veronicamo@iadb.org                              1380 Lawrence Street
                                                 Denver, CO 80204
                                                 andrea.velasquez@ucdenver.edu
    I.      Introduction


Attitudes people have towards risk influence key choices over the life course and are thought to play an
important role in determining the evolution of individual social and economic status, health and wellbeing.
Studies have established that willingness to take risks is associated with decisions made under uncertainty
including insurance acquisition, precautionary saving decisions, investment behavior, occupational choice,
technology adoption and geographic mobility (Barsky et al., 1997; Bellemare and Shearer, 2010; Bryan,
Chowdhury and Mobarak, 2014; Charles and Hurst, 2003; Deaton, 1991; Dupas, 2014; Kan, 2003; Kimball
et al., 2008; Lusardi, 1998).


There is less agreement in the literature on the extent to which attitudes towards risk are stable over the life
course. Implicit in many economic models is the assumption that an individual’s risk attitudes are
immutable whereas research in psychology and the health sciences typically assumes these attitudes react
to changes in an individual’s circumstances (Carmil and Breznitz, 1991; Tedeschi and Calhoun, 2004).
Several recent studies in economics have empirically examined whether measured risk attitudes are
responsive to major changes in an individual’s environment, including earthquakes, floods, tsunamis,
financial crisis, and outbreaks of violent conflict (Callen et al., 2014; Cameron and Shah, 2013; Cassar et
al., 2011; Guiso et al. 2013; Ingwersen et al., 2016; Hanaoka et al., 2015; Jakiela and Ozier, 2016;
Malmendier and Nagel, 2011; Moya, 2017; Voors et al., 2012).


Separating selection from causal mechanisms is a major challenge in this literature since exposure to
drivers that are thought to affect risk attitudes are potentially correlated with pre-existing characteristics.
For example, relatively more risk averse individuals likely engage in behaviors that mitigate exposure to
uncertainty in the environment, which will result in sorting of individuals by exposure, and thus
contaminate interpretation of observed associations between exposure to uncertainty and risk attitudes. To
address this concern, investigators have examined the link between risk attitudes and exposure to local area
shocks, such as floods, earthquakes or political violence. Not all such events though are, in fact, shocks and
it is critically important to establish that selective geographic sorting because of the perceived risks of the
event does not contaminate causal inference. Empirical studies have primarily relied on cross-section
surveys and so are not able to take into account behavioral responses to the event such as migration away
from the area.


This study directly addresses these challenges. Using longitudinal survey data that elicits risk attitudes from
the same respondents before and after the onset of the Mexican war on drugs, we exploit plausibly
exogenous variation in the timing, location, and magnitude of the rise in violent crime to identify its effect
                                                       1!
!
on risk. Key assumptions necessary to give these estimates a causal interpretation are tested drawing on the
panel dimension of the survey.


It is well documented that the outbreak of violence in Mexico had political origins. One of the main causes
was a fundamental change in the strategy of the Mexican government towards combating drug trafficking
organizations when Calderon took over the presidency in December 2006. After some brief initial success,
an unanticipated and unprecedented rise in crime quickly followed. This surge in violent crime diffused
widely throughout the country, affecting many regions that had previously had no exposure to the war on
drugs and creating geographic heterogeneity that was uncorrelated with previous trends in local
demographic, economic, security, and infrastructure characteristics (Brown, 2016; Velasquez, 2015). Our
identification strategy exploits both the temporal and geographic variation of this rise in violence across
Mexico.


Given the magnitude of the outbreak of violent crime, the increasing brutality of the crimes, and the
heightened visibility of the violence due to press coverage and active promotion by drug cartels through
narco-messages, the psychological exposure to this change in the environment is likely salient to most of
the population living in affected localities1. When considering this type of widespread environmental
shock, there are several potential mechanisms through which it may have an impact on risk attitudes. First,
exposure to violence has the potential to change an individual’s perception of the riskiness of the
current/future environment or their tolerance for additional risk. Second, the increase in potential
victimization is likely to provoke heightened anxiety and fear, which has been shown to induce increased
risk averse decision-making (Lerner and Keltner, 2001; Raghunathan and Pham, 1999). Third, given the
evidence that risk aversion is negatively associated with income and wealth (Barsky et al., 1997; Guiso and
Paiella, 2008), another potential link between crime and risk preferences is through the negative effect that
the Mexican drug war has had on the economic outcomes of the affected population (Dell, 2015; Robles et
al., 2013, Velásquez, 2015).


To explore whether changes in the level of violence affected risk attitudes of those in the affected localities,
we use data from the Mexican Family Life Survey (MxFLS), which is ideally suited for this research. The
MxFLS is representative of the Mexican population living in Mexico in 2002, when the baseline survey
was conducted. Subsequently, two additional follow-ups were conducted, in which respondents’ attitudes
towards risk were elicited by asking individual respondents in face-to-face interviews to choose between


!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
1
 The term “drug cartel” refers to organized crime organizations involved in drug-trafficking. It does not imply any
collusion to set prices. We use indistinctively the terms “drug cartel”, OCG and traffickers’ organizations.
                                                                2!
!
gambles with different payoffs2. Key for our study, the first follow-up (MxFLS2) took place during a time
of relatively stable levels of violent crime and the second follow-up (MxFLS3) was conducted after the
major escalation in violence. The individual level information from MxFLS is combined with
municipality- and month-specific homicide data collected by the National Institute of Statistics and
Geography (INEGI) in order to measure how attitudes towards risk vary as the level of local area violent
crime changes over time. The relationship between the timing of the escalation in violence and the dates of
survey interviews is displayed in Figure 1, which plots the monthly national homicide rate per 10,000
inhabitants from 2000 to 2011 and highlights months in which interviews that collected information about
risk attitudes were conducted in MxFLS2 and MxFLS3. The longitudinal dimension of MxFLS is exploited
to provide empirical evidence on the likely validity of threats to identifying assumptions necessary to
interpret our estimates as causal. This paper advances the literature linking risk attitudes and environmental
shocks by combining high quality longitudinal survey data with administrative information on homicides
that span a period of diverse geographic and sharp temporal variation in violent crime in Mexico. There are
several advantages of our research design.


First, we examine changes in risk attitudes before and after the onset of the Mexican war on drugs for the
same individuals interviewed in a population-representative survey. Moreover, all individual-specific
characteristics of respondents that are fixed over time are taken into account in the estimation through the
inclusion of individual fixed effects. This is a significant advance over the existing literature.


Second, residential sorting related to a locale’s level of safety may be correlated with individual
characteristics and lead to a spurious correlation between exposure to violence and risk attitudes. While one
way to address this issue is to use an environmental shock thought to be plausibly exogenous, we
demonstrate that even in the context of an unanticipated event, if a cross-sectional approach is used, this
potential confound can still significantly impact one’s conclusions. To demonstrate this we compare results
from an analysis using only cross-sectional data from before the recent surge in violence, an analysis only
using cross-sectional data from after the plausibly exogenous escalation in violence, and an analysis that
combines these two time periods and adds individual fixed effects. We find that when utilizing only
historical variation in violence levels or only current levels caused by a plausible exogenous event it

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
"
 !Even though the literature generally considers these empirical measures of risk aversion as capturing underlying risk
preferences, we would like to be cautious about this interpretation. In economic theory, risk preferences are
summarized by measures derived from utility-based models of behavior under uncertainty. These models require
making assumptions on a number of issues (such as the form of the utility function, whether the amounts of the
gambles are integrated with personal wealth, whether savings are allowed and whether background risk is accounted
for (Arrow, 1970; Pratt, 1964; Gollier, 2000)). We remain skeptical regarding these assumptions and to avoid
confusion, we do not interpret our empirical measures of risk aversion as capturing underlying preferences, but rather
more generally as capturing attitudes towards risk.!
                                                                3!
!
appears that exposure to violence is related to decreased risk aversion or is unrelated to risk attitudes,
respectively.3


However, after taking into account unobserved fixed respondent-level heterogeneity by including
individual fixed effects in the models, there is a large, robust, and statistically significant positive
relationship between violence exposure and risk aversion. Specifically, a rise of 1 homicide per 10,000
people at the municipality level, which is the average change between 2005 and 2009 across Mexican
municipalities, significantly increased the likelihood of being risk averse in MxFLS3 by 1.5 percentage
points, which represents a 5 percent increase from the average. We conclude that the removal of
unobserved individual heterogeneity is imperative to generating unbiased estimates.4


Third, exploiting the richness of the MxFLS, in conjunction with its panel design, we explore the
heterogeneity of the result with respect not only to fixed, but also changing characteristics of the
respondents. This allows us to provide suggestive evidence regarding the important mechanisms driving the
relationship between violence exposure and risk attitudes. While we find no evidence that the increase in
risk aversion amongst the exposed is greater for individuals who have been adversely economically
impacted by the violence, we do see significantly increased risk aversion amongst individuals with the
largest changes in their reported feelings of fear and insecurity. These results suggest that the channel by
which the conflict is changing risk attitudes is related to an individual’s increased perception of potential
victimization rather than as a result of a worsened financial environment.


Fourth, an environmental shock salient enough to potentially impact risk attitudes may induce behavioral
responses such as migration. We find evidence of selective migration in the Mexico and mitigate its impact
on interpretation of the results by assigning exposure intensity based on each respondent’s location of
residence before the onset of the surge in violence.


Fifth, it is plausible that the local intensity of the environmental shock under study may impact data
collection efforts in that area. If this were the case the analytical sample would likely be non-randomly
selected in a way that is correlated with the variable of interest. Without data on the respondents collected

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
#
  These results match the conclusions from the two prominent studies in this field, Voors et al. (2012) and Callen et al.
(2014), which examine the impact of violence exposure on a similar risk aversion measure using cross-sectional data.
Interestingly, while Callen et al. (2014) find no impact of violence on risk aversion generally, they report that, for
those exposed to violence, risk tolerance under uncertainty increases but that certainty is preferred when available.!
4
  The importance of removing individual level heterogeneity to assess the impact of an environmental shock on risk
attitudes is also not specific to the Mexican context or violence. In a recent working paper by Hanaoka et al. (2015)
they find that ignoring unobserved individual heterogeneity when examining the impact of exposure to the 2011 Great
East Japan earthquake on risk attitudes significantly changes the size and direction of the estimated effect.
                                                                4!
!
before the environmental shock it would be very difficult to assess the importance of this concern and
impossible to correct without making very strong assumptions about the nature of the non-response. In this
study, we are able to investigate whether attrition in our sample is correlated with local violence and find
no evidence of this relationship overall or specific to particular observed characteristics. Furthermore,
unique to the literature on violence and risk attitudes, by utilizing an individual fixed effect approach, any
non-random attrition related to fixed observed or unobserved respondent characteristics is unable to bias
the internal validity of the results.


Sixth, the measures of violence used in this study exploit the precise timing, location, and magnitude of the
rise in violent crime which contrasts with previous studies that use binary markers of exposure and/or
markers aggregated over many years (Voors et al., 2012, and Callen et al., 2014, for example).5


The next section provides a description of the increase of violence observed in Mexico since 2008. Section
3 describes the potential pathways between exposure to violence and risk attitudes and the current literature
on this relationship. Section 4 details the data used in this study with a focus on the risk measures being
employed as our main outcome of interest. Section 5 presents the empirical strategy and section 6 provides
the results. Finally, in section 7 we discuss remaining threats to identification and robustness checks and
section 8 concludes.


       II.            Background


Since early 2008, there has been a dramatic increase in violent crime in Mexico. Figure 1 provides the trend
in the monthly homicide rate (per 10,000 inhabitants) from 2000 until 2011. The figure illustrates a stable
homicide rate for almost a decade prior to 2007. The subsequent rise in 2008 homicides has been attributed
to a change in policy of the Government of Mexico when President Felipe Calderón was inaugurated in
December 2006 and soon after declared a war on drugs. The rise in homicides has been directly linked to
the rise in violence due to battles between the government and drug cartels and battles among the cartels
themselves. We will use municipality level homicide rates as a visible proxy for exposure to violent crime
in the study community.


In contrast to previous tactics, Calderón’s strategy with regard to the illegal drug trade in Mexico was
intensely focused on direct confrontations with Organized Crime Groups (OCGs) drawing heavily on the
use of the armed forces (Castillo et al., 2013; Molzán et al., 2012). The strategy had as its main goal to kill
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
5
 Moya (2017) makes a similar advancement to this aspect of the literature by using self-reported individual exposure
to violence to estimate its effect on risk aversion in Colombia.
                                                                5!
!
or capture the main leaders of the drug cartels. No more than ten days after taking office in December 2006,
Calderón sent thousands of federal troops to the state of Michoacán to battle drug traffickers (Ríos, 2012).
The initial success of this strategy can be seen from the break in the historical violence trend at the
beginning of 2007. Unfortunately, this early success was not sustained, as only a few months later violence
was back at its stable pre-2007 level.


The modest decline and then return to the long-term average of violent crime found in 2007 though was
followed up by an unprecedented and arguably unanticipated tripling of the homicide rate between 2007
and 2011. It is believed that a major contributor to this significant change in the violence environment was
an unintended consequence of the new war on drugs. Specifically, as Calderón’s troops successfully
displaced the leaders of the OCGs, the cartels, having lost their leadership, began to split apart into smaller
cells and viscously fight amongst themselves for territorial control. Overall, the number of cartels operating
in Mexico grew from six in 2006 to sixteen by 2011. In addition, once the outbreak happened, violence did
not just escalate in the areas already exposed to cartel violence, but rather spread across the country,
reaching areas that previously had no strategic value for drug-trafficking and were thus unaffected by the
cartels (Guerrero-Gutiérrez, 2011). Thus, while violence has risen consistently over time, there is a great
deal of variation in the changes in homicide rates across municipalities. Between 2005 and 2009, on
average there was a 0.8 per 10,000 increase in the municipality homicide rates, but some areas suffered a
13 per 10,000 increase while others had a 14 per 10,000 decline. We exploit both the temporal and spatial
variation to identify the effect of exposure to violent crime on people’s levels of risk aversion.


The dispersion of violence in Mexico is provided in the maps contained in Figure 2. These maps show the
municipal homicide rates per 10,000 inhabitants for 2002, 2005, and 2009. The first two maps provide a
view of the conflict environment before Calderón took office. It is apparent that violence was highly
concentrated along a few main drug trade routes. By 2009, however, the violence environment had
noticeably been altered, with homicide rates increasing significantly and violence spreading across Mexico.


More than just the magnitude of the violence, the nature of crime in Mexico has changed as well. Given the
increased competition between OCGs, these organizations have sought to build a reputation by committing
and actively advertising increasingly brutal crimes (Beittel, 2013; Guerrero-Gutiérrez, 2011; Molzán et al.,
2012). Also, as drug-trafficking profits have been squeezed by competition, the OCGs have diversified
their financial sources and turned to crimes that directly affected the civil population, such as extortions,
kidnappings and car thefts. Even executions have become more frequently targeted at civilians, particularly
at authorities, reporters, and those not paying transit or extortion fees. In consequence, drug-related


                                                       6!
!
violence has become embedded in society, triggering fear among the population (Díaz-Cayeros et al.,
2011).


    III. Violent crime and risk aversion: Pathways and prior evidence


Given the intensity of the escalation in violence, as well as, the OCG’s increased focus on conspicuous uses
of force and reliance on profits from personal crimes (e.g. extortion, kidnapping, car theft), there are several
channels through which we may expect this new environment created by the Mexican drug war to affect
people’s levels of risk aversion. For instance, people more exposed to crime might perceive the
environment as riskier and might behave in a more risk averse way to other choices with which they are
confronted in order to reduce their overall exposure to risk. Alternatively, there is some psychological
evidence of diminishing sensitivity that suggest people living in high risk environments act in a less risk
averse way as they are not as concerned about risks that seem small relative to their general setting
(Quiggin, 2003).


Another potential pathway is financial. Studies on the impact of the Mexican drug war have found that
individuals with greater exposure to violence have suffered poorer economic outcomes (Dell, 2015; Robles
et al., 2013; and Velásquez, 2015). Relying on different identification strategies, these studies find that the
surge in crime has had a detrimental effect on the labor market participation and income of the Mexican
population. The negative impact has been particularly strong for self-employed individuals, as they have
been found to be the most targeted group for extortion and are the most likely to work in informal sector
occupations which require more personal interaction (e.g. street vendors, small business owners, domestic
services, etc.) (Velásquez, 2015). The economic literature suggests that risk aversion is negatively
associated with income and wealth (Barsky et al., 1997; Guiso and Paiella, 2008) and thus through this
channel we would expect that exposure to violence would increase levels of risk aversion.


Despite these potential pathways, the empirical literature on the causal effect of violent conflict on attitudes
towards risk is still scarce. Voors et al. (2012) and Callen et al. (2014) have made the most significant
contributions to this literature to date. Specifically, Voors et al. (2012) examines the impact of a civil war in
Burundi on social, risk, and intertemporal choices. From 1993 to 2003 Burundi suffered through the most
intense period of violence from a civil war between the two main ethnic groups. The authors utilize
measures from experimental games collected in 2009 to study the cumulative effect of a decade’s worth of
violence on risk attitudes, amongst other preferences. The authors find that individuals who experienced
more local violence from 1993-2003 exhibit significantly greater risk-seeking behavior six years after the
end of that exposure period.
                                                       7!
!
Callen et al. (2014), explores the impact of the violence that ravaged Afghanistan for nearly thirty years on
risk attitudes collected in December 2010. Using a binary measure of local violence over the almost 8 year
span of April 2002-February 2010, they find, in contrast to Voors et al., that there is no direct impact of
exposure to violence on risk attitudes. However, they do report that when they randomly asked some
individuals to recall an experience that caused them fear or anxiety in the past year these recalls influenced
attitudes towards risk and certainty only among those who were exposed to violence. This finding suggests
that the salience of the violence is a key mechanism linking exposure to an increase in risk aversion, and
thus the fear generated by the victimization may be an important marker for its impact on risk attitudes.


In a recent, innovative study, Jakiela and Ozier (2016) compare risk attitudes of 14 to 31 year olds from the
Busia District in Kenya’s Western Province, for which the plausibly unexpected violence following he
2007 election lead some interviews to occur before and some to take place after this violent period. They
find that individuals interviewed after the post-election violence subsided display higher rates of risk
aversion although it is difficult to rule out the possibility that this result is also picking up the effect other
environmental changes, in addition to violence, that occurred around the same time.


One potential explanation for the incongruent results of the current literature is that it is difficult to identify
the effect of violence on risk attitudes relying solely on cross-sectional variation in exposure and
aggregated measures of violence. The approach and data used in this paper strives to improve upon these
limitations to contribute to our understanding of this topic.


    IV. Data


Data for this research are drawn from two sources that contain information ideally suited for our purposes.
First, we utilize the Mexican Family Life Survey (MxFLS), a rich longitudinal survey, representative of the
Mexican population in 2002 at the national, urban, rural and regional level. Second, the National Institute
of Statistics and Geography (INEGI) provides information on all reported homicides at the municipality
and month level. We use this dataset to construct our measure of violent crime. Crucial for this study, the
datasets cover periods both before and after the sudden outbreak of violence. By combining them we will
be able to compare the outcomes of the same individual under different levels of violence, which will allow
us to control for all unobserved time-invariant heterogeneity that might be correlated with exposure to
violence and risk attitudes.




                                                        8!
!
The MxFLS collects information on a wide range of socioeconomic and demographic indicators on
individuals across three rounds. The baseline survey (MxFLS1) was conducted in 2002 and collected
information on a sample of approximately 8,440 households and 35,600 individuals in 150 communities
and 16 states throughout the country. A key feature is that the first follow-up (MxFLS2) was conducted in
2005 and 2006, when violence was relatively stable, and the second follow-up (MxFLS3) was largely
conducted in 2009 and 20106, during the dramatic escalation of violence. In both follow-ups respondents’
attitudes towards risk were elicited using a set of hypothetical questions on choices between gambles.


Another key feature of the MxFLS is its follow-up policy, according to which all baseline respondents and
their children born after 2002 are sought for re-interview, including those who migrated within Mexico or
emigrated to the United States. The MxFLS has had an outstanding success in achieving low levels of
attrition: around 89% and 87% of the original baseline panel respondents were re-contacted in MxFLS2 and
MxFLS3, respectively. Nonetheless, the relevant issue is whether our sample of interest is selected due to
attrition in a way that is correlated with the change in the conflict environment. We perform this analysis in
section VI and find no evidence that this potential issue is biasing our results.


Risk aversion measures
An established survey method to measure attitudes towards risk is to ask respondents to choose between
gambles with different payoffs, in which options that offer a higher expected payoff also involve greater
risk. Starting in its second wave, the MxFLS introduced a set of hypothetical questions of this sort. We rely
on these questions to construct our measures of risk aversion.


In Figure 3, we present the set of hypothetical questions and the progression they followed in MxFLS2. The
first decision a respondent faced was between an alternative of receiving an amount of $1,000 with
certainty and an alternative of receiving either $500 or $2,000 with equal probability (in Mexico, the
symbol $ stands for pesos7). Depending on the choice of the respondent, he or she next faced an alternative
decision. If the sure amount of $1,000 was preferred, they will next have to decide between the sure amount
of $1,000 and now a more attractive gamble of receiving either $800 or $2,000 with equal probability. In
contrast, if the gamble offering either $500 or $2,000 was preferred, the subsequent choice they face was
between that same gamble and now a gamble offering either $300 or $3,000. A few more questions in this
pattern followed, and given all of their choices, individuals can be ranked according to their level of risk
aversion. This ranking, shown at the bottom of the figure, has seven possible categories.

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
6
 Only 6% of the sample of panel respondents in Mexico was interviewed after 2010.
7
 At the time of MxFLS2, $ 1,000 was around US$ 90 and represented approximately 80% of the minimum monthly
wage.
                                                                9!
!
MxFLS3 contains the same type of questions, but the amounts and the progression changed with the aim of
making the process simpler and increasing the respondent’s understanding. Figure 4 shows the choices
included in MxFLS3. One of the innovations introduced in MxFLS3 was to include a first question aimed
at evaluating whether the respondents understood the choices they faced. This question asked the
respondents to choose between a gamble of receiving either $2,500 or $5,000 with equal probability and a
dominated sure amount of $2,500. If the respondent preferred the latter, then the question was explained
again. If he or she still preferred the later then this may indicate that the respondent is extremely risk
averse, or “gamble averse”, as he or she preferred not to select the gamble even though it was costly
decision. However, an alternative interpretation of this behavior is that it indicates a lack of understanding
of the question. In order to push this further, a last question was asked in which both alternatives in the
gamble were strictly greater than the sure amount. Even in this case, there are respondents who preferred
the sure amount.


If the respondent is not “gamble averse”, then the next question he or she faced was between a gamble of
receiving either $2,000 or $5,000 and a sure amount of $2,500. If the sure amount was chosen, then no
more questions were asked. If the gamble was selected, the respondent then had to choose between the
same sure amount and a less attractive gamble. If the sure amount was chosen, then no more questions were
asked. This procedure continued for a few more questions and generated the risk aversion index shown at
the bottom of Figure 4.


As these types of measures are expected to be a noisy signal of the actual risk aversion of individuals
(Kimball et al., 2009), separating small changes in risk aversion from measurement error will prove to be
difficult. Our approach to deal with this challenge is to focus on changes at the extremes of the distribution
by classifying individuals as “most risk averse” or not. Since the exact questions changed between waves,
caution should be exercised when interpreting the results, as a change in categories between waves does not
necessarily mean that the respondent’s absolute level of risk aversion changed. Interpretation of the
transitions is relative to what happened in the population in general. For example, individuals changing
from “not most risk averse” in MxFLS2 to “most risk averse” in MxFLS3 does not mean they necessarily
became more risk averse, but rather that their level of risk aversion is on a more positive (or less negative)
trend relative to those categorized as “not most risk averse” in both waves.


There are several different ways to classify respondents as most risk averse or not, the classification we use
is based on the difference between the sure amount and the expected value of the gamble that was declined
in favor of the sure amount. This information provides us with a lower bound of the respondents’ risk
                                                     10!
!
premium, which is the difference between the certainty equivalent and the expected value of the gamble. In
MxFLS2 we classify as “most risk averse” those with a risk aversion index equal to 5, 6 or 7. Individuals in
this group have a risk premium greater than $400. In turn, in MxFLS3 we classify as “most risk averse”
those with a risk aversion index equal to 5. Individuals in this category have a risk premium greater than
$1,000. Also included in the category of “most risk averse” in MxFLS3 are the 13% of individuals
classified as “gamble averse” (i.e. with a risk index of 6 or 7 in MxFLS3). While this seems like the most
natural group for these individuals, in section VII we also perform the analysis designating the “gamble
averse” respondents as not being “most risk averse” and alternatively re-estimating the main results
excluding “gamble averse” respondents all together. In both cases the results are qualitatively and
quantitatively equivalent to the initial designation of the “gamble averse” respondents. In general defining
these classifications is not straightforward, and for that reason in section VII we also confirm the robustness
of our results to several different classifications of “most risk averse”.8


Our analytical sample includes those individuals who were 15 years old or older at baseline and answered
the hypothetical questions aimed at measuring risk aversion in both MxFLS2 and MxFLS3,9,10 Table 1
shows the distribution of the risk aversion indexes in both waves for our analytical sample. According to
our preferred classification, 17.5% of our sample is most risk averse in MxFLS2 and 44.1% in MxFLS3.
Transitions in risk attitudes between MxFLS2 and MxFLS3 could potentially be attributed to noise or to the
many other factors that determine risk attitudes that may have changed over the four-year period between
surveys.11 Our goal is to establish whether the change in the conflict environment constitutes part of the
explanation.


In order to conduct our analysis, we pair the MxFLS survey with the month and municipality-level
homicide dataset collected by INEGI. This dataset contains the official reports of all intentional homicides.
The homicide rate is used to capture the overall crime environment created by the drug war. Researchers

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
8
  Appendix Table A1 explores the relationship between our measure of “most risk averse” and behaviors that
represent some degree of risk-taking. Specifically, we examine if individuals measured as “most risk averse” in
MxFLS2 are more or less likely to be engaged in risky behaviors in MxFLS3. The first risky behavior we examine in
columns 1 and 2 is cigarette consumption. We find that individuals who are “most risk averse” in MxFLS2 are
smoking significantly less by MxFLS3. In columns 3 and 4 we add in two risky behaviors related to economic
decisions: migration and self-employment. In these columns we focus on our male sample as their labor decisions
typically determine the economic wellbeing of their household and migration for males is more likely to represent
moving to pursue economic opportunities and self-employment is more likely to reflect business ownership. The
results for this analysis, found in columns 3 and 4 of Table A1, show that being “most risk averse” in MxFLS2 is
negatively related in sign to each of the risky behaviors in MxFLS3 and statistically significantly so for migration.
9
  We require that individuals were interviewed in baseline and were at least 15 years old at the time of that interview
because in our empirical strategy we will control for individuals characteristics in previous waves, and some of those
characteristics are only measured for those who are at least 15 years old.
10
   Appendix Table A2 provides descriptive statistics for our analytical sample.
11
   Appendix Table A3 provides the risk attitudes index transition matrix.
                                                                11!
!
have shown that the INEGI intentional homicide data matches the temporal and geographic heterogeneity
of reports of homicides specifically related to drug-related confrontations collected by the government
(Heinle et al., 2015). Moreover, a relationship has been established between homicide rates and other types
of crimes committed by traffickers’ organizations (Guerrero and Gutiérrez, 2011; Molzán et al., 2012).
Exploiting the richness of the MxFLS, we can provide further evidence that homicide rates seem to be a
useful measure of the general crime environment. At the time of the MxFLS3 interview, people living in
municipalities that experienced greater changes in homicide rates between 2005 and 2009 were more likely
to report feeling less safe than 5 years ago and more scared of being attacked (see Table A4 of the
Appendix, columns 1-2))12.


Nonetheless, concerns regarding potential measurement error in the INEGI homicide dataset might remain.
With respect to random measurement error, there are good reasons to think that homicides are less prone to
this problem in comparison to other indicators of violence such as physical injury or property loss.
Homicides are more reliably reported given that they measure an extreme endpoint of individual violence
and are homogeneously defined across regional boundaries (Shrader, 2001). The presence of systematic
measurement error is also a potential concern, but this does not seem to be an issue in this case as the
INEGI dataset closely correlates with other datasets that rely on alternative sources such as the government
or journalist reports (Heinle et al., 2015, Molzán et al., 2012).


     V.       Identification strategy


              V.1. Endogenous Migration


A potentially important concern when trying to establish causality between an environmental shock and
risk attitudes is endogenous migration. Intuitively, exposure to a shock may cause migration that is selected
on an individual’s risk attitudes. In our context, for example, this would arise if a more risk averse
individual were more likely to move away from municipalities with higher levels of violence. If this was
the case and migration was ignored in the identification strategy, the relationship between crime and risk
tolerance would be upward biased. To examine whether migration responded to the change in the conflict
environment in Mexico we estimate the following model:


M ijt = ! 0 + ! 1"Hom j + ! 2 Xij + # (Xij $ "Hom j ) + % t + & j + ' ij                                   (1)


!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
12
   The same conclusion is reached if we use contemporaneous measures of homicide rates at the time of the MxFLS3
interview instead of changes between 2005 and 2009.
                                                                12!
!
where Mij is a binary variable equal to 1 if the respondent was interviewed in a different municipality in
MxFLS2 and MxFLS3, !Hom j is the change in the homicide rate between 2005 and 2009 in MxFLS2

municipality of residence j, X ij are individual and household characteristics measured in MxFLS2 and

include: age, age squared, years of education, marital status, employment status, earnings, household
characteristics and rural residence,       ! t captures date of interview fixed effects, which include a wave fixed
effect and year and month of interview fixed effects, and ! j represents fixed effects for the municipality

of residence in MxFLS2. Running this regression excluding the interacted terms,          !1 , provides evidence on
whether overall migration is related to the change in violence. More importantly to the potential bias caused
by endogenous migration, we evaluate whether conflict related migration was systematically different for
individuals with certain characteristics. Evidence on this is provided by the set of coefficients represented
by ! in equation 1.


Table 2 presents the results of this analysis for our analytical sample. While there is not a significant
relationship between potential violence exposure and migration in general, we do find evidence of violent
crime induced selective migration that is related to the ruralness of the respondent’s location of residence
and the respondent’s martial status. Specifically, it appears that individual’s living in rural areas are more
likely to move out of their municipality than individuals living in urban areas in response to increased
crime and that being single increases the probability of moving as a response to local violence. Since these
observed characteristics, and the potential unobserved characteristics, driving non-random migration may
have a relationship with the evolution of an individual’s risk attitudes, the theoretical bias of endogenous
migration must be accounted for to generate unbiased estimates of the impact of violence on risk attitudes.


In order to shield our estimates from the bias of endogenous migration, we follow an intent-to-treat
approach in our empirical specification. To do this an individual is assigned a conflict exposure level based
on their municipality of residence in MxFLS2, before the rise in crime, rather than based on his/her current
municipality of residence. Thus, the intensity of violence exposure assigned to a respondent is independent
of any migration decisions made as a response to crime.


         V.2. Empirical specification


The empirical strategy can be summarized in the following regression framework:


Yijmt = !1 Hom jt + ! 2 Xi,t"1 + # i + $ t + % m + & ijmt                                                     (2)

                                                            13!
!
where Yijt is a binary variable equal to 1 if individual i, living in municipality j at the time of the MxFLS2

interview, currently living in municipality m, and interviewed at time t, is in the most risk averse category,
Hom jt is the homicide rate in municipality j over the 12 months prior to the MxFLS interview, X it are the

time-varying characteristics measured during the previous wave13,             !i captures individual fixed effects, ! t
captures date of interview fixed effects, which include a wave fixed effect and year and month of interview
fixed effects, and ! m represents fixed effects for the municipality of current residence.14


     VI. Results
              VI.1. Using Cross-Sectional Data
Before moving to the main results from the full specification described in equation 2, it is useful to present
results that are directly comparable with existing studies that use cross-sectional variation in exposure to
identify the effects on risk. This analysis is conducted by running equation 2 separately for MxFLS2 and
MxFLS3 and thus also removing the individual fixed effects and wave fixed effects. The results of these
cross-sectional regressions are found in columns 1 and 2 for the MxFLS2 data and columns 3 and 4 for the
MxFLS3 data of Table 3.


Column 1 and 2 of Table 3, which only uses the MxFLS2 data, mirrors the method most commonly
employed in this literature of analyzing persistent levels of violence. In these regressions most of the
variation in violence comes from differences in crime rates that have existed for over a decade. In addition,
the majority of the literature that examines the impact of local violence on risk attitudes assigns each
individual in an area the same cumulative violence exposure score and thus cannot employ area fixed
effects at the level of the violence measure, making column 1 of Table 3 the most direct comparison. Using
this approach we find that violent crime is associated with significantly increased risk tolerance, similar to
the conclusions of Voors et al. (2012). One concern with this analysis is that it could possibly be picking up
the fact that individuals with more risk averse attitudes are more likely to locate in municipalities with
lower potential violence. Do to the fact that individuals are interviewed on different dates in the MxFLS
and that the INEGI provides monthly homicide data, we partially address this issue by including a
municipality fixed effect into the analysis. These results are found in column 2 of Table 3. The inclusion of

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
13
   In an attempt to limit the possibility that time-varying individual characteristic trends related to violence exposure
bias our results, we add as controls time-varying characteristics (marital status, number of children, years of
education, employment status, employment category, earnings and household characteristics), measured during
previous waves. We use previous wave characteristics to ensure the controls are not endogenous to violent crime.
14
   The main results are provided with and without the municipality of current residence fixed effects as it may be
endogenous to violent crime exposure.
                                                                14!
!
the municipality fixed effect greatly attenuates the coefficient on violence exposure, which remains
negative but is now insignificant, similar to the comparable results in Callen et al. (2015).


An alternative to using variation in violence that comes from a long-standing conflict or persistent
situation, which may be particularly susceptible to endogenous behavioral responses, is to identify a
plausibly exogenous source of change in the violence environment. As detailed previously, this type of
unanticipated shift in the magnitude and location of violent crime occurred in Mexico in the last few years.
Thus, an alternative approach would be to exploit this natural experiment by looking at the impact of
violence on risk attitudes during the period after this unprecedented change in the violence in Mexico
occurred. The results from this strategy are found in column 3 and 4 of Table 3 and imply that no
significant relationship exists between risk attitudes and exposure to local violent crime.


The main concern that remains with both of these cross-sectional analyses is that the estimates may be
biased by the unobserved individual heterogeneity that determines the level of crime they are exposed to,
when they are surveyed, if they complete that survey, and how there risk attitudes evolve over time. Our
identification strategy, by exploiting the panel nature of our survey to compare the risk aversion levels of
the same individuals before and after the change in the conflict environment, will control for any of the
unobserved individual heterogeneity that is fixed over time. If this unobserved heterogeneity is not leading
to bias in the cross-sectional results, we should find that the cross-sectional estimates do not substantially
differ from the preferred specification we outlined in equation 2.


        VI.1. Using Longitudinal Data


The results of conducting equation 2 on our analytical sample are shown in columns 5 and 6 of Table 3.
The estimates in both columns provide evidence that individual heterogeneity was a source of bias in the
cross-sectional analyses and that exposure to local violence is associated with a significant and substantial
increase in risk aversion. Specifically, these results suggest that an increase of 1 homicide per 10,000
people, which is similar to the average change between 2005 and 2009 across municipalities, increased the
likelihood of being in the most risk averse category in MxFLS3 by 1.5 percentage points or a 5% increase
in being risk averse as compared to the average.


We continue our analysis by testing the level of heterogeneity of this effect on the population. To do this
we selected individual demographic and economic characteristics, measured in MxFLS2 that could
plausibly affect an individual’s level or type of exposure to violence and used them to run a fully interacted
version of equation 2. The results of this heterogeneity analysis are found in Table 4.
                                                      15!
!
The first difference we examine is between women and men. In the Mexican context there are several
reasons to believe men and women may have different levels of expected exposure to crime. For example,
as the labor participation of men is much greater than that of women they may be more exposed to
extortions, kidnappings and business thefts. In addition, the type of crimes and violence faced by women
and men may differ as well. It has been documented, for example, that women face hire rates of violence in
Mexico that is personal in nature (United Nations 2011). The estimated difference in the impact of violence
on risk attitudes between men and women can be found in Table 4, column 2. Here we see again that
overall there is a positive relationship between local violent crime exposure and risk aversion, but that the
effect does not differ significantly by gender.


Another dynamic of the violence in Mexico is that the change in the conflict environment was not
homogeneous across the country. Since most of the cartels profits are generated by drug-trafficking
activities rather than by drug production, part of President Calderón’s change in strategy was to reduce the
focus on crop eradication and target drug-trafficking centers including urban warehouses and highway
transportation routes (Castillo et al., 2013; Llorente et al., 2014). It is thus possible that the type and
severity of the crimes also differ between rural and urban areas. To evaluate whether the results vary
between these areas, we fully interact equation 2 with the urban/rural status of the individual’s municipality
of residence in MxFLS2. These results are found in column 3 of Table 4 and provide no evidence of a
difference in the impact of violence on risk attitudes by urban/rural status.


A third piece of heterogeneity we explored was socio-economic status (SES). Individuals with different
levels of socio-economic status may experience local violence in very different ways. For example lower
SES individuals may be unable to avoid exposure and potential victimization due to relying on public
transportation, having inflexible work schedules, and not being able to afford protection service at home or
at work. It is also possible that within a municipality the location the crime is actually occurring is in the
low or high income neighborhoods, thus the violence measure in the model does not reflect actual intensity
of exposure. Alternatively, if violent crime during this period increased in all areas of the municipality the
relative change may be bigger for areas that previously had the lowest rates. To proxy for low SES we
identify respondents living in a household in the bottom quartile of per capita expenditure (PCE) in
MxFLS2. The results when exploring heterogeneity by household per capita expenditure are found in
column 4 of Table 5. The estimates for this analysis suggest that, unlike the rest of the respondents, the risk
attitudes of individuals living in households in the lowest quartile of PCE are not sensitive to the municipal
homicide rate.


                                                      16!
!
This result is consistent with a few different potential explanations. First it could be the case that there is a
difference in the location of the violence within a municipality that is related to SES, either in magnitude or
relative to previous levels (i.e. violence was more intense in magnitude, or relative to previous levels, in
high income neighborhoods compared to low income neighborhoods). Second, if the reason risk attitudes
are reactive to exposure to violence is related to increased fear/anxiety/instability, it is possible that low
SES individuals may already be past some threshold on that dimension such that increased local violence is
unable to make a significant difference in those preferences. Third, it is possible the risk attitude index is a
more noisy measure for low SES individuals.


The last area of heterogeneity based on fixed characteristics was examined in order to start providing clues
into the mechanism driving the relationship between exposure to violence and increased risk aversion. One
of the main channels that could be generating this relationship is financial. If the increase in local violence
also led to decreased economic activity and opportunity, it is possible that this weaker labor market is the
element to which risk attitudes are reacting. In the Mexican context there is evidence that increased
violence has caused poor economic outcomes for a certain subset of the population.


Consistent with anecdotal evidence that the self-employed have suffered the most economically from
reduced night time commerce in commercial centers caused by increased violence, Velásquez (2015) finds
that exposure to violence significantly reduced the earnings of self-employed men and the labor market
participation of self-employed women. This difference in experience for the self-employed offers us the
first opportunity to test if the focal pathway of municipal violence on risk attitudes is financial. In column 5
of Table 4 we explore if the risk attitudes of the self-employed are more strongly impacted by local
violence than other respondents and find no evidence to support this hypothesis. While this result is
suggestive that economic wellbeing is not the main mechanism behind the increased risk aversion of those
living in more violent municipalities, we explore this further by examining heterogeneity related to changes
in an individual’s economic wellbeing.


In order to more fully examine if it is the individuals that suffered economic shocks as a result of the
increase in violence that are driving the relationship between risk aversion and local violent crime
exposure, we full interact our main model, equation 2, with two measures of time-varying economic
wellbeing. The intuition for this analysis is that if the change in risk attitudes caused by local violence is a
function of the adverse effect violence is having on economic wellbeing, then individuals who have
experienced the worst changes in their labor market/financial outcomes during the escalation in violence
should display the largest effect.


                                                       17!
!
First, we explore if the effect of violence on risk aversion differed for individuals who lost their job
between MxFLS2 and MxFLS3. The results for this analysis are presented in column 2 of Table 5 and
provide no evidence that individuals that became unemployed during the time of the escalation of violence
are differentially contributing to the impact of exposure to violent crime on risk aversion. The second
measure we use to capture the relationship between financial loss during the surge in violence and risk
attitudes is changes in household per capita expenditure. Specifically, we examine the risk attitudes of
individuals from households that were in the bottom quartile of change in per capita expenditure between
MxFLS2 and MxFLS3. The estimates of this heterogeneous treatment effect are provided in column 3 of
Table 5 and further suggest that economic wellbeing is not the mechanism through which local violence is
changing risk attitudes.


An alternative explanation for the positive relationship between exposure to violence and risk aversion is
that individuals are responding to the insecurity in their environment by reducing risk in choices they have
direct control over. If this were the case we would expect individuals who perceive that they are at the
highest risk for victimization would be the most likely to respond to the risk attitudes survey instrument in
a risk averse way. To investigate this hypothesis we look at if individuals who have become fearful of
being attacked at night between MxFLS2 and MxFLS3 are those whose risk attitudes are most sensitive to
local violence exposure. The results for this analysis are shown in column 4 of Table 5. These estimates
suggest that the percentage point increase in risk aversion amongst respondents who report becoming
fearful of victimization during the escalation of violence is more than double the size as compared to the
rest of the sample. Taken altogether the estimate in column 5 of Table 4 and the results in Table 5 provide
suggestive evidence that the pathway through which local violent crime is impacting risk attitudes is
through the fear of victimization rather than financial hardship.!


    VII. Threats to Identification


The main threat to identification that exists given that our empirical strategy utilizes an individual fixed
effects approach within a natural experiment framework, is that the diverse geographic and sharp temporal
variation in violence found in Mexico was not unanticipated and/or was correlated with other underlying
trends related to an individual’s level of risk aversion. While we contend that this is an unlikely scenario
given the suddenness and political origins of the outbreak of violence, we believe it is important to lay out
the evidence that exists regarding this potential concern.


With regard to the hypothesis that the change in the conflict environment was unanticipated and unrelated
to prior trends in crime/insecurity, the MxFLS data on self-reported feelings of safety provide supporting
                                                      18!
!
evidence. When estimating models at the individual level, we find no correlation between self-reported
feelings of current safety or trends in feelings of safety in MxFLS2 (i.e. pre-escalation of violence) and the
subsequent changes in homicide rate that actually occurred between 2005 and 2009 (see Table A4 of the
Appendix, columns 3-4). This suggests that municipalities that would subsequently be exposed to larger
increases in violence were not already less safe or on a downward trend in perceived security.


More generally, Brown (2016) and Velasquez (2015), explicitly explore if linear trends in pre-violence
municipality characteristics such as education, institution, infrastructure, economic activity, demographics,
among other factors, predict the level and location of the escalation in violence. Specifically, they use over
30 pre-escalation of violence trends for the 136 baseline MxFLS municipalities to predict both the 2009
municipal homicide rate and the change in the municipal homicide rate between 2005 and 2009. The pre-
outbreak of violence trends were generated using the IPUMS samples of the 2000 and 2005 Mexican
censuses and the MxFLS1 and MxFLS2 survey waves. The findings from this analysis strongly suggest
that previous municipal trends do not predict future violence15.


While these two pieces of evidence suggest that there are not linear unobserved municipal trends that are
correlated with the homicide rate, they would not be able to detect a non-linear municipal characteristic
change that occurred simultaneously or closely in time to the escalation of violence and followed a similar
geographic pattern. Thus, our results should be considered causal only under the assumption that this type
of shift did not occur.


One potential event that occurred between the MxFLS2 and MxFLS3 survey waves and could possibly fit
this description is the Great Recession. Specifically, if the areas most economically impacted by the Great
Recession also happened to be the locations with the largest change in violence this would violate our
identification strategy. Several studies of this issue, though, have confirmed that the geographic
heterogeneity of crime in Mexico does not correspond to the differential regional magnitude of the Great
Recession (Ajzenman et al., 2015; Velásquez, 2015). Despite the lack of evidence to corroborate this
potential issue, we next conduct robustness checks on our main result from column 6 of Table 3, to help
alleviate concerns that the Great Recession biases our findings.


The first test we run is to include controls for the local economic environment into equation 2 in order to
potentially mitigate any bias caused by the Great Recession. Specifically, we add municipality-year level

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
15
  Of the 62 independent variables tested only 3 coefficients are significant at the 10 percent level, which are fewer
than what would be expected by chance, and a joint F-test of all the estimates is insignificant. These results are
replicated in Appendix Table A5.
                                                                19!
!
electricity use (kWh), manufacturing industry and retail sector characteristics (# of establishments, # of
employees, gross total production, total value added) for each municipality in 2004 (assigned to MxFLS2
observations) and 2009 (assigned to MxFLS3 observations), and state-year level GDP.16 The estimate from
this analysis, which can be found in column 2 of Appendix Table A6, is slightly attenuated in magnitude as
compared to the main specification, but is statistically indistinguishable from the main result.

A second robustness check that we conduct is to exclude from the sample respondents that live in regions
of Mexico that are most likely to be exposed to the adverse effects of the Great Recession. Mexico’s
economic decline during the Great Recession is due to its economic relationship with the United States.
Since, this relationship is likely strongest along the U.S.-Mexico border, we drop from our analysis
respondents from states along the northern border with the U.S.17 The results from this subsample are
provided in column 3 of Appendix Table A6 and confirm the estimates from the main analytical sample.

Another potential threat to the validity of our results is our choices with regard to the creation of our main
dependent variable. The first challenge is the appropriate way to assign risk aversion to the “gamble
averse” respondents. While in our main results we include the “gamble averse” individuals in the “most
risk averse” category, we have also explored whether our results are robust to two alternative ways of
treating the “gamble averse”: assuming they are not in the “most risk averse” category and excluding them
from the sample altogether. Results, shown in Panel A of Appendix Table A7, confirm that our estimate of
the impact of violence on risk aversion is statistically unchanged using either of these two alternative
approaches. The second sensitivity analysis of our dependent variable is a test of using five alternative
classifications of the “most risk averse” category in both MxFLS2 and MxFLS3. Results are reported in
Panel B of Appendix Table A7.18 The robustness of our estimate to these alternative classifications is also
confirmed.

The final issue that one faces when using survey data to study a major environmental shock is the
possibility of selective attrition. Moreover, despite MxFLS’ successfully low levels of attrition in general, it
is important to evaluate whether selection in our analytical sample is correlated specifically with changes in
the levels of violence. The concern is that if there is selective attrition related to potential violence exposure
our sample would no longer be representative. To test for potential selection bias from attrition we estimate
the same linear probability model as we used to examine endogenous migration, equation 1, and replace the

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
16
  This analysis should be viewed with caution as these economic controls are potentially endogenous in a way that
would bias our estimates towards zero, as previous research has documented the negative economic impact of the War
on Drugs in Mexico (Robles et al., 2013; Dell, 2015; and Velásquez, 2015) and this could be part of the causal
channel that influences the risk attitudes of individuals exposed to local violence.
17
   Specifically, respondents from the Mexican northern border states in the MxFLS (i.e. Coahuila, Nuevo León, and
Sonora) are dropped from the sample.
$%
  !In each specification the “gamble averse” individuals are included in the “most risk averse” category.!
                                                                20!
!
dependent variable with an indicator equal to 1 if we have the necessary survey responses from the
individual for our main analysis in MxFSL2 but not in MxFLS3. Results are reported in Appendix Table
A8. We do not find evidence that attrition is on average correlated with the change in violence (column 1),
or within any subgroups that would indicate non-random crime-related attrition (column 2).



    VIII.       Conclusion


This research has examined the impact of the Mexican drug war on risk attitudes to shed new light on the
question of whether and how an individual’s attitudes towards risk respond to changes in their
environment. We directly address several empirical challenges that have impeded progress in this literature.
Using plausibly exogenous spatial and temporal variation in exposure to violent crime in combination with
longitudinal survey data, we compare an individual respondent’s measured attitude towards risk before the
onset of Calderon’s war on drugs with the same individual’s attitudes after the onset. The empirical
estimates thereby take into account all individual-specific characteristics that are fixed and affect attitudes
towards risk. Our identification strategy not only takes into account individual-specific time-invariant
heterogeneity that may be correlated with exposure to violence and risk attitudes but also directly deals
with selective migration that is related to violence and risk attitudes. We also provide evidence that failing
to control for unobserved individual heterogeneity results in substantially biased estimates of the
relationship between risk attitudes and an environmental shock in our context.


We find that exposure to local violence significantly increases risk aversion. In particular, our results
suggest that an increase of 1 homicide per 10,000 people, which is similar to the average change between
2005 and 2009 across municipalities in Mexico, increased the likelihood of being in the most risk averse
category in MxFLS3 by 1.5 percentage points or a 5% increase in being risk averse as compared to the
average. Moreover, our results do not seem to be driven by respondents that have suffered the most
economically due to the escalation of violence, but rather it is those who face the highest perceived
potential risk from the violence that are most likely to become more risk averse.


In addition to increasing our understanding of the ways risk attitudes evolve in response to changes in our
environment, our results also provide evidence of another hidden cost of violent conflict on the wellbeing
of the exposed. Increased risk aversion has been shown to be negatively associated with engaging in riskier
but more profitable endeavors related to investment decisions, occupational choice and migration (Barsky
et al, 1997; Bellemare and Shearer, 2010; Charles and Hurst, 2003; Kan, 2003; Kimball et al., 2008). This
suggests that risk aversion can be detrimental to wealth accumulation and thus violent conflict and

                                                      21!
!
insecurity have another pathway through which they can impact a country’s long-term economic
development.




                                            22!
!
REFERENCES

Ajzenman, N., Galiani, S., and Seira, E. (2015). “On the Distributive Costs of Drug-Related Homicides”
Journal of Law and Economics, 58(4): 779-803.

Arrow, K. (1970). “Essays in the Theory of Risk-Bearing”. North Holland.

Barsky, R., T. Juster, M. Kimball and S. Shapiro (1997). “Preference Parameters and Individual
Heterogeneity: An Experimental Approach in the Health and Retirement Study”, Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 112, 537–579.

Beittel, J. (2013). “Mexico’s Drug Trafficking Organizations: Source and Scope of the Rising Violence”.
Washington D.C., Congressional Research Service.

Bellemare, C. and B. Shearer (2010). “Sorting, incentives and risk preferences: Evidence from a field
experiment,” Economics Letters, Elsevier, 108(3), 345-348.

Brown, R. (2016). “The Mexican Drug War and Early-Life Health: The Impact of Violent Crime on Birth
Outcomes”. Working paper.

Brown, R. and A. Velasquez (2016). “The Effect of Violent Crime on the Human Capital Accumulation of
Young Adults”. Working paper.

Bryan, G., S. Chowdhury and A. M. Mobarak. (2014). “Underinvestment in a Profitable Technology: The
Case of Seasonal Migration in Bangladesh.” Econometrica. 82.5:1671-1748.

Callen, M., M. Isaqzadeh, J. D. Long, and C. Sprenger. (2014). “Violence and Risk Preference:
Experimental Evidence from Afghanistan.” American Economic Review, 104(1): 123-48

Cameron. L. and M. Shah (2013) “Risk-Taking Behavior in the Wake of Natural Disasters,” Working
paper.

Carmil, D. and S. Breznitz (1991). “Personal trauma and world view—Are extremely stressful experiences
related to political attitudes, religious beliefs, and future orientation?”, Journal of Traumatic Stress 4(3),
393-405

Cassar. A, A. Healy and C. Kessler (2011). “Trust, Risk, and Time Preference after a Natural Disaster:
Experimental Evidence from Thailand”. Working paper.

Castillo, J., D. Mejía and P. Restrepo. (2013). “Illegal drug markets and violence in Mexico: The causes
beyond Calderón”. Working paper.

Charles, K and C. Hurst (2003). “The correlation of wealth across generations”. Journal of Political
Economy, 111, 1155–1182.

Deaton. A. (1991). “Savings and Liquidity Contstraings” Economtrica, 59.5:1221-48.




                                                     23!
!
Dell, M. (2015). “Trafficking Networks and the Mexican Drug War”, American Economic Review, 105(6):
1738-1779.

Díaz-Cayeros, A., B. Magaloni, A. Matanock, and V. Romero. (2011). “Living in Fear: Mapping the Social
Embeddedness of Drug Gangs and Violence in Mexico,” Working paper.

Dupas. P. (2014). “Short-run Subsidies and Long-run Adoption of New Health Products: Evidence from a
Field Experiment. Econometrica, 82.1:197-228.

Gollier Christian (2000). “What Does the Classical Theory Have to Say About Portfolio Choice?” In
“Household Portfolios,” edited by L. Guiso, M. Haliassos, and T. Jappelli. MIT Press.

Guerrero-Gutiérrez, E., (2011). “Security, Drugs, and Violence in Mexico: A Survey," 7th North
AmericanForum, Washington D.C.

Guiso, L. and M. Paeilla. (2008). “Risk Aversion, Wealth, and Background Risk,” Journal of the European
Economic Association, 6(6), 1109-1150.

Guiso, L., P. Sapienza and L. Zingales (2013). “Time-Varying Risk Aversion”. Working Paper.

Hanaoka, C., H. Shigeoka and Y. Watanabe. (2015). “Do Risk Preferences Change? Evidence from Panel
Data Before and After the Great East Japan Earthquake”. NBER Working Paper # 21400.

Heinle, K., C. Molzahn, and D. Shirk. “Drug Violence in Mexico: Data and Analysis through 2014.”
Department of Political Science and International Relations, University of San Diego, 2015.

Ingwersen, N., E. Frankenberg and D. Thomas. (2016). Impact of a natural disaster on risk aversion.
Mimeo.

Jakiela, P., O. Ozier. (2016). “The Impact of Violence on Individual Risk Preferences: Evidence from a
Natural Experiment”. Working Paper.

Kan, K. (2003). “Residential mobility and job changes under uncertainty”. Journal of Urban Economics 54,
566–586.

Kimball, M., C. Sahm and M. Shapiro. (2008). “Imputing Risk Tolerance From Survey Responses” Journal
of the American Statistical Association, American Statistical Association, 103(483), 1028-1038.

Kimball, M., C. Sahm and M. Shapiro. (2009). “Risk Preferences in the PSID: Individual Imputations and
Family Covariation,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 99, 363-368.

Lerner, J. and D. Keltner. (2001). "Fear, anger, and risk" Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 81(1): 146-158.

Llorente, M., J. McDermott, R. Benítez, M. Ramírez de Rincón. (2014). “One Goal, Two Struggles:
Confronting Crime and Violence in Mexico and Colombia”. Woodrow Wilson International Center for
Scholars.
                                                     24!
!
Lusardi, A. (1998). “On the importance of the precautionary saving motive”. American Economic Review,
88 (2), 449–453

Malmendier, U. and S. Nagel. (2011) “Depression Babies: Do Macroeconomic Experiences Affect Risk-
Taking?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126, 373-416.

Molzahn, C., V. Ríos and D. Shirk. (2012). “Drug Violence in Mexico: Data and Analysis Through
2011” Trans-Border Institute Joan B. Kroc School of Peace Studies University of San Diego Ríos, 2012

Moya, A. (2017). “Violence, Mental Trauma, and Induced Changes in Risk Attitudes Among the Displaced
Population in Colombia.” Working paper.

Pratt, J.(1964). “Risk Aversion in the Small and in the Large.” Econometrica, 32, 122–136.

Quiggin, J. (2003). “Background risk in generalized expected utility theory”, Economic Theory, 22, 607-11.

Raghunathan, R. and M.T. Pham. (1999). "All Negative Moods are not Equal:
Motivational Influences of Anxiety and Sadness on Decision Making." Organizational Behavior
and Human Decision Processes, 79(1): 56-77.

Ríos, V. (2013). “Why did Mexico become so violent? A self-reinforcing violent equilibrium caused by
competition and enforcement”, Trends in Organized Crime, 16(2): 138-55

Robles, G., Magaloni, B., and Calderon G., (2013). “The Economic Costs of Drug-Trafficking Violence
in Mexico”. Working paper.

Shrader, E. (2001) “Methodologies to Measure the Gender Dimensions of Crime and Violence”, Policy
Research Working Paper Series, The World Bank.

Tedeschi, R. G., and L. G. Calhoun (2004). “Posttraumatic growth: Conceptual foundations and empirical
evidence”. Psychological Inquiry, 15, 1–18.

United, Nations. (2011). “Feminicidio en México. Aproximación, tendencias y cambios, 1985-2009.” ONU
Mujeres, Entidad de las Naciones Unidas para la igualdad de Género y el Empoderamiento de las Mujeres.


Velásquez, A. (2015). “The Economic Burden of Crime: Evidence from Mexico”. Working paper.

Voors, M. J., E. M. Nillesen, P. Verwimp, E. H. Bulte, R. Lensink and Daan P. Van Soest (2012), “Violent
Conflict and Behavior: A Field Experiment in Burundi”. American Economic Review, 102(2): 941–964.




                                                   25!
!
                 Figure 1: Monthly Homicide Rate (per 10,000)

                                                        MxFLS2                                  MxFLS3




Notes: Data on all reported homicides are collected by the National Institute of Statistics and Geography (INEGI)
Figure 2: Municipality Homicide Rates (per 10,000) by Year
     Figure 3: Series of Binary Choices over Hypothetical Gambles in
                                 MxFLS2
                                                                                 $ 500 / $ 2,000     or         $ 1,000




                                                      $ 300 / $ 3,000      or    $ 500 / $ 2,000




                                                                                                           $ 800 / $ 2,000      or        $ 1,000

                          $ -100 / $ 7,000      or    $ 100 / $ 4,000



                                                                                                                                      $ 800 / $ 4,000      or         $ 1,000




                                                                                                                                                                   $ 800 / $ 8,000   or   $ 1,000

           EXIT

     Risk aversion
                                  1                           2                                                3       4                      5                          6                  7
        index:

Notes:   In Mexico, the symbol $ stands for Mexican pesos. In this figure $ is also used to represent pesos.
          The risk aversion index goes from 1 to 7 and is increasing in risk aversion.
          The risk index categories 3 and 4 share the same exit option but corresponds to different choices:
          - The risk index category 3 corresponds to the following choices: $500 / $2,000 in the first and second choices and $800 / $2,000 in the third choice.
          - The risk index category 4 corresponds to the following choices: $1,000 in the first choice and $800 / $2,000 in the second choice.
        Figure 4: Series of Binary Choices over Hypothetical Gambles in
                                    MxFLS3

                                                                                                                                         $ 2,500 / $ 5,000      or          $ 2,500

                                                                                                                                                                        Explain again

                                                                                                                                         $ 2,500 / $ 5,000      or          $ 2,500




                                                                                                                                                                      $ 2,500 / $ 5,000   or   $ 2,000
                                                                                                 $ 2,000 / $ 5,000     or    $ 2,500




                                                                    $ 1,500 / $ 5,000     or          $ 2,500




                                       $ 1,000 / $ 5,000      or         $ 2,500




            $ 500 / $ 5,000      or         $ 2,500




 EXIT

  Risk
aversion            1                           2                           3                            4                       5                                             6                 7
 index:

  Notes:   In Mexico, the symbol $ stands for Mexican pesos. In this figure $ is also used to represent pesos.
            The risk aversion index goes from 1 to 5 and is increasing in risk aversion. We call “gamble averse” those in category 6 and “gamble averse – pay” those in category 7.
                                          Table 1: Distribution of risk aversion index

 Index Number          Index Description          MxFLS2          Index Number          Index Description       MxFLS3
             1   Lowest risk aversion              33.0%                      1   Lowest risk aversion           22.9%
             2   Second lowest risk aversion        4.9%                      2   Second lowest risk aversion     4.7%
             3   Third lowest risk aversion         8.3%                      3   Third lowest risk aversion     11.1%
             4   Fourth lowest risk aversion       36.3%                      4   Fourth lowest risk aversion    17.2%
             5   Third highest risk aversion        7.3%                      5   Highest risk aversion          30.9%
             6   Second highest risk aversion       1.8%                      6   Gamble aversion                 5.8%
             7   Highest risk aversion              8.4%                      7   Higher gamble aversion          7.4%
Observations                                       11,348        Observations                                    11,348
      Table 2. Relationship Between Migration and Homicide Rate
  Dependent variable equals 100 if respondent was interviewed in a different
        municipality between MxFLS2 and MxFLS3 and 0 otherwise

                                                  (1)                                (2)
! in Municipal Homicide Rate between 2009 & 2005-3.134                             -6.410
                                                [4.539]                           [5.006]

! Homicide Rate between 2009 & 2005 interacted with MxFLS2 characteristics:

Female                                                                             0.197
                                                                                  [0.335]
Age                                                                                0.006           ###
                                                                                  [0.035]
Age Squared                                                                        0.000           ###
                                                                                  [0.000]
Married or cohabits                                                              -0.501**          ###
                                                                                  [0.221]
Number of children                                                                 0.021           ###
                                                                                  [0.016]
Education (years)                                                                  0.044           ###
                                                                                  [0.030]
Worked last week                                                                   0.269           ###
                                                                                  [0.291]
Self-employed                                                                      -0.120          ###
                                                                                  [0.118]
Earnings (quartic root)                                                            -0.011          ###
                                                                                  [0.029]
HH size                                                                            -0.018          ###
                                                                                  [0.048]
Number of children of other HH members                                             0.031           ###
                                                                                  [0.084]
HH PCE (quartic root)                                                              0.062           ###
                                                                                  [0.068]
Rural                                                                             2.074**          ###
                                                                                  [0.963]
Scared of being attacked at night                                                  -0.050          ###
                                                                                  [0.176]
Mean dep. variable                                     3.41                         3.41           ###
Observations                                          11,309                       11,309
Notes: Standard errors clustered at the municipality level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
All models control for individual characteristics, household characteristics, date of interview,
and municipality fixed effects.
                                    Table 3: Impact of violent crime on risk aversion

                                                                         Most risk averse = 100
                                                                                                        MxFLS2 &        MxFLS2 &
                                   Only MxFLS2 Only MxFLS2 Only MxFLS3 Only MxFLS3
                                                                                                         MxFLS3          MxFLS3
                                         (1)              (2)              (3)             (4)             (5)             (6)
Homicide rate                         -2.203***         -0.426           0.373            -0.368         1.472***         1.525***
                                       [0.772]          [1.096]         [0.329]          [0.588]          [0.465]          [0.481]
Mean dep. variable                      17.51            17.51           44.14            44.14            30.82            30.82
Observations                           11,348           11,348          11,348           11,348           22,696           22,696
Number of individuals                     -                -               -                -             11,348           11,348
Individual Fixed Effects                 NO               NO              NO               NO              YES              YES
Municipality Fixed Effects               NO                YES              NO              YES               NO            YES
Notes: Standard errors clustered at the municipality level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. All models control for individual
characteristics and household characteristics and date of interview fixed effects. Wave fixed effects included when using multiple
waves.
               Table 4: Heterogenous impact of violent crime on risk aversion
         by individual characteristics measured before the escalation of violent crime

                                                                           Most risk averse = 100
                                                              (1)        (2)         (3)        (4)        (5)

Homicide rate                                       1.525*** 1.519*** 1.482*** 1.839*** 1.462***
                                                     [0.481]  [0.492]  [0.556]  [0.501]  [0.482]
Homicide Rate*I(Male=1)                                        0.030
                                                              [0.528]
Homicide Rate*I(Live in Rural Locality in MxFLS2=1)                     -0.095
                                                                       [0.922]
Homicide Rate*I(Bottom Quartile of PCE in MxFLS2=1)                              -1.02
                                                                                [1.097]
Homicide Rate*I(Self-Employed in MxFLS2=1)                                                -0.008
                                                                                         [1.045]
P-value for F-Test (Homicide Rate + Homicide Rate Interaction=0):             0.01        0.07     0.44      0.20
Mean dep. variable                                               30.82       30.82       30.82    30.82     30.81
Observations                                                    22,696      22,696      22,696   22,494    22,628
Number of Individuals                                           11,348      11,348      11,348   11,247     11,314
Notes: Standard errors clustered at the municipality level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. All models control for
individual characteristics and household characteristics and date of interview, wave, municipality, and individual
fixed effects, as well as, the interaction of each of these controls with the relevant subgroup.
                    Table 5: Heterogenous impact of violent crime on risk aversion
                by changes in individual characteristics between MxFLS2 and MxFLS3

                                                                            Most risk averse = 100
                                                            (1)              (2)              (3)               (4)

Homicide rate                                   1.525***         1.460***                   1.453**          1.175**
                                                 [0.481]          [0.503]                   [0.581]          [0.528]
Homicide Rate*I(Employment in MxFLS2=1 and in MxFLS3=0)            0.854
                                                                  [0.797]
Homicide Rate*I(Bottom Quartile of Change in PCE from MxFLS2 to MxFLS3)                      0.533
                                                                                            [0.650]
Homicide Rate*I(Scared of Being Attacked at Night in MxFLS2=0 and in MxFLS3=1)                               1.356**
                                                                                                             [0.562]
P-value for F-Test (Homicide Rate + Homicide Rate Interaction=0):                0.00         0.00              0.00
Mean dep. variable                                             30.82            30.81        30.83             30.82
Observations                                                  22,696           22,558       22,212            22,540
Number of Individuals                                         11,348           11,279       11,106            11,270
Notes: Standard errors clustered at the municipality level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. All models control for
individual characteristics and household characteristics and date of interview, wave, municipality, and individual fixed
effects, as well as, the interaction of each of these controls with the relevant subgroup.
   Table A1: Relationship Between Most Risk Averse Measure in MxFLS2 and Subsequent Risky Behaviors

Dependent Variable: Most Risk Averse in MxFLS2=100
                                                                            All                                    Males
Risky Behavior in MxFLS3                                      (1)                       (2)                (3)                (4)
Cigarettes Smoked per Week                                 -0.017**                   -0.013*            -0.030             -0.026
                                                            [0.008]                   [0.008]           [0.020]             [0.020]
Migration (At Least 1 Month)                                                                           -6.038***           -5.382**
                                                                                                        [2.101]             [2.142]
Self-Employment                                                                                           -1.22              -0.36
                                                                                                        [1.426]             [1.426]
P-value for F-Test (Cigs per Week=Migration=Self-Employment=0):                                          0.01               0.04
Mean dep. variable                                17.35                                 17.35            17.48              17.48
Observations                                                10,351                     10,351           11,330             11,330
Municipality Fixed Effects                                   NO                         YES               NO                YES
Notes: Robust standard errors provided in brackets *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
All models control for individual characteristics, household characteristics, and date of interview.
                                Table A2: Summary statistics


                                                     In MxFLS2                In MxFLS3

                                              Mean         Std. Dev.   Mean         Std. Dev.
Individual characteristics
Female                                       60.4%                     60.4%
Age (years)                                   39.7           14.0       43.9          14.0
Married or cohabits                          70.2%                     72.4%
Number of children                            2.5            2.4        2.7           2.4
Education (years)                             7.2            4.5        7.3           4.7
Worked last week                             53.5%                     56.4%
Self-employed                                15.4%                     17.8%
Earnings (quartic root)                       3.4            3.8        3.8           4.0
HH characteristics
HH size                                        4.9           2.3        4.9           2.4
Number of children of other HH members         1.6           1.5        1.4           1.4
HH PCE (quartic root)                          5.6           1.3        6.0           1.3
Location of residence characteristics
Rural                                        43.6%                     36.0%
Observations                                 11,348                    11,348
                Table A3: Risk attitude index transition matrix between MxFLS2 and MxFLS3

                                              Risk index in MxFLS2
Risk index in
                                                                                            Total
  MxFLS3           1          2          3             4             5     6        7

     1            820        136        243           938            212    51     194      2,594
     2            170         25         38           203             45    12      38       531
     3            432         67        102           456             82    28      92      1,259
     4            676         86        181           693            135    29     155      1,955
     5           1,180       163        268          1,261           244    60     328      3,504
     6            207         37         55           250             46    9       59       663
     7            258         43         58           315             64    18      86       842
    Total        3,743       557        945          4,116           828   207     952      11,348
  Table A4: Self-reported feelings of safety from crime and homicide rates

                                        At the time of MxFLS3                At the time of MxFLS2

                                                   Feel scared of                Feel scared of
                                    Feel less safe                Feel less safe
                                                   being attacked                being attacked
                                    than 5 years                  than 5 years
                                                     during the                    during the
                                     ago = 100                     ago = 100
                                                    night = 100                   night = 100

                                          (1)                (2)               (3)                (4)
Homicide rate change
                                      2.030***           1.031***            -0.335              -0.30
from 2005 to 2009
                                        [0.558]           [0.270]            [0.379]           [0.368]
Mean of dep. Variable                    34.58             22.11              25.76             19.81
Observations                            11,288            11,288             11,330            11,330
Notes: Standard errors clustered at the municipality level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
All models control for individual characteristics, household characteristics, and date of interview.
     Table A5: Previous Municipal Trends and Levels of Characteristics' Relationship to Current Homicide Rate

                                                                                          Municipal Homicide Rate (per 10,000)
                                                                                    Level in 2009               Change From 2005 to 2009
            Municipality Characteristics                                                 (1)                                (2)
CENSUS: Change in Share of Households Between 2000-2005 with:
Televisions                                             ch_sh_vtel0500                           -5.83                             -3.86
                                                                                                (5.81)   1.00                     (8.16)    0.47
Piped Water                                                         ch_sh_vwater0500             -1.99                              4.46
                                                                                                (4.73)   0.42                     (5.44)    0.82
Sewage System                                                       ch_sh_vsew0500                1.17                             -5.29
                                                                                                (3.46)   0.34                     (4.71)    1.12
Electricity                                                         ch_sh_velec0500               3.95                             10.54
                                                                                                (9.34)   0.42                    (11.00)    0.96
CENSUS: Change in Share of 21-65 Year Olds Between 2000-2005 with:
Less Than Primary Education                              chg0005_perc_less_prim                    0.16                           -17.71    *
                                                                                                 (8.83) 0.02                     (10.10)    1.75
At Least High School Diploma                                        chg0005_perc_HSgrad         -14.81                            -34.72    *
                                                                                               (15.54) 0.95                      (17.64)    1.97
Speak Indigenous Language                                           chg0005_perc_spkind           -4.50                           -10.80
                                                                                                 (6.73) 0.67                       (6.63)   1.63
CENSUS: Change Between 2000-2005 in Share of:
Less Than 18 Year Olds                                              chg0005_perc_less18          10.12                              0.21
                                                                                               (19.02) 0.53                      (23.86) 0.01
18 to 65 Year Olds                                                  chg0005_perc_18_65            5.66                             -7.44
                                                                                               (27.35) 0.21                      (30.27) 0.25
CENSUS: Change Between 2000-2005 in:
Average Educational Attainment                                      chg0005_avg_yeduc             1.59                              1.62
                                                                                                (1.65) 0.96                       (1.85) 0.88
MxFLS: Change in Share of Older than 18 Year Olds Between MxFLS1-MxFLS2:                               ###                               ###
Married                                                    ch_married0500                        -5.77                             -7.73
                                                                                                (6.63) 0.87                       (7.23) 1.07
Employed Females                                                    ch_emp_fem0500               -1.78                              0.75
                                                                                                (4.57) 0.39                       (4.87) 0.15
Employed Males                                                      ch_emp_male0500               1.05                              2.17
                                                                                                (4.86) 0.22                       (4.81) 0.45
Self-Employed Females                                               ch_self_fem0500              -1.02                             -4.48
                                                                                                (4.35) 0.23                       (4.38) 1.02
Self-Employed Males                                                 ch_self_male0500              1.42                              2.79
                                                                                                (4.07) 0.35                       (4.24) 0.66
Rural                                                               ch_rural0500                  1.62                              2.02 *
                                                                                                (1.09) 1.48                       (1.14) 1.78
Have Relative in the U.S.                                           ch_mx_relus0500              -2.27                             -2.12
                                                                                                (1.79) 1.26                       (1.84) 1.15
Have Thoughts of Future Migration                                   ch_mg_fut0500                -2.34                             -0.38
                                                                                                (3.17) 0.74                       (3.38) 0.11
Have Fear in the Day                                                ch_hdfear0500                -1.73                             -0.09
                                                                                                (5.66) 0.31                       (6.32) 0.01
Have Fear in the Night                                              ch_hnfear0500                -2.59                             -3.86
                                                                                                (5.59) 0.46                       (5.79) 0.67
MxFLS: Change Between MxFLS1-MxFLS2 in:
Average Household Size                                              ch_hhsize0500                 0.15                              0.09
                                                                                                (0.70)   0.22                     (0.71)    0.13
Log Hourly Earning of Females Older than 18 (Pesos)                 ch_lnearn_hour_fem0500        0.35                              0.08
                                                                                                (0.45)   0.77                     (0.47)    0.17
Log Hourly Earning of Males Older than 18 (Pesos)                   ch_lnearn_hour_male0500       0.78                              0.38
                                                                                                (0.68)   1.15                     (0.67)    0.57
Log Household Per Capita Expenditure (Pesos)                        ch_lpce0500                   0.68                              0.93
                                                                                                (1.02)   0.66                     (1.18)    0.79
MxFLS: Change in Share of Localities Between MxFLS1-MxFLS2 with:
Increased Domestic Violence                             ch_incdomv0500                           -0.13                             -0.17
                                                                                                (0.43) 0.30                       (0.43) 0.39
Presence of Vandalism                                               ch_vand0500                   0.54                              0.36
                                                                                                (0.38) 1.43                       (0.43) 0.84
Presence of Police                                                  ch_police0500                 0.15                              0.08
                                                                                                (0.41) 0.37                       (0.45) 0.18
MxFLS: Change Between MxFLS1-MxFLS2 in Localities:
Number of Primary Schools/100                                       ch_prim0500                  -0.01                             -0.24
                                                                                                (0.33)   0.03                     (0.29)    0.83
Number of Junior Highs/100                                          ch_jrhigh0500                -0.55                             -0.08
                                                                                                (0.66)   0.84                     (0.62)    0.12
Number of High Schools/100                                          ch_high0500                   0.25                              0.04
                                                                                                (0.93)   0.27                     (0.84)    0.04
Rate of Poor Households                                             ch_poorhh_rate0500            0.00                             -0.01
                                                                                                (0.01)   0.03                     (0.01)    0.81
Observations                                                        Observations                   136                               136
Mean of Dependent Variable                                                                        1.88                              0.97
F test: Jointly 0; Prob>F                                                                         0.45                              0.18
Notes: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Robust standard errors provided.
    Table A6: Robustness checks on impact of violent crime on risk aversion


                                                              Including     Excluding
                                          Main Result from Local Economic Northern Border
                                          Table 3, Column 6
                                                              Controls1       States2
                                                  (1)                (1)               (1)
Homicide rate                                 1.525***            1.213***          1.723***
                                               [0.481]             [0.455]           [0.580]
Mean dep. variable                              30.82               30.82             30.82
Observations                                   22,696              22,696            17,822
Number of individuals                          11,348              11,348             8,911
Individual Fixed Effects                        YES                 YES               YES
Municipality Fixed Effects                       YES                 YES               YES
Notes: Standard errors clustered at the municipality level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. All
models control for individual characteristics and household characteristics and date of interview
fixed effects. Wave fixed effects included when using multiple waves.
1
Local economic condition controls include: Municipality-year level electricity use (kWh),
manufacturing industry and retail sector characteristics (# of establishments,
2
 Respondents from Mexican northern border states in the MxFLS (Coahuila, Nuevo León, and
Sonora) are dropped from the sample.
                   Table A7: Robustness Checks for Risk Aversion Measure

                                                    Panel A. Most risk averse = 100
                                           Alternative treatments of "gamble averse" response
                            Gamble averse classified Gamble averse classified
                                                                                   Gamble averse excluded
                            as most risk averse = 100 as most risk averse = 0
                                       (1)                         (2)                        (3)
Homicide rate                       1.525***                   1.720***                   1.789***
                                     [0.481]                     [0.456]                   [0.502]
Mean of dep. Variable                 30.82                       24.19                     26.46
Observations                         22,696                      22,696                    19,686
Number of individuals                11,348                      11,348                     9,843

                                                      Panel B. Most risk averse = 100
                                               Alternative classifications of "most risk averse"
                                Classification [1]             Classification [2]             Classification [3]

Homicide rate                        1.525***                       1.762***                       1.051**
                                      [0.481]                        [0.526]                       [0.448]
Mean of dep. Variable                  30.82                          39.44                          27.18
Observations                          22,696                         22,696                        22,696
Number of individuals                 11,348                         11,348                         11,348

                                Classification [4]             Classification [5]             Classification [6]

Homicide rate                         0.955**                        1.674**                       1.912**
                                      [0.414]                        [0.795]                       [0.853]
Mean of dep. Variable                   26.26                          48.96                         57.57
Observations                          22,696                         22,696                        22,696
Number of individuals                  11,348                         11,348                        11,348
Notes: Standard errors clustered at the municipality level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. All models control for
individual and household characteristics and date of interview, wave, municipality, and individual fixed effects.
      Classification [1]: "Most risk averse" in 05: risk index ! 5 (risk premium ! $400)
                          "Most risk averse" in 09: risk index ! 5 (risk premium ! $1,000)
      Classification [2]: "Most risk averse" in 05: risk index ! 5 (risk premium ! $400)
                          "Most risk averse" in 09: risk index ! 4 (risk premium ! $750)
      Classification [3]: "Most risk averse" in 05: risk index ! 6 (risk premium ! $1,400)
                          "Most risk averse" in 09: risk index ! 5 (risk premium ! $1,000)
      Classification [4]: "Most risk averse" in 05: risk index = 7 (risk premium ! $3,400)
                          "Most risk averse" in 09: risk index ! 5 (risk premium ! $1,000)
      Classification [5]: "Most risk averse" in 05: risk index ! 4 (risk premium ! $250)
                          "Most risk averse" in 09: risk index ! 5 (risk premium ! $1,000)
      Classification [6]: "Most risk averse" in 05: risk index ! 4 (risk premium ! $250)
                          "Most risk averse" in 09: risk index ! 4 (risk premium ! $750)
             Table A8. Relationship Between Attrition and Homicide Rate
              Dependent variable equals 100 if respondent was interviewed
         in MxFLS2 but not MxFLS3 and 0 if interviewed in MxFLS2 and MxFLS3

                                                              (1)                         (2)
      ! in Municipal Homicide Rate between 2009 & 2005-3.494                             -0.542
                                                      [6.419]                           [8.201]

      ! Homicide Rate between 2009 & 2005 interacted with MxFLS2 characteristics:

      Female                                                                             -0.444
                                                                                        [0.437]
###   Age                                                                                 0.031          ###
                                                                                        [0.075]
###   Age Squared                                                                        -0.001          ###
                                                                                        [0.001]
###   Married or cohabits                                                                -0.095          ###
                                                                                        [0.451]
###   Number of children                                                                  0.089          ###
                                                                                        [0.071]
###   Education (years)                                                                   0.026          ###
                                                                                        [0.046]
###   Worked last week                                                                    0.204          ###
                                                                                        [0.459]
###   Self-employed                                                                      -0.177          ###
                                                                                        [0.329]
###   Earnings (quartic root)                                                            -0.065          ###
                                                                                        [0.054]
###   HH size                                                                             0.128          ###
                                                                                        [0.120]
###   Number of children of other HH members                                             -0.213          ###
                                                                                        [0.199]
###   HH PCE (quartic root)                                                              -0.124          ###
                                                                                        [0.142]
###   Rural                                                                              -1.910          ###
                                                                                        [1.592]
###   Scared of being attacked at night                                                  -0.253          ###
                                                                                        [0.430]
###   Mean dep. variable                                     20.69                        20.69          ###
      Observations                                          14,274                      14,274
      Notes: Standard errors clustered at the municipality level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
      All models control for individual characteristics, household characteristics, date of interview,
      and municipality fixed effects.
