NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE OPERATION AND DEMISE OF THE BRETTON WOODS SYSTEM; 1958
TO 1971
Michael D. Bordo
Working Paper 23189
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23189

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2017

Paper prepared for the Yale University Press Volume on Bretton Woods edited by Naomi
Lamoreaux and Ian Shapiro The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Michael D. Bordo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

The Operation and Demise of the Bretton Woods System; 1958 to 1971
Michael D. Bordo
NBER Working Paper No. 23189
February 2017
JEL No. N10
ABSTRACT
This chapter revisits the history of the origins, operation and demise of the Bretton Woods
International Monetary System. The Bretton Woods system was created by the !944 Articles of
Agreement to design a new international monetary order for the post war at a global conference
organized by the US Treasury at the Mount Washington Hotel in Bretton Woods ,New
Hampshire at the height of World War II. The Articles represented a compromise between the
American plan of Harry Dexter White and the British plan of John Maynard Keynes. The
compromise created an adjustable peg system based on the US dollar convertible into gold at $35
per ounce along with capital controls. It was designed to combine the advantages of fixed
exchange rates of the pre World War I gold standard with some flexibility to handle large real
shocks. The compromise gave members both exchange rate stability and the independence for
their monetary authorities to maintain full employment.
It took over a decade for the fully current account convertible system to get started. The system
only lasted for 12 years from 1959 to 1971 but it did deliver remarkable economic performance.
The BWS evolved into a gold dollar standard which depended on the US monetary authorities
following sound low inflation policies. As the System evolved it faced the same severe
fundamental problems as in the interwar gold exchange standard of: adjustment, confidence and
liquidity. The adjustment problem meant that member countries with balance of payments
deficits, in the face of nominal rigidities, ran the gauntlet between currency crises and recessions.
Surplus countries had to sterilize dollar inflows to prevent inflation.
The U.S. as center country faced the Triffin dilemma. With the growth of trade and income
member countries held more and more dollars instead of scarce gold as reserves generated by a
growing US balance of payments deficit. As outstanding dollar liabilities grew relative to the US
monetary gold stock confidence in the dollar would wane raising the likelihood of a run on Fort
Knox.This led to the possibility that the US would follow tight financial policies to reduce the
deficit thereby starving the rest of the world of needed liquidity leading to global deflation and
depression as occurred in the 1930s. Enormous efforts by the US, the G10 and international
institutions were devoted to solving this problem.
As it turned out, after 1965 the key problem facing the global economy was inflation, not
deflation, reflecting expansionary Federal Reserve policies to finance the Vietnam war and the
Great Inflation. US inflation was exported through the balance of payments to the surplus
countries of Europe and Japan leading them in 1971 to begin converting their outstanding dollar
holdings into gold. In reaction President Richard Nixon closed the US gold window ending the
BWS.

Michael D. Bordo
Department of Economics
Rutgers University
New Jersey Hall
75 Hamilton Street
New Brunswick, NJ 08901
and NBER
bordo@econ.rutgers.edu

1. Introduction
The Bretton Woods system was established to avoid the perceived problems of
the interwar period: protectionism ( the devolution of international trade from
multilateralism to bilateralism and autarky), beggar thy neighbor devaluations (
‘currency wars’), hot money flows and unstable exchange rates1; and to provide
a framework of monetary and financial stability to foster global economic
growth and the growth of international trade.
The system established in the 1944 Agreement was a compromise between the
fixed exchange rates of the gold standard, seen as conducive to rebuilding the
network of global trade and finance, and the greater flexibility to which
countries had resorted to in the 1930s in the effort to restore and maintain
domestic economic and financial stability.
It was a compromise between John Maynard Keynes’ UK plan for the
establishment of a supra national central bank, The International Clearing Union,
and Harry Dexter White’s US plan for a United Nations Stabilization Fund. It was
designed to combine the advantage of fixed exchange rates of the pre World War
I war gold standard with some flexibility to handle large real shocks. Each
member would declare a par value of its currency in terms of dollars while the
United States declared the par value of the dollar as $35.00 per ounce of gold.
The Articles of Agreement formally obliged member countries to ask the IMF for
permission in advance before adjusting their parities, as a way of preventing
opportunistic, beggar-thy –neighbor exchange rate changes. Adjustment would
1

See Taylor (2015).
3

occur in the face of a fundamental disequilibrium which was never defined but
has been later construed to mean an imbalance requiring a change in the real
exchange rate. Thus the Bretton Woods system was set up as an adjustable peg
system.
The Agreement further obliged countries to remove restrictions on the current
account while permitting them to maintain controls on transactions on capital
account (so as to limit destabilizing capital flows). Capital controls and the
ability to adjust parities in the face of shocks gave members the flexibility to use
domestic monetary and fiscal policy to alleviate business cycle shocks but
adherence to the pegged parities limited the size of these policy actions. The IMF,
based on the principle of a credit union, whereby members could withdraw
more than their original gold quotas2 was to provide relief to members for
temporary current account shortfalls.
The system evolved differently from what the framers of Bretton Woods first
imagined. Originally currencies were treated as equal in the Articles. In theory
each country was required to maintain their par values by intervening in terms
of the currency of every other country but because the United States was the
only country which pegged its exchange rate to gold, the others set their parities
in terms of dollars and intervened in the dollar market. Thus the system evolved
into a gold dollar standard which in many ways resembled the interwar gold
exchange standard.

2

Up to the amount of their total contribution with conditions attached.
4

The dollar emerged into prominence in the 1950s because of the sheer size of
the role that the U.S. played in the world economy, its importance in world trade
and its open and deep capital markets. Thus the dollar emerged in the 1950s as a
private international money (McKinnon 1988). By the 1960s it was used as a
unit of account in invoicing imports and exports, as a medium of exchange in
serving as a vehicle currency for interbank transactions, and as a store of value
for private claims for much of the world, although some countries closely linked
to British trade and payments primarily used sterling. At the same time, the
dollar emerged as an official international money. This stemmed from its use as
a unit of account to define the parities of the member countries and because the
dollar was used as the primary intervention currency. Finally because of its role
as a unit of account and a medium of exchange and its growing private
acceptance, it became the dominant international store of value to be used as
reserves. The growing private and official demands for dollars were supported
through private and official long-term capital outflows in excess of a current
account surplus which produced a series of official settlement balance of
payments deficits beginning as early as 1950 (Bordo 1993, page 47).
This paper focuses on the Bretton Woods System in the period 1958 to 1971
after the Western European members declared current account convertibility
until the closing of the gold window by President Richard Nixon on August 15
1971, which effectively ended it. I describe the problems in getting the system
started ,the operation of the System and the problems faced by the United States.
I also discuss the problems faced by other key members, the policies adopted by

5

governments, the IMF and other international institutions to preserve the
System Finally I describe the breakdown of the System between 1968 and 1971.

2. Getting the System Started
It took close to fifteen years to get the Bretton Woods system fully operating.
A number of overwhelming obstacles stood in the way. The first was
bilateralism -- for most countries, with the major exception of the United
States, there were pervasive exchange controls and controls on international
trade. Along with exchange controls, every country negotiated a series of
bilateral agreements with each of the trading partners. The rationale for the
use of controls and bilateralism was a shortage of international reserves. The
devastated economies of Europe and Asia were unable to produce the
exports needed to generate foreign exchange.
The second problem facing the System was a dollar shortage. By the end of
World War II the US held two thirds of the world’s monetary gold stock and
gold and dollar reserves were depleted in the rest of the world. Europe ran a
massive current account deficit reflecting the demand for essential imports
and the reduced capacity of its export industries. The dollar shortage was
aggravated by overvalued official parities by the major European industrial
countries set at the end of 1946. The IMF pressured its members to declare
par values as soon as possible and if the exchange rate chosen was
inappropriate, it could be corrected later. Indeed most countries adopted
their prewar parities on the assumption that wartime and post war inflation

6

did not seriously disrupt their competitive position relative to the United
States (Triffin 1957).
By the early 1950s both problems had been solved by two developments; the
Marshall Plan and the European Payments Union (EPU). The Marshall Plan
funneled approximately $13 billion in grants and loans to Western Europe
between 1948 and 1952. The Economic Cooperation Act of 1948, which
created the Marshall Plan was designed to help the European countries
expand their economies, restore their export capacity, and, by creating
economic stability preserve political stability. These results would follow
from providing relief from the burden of financing a massive payments
deficit.
The EPU was established

in 1952 under the auspices of the OEEC (

Organization of European Economic Cooperation) to simplify bilateral
clearing and pave the way to multilateralism ( Kaplan and Schlieminger
1989). The EPU followed the basic principle of a commercial bank clearing
house. At the end of each month, each member would clear its net debit or
credit position against all of its members with the EPU, with the Bank for
International Settlement (BIS) acting as its agent. The EPU became the center
of a worldwide multilateral settlement area, including the countries of the
sterling and franc zone. The process of multilateralism continued until eight
European countries declared their currencies convertible for current account
transactions on December 27, 1958 (Bordo 1993 page 431).

7

The third problem getting started concerned the role of the IMF. The IMF, by
intention, was not equipped to deal with the postwar reconstruction
problem. Most of the structural balance of payments assistance in this period
was provided by the Marshall Plan and other U.S. aid including the AngloAmerican loan of 1945.

In a sense the U.S. replaced the IMF. As a

consequence new institutions such as the OEEC and existing institutions such
as the BIS emerged as competing sources of international monetary
authority. Moreover the Fund did very little to speed up the process of
achieving multilateralism .
The Fund also was criticized for seeking a declaration of par values too soon.
The resultant fixed parities then set in motion forces within each country to
resist devaluation until it was done in the face of a currency crisis. The crisis
associated with the 1949 sterling devaluation ( consequent on the 1947
sterling crisis) in turn created further resistance by monetary authorities to
changes in parity ( Schenk 2010), which ultimately changed the nature of the
international monetary system from the adjustable peg intended in the
Articles to a fixed exchange rate regime.
The Fund’s prestige was dealt a severe blow by three events in the pre
convertibility period (Mundell 1969a).

The first occurred when France

devalued the franc in 1948 and created a multiple exchange rate system. This
violated Article IV, section 5 of the Articles and France was then denied
access to the Fund’s resources until 1952. Since France had access to
Marshall plan aid, the Fund’s actions had little effect.

8

Second was the sterling devaluation of September 1949 when the Fund was
given only twenty four hours advance notice which also violated Article IV,
section 5. This event revealed the Fund’s inability to deter a major power
from following its sovereign interest.
Third was Canada’s decision to float its currency in 1950 again in violation of
the Articles. The Fund was highly critical of the action. The Canadian
authorities assured the Fund that it was only a temporary expedient
reflecting a massive capital inflow from the US during the Korean war. As it
turned out Canada did not return to the par value system until 1961 and in
contrast to the Fund’s warnings, while the Canadian dollar freely floated
there were only limited swings in it and the Canadian economy performed
better than it did when it was part of the par value system (Bordo, Dib and
Schembri 2010).
Fourth, the Fund’s resources were inadequate to solve the emerging
perceived liquidity problem of the 1960s. The difference between the growth
of international reserves required to finance the growth of real output and
trade and avoid deflation and the growth in the world’s monetary gold stock
was met largely by an increase in official holdings of U.S. dollars resulting
from U.S. balance of payments deficits. By the time full convertibility was
achieved, the U.S. dollar was serving the buffer function for which the
Articles intended the Fund’s resources (Mundell 1969a, page 481).
The final development that preceded the full operation of the Bretton Woods
system was the decline of sterling as a reserve currency. At the outset it was

9

expected that sterling would play an important role in the postwar period. At
the end of World War II, Britain ran a massive balance of payments deficit in
gold and dollars. It also had an outstanding sterling debt of 3.7 billion pounds
amassed by borrowing from the British Empire, most of which was made
inconvertible into dollars. The 1946 Anglo American loan of $3.75 billion
from the U.S. and $1.25 billion from Canada was to allow Britain to ratify the
Bretton Woods Articles and restore current account convertibility in dollars.
Current account convertibility was restored in July 15 1947 quickly followed
by a run on sterling which rapidly depleted the UK’s reserves and led to the
suspension of convertibility on August 20 1947. This event as well as the
devaluation of sterling in 1949 greatly weakened sterling’s credibility as a
reserve currency. Sterling’s

devaluation was quickly followed by 23

countries.
The devaluation of 1949 was important for the system because it and
Marshall Plan aid ( by both boosting trade liberalization and removing
political uncertainty) helped move key European countries from a current
account deficit to a surplus which was important to the eventual restoration
of convertibility. It was also important because it revealed a basic weakness
with the adjustable peg arrangement – the one way option of speculating
against parity.

By allowing changes in parity only in the event of a

fundamental disequilibrium the system encouraged the monetary authorities
to delay adjustment until they were sure it was necessary. By then,

10

speculators would also be sure and they would take a position from which
they could not lose (Friedman 1953).

3. The Operation and Flaws of the BWS
The Bretton Woods system became functional in December 1958 almost 15
years after the original conference, when the Western European countries
declared current account convertibility. Japan followed in 1961. The convertible
Bretton Woods sytem that began at the end of 1958 differed in a number of ways
from the system intended by its architects. These included the dominance of the
United States in the international monetary order, the reduced prestige of the
IMF, the rise of the dollar as a key currency and the decline of sterling, a shift
from the adjustable peg system towards a de facto fixed exchange rate and
growing capital mobility. Despite the prevalence of capital controls in most
countries, private long-term capital mobility increased considerably in the
1950s, and speculative short-term capital movements (through leads and lags in
the invoicing of exports and imports) emerged as a force to threaten the attempt
by monetary authorities to maintain a parity far from fundamentals.
Although the Bretton Woods system was short-lived, it lasted in its convertible
phase from 1959 to 1971, and as we discuss below it had many problems, yet
economic performance during its existence was remarkable. The Bretton Woods
system( along with trade liberalization under the GATT) was associated with
higher and more stable economic growth than in any other period in the past
150 years with the exception of the Great Moderation from 1983 to 2006. In

11

addition inflation performance, both in terms of levels and variation was also
superior to previous and subsequent regimes with the principal exception of the
classical gold standard and the Great Moderation periods. (Bordo and Schwartz
1999, Benati and Goodhart 2010) . However, as we discuss below inflation
began to rise in 1965 leading to the Great Inflation of the 1970s.
Problems for Bretton Woods began well before the declaration of current
account convertibility. First came a series of speculative attacks on the members
that had misaligned currencies. The UK devaluation of 1949 was followed by
that of 23 countries. Other adjustments driven by speculative attacks occurred in
the 1950s and 1960s.3
Second, the UK as the second reserve country was under continued pressure
and frequent attack because of a basic overvaluation of sterling reflecting slower
productivity growth and higher inflation than its competitors. A series of four
currency crises from 1961 to 1967 led to massive rescues by the IMF, the G10
and the Federal Reserve culminating in the devaluation of November 1967 and
the effective end of sterling’s role as a reserve currency (Bordo, MacDonald and
Oliver 2010).
Third, as the system evolved into a gold dollar standard, the three big problems
of the interwar gold exchange standard re emerged: the adjustment, confidence
and liquidity problems.
The Adjustment Problem
Canada devalued in 1949 and floated in 1950, France devalued in 1957, 1958 and
1969, Italy devalued in 1961, the Netherlands revalued in 1961 and Germany
revalued in 1961 and 1969.
3

12

The adjustment problem in Bretton Woods reflected downward rigidity in
wages and prices which prevented the normal price adjustment of the gold
standard price specie flow mechanism to operate. Consequently, payments
deficits would be associated with rising unemployment and recessions. The
reluctance to follow tight monetary and fiscal policies (in most advanced
countries with the principal exceptions of Germany and Switzerland) except in
the face of a currency crisis, reflected the strong commitment to full employment
and a social safety net .For surplus countries inflationary pressure would ensue
which they would try to block by sterilization and capital controls.
The United Kingdom between 1959 and 1967 alternated between expansionary
monetary and fiscal policies designed to maintain full employment and
encourage economic growth and austerity programs—a strategy referred to as
stop-go. The connecting link was the state of the balance of payments.
Expansionary policy inevitably led to deterioration in the current account, a
decline in international reserves and speculation against the sterling parity.
On several occasions, standby loans were drawn from the IMF and rescue
packages arranged by the G10 through the BIS.4 (referred to as Basle Operations
and Arrangements, Bordo and Schenk 2017). These took place in 1957, 1961 and
1964. The final crisis occurred in 1966-67 ending in sterling’s devaluation in
November 1967, in which the Federal Reserve and other central banks
contributed to a $3 billion rescue package which was insufficient to stem the
speculative attack. After the November 1967 devaluation and the 1968 Basel
4

Referred to as Basel Operations and Arrangements ( Bordo and Schenk 2017).
13

Agreement( in which the members of the Sterling area received a dollar
guarantee of their sterling holdings ) sterling ceased to be an effective
international reserve currency (Schenk 2010).
The experience of the UK was important for the adjustment issue because it was
a country with a chronic balance of payments deficit forced to take corrective
action 5. For the U.S. sterling as an alternative reserve currency was viewed as a
first line of defense for the dollar ( Bordo, Humpage and Schwartz 2015).
During this period, every technique and tool recommended by the Organization
for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD)’s Working Party 3 on
adjustment was used. Other facilities to provide the liquidity needed for
adjustment were developed (Basel arrangements, short-term swaps (extensions
of inter-central bank credit lines) and longer term facilities. The IMF instituted
the General Arrangements to Borrow (GAB) in 1961, in which the G10 countries
provided a $6 billion line of credit in hard currencies to the IMF.

West Germany (1959-67) (also the Netherlands) was a surplus country facing the
opposite problem to the UK. Rapid economic and export growth and relatively slow
inflation led to a series of current account surpluses and reserve inflows in the
1950s and 1960s. Concern over the inflationary consequences of the balance of
payments surplus led the German monetary authorities in 1955 to both follow tight
monetary policy and to institute measures to prevent capital inflows, including the
prohibition of interest payments and discriminatory reserve requirements on
5

France had been in a similar position in 1950.
14

foreign deposits. Finally, in 1961 the Deutsche Mark was revalued by 5%. The
package of tight money and capital controls was repeated again in 1964-66 and
1968. Germany resisted adjustment during the Bretton Woods era. The German
monetary authorities believed that the key problem of the international monetary
system was inflation imported from abroad ( Bordo 1993 pp 54-55).

Asymmetric adjustment between the United States and the Rest of the
World
In the Bretton Woods pegged exchange rate system the United States as central
reserve country did not have to adjust to its balance of payments deficit. It was
the n-1th currency in the system of n currencies (Mundell. 1969b). Other
countries had to intervene in their foreign exchange markets and buy or sell
dollars to maintain their pegs. The US Treasury only had to intervene in the gold
market to maintain the fixed dollar price of gold at $35 per ounce. Indeed, as a
matter of routine the Federal Reserve automatically sterilized dollar outflows.
This asymmetry of adjustment was resented by the Europeans. The Germans
viewed the U.S. as exporting inflation to surplus countries through its deficits
(Emminger 1967). The French resented U.S. financial hegemony and the
seigniorage that the U.S. earned on its outstanding liabilities (Rueff 1967). They
preferred jettisoning the gold dollar system and returning to the classical gold
standard.
The U.S. monetary authorities began to worry about the balance of payments
deficit because of its effect on confidence. As official dollar liabilities held

15

abroad mounted with successive deficits, the likelihood increased that these
dollars would be converted into gold and that the U.S. monetary gold stock
would eventually reach a point low enough to trigger a run. This was actually
what happened to the Gold Exchange standard in the interwar period. Indeed, by
1959, the U.S. monetary gold stock equaled total external dollar liabilities and
the rest of the world’s monetary gold stock exceeded that of the United States. By
1964, official dollar liabilities held by foreign monetary authorities exceeded the
U.S. monetary gold stock. See figure 1.
A second source of concern, which also echoed the interwar, was the dollar’s role
in providing liquidity to the rest of the world. Elimination of the U.S. balance of
payments deficit (as the Germans and French urged) could create a worldwide
liquidity shortage. Much concern through the 1960s was over how to provide
this liquidity.
Robert Triffin (1960) captured the problems in his famous dilemma. Because the
Bretton Woods parities which were declared in the 1940s had undervalued the
price of gold, gold production would be insufficient to provide the reserves to
finance the growth of global trade. Moreover, the main source of supply at the
time, the USSR and South Africa were unreliable (Gilbert 1968). Under the gold
dollar standard, the shortfall would be met by US dollars provided by capital
outflows from the US manifest in its balance of payments deficit. Triffin posited
that as outstanding US dollar liabilities mounted they would increase the
likelihood of a classic bank run when the rest of the world’s monetary
authorities would convert their dollar holdings into gold ( Garber 1993).

16

According to Triffin, when the tipping point would occur the US monetary
authorities would tighten monetary policy and this would lead to global
deflationary pressure and, in the face of nominal rigidities, global depression as
in the 1930s (Bordo Erceg and Evans 2000)6. Triffin’s solution was to create a
form of global liquidity like Keynes’s (1943) bancor to act as a substitute for US
dollars in international reserves. This was achieved in 1969 with the creation of
the SDR (special drawing rights sometimes referred to as paper gold). This was
too little and too late to save the system.
Another way to think about the problems of Bretton Woods is in terms of the
open economy trilemma posited by Obstfeld and Taylor (2004). According to
the trilemma only two of three conditions could prevail; fixed exchange rates; an
open capital account; and independent monetary policy. In the Bretton Woods
system the trilemma would be solved by imposing capital controls. This would
allow the domestic monetary authorities to maintain full employment and low
inflation while keeping the exchange rate pegged. As events unfolded member
states followed financial policies inconsistent with the pegged rates and capital
controls were increasingly evaded leading to speculative attacks.

As it turned out Triffin’s predictions never came true. As it is argued below , the
System did not collapse into deflation but exploded into inflation . Bordo and
Mccauley 2017.
6

17

4.Policies to Shore Up the System

The problems of the Bretton Woods System were dealt with by the IMF, the G10
plus Switzerland and by the U.S. monetary authorities. The remedies followed
often worked in the short-run but not in the long-run. The main threat to the
system as a whole was the Triffin problem which was exacerbated after 1965
by expansionary U.S. monetary and fiscal policy which led to rising inflation.
Misalignments between member countries other than the U.S. also aggravated
the basic problem because deficit countries like the U.K. would settle their
imbalances with surplus countries like Germany in dollars, which in turn
increased the threat of eventual conversion into U.S. monetary gold. The ongoing
U.S. balance of payments deficits and depleting gold stock, which were initially
viewed as temporary were dealt with by actions taken both by the Treasury and
the Federal Reserve.
The event which galvanized action was a spike in the London price of gold to
$40.50 in October 1960. It was based on the fear in the financial markets that if
John F Kennedy were to be elected as President that he would pursue
inflationary policies. The Treasury developed policies to both discourage
conversion of dollars into gold by the Europeans, e.g. moral suasion on Germany
with the threat to pull out U.S. troops, the creation of the Gold Pool in 1961
(eight central banks pooled their gold reserves to be used to keep the London
price of gold close to the $35 per ounce parity price), the issue of Roosa bonds(
foreign currency denominated bonds to discourage US allies from converting

18

dollars into gold, originated by Robert Roosa, Undersecretary of the Treasury for
Monetary Affairs) , The General Arrangements to Borrow ( GAB) 1961 which
created an IMF lending facility large enough to offer substantial credit to the
United States.),Operation Twist in 1962( the U.S. Treasury bought long term
debt to lower long term interest rates and encourage investment while the
Federal Reserve simultaneously sold short –term Treasury bills to raise short –
term interest rates to attract capital inflows), and the Interest Equalization Tax
in 1963 (which imposed a tax on capital outflows).
The U.S.Treasury also engaged in sterilized exchange market intervention, both
spot and forward, using the Exchange Stabilization Fund, which had been
created in 1934 from the proceeds of Roosevelt’s devaluation of the dollar
(Bordo, Humpage and Schwartz 2015 chapter 3). In 1961, to tap the Fed’s
greater resources, the Treasury requested it to join in the intervention. The main
instrument used by the Fed to protect the gold stock was the swap network. It
was designed to protect the U.S. gold stock by temporarily providing an
alternative to foreign central bank conversion of their dollar holdings into gold.
In a typical swap transaction, the Federal Reserve and a foreign central bank
would undertake simultaneous and offsetting spot and forward exchange
transactions typically at the same exchange rates and equal interest rates.
The swaps in turn became valuable to foreign monetary authorities in the face of a
currency crisis, e.g. the UK 1961 to 1967 and France 1968-69. The Federal Reserve
swap lines increased from $ 900 million to $11.2 billion between March 1962 and
the closing of the gold window in August 1971 (Bordo, Humpage and Schwartz

19

2015). See Figure 2 and Figure 3 .As can be seen in figure 3 until 1967 sterling took
up the lions share of the swap lines.
The swaps and the ancillary Treasury policies did protect the U.S. gold reserve until
the mid 1960s and were viewed at the time as successful policies. Indeed during the
period 1959 to 1967 the Bretton Woods system functioned reasonably well with the
various cooperative arrangements that had been worked out by the G10, the BIS and
the IMF (Bordo and Schenk 2017).
In addition to the many policies designed to solve the U.S. adjustment problem,
following Triffin’s approach, a number of plans were instituted to provide
alternative forms of liquidity for the international monetary system to gold and
dollars. Triffin’s own solution was to go back to the Keynes plan and have the IMF
serve as the world’s central bank and issue bancor (international fiat money). An
alternative plan was Edward Bernstein (first Research Director of the IMF)’s plan to
issue CRU-- a composite reserve unit. Under the Bernstein plan, each member of the
G10 would subscribe an amount of its own currency to a pool and receive in
exchange a corresponding amount of CRUs which could then be used as equivalent
to gold. An extension of the CRU was the Special Drawing Right (SDR) which was
adopted under the First Amendment to the IMF articles in 1969. In the SDR scheme,
a special drawing account was set up at the Fund, separate from the general
account. In contrast to the CRU, access to SDRs was made available to all members,
not just the G10. Members were credited SDRs in proportion to their quotas. Also
unlike the CRU, the SDR was a fiat obligation and was not backed by gold, although it
was valued in terms of gold at par with the U.S. dollar. Its acceptability derived from

20

the obligation by other members to accept SDRs in exchange for providing hard
currency. Members had to accept SDRs when the Fund mandated their acceptance,
as long as their holdings were less than three times their cumulative allocation. The
IMF Articles were amended in 1969 creating the SDR. It was activated in 1970.
Several plans were also suggested to alleviate the confidence problem. These
included: substituting SDRs for gold and dollars as reserve assets “the substitution
account” ( McCauley and Schenk 2015). Many felt that this would just put the
pressure onto the new asset; doubling the official price of gold (Rueff 1967, Gilbert
1968). It would create sufficient liquidity to alleviate both the liquidity and
adjustment problems. Also, the rise in the official price of gold would encourage gold
production and discourage private demand. Growth in the world monetary gold
stock would be sufficient to finance the growth of real output and prevent a threat
to US gold reserves for the foreseeable future. It was opposed on the grounds that it
was time inconsistent, that if the official price of gold were raised once why would it
not happen again? Market agents would expect a change in gold’s price in the future
and would reduce their holdings of dollars permanently. Second it would only
postpone the problem because eventually, in the face of rapid real growth scarcity
would reappear (Bordo 1993 page 72).

5. The Breakdown of Bretton Woods 1968 to 1971

A key force that led to the breakdown of the BWS was the rise in inflation in the
center country, the United States, beginning in 1965. Until that year Federal Reserve

21

Chairman William McChesney Martin had maintained low inflation. It also attached
high importance to the balance of payments and the US monetary gold stock in its
policy deliberations (Bordo and Eichengreen 2013). Beginning in 1965 the Martin
Fed shifted to an inflationary policy which continued until the early 1980s and in
the 1970s became known as the Great Inflation .See figure 4. The shift in policy
reflected the accommodation of growing fiscal deficits—a strategy referred to as
fiscal dominance (Leeper and Walker 2011.). Rising deficits reflected the increasing
expense of the Vietnam War and Lyndon Baines Johnson’s Great Society. One way
that fiscal pressure led to accommodative monetary policy was by the use of “Even
Keel” policies under which the Federal Reserve would stabilize interest rates during
Treasury funding operations. This operation prevented the Fed from tightening
monetary policy to offset inflationary pressure (Meltzer 2010, Humpage 2015).
The Federal Reserve shifted its stance in the mid 1960s away from monetary
orthodoxy in response to the growing influence of Keynesian economics in the
Kennedy and Johnson administrations with its emphasis on the primary objective of
full employment and the belief that the Fed could manage the Phillips Curve tradeoff
between inflation and unemployment ( Meltzer 2010 Vol 2 Book 1) In addition, as
the inflation rate ratcheted up, fear that the tight monetary policies required

to

reduce it would lead to rising unemployment and a political backlash against the
Fed made first Chairman Martin and then Arthur Burns, his successor, reluctant to
stop it ( Bordo and Orphanides 2013. Introduction)
Increasing U.S. monetary growth led to rising inflation. Rising U.S. inflation then
spread to the rest of the world through growing US balance of payments deficits. A

22

well understood transmission mechanism was via the classical price specie flow
mechanism supplemented by capital flows .This led to growing balance of payment
surpluses in Germany and other countries. The German monetary authorities ( and
other surplus countries) attempted to sterilize the inflows but were eventually
unsuccessful leading to growing inflationary pressure. (Darby, Lothian,et al 1983).
In addition to the rise in US inflation as a source of strain on the international
monetary system, world gold production leveled off in the mid 1960s and even
declined in 1966. While at the same time private demand for gold increased leading
to a drop in the world monetary gold stock after 1966. Beginning in 1966, the Gold
Pool became a net seller of gold.
After the devaluation of sterling in November 1967 pressure mounted against the
dollar via the London gold market. From December 1967 to March 1968, the Gold
Pool lost $3 billion in gold with the U.S. share at $2.2 billion (Solomon 1976, Bordo,
Monnet and Naef 2017). In the face of the pressure the Gold Pool was disbanded on
March 17, 1968 and a two-tier arrangement put in its place. The monetary
authorities of the Gold Pool agreed neither to sell nor to buy gold from the market
and would transact amongst themselves at the official $35 price. As a consequence,
the link between gold production and other sources of gold and official reserves was
cut. In the following three years the U.S. put considerable pressure on other
monetary authorities to refrain from converting their dollar holdings into gold.
The world had switched to a de facto dollar standard. However gold convertibility
still played a role. Although the major industrial countries tacitly agreed not to
convert their outstanding dollar liabilities into U.S. monetary gold the threat of

23

doing so was always present. The system also developed into a de facto fixed
exchange rate system. Exchange rates became more rigid out of the fear of the
consequences of members allowing them to change. Moreover because of increased
capital mobility the pressure for altering the parities of countries with persistent
deficits and surpluses became harder to stop through the use of domestic policy
tools and the aid of international rescue packages.
1968-1969 was characterized by currency crises in France and Germany leading to
a devaluation in France and a temporary float and then revaluation in Germany
taking the pressure temporarily off the U.S..In 1970 U.S. interest rates fell in
response to rapid monetary expansion and the U.S. balance of payments
mushroomed to $9 billion. The deficit exploded to $30 billion by August 1971. The
dollar flood increased the reserves of the surplus countries auguring inflation.
German money growth doubled from 6.8 % to 12% in 1971 and the German
inflation rate increased from 1.8% in 1969 to 5.3% in 1971 (Meltzer 1991, page 73).
In April 1971 the dollar inflow to Germany reached $3 billion. On May 5 1971 the
Bundesbank suspended official operations in the foreign exchange market and
allowed the deutsche mark to float. Similar actions by Austria, Belgium, the
Netherlands and Switzerland followed (Solomon 1976, page 179).
In April 1971, the U.S. balance of trade turned to a deficit for the first time. The
decision to suspend gold convertibility by President Richard Nixon on August 15
1971 was triggered by French and British intentions in early August to convert
dollars into gold. The U.S. decision to suspend gold convertibility ended a key aspect

24

of the Bretton Woods System. The remaining part of the system, the adjustable peg
disappeared by March 1973.
The Bretton Woods system collapsed for three basic reasons. First inflationary US
monetary policy was inappropriate for the key currency country of the system.
Although the acceleration of inflation from 1965 to 1971 was low compared to what
happened in the 1970s, it was sufficient to trigger a speculative attack on the
world’s monetary gold stock in 1968, leading to the collapse of the Gold Pool (
Garber 1993). Once the system had evolved into a de facto dollar standard after the
collapse of the Gold Pool, the obligation of the United States was to maintain price
stability. Instead it conducted an inflationary monetary policy that ultimately
destroyed the system. Indeed the Bretton Woods System was based on rules. The
most important of which was to follow monetary and fiscal policies consistent with
the official peg. The U.S. violated this rule after 1965 ( Bordo 1993 page 84).
Second, the surplus countries were increasingly unwilling to adjust and absorb
dollar balances and revalue their currencies. This reflected basic differences in the
underlying inflation rates that they were willing to accept. It also reflected growing
productivity differences between Germany and Japan on the one hand and the
United States on the other which changed real exchange rates ( Marston 1987). The
growing gap between the sovereign interests of the United States and the other
major powers likely reflected the decline in U.S. power. At the same time as U.S.
power declined relative to the continental countries European countries and Japan
the G10 lost effectiveness and no other focal points of power emerged. The stage
was set for a decentralized system.

25

Finally, the collapse of the Bretton Woods System was related to two major design
flaws. The first was the gold dollar/ gold exchange system which placed the United
States under threat of a convertibility crisis. In reaction it pursued policies that in
the end made adjustment more difficult. The second flaw was the adjustable peg.
Because, in the face of growing capital mobility, the costs of discrete changes in
parities were deemed so high, the system evolved into a reluctant fixed exchange
rate system without any effective adjustment.

6 .Conclusion
The collapse of the Bretton Woods syatem between 1971 and 1973 led to the
general adoption by advanced countries of a managed floating exchange rate system
which is still with us. Yet this outcome (at least at the time) was not inevitable.7 As
was argued by Despres, Kindleberger and Salant (1966) in contra distinction to
Triffin, the ongoing U.S. balance of payments deficit was not really a problem. The
rest of the world voluntarily held dollar balances because of their valuable service
flow—the deficit was demand determined. They viewed the U.S. as supplying
financial intermediation services to the rest of the world. Europeans borrowed long
–term capital from the U.S. because the U.S. capital markets were deeper and more
efficient and interest rates were lower. In turn, Europeans maintained short-term
balances in American banks because of a higher return. In their view the Bretton
Woods System could have continued indefinitely .
This of course was not the case, but although the par value system ended in 1973
See Bordo and Eichengreen (1998 )for an analysis based on a model of the global
gold standard of how the life of Bretton Woods could have been prolonged.
7

26

the dollar standard without gold is still with us as McKinnon (1969, 1988, 2014) had
long argued. Both private entities and official agencies hold dollars because of their
superior attributes as money. This was the case in the 1960s when under the gold
dollar standard and still is the case today with fiat money. The key requirement to
maintain the pure dollar standard is for the Federal Reserve to follow a policy of
credible monetary policy geared to price stability. In the 1970s the Federal
Reserve’s inflationary policy led to a shift out of dollar holdings in the rest of the
world and culminated in a speculative attack on the dollar in 1978. Paul Volcker was
appointed Chairman of the Federal Reserve to end the inflationary spiral and
restore credibility. He succeeded in doing this by following a vigorous
disinflationary policy which by the mid 1980s greatly reduced the inflation rate but
at the expense of a serious recession in 1980-82. Since the mid 1980s the Fed has
followed a policy to maintain credibility for low inflation and the international
stature of the dollar has been more than fully restored (Eichengreen 2010).
The dollar standard was resented by the French in the 1960s and referred to as
conferring “the exorbitant privilege” on the U.S. and the same argument was made in
2010 by the Governor of the Central Bank of China. However the likelihood that the
dollar will be replaced as the dominant international reserve currency in the
foreseeable future seems remote. The alternative candidates are the euro and the
Chinese renminbi. The euro is still in crisis and the likelihood that the Eurozone will
ever be a secure and stable political and economic entity is doubtful. China is not yet
financially developed and does not have the open financial system free from capital
controls or the presence of the rule of law necessary to backstop a true international

27

reserve currency. The dollar standard and the legacy of the Bretton Woods system
will be with us for a long time.

Figure 1: U.S. Gold Stock and External Liabilities 1951-1975

28

Source: Banking and Monetary Statistics 1941‐1970. Washington D.C. Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System. September 1976 Table 14.1, 15.1

Figure 2: Federal Reserve Swap Lines 1962 –1973

Source: Federal Reserve System

Figure 3: Composition of Drawings on the Federal Reserve Swap Line
29

1962 –1971

Source: Federal Reserve System

Figure 4: Inflation Rates

Source: U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, IMF (various issues).

30

References
Luca Benati and Charles Goodhart (2010) “Monetary Policy Regimes and
Economic Performance: The Historical Record 1979-2008” in Benjamin
Friedman and Michael Woodford (eds) Handbook of Monetary Economics Vol 3.
New York North Holland Press

Michael Bordo and Robert N McCauley ( 2017) “Triffin ;Dilemma or Myth?”
Basel:BIS (mimeo)

Michael Bordo and Catherine Schenk (2017) “Monetary Policy Cooperation and
Coordination: An Historical Perspective on the Importance of Rules” in Michael
Bordo and John Taylor (eds) Rules for International Monetary Stability: past,
Present and Future. Stanford CA: Hoover Institution Press

Michael Bordo, Eric Monnet and Alain Naef (2017) “The Gold Pool ( 1961-1968)
and the Fall of Bretton Woods: Lessons for Central Bank Cooperation.” Banque
de France (mimeo)

Michael D. Bordo, Owen Humpage and Anna J. Schwartz (2015), Strained
Relations: US Foreign Exchange Operations and Monetary Policy in the Twentieth
Century. Chicago: University of Chicago Press

31

Michael D Bordo and Barry Eichengreen (2013) “ Bretton Woods and the Great
Inflation” chapter 9 in Michael Bordo and Athanasios Orphanides (eds) The Great
Inflation. University of Chicago Press

Michael D Bordo and Athanasios Orphanides (2013) The Great Inflation. Chicago;
University of Chicago Press

Michael D Bordo, Ali Dib and Larry Schembri (2010) “Canada’s Pioneering
Experience with a Flexible Exchange Rate in the 1950s” International Journal of
Central Banking. October

Michael D Bordo, Ronald MacDonald and Michael Oliver (2010) “ Sterling in
Crisis: 1964-1967” European Review of Economic History 13 (3) ; 437-459.

Michael D Bordo, Christopher Erceg and Charles Evans (2000) “Money, Sticky
Wages and the Great Depression” American Economic Review, December

Michael D Bordo and Anna J Schwartz (1999) ‘Monetary Policy Regimes and
Economic Performance; The Historical Record’ chapter two of the Handbook of
Macroeconomics (eds) John Taylor and Michael Woodford. New York. North
Holland

32

Michael D Bordo and Barry Eichengreen ( 1998) “ Implications of the Great
Depression for the Development of the International Monetary System ‘ in
Michael D. Bordo, Claudia Goldin and Eugene N. White. The Defining Moment: The
Great Depression and the American Economy in the Twentieth Century. Chicago;
University of Chicago Press

Michael D. Bordo (1993) “The Bretton Woods International Monetary System; A
Historical Overview” in A Retrospective on the Bretton Woods System, Lessons for
International Monetary Reform, edited by Michael Bordo and Barry Eichengreen,
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Michael Darby, James Lothian et al (1983) The International Transmission of
Inflation. Chicago; University of Chicago Press

Emil Despres, Charles Kindleberger and William Salant (1966) “ The Dollar and
World Liquidity: A Minority View” Economist 5 ( February): 526-529.

Barry Eichengreen (2010) Exorbitant Privilege: The Rise and Fall of the Dollar
and the Future of the International Monetary System. New York: Oxford
University Press.

Otmar Emminger (1967) “Practical Aspects of the Problem of Balance of
Payments Adjustment’ Journal of Political Economy 75 (August): 512-522.

33

Milton Friedman (1953) “The Case for Flexible Exchange Rates” in Essays in
Positive Economics, 157-203. Chicago; University of Chicago Press

Peter M Garber (1993) “The Collapse of the Bretton Woods Fixed Exchange Rate
Regime” in A Retrospective on the Bretton Woods System: Lessons for
International Monetary Reform. Edited by Michael D. Bordo and Barry
Eichengreen. Chicago: University of Chicago Press: 461-485.

Martin Gilbert (1968) The Gold Dollar System; Conditions of Equilibrium and the
Price of Gold. Princeton Essays in International Economics. Princeton University,
International Finance Section.

Owen Humpage (2015) “Even Keel and the Great Inflation” Federal Reserve
Bank of Cleveland Working Paper 15-32

Jacob Kaplan and Gunther Schleiminger ( 1989) The European Payments Union:
Financial Diplomacy in the 1950s. Oxford : Clarendon Press

John Maynard Keynes (1943) [1969] “Proposals for an International Clearing
Union”. April in

Keith Horsefield et al, The International Monetary Fund 1945-

1965: Twenty Years of International Monetary Cooperation. Vol 1. Chronicle.
Washington DC: International Monetary Fund.

34

Eric Leeper and Todd Walker (2011)” Perceptions and Misperceptions of Fiscal
Inflation’ BIS Working paper 364 December

Richard Marston ( 1987) “ Real Exchange rates and Productivity Growth in the
United States and Japan”.in Sven Arndt(ed) Real Financial Linkages among Open
Economies. Cambridge Mass: MIT Press

Robert McCauley and Catherine Schenk (2015) “Reforming the International
Monetary System in the 1970s and 2000s: Would an SDR Substitution Account
Have Worked? “ International Finance 18(2) pp 187-206.

Ronald I. McKinnon (2014) The Unloved Dollar Standard: From Bretton Woods to
the Rise of China. New York: Oxford University Press.

Ronald I. McKinnon (1988) “An International Gold Standard without Gold,” Cato
Journal 8 (Fall); 351-373.

Ronald I. McKinnon (1969) Private and Official International Money: The Case for
the Dollar. Princeton Essays in International Economics. Princeton University.
International Finance Section.

35

Allan H. Meltzer (2010) A History of the Federal Reserve. Volume 2 Book 1,
Chicago; University of Chicago Press.

Allan H. Meltzer (1991) “U.S. Policy in the Bretton Woods Era” Federal Reserve
Bank of St.Louis Review 73 ( May/June): 54-83.

Robert A Mundell (1969a) ‘The International Monetary Fund’ Journal of World
Trade Law 3, pp 455-97.

Robert A Mundell (1969b) ‘Problems of the International Monetary System’ in
Robert A Mundell and Alexander Swoboda (eds) Monetary Problems of the
International Economy. Chicago; University of Chicago Press

Maurice Obstfeld and Alan Taylor (2004) Global Capital Markets: Integration,
Crises and Growth. New York: Cambridge University Press

Jacques Rueff (1967) “ Increase the Price of Gold” in The International Monetary
System : Problems and Proposals , ed Lawrence H. Officer and Thomas D. Willett,
179-190. Englewood Cliffs NJ: Prentice Hall

Catherine Schenk (2010) The Decline of Sterling” Managing the Retreat of an
International Currency ,1945 to 1992. New York: Cambridge University Press

36

Robert Solomon (1976) The international Monetary System, 1945-1976; An
Insider’s View. New York; Harper and Row

John B Taylor ( 2015) “ Recreating the 1940s –Founded Institutions for Today’s
Global Economy: Remarks upon receiving the Truman Medal for Economic
Policy” Kansas City Missouri October 14

Robert Triffin (1957) Europe and the Money Muddle. New Haven, Conn. Yale
University Press

Robert Triffin (1960) Gold and the Dollar Crisis. New Haven, CT: Yale University
Press.

37

