NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

POLITICAL CYCLES AND STOCK RETURNS
Lubos Pastor
Pietro Veronesi
Working Paper 23184
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23184

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2017, Revised May 2019

The views in this paper are the responsibility of the authors, not the institutions with which they
are affiliated, nor the National Bureau of Economic Research. For helpful comments, we are
grateful to our conference discussants Daniel Andrei, Frederico Belo, Ian Dew-Becker, Alex
Michaelides, Anna Pavlova, Ross Valkanov, and Mungo Wilson, as well as to Peter Buisseret,
Wioletta Dziuda, Vito Gala, Marcin Kacperczyk, Ali Lazrak, Pedro Santa-Clara, Rob Stambaugh,
Lucian Taylor, Francesco Trebbi, Harald Uhlig, Jan Zabojnik, conference participants at the
Adam Smith Workshop, American Finance Association, Citrus Finance Conference, ESSFM
Gerzensee, European Finance Association, Jackson Hole Finance Conference, Minnesota MacroAsset Pricing Conference, MIT Capital Markets Research Workshop, Political Economy of
Finance conference, Red Rock Finance conference, and seminar audiences at The Einaudi
Institute for Economics and Finance, Imperial College, Rice University, University of British
Columbia, University of Chicago (both Booth and Harris schools), University of Houston,
University of Matej Bel, University of Michigan, University of Pennsylvania, University of Texas
at Austin, WU Vienna, and the National Bank of Slovakia. We are also grateful to Will Cassidy,
Bianca He, and Pierre Jaffard for excellent research assistance and to the Fama-Miller Center for
Research in Finance and the Center for Research in Security Prices, both at Chicago Booth, for
research support.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Lubos Pastor and Pietro Veronesi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Political Cycles and Stock Returns
Lubos Pastor and Pietro Veronesi
NBER Working Paper No. 23184
February 2017, Revised May 2019
JEL No. D72,G12,G18,P16
ABSTRACT
We develop a model of political cycles driven by time-varying risk aversion. Agents choose to
work in the public or private sector and to vote Democrat or Republican. In equilibrium, when
risk aversion is high, agents elect Democrats—the party promising more redistribution. The
model predicts higher average stock market returns under Democratic presidencies, explaining
the well-known “presidential puzzle.” The model can also explain why economic growth has
been faster under Democratic presidencies. In the data, Democratic voters are more risk- averse
and risk aversion declines during Democratic presidencies. Public workers vote Democrat while
entrepreneurs vote Republican, as the model predicts.

Lubos Pastor
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Ave
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
lubos.pastor@chicagobooth.edu
Pietro Veronesi
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
pietro.veronesi@chicagobooth.edu

1. Introduction
Stock market returns in the United States exhibit a striking pattern: they are much higher
under Democratic presidents than under Republican ones. From 1927 to 2015, the average
excess market return under Democratic presidents is 10.7% per year, whereas under Republican presidents, it is only −0.2% per year. The difference, almost 11% per year, is highly
significant both economically and statistically. This fact is well known, having been carefully
documented by Santa-Clara and Valkanov (2003).1 However, the source of this return gap
is unclear. After ruling out various potential explanations, most notably differences in risk,
Santa-Clara and Valkanov dub this phenomenon the “presidential puzzle.”
Many financial market anomalies are coincidences that can be attributed to data mining.
Such anomalies tend to vanish out of sample. The presidential puzzle, however, survives an
out-of-sample assessment. In the 1927–1998 period analyzed by Santa-Clara and Valkanov,
the Democrat-Republican return gap is 9.4% per year. In 1999 through 2015, the gap is even
larger at 17.4% per year. There seems to be a genuine fact to explain.
It might be tempting to offer explanations based on different economic policies of the two
parties. Perhaps Democratic policies are good for the stock market, or Republican policies
are bad. However, such explanations would require a large amount of market irrationality.
Investors would have to repeatedly misprice stocks by failing to anticipate such policy effects.
We propose a simpler explanation that does not involve irrational behavior.
Our explanation emphasizes the endogeneity of election outcomes. We argue that the
return gap is not explained by what presidents do, but rather by when they get elected.
Democrats tend to get elected when expected future returns are high; Republicans win when
expected returns are low. To generate rational time variation in expected returns, we rely
on time variation in risk aversion. The idea of time-varying risk aversion is widely accepted
in financial economics as a way of understanding the observed time variation in risk premia
(e.g., Campbell and Cochrane, 1999). When risk aversion is high, investors demand high
compensation for risk, which they earn in the form of high average future returns.
We develop a model of political cycles that gives rise to the following story, in which the
presidential puzzle emerges endogenously. When risk aversion is high, as during economic
crises, voters are more likely to elect a Democratic president because they demand more social
insurance. When risk aversion is low, voters are more likely to elect a Republican because
1

Prior to Santa-Clara and Valkanov (2003), this fact was reported by several studies in practitioner
journals, such as Huang (1985) and Hensel and Ziemba (1995). To simplify the exposition, we attribute the
finding to Santa-Clara and Valkanov whose analysis is more formal and comprehensive.

1

they want to take more business risk. Therefore, risk aversion is higher under Democrats,
resulting in a higher equity risk premium, and thus a higher average return. In our model,
the high risk premium is not caused by the Democratic presidency; instead, both the risk
premium and the Democratic presidency are caused by high risk aversion.
Our model features agents with heterogeneous skill and time-varying risk aversion. The
agents make two decisions: they choose an occupation and vote in an election. There are
two occupations and two political parties. For their occupation, each agent can be either
an entrepreneur or a government worker. Entrepreneurs are risk-takers whose income is
increasing in skill and subject to taxation. Government workers support entrepreneurial
activity and live off taxes paid by entrepreneurs. In the election, agents choose between two
political parties, a high- and a low-tax one. The high-tax party, if elected, imposes a high
flat tax rate on entrepreneurs’ income; the low-tax party imposes a low rate. Under either
party, the government balances its budget. The election is decided by the median voter.
In equilibrium, entrepreneurs vote for the low-tax party while government workers vote
for the high-tax party. The low-tax party thus wins the election if more than half of all
agents are entrepreneurs. Agents become entrepreneurs if their skill is sufficiently high. The
mass of entrepreneurs is larger under the low-tax party than under the high-tax one.
Time-varying risk aversion shapes election outcomes by affecting agents’ occupational
choice, which in turn affects their electoral choice. Higher risk aversion makes entrepreneurship less attractive because agents dislike the risk associated with entrepreneurship. When
risk aversion is high, more agents prefer the safe income from the government over the risky
income from business ownership. An increase in risk aversion thus shrinks the ranks of entrepreneurs, raising the likelihood of the high-tax party getting elected. Loosely speaking,
when agents are more risk-averse, they demand a stronger safety net, which the high-tax
party does a better job providing through larger fiscal redistribution.
When risk aversion is high enough, the economy has a unique equilibrium in which less
than half of all agents become entrepreneurs and the high-tax party wins the election. When
risk aversion is low enough, there is a unique equilibrium in which the low-tax party wins.
When risk aversion is in between, either party can win, and which of the two “sunspot”
equilibria we end up in is impossible to predict within the model.
Risk aversion connects the party in office to stock returns. Since high risk aversion
gets the high-tax party elected, risk aversion is higher while the high-tax party—which we
interpret as Democrats—is in office. The higher risk aversion translates into a higher risk
premium under Democrats, generating the presidential puzzle inside the model.
2

Are Democrats more likely to get elected when risk aversion is high? Risk aversion tends
to rise in times of economic turmoil (e.g., Guiso et al., 2016), and during such periods, hightax parties tend to get elected. Broz (2013) examines bank crises in developed countries
and finds that left-wing governments are more likely to be elected after financial crashes.
Wright (2012) shows that U.S. voters tend to elect Democrats when unemployment is high.
The two biggest financial crises over the past century also fit the bill. In November 1932,
during the Great Depression, the incumbent Republican president Herbert Hoover lost the
election to Democrat Franklin Roosevelt. In November 2008, at the peak of the financial
crisis, Republican George W. Bush was replaced by Democrat Barack Obama. Roosevelt and
Obama are not the only Democratic presidents elected during or shortly after recessions. For
example, Kennedy was elected during the 1960-61 recession, Carter shortly after the 1973-75
recession, and Clinton shortly after the 1990-91 recession. We argue this is not a coincidence.
When the economy is weak, risk aversion rises, contributing to a Democrat victory.
We also provide direct evidence connecting risk aversion to voter preferences. In the time
series, four different proxies for risk aversion tend to decline over the course of a Democratic
presidency, consistent with the model. In the cross section, more risk-averse Americans tend
to vote Democrat while less risk-averse ones vote Republican, consistent with the idea that
more risk-averse individuals avoid business risk but demand social insurance. In the same
survey data, we also find that government workers tend to vote Democrat while entrepreneurs
vote Republican, as the model predicts. We find similar results for the UK, with the Labour
(Conservative) Party playing the role of the U.S. Democratic (Republican) Party.
Not only stock returns but also economic growth has been faster under Democrats. From
1930 to 2015, U.S. real GDP growth is 4.9% per year under Democratic presidents but
only 1.7% under Republican presidents. The difference, 3.2% per year, is significant both
economically and statistically. A partisan growth gap has also been noted by Hibbs (1987),
Alesina and Sachs (1988), and Blinder and Watson (2016). Our model can explain this gap.
When risk aversion is high, the private sector is more productive because only high-skilled
agents become entrepreneurs. The public sector contributes to growth by leveraging the
private sector’s productivity. If the contribution is sufficiently strong, the model implies
faster growth under high risk aversion, which is when Democrats are in power.
Political cycles arise naturally in our model. When the economy is weak, risk aversion
is high, helping Democrats win the election. Under Democrats, growth is higher, leading
to lower risk aversion, which helps Republicans win the next election. Under Republicans,
growth is lower, leading to higher risk aversion, which helps Democrats win, etc.

3

This paper expands the intersection of finance and political economy. To finance, we
contribute the first model of political cycles. To political economy, we add a new mechanism
that generates such cycles, along with novel implications for asset prices. To both literatures,
we add a rational explanation for the presidential puzzle in stock returns.
In the earliest economic models of political cycles, beginning with Nordhaus (1975),
the sole objective of political parties is to win elections. In these “opportunistic” models,
all parties adopt the same policy in an effort to capture the median voter (Downs, 1957).
These models cannot explain differences between Democratic and Republican administrations. “Partisan” models, originating with Hibbs (1977), assume that parties have different
policy preferences, which translate into different policy platforms. We develop a new partisan model with strong asset pricing implications. To our knowledge, this is the first model
making predictions for the behavior of stock prices under different administrations.
In the traditional partisan view (e.g., Hibbs, 1977, 1987, and Alesina, 1987), Democrats
prioritize growth over inflation while Republicans do the opposite. In contrast, we emphasize
the parties’ different preferences over fiscal redistribution. We think of Democrats as the
“high-tax” party and Republicans as the “low-tax” party. While these labels are simplistic,
they have some empirical support. Across U.S. states, state tax burdens are higher when
the state legislature is controlled by Democrats (Reed, 2006). Across developed countries,
left-wing governments are associated with an expansion of government revenue (Cameron,
1978, Tavares, 2004, Potrafke, 2017a).2 We show that the U.S. federal tax/GDP ratio tends
to rise under Democratic presidents and fall under Republican presidents.
Our focus on tax policy is not the only difference between our model and traditional
partisan models. In those models, agents have preferences over policies; in our model, they
have preferences over consumption. In traditional models, parties optimize over policies; in
ours, policies are taken as given, for simplicity.3 We let agents make not only electoral but also
occupational choices; as a result, the occupation of the median voter changes endogenously.
We allow risk aversion to vary over time, resulting in time variation in policy preferences.
These novel modeling features are crucial in generating our asset pricing predictions.
A large literature is devoted to tests of political cycle models (see surveys by Drazen,
2

Cameron (1978) argues that the U.S. “Democratic party is not considered to be leftist” by international
standards, but adds that “it is, of course, true that the party is to the left of the Republican party.”
3
A richer model could attempt to endogenize the tax rates as equilibrium outcomes of the parties’ policy
decisions. If the two competing parties were purely opportunistic, caring only about winning the election,
they would converge to the same tax rate preferred by the median voter. But if the two parties care also
about the actual policy, convergence is only partial, resulting in two different platform tax rates, as assumed
here. For a detailed discussion of partial convergence, see, for example, Alesina and Rosenthal (1995).

4

2000a, and Dubois, 2016). Given their assumption that Democrats prioritize growth over
inflation, partisan models can explain faster economic growth under Democrats, but their
prediction of higher inflation under Democrats is less successful empirically (e.g., Drazen,
2000b, Potrafke, 2017b). Moreover, they cannot explain the presidential puzzle in stock
returns. Our model can, and it can also explain faster growth under Democrats.
In finance, our paper is related not only to the literature on the presidential puzzle, cited
earlier, but also to studies analyzing the market response to electoral outcomes. It is well
known that the stock market tends to respond more favorably to the election of a Republican
president.4 This evidence is in line with our model: the election of a low-tax party is good
news for shareholders because lower taxes imply higher after-tax cash flows. This effect is
nontrivial, 2–3% per election (Snowberg et al., 2007), but the presidential puzzle is much
larger: almost 11% per year, or over 40% per four-year presidential term. This paper is also
related to Belo et al. (2013), who relate political cycles to the cross-section of stock returns,
Belo and Yu (2013), who link government investment to risk premia, Koijen, Philipson,
and Uhlig (2016), who find government risk embedded in health care stock prices, Knight
(2006), who analyzes the extent to which policy platforms are capitalized into stock prices,
and the literature on political uncertainty.5 Our model is significantly richer than Pástor and
Veronesi (2016) as we add two key features: electoral choice and time-varying risk aversion.
Moreover, while their focus is on income inequality, ours is on political cycles.

2. Model
There is a sequence of electoral periods indexed by t. At the beginning of each period, a
continuum of agents with unit mass is born. These agents immediately choose an occupation
and elect a government. At the end of the period, agents consume and die.
Agents have identical preferences over end-of-period consumption:
(Ci,t+1 )1−γt
Ut (Ci,t+1 ) =
,
1 − γt

(1)

where Ci,t+1 is agent i’s consumption at the end of period t and γt > 0 is the coefficient of
relative risk aversion. Note that risk aversion γt varies over time but not across agents.
Agents are heterogeneous in entrepreneurial skill. Agent i is endowed with a skill level
4

See, for example, Niederhoffer et al. (1970), Riley and Luksetich (1980), and Snowberg et al. (2007).
See, for example, Pástor and Veronesi (2012, 2013), Boutchkova et al. (2012), Julio and Yook (2012),
Baker et al. (2016), Fernández-Villaverde et al. (2015), and Kelly et al. (2016).
5

5

µi , which is randomly drawn from a normal distribution:6

µi ∼ N 0, σµ2 .

(2)

Agents with higher skill produce more output if they become entrepreneurs.
Each agent is endowed with one unit of human capital. Agents choose whether to deploy
this capital in the private or public sector. Specifically, each agent chooses one of two
occupations: entrepreneur or government worker. Entrepreneurs produce output and pay
taxes; government workers support entrepreneurial activity and consume taxes.
If agent i chooses to become an entrepreneur, he invests his capital in a private agentspecific technology that produces output equal to
Yi,t+1 = eµi + εt+1 + εi,t+1 Gt ,

(3)

where εt+1 is an aggregate shock, εi,t+1 is an idiosyncratic shock, and Gt is the government’s
contribution. All shocks are i.i.d. normal: εt+1 ∼ N (− 12 σ 2 , σ 2 ) and εi,t+1 ∼ N (− 21 σ12 , σ12 ), so
that E(eεt+1 ) = E(eεi,t+1 ) = 1. All εi,t+1 are i.i.d. across agents. The investment is made at
the beginning of period t. The shocks are realized—and output Yi,t+1 produced—at the end
of period t, just before a new generation of agents is born. Each entrepreneur owns a firm
producing a liquidating dividend of Yi,t+1 (1 − τt ), where τt is the tax rate. The entrepreneur
can sell a fraction of his firm to other entrepreneurs and use the proceeds from the sale to
purchase two kinds of financial assets: shares in the firms of other entrepreneurs and risk-free
bonds. The bonds mature at the end of period t and are in zero net supply. Each entrepreneur
faces a constraint inspired by moral hazard considerations: he must retain ownership of at
least a fraction θ of his own firm. Due to this friction, markets are incomplete.
If agent i becomes a government worker, she contributes to production indirectly, by
supporting entrepreneurs. In practice, governments support business in many ways: by
maintaining law and order, building roads, providing education, supporting research, etc. We
summarize all this support in the term Gt .7 This term enters equation (3) in a multiplicative
fashion, indicating that government makes all entrepreneurs more productive. We do not
make any assumptions about Gt , other than it is positive and finite, until Section 2.3.
Each government worker consumes an equal share of the tax revenue paid by entrepreneurs.
Government workers cannot sell claims to their future tax-financed income.
Since the model features only two types of agents, the types must be interpreted broadly.
In a realistic system of fiscal redistribution, we think of entrepreneurs as net contributors,
6

Without loss of generality, we set the mean of this distribution to zero, to simplify the algebraic presentation. None of our conclusions rely on the zero mean, though (see the Online Appendix).
7
Barro (1990) seems to be the first to include government as an input in a private production function.

6

or net tax payers, and government workers as net beneficiaries, or net tax recipients. For
example, we think of government workers as not only government employees but also retirees
living off Social Security, people on disability or unemployment benefits, etc.
In the election, agents choose between two political parties, H (high-tax) and L (lowtax). The two parties differ in a single dimension: the tax rate they levy on entrepreneurs’
income.8 We denote the tax rates levied by parties H and L by τ H and τ L , respectively,
where τ H > τ L . We take the two tax rates as given and assume that the parties implement
those rates if elected.9 Under either party, the tax proceeds are redistributed to government
workers, so that the government always runs a balanced budget. The election is decided by
the median voter. The key events in the model are summarized in Figure 1.

2.1. Equilibrium
At the beginning of each period, agents make two simultaneous choices: they select an
occupation and elect a party. We solve for a Nash equilibrium in which each agent maximizes
the expected utility in equation (1) while taking all other agents’ choices as given. We first
show how agents vote while taking occupational choices as given (Section 2.1.1), then how
agents choose their occupations while taking electoral choices as given (Section 2.1.2), and
finally, we examine the equilibrium outcomes (Section 2.1.3).
Let It denote the set of agents who choose to become entrepreneurs at the beginning
R
of period t. The equilibrium mass of entrepreneurs is then mt = i∈It di and the mass
of government workers is 1 − mt . In equilibrium, It includes all agents whose expected
utility from being an entrepreneur exceeds that from being a government worker. Since
each agent’s utility depends on It , obtaining the equilibrium involves solving a fixed-point
problem. Below, we present only the results. All proofs are in the Online Appendix.

2.1.1. Electoral Choice
We assume that each agent votes for the party whose election would maximize the agent’s
utility. This “truthful voting” assumption seems reasonable because, due to their infinitesimal size, agents cannot affect the election outcome through strategic voting.
8

The simplifying assumption of single-dimensional party platforms is common in the literature. For
example, Alesina and Rosenthal (1995) assume a one-dimensional policy model throughout their book.
9
This assumption of no difference between the parties’ policy platforms and actual policies is often made
in theoretical models of political cycles (e.g., Rogoff and Sibert, 1988).

7

Proposition 1.

All entrepreneurs vote for party L and all government workers vote for

party H. Therefore, party L wins the election if and only if mt > 0.5.
Proposition 1 shows that agents’ electoral and occupational choices are closely connected.
The intuition is simple. Given It , the economy’s expected total output is fixed. This output is
divided among government workers, who get a share equal to the tax rate, and entrepreneurs,
whose share is one minus the tax rate. Therefore, government workers vote for high taxes
while entrepreneurs vote for low taxes. More broadly, net beneficiaries of fiscal redistribution
vote Democrat while net contributors vote Republican.
Government workers consume tax revenue. This revenue depends on total output Yt+1 ,
Z
Yj,t+1 dj .
(4)
Yt+1 =
j∈It

For a given tax rate τt , total tax revenue is τt Yt+1 . Since this revenue is distributed equally
among 1 − mt government workers, the consumption of any given worker i is
Ci,t+1 =

τt Yt+1
mt
= τt
Gt eεt+1 E [eµj |j ∈ It ]
1 − mt
1 − mt

for all i ∈
/ It ,

(5)

where the second equality follows from equation (3). Given It , each government worker’s
consumption is proportional to τt . Each worker is thus better off choosing τ H over τ L .10
Entrepreneurs consume the proceeds of their investments. Entrepreneur i’s firm pays a
dividend Yi,t+1 (1 − τt ). The firm’s equilibrium market value at the beginning of period t is
Mi,t = Et [πt,t+1 Yi,t+1 (1 − τt )] ,

(6)

where πt,t+1 is the endogenous stochastic discount factor. To diversify, the entrepreneur sells
the fraction 1 − θ of his firm and uses the proceeds, (1 − θ) Mi,t , to buy shares in other firms
and risk-free bonds. Each entrepreneur chooses his portfolio by maximizing expected utility.
In equilibrium, each entrepreneur holds fraction θ of his portfolio in his own firm and 1 − θ
in the value-weighted aggregate stock market portfolio. There is no borrowing or lending
because risk aversion is equal across entrepreneurs. Entrepreneur i’s consumption is
Ci,t+1 = (1 − τt ) Gt eµi +εt+1 [θeεi,t+1 + (1 − θ)]

for all i ∈ It .

(7)

This consumption increases in µi , indicating that more skilled entrepreneurs, whose firms
have higher market values, tend to consume more. Given It , each entrepreneur’s consumption
is proportional to 1 − τt . Entrepreneurs are thus clearly better off choosing τ L over τ H .
10

Since government workers do not invest, they do not bear idiosyncratic risk. Yet their consumption
is not risk-free: it depends on the aggregate shock εt+1 . Given our balanced budget assumption, there is
no room for intertemporal smoothing by the government. When the economy suffers a negative shock, tax
revenue declines, and so does government workers’ consumption. Empirically, the wages of public employees
are indeed procyclical, though not as much as private sector wages (Quadrini and Trigari, 2007).

8

2.1.2. Occupational Choice
In this subsection, we analyze how agents choose to become entrepreneurs or government
workers, taking the electoral choice (i.e., the tax rate) as given.
Proposition 2. Assume that party k ∈ {H, L} is in power, so that the tax rate τ k is given.
Agent i becomes an entrepreneur if and only if
µi > µkt ,

(8)

where µkt is the unique solution to
µkt = log



k

τ
1 − τk







1 − Φ µkt ; σµ2 , σµ2
σµ2
log E [θeεi,t+1 + 1 − θ]1−γt

 +
+ log 
−
, (9)
2
1 − γt
2
k
Φ µt ; 0, σµ


and Φ (.; a, b) is the cdf of the normal distribution
with
 mean a and variance b. The equilib
rium mass of entrepreneurs, mkt = 1 − Φ µkt ; 0, σµ2 , always satisfies 0 < mkt < 1.
Equation (8) shows that only sufficiently skilled agents become entrepreneurs. Agents
with lower skill become government workers. We emphasize that µi denotes entrepreneurial
skill, not general ability. An agent can be an extremely capable public school teacher, police
officer, or public official while being imperfectly suited for entrepreneurship.
Corollary 1. The equilibrium mass of entrepreneurs mkt is decreasing in the tax rate τ k ,
risk aversion γt , idiosyncratic volatility σ1 , and the degree of market incompleteness θ.
Corollary 1 identifies four variables whose high values discourage entrepreneurship: a high
tax rate reduces entrepreneurs’ after-tax income; a high risk aversion means low willingness to
bear the idiosyncratic risk associated with entrepreneurship;11 a high idiosyncratic volatility
implies that entrepreneurial risk is large; and a high degree of market incompleteness means
that this risk cannot be diversified away. When the four variables take high values, only the
most skilled agents find it worthwhile to become entrepreneurs.
2.1.3. Equilibrium Outcomes
The equilibrium outcomes crucially depend on risk aversion.

11

In two special cases, risk aversion has no impact on entrepreneurship. When σ1 = 0, entrepreneurship
involves no idiosyncratic risk. When θ = 0, all idiosyncratic risk can be diversified away. But for σ1 > 0 and
θ > 0, a higher value of risk aversion implies a lower amount of entrepreneurship.

9

Proposition 3. There exist two thresholds γ < γ such that:
1. For γt > γ, there is a unique equilibrium: mt <

1
2

and party H wins the election

2. For γt < γ, there is a unique equilibrium: mt >

1
2

and party L wins the election

3. For γ < γt < γ, there are two pure-strategy Nash equilibria that can both be supported:
(a) If agents believe party H will win, then mt <
(b) If agents believe party L will win, then mt >

1
2
1
2

and H wins
and L wins

The formulas for the two thresholds, γ and γ, are presented in the Online Appendix.
This proposition shows that when risk aversion is high enough, the economy is in the
“H equilibrium” where taxes are high and the majority of agents work for the government.
When risk aversion is low enough, we are in the “L equilibrium” where taxes are low and
most agents are entrepreneurs. In between, either equilibrium is possible.
To understand Proposition 3, recall from Corollary 1 that the threshold µkt from Propo. There are
sition 2 is increasing in the tax rate τ k . Since τ L < τ H , we have µLt < µH
t
H
three types of agents. Agents with µi > µt are “always-entrepreneurs”: they choose entrepreneurship in both H and L equilibria. Agents with µi < µLt are “never-entrepreneurs”:
they choose government work in both equilibria. The third type are agents with
.
µLt < µi < µH
t

(10)

These “intermediate-skill” agents choose a different occupation depending on whether we
are in the H or L equilibrium. The three types of agents are illustrated in Figure 2.
Since both thresholds µLt and µH
are increasing in γt , a higher value of γt implies a smaller
t
mass of always-entrepreneurs and a larger mass of never-entrepreneurs. When γt > γ, the
mass of never-entrepreneurs exceeds 12 so that, given Proposition 1, we end up in the H
equilibrium. When γt < γ, the mass of always-entrepreneurs exceeds 21 and we end up in
the L equilibrium. When γ < γt < γ, the masses of both never-entrepreneurs and alwaysentrepreneurs are smaller than 12 , so it is the intermediate-skill agents who decide which of
the two equilibria will be supported. Which equilibrium they pick cannot be determined
within the model. If they believe, for whatever reason, that the high-tax party is going to
win, then that party indeed wins. But if they believe the low-tax party is going to win, then
the low-tax party wins. See Figure 3 for an illustration of this sunspot equilibrium.
Given the indeterminacy of the equilibrium when γ < γt < γ, we need a rule for choosing
between H and L in such scenarios. For simplicity, we assume that this choice is completely
random, determined by the flip of a fair coin.
10

2.2. Stock Returns
To calculate firm market values in equation (6), we need the equilibrium stochastic discount
factor πt,t+1 . We obtain it from entrepreneurs’ first-order conditions: πt,t+1 ∝ e−γt εt+1 .
Interestingly, despite market incompleteness, πt,t+1 does not depend on idiosyncratic shocks,
εi,t+1 , even though such shocks cannot be fully diversified away (for θ > 0). The reason is
that all agents have the same risk aversion and all firms the same risk exposure. As a result of
this symmetry, all entrepreneurs’ portfolios are symmetric—each entrepreneur holds fraction
θ of his wealth in his own firm and 1 − θ in the market portfolio—and only aggregate risk,
εt+1 , is priced. This fact allows us to derive asset pricing results in closed form.12
The equilibrium market value of firm i at the beginning of period t is given by
2

Mi,t = (1 − τt ) eµi −γt σ Gt .

(11)

This expression is remarkably simple and intuitive. Firm value is increasing in both skill
and government contribution because both raise expected pre-tax dividends. Firm value is
decreasing in the tax rate because stockholders receive after-tax dividends. The value is also
decreasing in aggregate volatility and risk aversion because agents dislike risk.
We obtain a closed-form solution for the value of the aggregate stock market portfolio by
adding up the values from equation (11) across all entrepreneurs:
2

MP,t = (1 − τt ) e−γt σ E [eµj |j ∈ It ] Gt mt ,

(12)

where the value of E [eµj |j ∈ It ] is in the Online Appendix. The market portfolio is worth
MP,t at the beginning of period t and (1 − τt ) Yt+1 at the end of period t. Computing the
ratio of these two values, we obtain the aggregate stock market return Rt+1 = eγt σ

2 +ε

t+1

− 1.

Recalling that E(eεt+1 ) = 1, we see that the expected stock market return is
2

Et (Rt+1 ) = eγt σ − 1 ≈ γt σ 2 .
Proposition 4.

(13)

Assume that γt fluctuates sufficiently so that at least one of the events

γt < γ and γt > γ occurs with nonzero probability, where γ and γ are from Proposition 3.
Expected stock market return is then higher under party H than under party L:


E Rt+1 |τt = τ H > E Rt+1 |τt = τ L .
(14)
Recall the three scenarios from Proposition 3: H, which occurs when γt > γ and in which
party H always wins the election; L, which occurs when γt < γ and in which party L always
12

Many quantities in this section, such as τtk , γtk , mkt , and Gkt , depend on the equilibrium k ∈ {H, L} that
the economy is in. We suppress the superscript k throughout to reduce notational clutter.

11

wins; and H/L, which occurs when γ < γt < γ and in which either party can win. Denote
the expected returns in the three scenarios by ERH , ERL , and ERH/L . From equation (13),
ERL < γσ 2 < ERH/L < γσ 2 < ERH .

(15)

While ERH is always earned under party H and ERL under party L, ERH/L can be earned
under either party with equal probability. Therefore, in the H/L scenario, expected returns
are the same under both parties. Averaging across all three scenarios, it follows that expected
return under party H is higher than under party L.
Proposition 4 summarizes our explanation of the presidential puzzle. As long as risk
aversion is sufficiently volatile, expected market return under Democrats (party H) is higher
than under Republicans (party L), on average. This is a powerful result—what has been
viewed as a puzzle turns out to be a theorem in our model.
Expected stock returns in our model can be interpreted as risk premia, or returns in
excess of the risk-free rate, because that rate is effectively zero. Since agents consume only
once, at the end of the period, there is no intertemporal consumption-saving decision that
would pin down the risk-free rate. We thus use the bond price as the numeraire.
The equity risk premium reflects the unpredictability of aggregate shocks (see equation
(13)). There is no premium for electoral uncertainty because stocks are claims on dividends
paid just before the next election. In our simple model, agents and their firms live for one
period. In a more complicated model in which firms’ lives span elections, electoral uncertainty
would command a risk premium (e.g., Kelly et al., 2016). Our conclusions would likely get
stronger because the impact of electoral uncertainty on stock prices would be larger under
party H when risk aversion is higher. In Section 2.5, we analyze the asset pricing implications
of electoral uncertainty differently—by considering a mixed Nash equilibrium.

2.3. Economic Growth
To calculate economic growth in period t, we divide total output at the end of the period,
Yt+1 , by total capital invested at the beginning of the period. That capital is equal to one
because each agent is endowed with one unit of capital and the mass of agents is also one.
Therefore, economic growth in period t is simply equal to Yt+1 . From equations (3) and (4),
Yt+1 = E (eµi |i ∈ It ) mt Gt eεt+1 .

(16)

The first term on the right-hand side, E (eµi |i ∈ It ), is the average value of eµi across all
entrepreneurs. This term measures the average productivity of entrepreneurs, excluding the
12

government’s contribution. We refer to this term as private sector productivity.
Proposition 5. Private sector productivity is higher under party H than under party L:
E eµi |i ∈ It , τ = τ H



> E eµi |i ∈ It , τ = τ L



.

(17)

To understand this proposition, recall that in equilibrium k ∈ {H, L}, agent i is an
entrepreneur if his skill exceeds a threshold: µi > µkt (Proposition 2). This threshold is
higher under party H: µH
> µLt (Corollary 1). The average skill of entrepreneurs is thus
t
higher under party H, and so is the average value of eµi . The private sector is more productive
under party H due to the selection of more skilled agents into entrepreneurship.13
Proposition 5 shows that a key component of growth, private sector productivity, is higher
under party H than under party L. However, growth in equation (16) depends also on the
product of private investment mt and the government’s contribution Gt . Under party H, mt
is lower (Corollary 1) but Gt could be higher; therefore, mt Gt could be higher or lower. How
mt Gt compares between the H and L equilibria depends on the functional form for Gt .
The only assumptions we have made about Gt so far is that it is positive and bounded. We
now add the assumption that Gt is an increasing function of 1 − mt , the mass of government
workers. With more workers, the government can make a larger contribution to aggregate
output. The simplest increasing functional form is linear:
Gt = (1 − mt ) eg .

(18)

The value of g can be interpreted as the average productivity of the public sector.
Given equation (18), mt Gt is proportional to mt (1 − mt ). If the latter product takes
similar values under both H and L equilibria, then given Proposition 5, growth is faster
under party H. The product mt (1 − mt ) is equal under both equilibria if the masses of
entrepreneurs under those equilibria, mH and mL , are symmetric around 21 :
mH + mL = 1 .
The symmetry of mt around

1
2

(19)

seems natural—it means that the margin of victory is the

same regardless of which party wins. For example, if mH = 0.48 and mL = 0.52, then the
margin is always 4%, whether the election is won by party H or L. In general, mH and mL
13

A closely related selection effect is emphasized by Pástor and Veronesi (2016). They also find that OECD
countries with higher tax/GDP ratios tend to be more productive, as measured by GDP per hour worked.
Blinder and Watson (2016) find that U.S. labor productivity and total factor productivity are both higher
under Democratic than Republican administrations, but the difference is not statistically significant. Note
that private productivity in Proposition 5 excludes the government’s contribution Gt , unlike in the data.

13

depend on γt . For condition (19) to hold, the values of mH (γt ) and mL (γt ) must be spread
out symmetrically around 21 . For example, suppose γt can take only two values, γ H and γ L ,
which lead to unique equilibria H and L. Then there is only one value of mH (γ H ) and one
value of mL (γ L ). If these two values add up to one, condition (19) is satisfied.
Proposition 6. Under the linearity of Gt and symmetry of mt (conditions (18) and (19)),
the expected economic growth under party H is higher than under party L:


E Yt+1 |τt = τ H > E Yt+1 |τt = τ L .

(20)

The two assumptions in Proposition 6 are sufficient but not necessary. Any other assumptions
that keep mt Gt similar under both parties would also deliver (20), thanks to Proposition 5.
For example, it is enough for the symmetry condition (19) to hold approximately.
The intuition behind Proposition 6 is that under party H, entrepreneurs are more skilled,
and even though there are fewer of them, their high productivity is leveraged by stronger
government support. For example, suppose voters kick out party L and elect party H.
The mass of entrepreneurs shrinks from mL > 12 to mH < 12 , which is harmful to growth.
However, the entrepreneurs who quit are less skilled than those who stay. Moreover, the
smaller private sector is supported by a larger public sector (because 1 − mH > 1 − mL ).
Under conditions (18) and (19), the net effect is faster growth under party H.
A key ingredient of Proposition 6 is that Gt enters the production function (3) in a
multiplicative fashion. The idea is that government contributes to output by leveraging the
productivity of the private sector. For example, one police officer contributes to the productive capacity of many businesses. If an agent abandons her business of selling sandwiches and
starts building roads, the economy suffers the loss of sandwiches, but it also gains because
many businesses benefit from the common roads. Proposition 6 shows that intermediate-skill
agents contribute more to aggregate growth by supporting top-skill agents than by investing
on their own. The proposition holds under conditions (18) and (19), which ensure sufficient
complementarity between the public and private sectors.
Proposition 6 holds also under weaker conditions. For example, we could allow for “decreasing returns to scale” in the public sector, so that each additional government worker
contributes less to Gt . Specifically, we could replace condition (18) by Gt = (1 − mt )α eg , so
that Gt is concave in the mass of government workers when α < 1. The complementarity
between the public and private sectors is present for any α > 0. Condition (18) assumes
α = 1, but Proposition 6 holds more generally, when α is sufficiently high.14
14

Empirical studies generally find complementarity between public and private capital (e.g., Anschauer

14

A social planner would choose mt that maximizes expected total output and redistribute
to maximize welfare. Under condition (18), the welfare-maximizing value of mt is m∗t =
σ2

1 − Φ( 2µ ; 0, σµ2 ) < 0.5. The social planner would thus assign fewer than half of agents, those
with the highest skill, to entrepreneurship, and the remaining majority to government work.
There are two opposing effects. On the one hand, Gt reduces output by “crowding out”
private investment (higher 1 − mt implies lower mt ). On the other hand, Gt raises output
by leveraging the private sector’s productivity. The latter effect is stronger when mt > m∗t ;
otherwise the former effect prevails. The two effects offset each other when mt = m∗t .

2.4. Endogenous Risk Aversion
All the results presented so far are very general, as they hold for risk aversion γt following any
exogenous process. We obtain further insights by specifying the evolution of γt . Evidence
suggests that risk aversion rises after negative economic shocks (e.g., Guiso et al., 2016).
We therefore endogenize γt by linking it to the state of the economy: γt = γ(Yt ), which is
decreasing in Yt . That is, γt is high when the economy is weak (i.e., after low realizations of
output Yt at the end of the previous period), and vice versa.
Political cycles then arise naturally in the model. Suppose the economy is strong. Risk
aversion is low, so party L is more likely to win the next election (Proposition 3). Under
party L, economic growth is likely to be lower (Proposition 6), leading to higher risk aversion.
As a result, the following election is more likely to be won by party H. Under H, growth is
higher, leading to lower risk aversion and thus better electoral odds of party L. This cycle,
in which the two parties alternate in office, is summarized in Figure 4.
To formalize this result, we consider a special case of γ(Yt ) in which the function takes
only two values, high or low, depending on the state of the economy:
 H
γ , where γ H > γ ,
for yt < y
γ(Yt ) =
,
γ L , where γ L < γ ,
for yt > y

(21)

where yt = log (Yt ) and y = E [yt ] − 12 σ 2 . We let λH,L denote the probability of an electoral
shift from party H to party L, and λL,H denote the probability of a reverse shift. In other
words, λk1 ,k2 is the probability of party k2 winning the election when party k1 is in power.
(1989) and Lynde and Richmond (1992)), but there is no consensus regarding the magnitude of the effect. In
their meta-analysis of 68 studies, Bom and Ligthart (2014) find that over 80% of the reported estimates of
the output elasticity of public capital are positive, but they range from -1.73 to 2.04. This range comfortably
includes many values of α for which Proposition 6 holds. We must be cautious in comparing these estimates
to α, though. Most empirical studies define public capital as the tangible capital stock owned by the public
sector whereas in our paper, public capital is 1 − mt , the human capital of government workers.

15

Proposition 7. Under the assumptions in equation (21) and Proposition 6,


1
E [yt+1 |H] − E [yt+1 |L]
2
H,L
L,H
; 0, σ
>
.
λ
= λ
= Φ
2
2

(22)

This proposition formalizes the formation of endogenous political cycles. When party
H is in power in period t, growth in period t tends to be faster, raising the likelihood of
yt+1 > y, in which case risk aversion jumps from γ H to γ L , which then results in a higher
probability of party L winning the election at the beginning of period t + 1. Under party L,
it is more likely that yt+2 < y, in which case risk aversion jumps from γ L to γ H , boosting
the electoral prospects of party H at the beginning of period t + 2, etc.
Interestingly, our model generates political cycles even in the absence of aggregate shocks.
When we eliminate the aggregate shock εt from equation (3) by letting its volatility σ 2 → 0,
both λH,L and λL,H in equation (22) converge to one. In this limiting case, political cycles
are fully deterministic as the two parties alternate in office at each election.
The assumption that γt is fully driven by Yt establishes a tight link between political
cycles and business cycles. In reality, however, the link between γt and Yt is unlikely to be
perfect. Any variation in γt that is independent of Yt drives a wedge between business cycles
and political cycles. By adding such independent variation, our model can easily generate
return predictability above and beyond the business cycle.
To illustrate the formation of political cycles, we construct two numerical examples,
which we present in the Online Appendix. In the first example, risk aversion γ(Yt ) can take
two values, as in equation (21). In the second example, risk aversion can take three values,
covering all three scenarios considered in Proposition 3. Both examples show that the model
generates realistic political cycles, and that it has no trouble matching not only the sign but
also the magnitude of the observed Democrat-Republican return gap.

2.5. Announcement Effects
Stock prices respond to the announcements of election outcomes, especially if those outcomes
are unexpected. To analyze such responses, we step away from the pure-strategy Nash
equilibria described in part 3 of Proposition 3. In those equilibria, each agent takes the
choices of other agents as given, which precludes surprises about electoral outcomes. We
introduce such surprises by considering a mixed equilibrium for γt such that γ < γt < γ. To

16

keep things simple, we analyze a simple case

H

 γ
γM
γ(Yt ) =

 γL

in which γt can take three values:
for yt < y
for y ≤ yt ≤ y
for yt > y

,

(23)

where y < y and the thresholds from Proposition 3 satisfy γ L < γ < γ M < γ < γ H .


Proposition 8. There exists γ M ∈ γ, γ for which the economy is in a mixed equilibrium
with both parties H and L having the same probability of winning the election. In this equilibrium, mt = 12 , and the median voter chooses the winning party randomly. In addition,
(a) The market reaction to the election is positive if party L wins but negative if H wins
(b) The risk premium for electoral uncertainty is positive.
Stock prices rise when party L is elected because a lower tax rate implies higher after-tax
dividends. Prices fall when H is elected because a higher tax rate means lower after-tax
dividends. These predictions are supported by the evidence cited in footnote 4, which shows
that the market responds more favorably to the election of a Republican president.
Agents require a risk premium for holding stocks during the electoral announcement. This
premium, which is equal to the expected value of the announcement return, compensates
stockholders for the uncertainty about which tax rate will prevail at the end of period t.
In the Online Appendix, we provide simple closed-form formulae for the party-specific
announcement returns, the electoral risk premium, and the value of γ M that satisfies Proposition 8. We also provide a numerical example showing that the model can deliver plausible
magnitudes of the announcement returns and the risk premium.

3. Empirical Analysis: Democrats vs Republicans
Our model makes only a few fundamental assumptions: Democrats redistribute more than
Republicans, risk aversion varies over time, skill varies across agents, and entrepreneurs are
under-diversified. From these plausible assumptions, and a few auxiliary ones, we derive a
rich set of predictions. We test those predictions empirically in this section.

17

3.1. Stock Market Performance
Our model predicts higher stock market returns under Democrats than under Republicans,
on average (Proposition 4). Santa-Clara and Valkanov (2003) compare average U.S. market
returns under Democratic and Republican presidents between years 1927 and 1998. We
extend their analysis through 2015. We construct a series of monthly excess stock market
returns by subtracting the log return on a three-month Treasury bill from the log return on
the value-weighted market return.15 We obtain both series from the Center for Research in
Security Prices, where they are available back to January 1927.
We construct a monthly time series of a Democrat dummy variable, D, which we define as
D = 1 if a Democratic president is in office and D = 0 otherwise. We handle transitions by
assuming that a president is in office until the end of the month in which his term ends. For
example, if a new president assumes office on January 20, we assign the month of January
to the old president and the month of February to the new president.16 We find D = 1 in
52.5% of all months between January 1927 and December 2015, indicating that time in the
White House is split roughly equally between Democrats and Republicans. Figure 5 plots
average excess stock market returns for the 23 administrations between 1927 and 2015.
Table 1 compares market returns under Democratic and Republican presidents. In the full
sample period, the average excess stock market return is 10.69% per year under Democrats
but only -0.21% under Republicans. This is a striking result—all of the equity premium from
1927 through 2015 has been earned under a Democratic president! The Democrat-Republican
gap, 10.90% per year, is significant both economically and statistically (t = 2.73). To assess
statistical significance, we regress returns on D and compute the t-statistic for the slope
based on standard errors robust to both heteroscedasticity and autocorrelation.
When we split the sample into two equally long subperiods, we find very similar results
in both of them: almost 11% per year under Democrats and -0.2% under Republicans. Even
in three equally long subperiods, the Democrat-Republican return gap is always positive,
ranging from 4.57% to 14.46% per year. Santa-Clara and Valkanov’s evidence is clearly
robust to the addition of 17 years of data. In fact, the evidence is even stronger out of
sample: in 1999–2015, the return gap is 17.39% per year (t = 2.14), compared to 9.38%
(t = 2.05) in the 1927–1998 period analyzed by Santa-Clara and Valkanov.
Table 2 shows that the Democrat-Republican return gap is larger when computed over
15

Santa-Clara and Valkanov (2003) also use log returns. Simple returns lead to very similar results. Also
note that by using excess returns, we effectively eliminate the effects of inflation.
16
Assigning January to the new president leads to very similar results.

18

the early years of a presidency. The gap is huge, 36.88% per year, when averaged over the
first year of the presidency alone. Over the first two years, the gap is 15.55%; over the
first three years, it is 12.43%. All of these values exceed the full-term average of 10.90%.
This evidence is consistent with our mechanism in the presence of mean reversion in risk
aversion (e.g., Campbell and Cochrane, 1999). In the model, risk aversion is fixed within
electoral periods, but allowing it to mean-revert would imply a larger return gap in the early
years of presidential terms. When risk aversion is high, so is the equity risk premium, and
a Democrat gets elected. As time passes, risk aversion mean-reverts, and the falling equity
premium fuels stock returns while the Democrat is in office. The opposite happens under
Republicans, resulting in a larger return gap in the early years of presidencies.
The presidential puzzle cannot be explained by higher risk under Democrats. In fact, the
volatility of stock returns under Democrats is lower, as shown by Santa-Clara and Valkanov
(2003). In 1927–2015, the volatility is 17.33% per year under Democrats and 20.00% per
year under Republicans. The annual Sharpe ratio is 0.62 under Democrats and -0.01 under
Republicans. Similarly, the puzzle cannot be explained by higher policy uncertainty, or its
faster resolution, under Democrats, as we show in the Online Appendix.

3.2. International Evidence
For an international perspective on the presidential puzzle, we analyze stock returns in five
large developed countries outside the U.S.: Australia, Canada, France, Germany, and the
UK. For each country, we compute its excess market returns by subtracting the country’s
90-day interbank rate, obtained from FRED, from the country’s MSCI stock index returns,
which are available for 1970 through 2015. We compare each country’s average excess market
return when the U.S. president is a Democrat versus when he is a Republican.
Our approach reflects the view that international stock markets are mostly integrated in
that stocks are globally owned. We argue that the outcome of the U.S. presidential election—
the largest election in the developed world—is a signal about the level of global risk aversion.
One could also relate each country’s returns to the elections in that country, but doing so
would implicitly assume that international stock markets are segmented in that there are
no cross-border equity holdings. While markets do exhibit some home bias, they are far
from segmented. Another complication in analyzing country-by-country elections is that it
is difficult to determine the vote shares of high-tax and low-tax parties. No large country
outside the U.S. has a simple two-party system. Even countries that come closest, such
as the UK, have smaller parties that enter into coalitions with the leading parties. Junior
19

coalition partners often have significant bargaining power over government policy.
Table 3 shows that in each of the five countries, average return is higher when a Democrat
is in the White House. The Democrat-Republican difference is statistically significant in four
of the five countries, ranging from 7.3% to 13.8% per year. These magnitudes are close to
those observed for the U.S. This evidence suggests that the outcome of the U.S. election is
related to equity risk premia across the globe. See the Online Appendix for more detail.

3.3. Economic Growth
The model predicts faster economic growth under Democratic presidents (Proposition 6).
Table 4 shows that GDP growth is indeed faster under Democrats. We use real GDP growth
data from BEA. In 1930 through 2015, the average growth is 4.86% per year under Democrats
but only 1.70% under Republicans. The Democrat-Republican growth gap, 3.16% per year,
is significant both economically and statistically (t = 2.40).17 When we split the sample
into two or three equally long subperiods, we find a positive gap in all of them. The gap is
not always statistically significant, but it is at least 0.47% per year in all six time periods
considered. Post World War II, the gap is 0.74% per year.
Earlier studies report that the partisan growth gap is larger in the first half of the
presidential term (e.g., Alesina and Sachs, 1988, Blinder and Watson, 2016). We confirm this
finding in our longer sample. The growth gap over the first two years of presidency is 3.34%
per year (t = 3.73), which exceeds the full-term average of 3.16% per year. This evidence
is consistent with our mechanism if we allow agents to reoptimize their occupational choice
between elections. Mean-reverting risk aversion leads agents to adjust their occupations
ahead of the next election, contributing to a gradual reduction of the growth gap.

3.4. Electoral Transitions
Our model predicts that transitions from Republicans to Democrats are more likely to happen
when the economy is weak, and vice versa (Figure 4). To examine this prediction, we run
logistic regressions in which the dependent variable is equal to one in months when one party
wins the presidential election over an incumbent president from the other party, and zero
otherwise. Our sample contains five transitions from a Republican president to a Democratic
17
We follow the same approach to assessing statistical significance as in Sections 3.1 and 3.2: we regress
GDP growth on the Democrat dummy D and compute the t-statistic for the slope coefficient, based on
standard errors robust to both heteroscedasticity and autocorrelation.

20

president (1932, 1960, 1976, 1992, 2008) and four reverse transitions (1952, 1968, 1980, 2000).
Given the small numbers of observations, we include only one independent variable at a
time. We consider three such variables: log stock market excess return, real GDP growth,
and realized market variance estimated from daily data within the month. We average each
of these variables over the previous m months, where m ∈ {3, 6, 12, 36}.
Table 5 shows that transitions from Republicans to Democrats tend to be preceded by
poor economic performance. At all horizons, such transitions are preceded by low market
returns, low GDP growth, and high volatility. This evidence supports the model. In contrast,
no relation is significant for reverse transitions from Democrats to Republicans.
One reason why we find nothing for reverse transitions is that our model treats incumbents and challengers symmetrically, so it does not predict that incumbents tend to be kicked
out in bad times.18 That fact pulls opposite to our mechanism for transitions from Democrats
to Republicans, contributing to the no-result we observe for such transitions. Future work
can extend our model to incorporate the incumbent-challenger asymmetry.
According to Proposition 1, Democrats (Republicans) are elected when the median voter
is a government worker (entrepreneur). Electoral changes should thus be accompanied by
occupational ones—we should see increases in the number of government workers, and decreases in the number of entrepreneurs, around transitions from Republican to Democratic
presidents. Reverse transitions should be accompanied by opposite patterns. We construct
crude measures of government work and entrepreneurship for which the time series are reasonably long. For government work, we add government employees and the unemployed.
For entrepreneurship, we use the number of new firms entering the economy. We run logistic
regressions similar to those in Table 5, focusing on changes around the transitions. We find
that Republican-to-Democrat transitions tend to be accompanied by increases in government
work and decreases in entrepreneurship, as the model predicts. For reverse transitions, the
evidence is insignificant, but it points in the model-predicted direction. The evidence need
not be strong because the underlying effect may be weak—in the model, a job change by a
single agent, the median voter, causes the election outcome to flip. We conclude that our
evidence is consistent with the model. For details, see the Online Appendix.
18

This fact is documented by Fair (1978) and others. While it is not predicted by the model presented
here, it is predicted by the models of Pástor and Veronesi (2012, 2013) and Kelly et al. (2016).

21

3.5. Risk Aversion
Risk aversion drives election outcomes in our model. In this section, we explore the role of
risk aversion empirically, both in the time series and in the cross section.

3.5.1. Time Series
We use four proxies for risk aversion. The proxy with the strongest theoretical justification
is the surplus consumption ratio, which is perfectly negatively correlated with risk aversion
in the habit model of Campbell and Cochrane (1999). In addition, we use the measures
of Pflueger et al. (2018), Miranda-Agrippino and Rey (2018), and the unemployment rate.
We also use four proxies for the equity risk premium that may be related to risk aversion:
cay (Lettau and Ludvigson, 2001), the dividend-price ratio, the equity premium bound of
Martin (2017), and IPO volume, which is related to the equity premium in the model of
Pástor and Veronesi (2005). The details of all measures are in the Online Appendix.
Table 6 reports the results from time-series regressions of risk aversion on the Democrat
dummy, D, time in office, which is the number of months for which the party in power
has held the presidency, and the interaction of D and time in office. The slope on this
interaction term is significantly negative for all four proxies, indicating that risk aversion
tends to decline over the course of a Democratic presidency. This evidence is consistent
with our model, in which a high level of risk aversion propels Democrats to power. The
subsequent mean reversion in risk aversion pushes up stock prices, especially in the early
years of Democratic presidencies, as shown earlier in Table 2. The evidence based on the risk
premium proxies is less conclusive. For three of the four proxies, the coefficient estimates
also indicate a declining risk premium under Democrats, but none of the estimates are
statistically significant. Overall, the evidence in Table 6 is consistent with our theory.

3.5.2. Cross Section
Strictly speaking, our model does not make cross-sectional predictions for risk aversion because it assumes that risk aversion varies over time but not across agents. However, the
model’s economic mechanism suggests that in the presence of cross-sectional heterogeneity,
more risk-averse agents would vote Democrat while less risk-averse ones would vote Republican. That is indeed true in the data, as we show next. Our evidence also supports the
predictions of Proposition 1 that entrepreneurs vote Republican while government workers
vote Democrat. We test these predictions in both U.S. and UK voter survey data. For the
22

U.S., we use data from the 2014 Cooperative Congressional Election Study. For the UK, we
use data from the 2014-2018 British Election Study.
For both countries, we estimate logit regressions across voters. On the left-hand side
is a dummy variable equal to one if the survey respondent supports the Democratic Party
(for the U.S.) or the Labour Party (for the UK), and zero otherwise. The right-hand side
variables include a proxy for the respondent’s risk aversion, dummy variables identifying the
respondent as an entrepreneur or a government worker, and controls for the respondent’s
income, education, age, and gender. We infer U.S. voters’ risk aversion from their responses
to questions about whether they would accept risky gambles. UK respondents report their
willingness to take risk. We describe all variables in detail in the Online Appendix.
Table 7 shows that more risk-averse voters are more likely to support both the Democratic
Party and the Labour Party. This evidence is consistent with the idea that risk-averse voters
avoid business risk but demand social insurance. Both parties also have more support among
government workers and less among entrepreneurs, as the model predicts. The results hold
for both countries, with and without controls, providing strong support for the model.19

3.6. Additional Evidence
We interpret the high-tax party as Democrats and the low-tax party as Republicans. It is
often argued that Democrats favor bigger government than do Republicans. For more evidence, we compare changes in the tax burden under Democrat versus Republican presidents
in 1929 to 2015. We measure the tax burden by the ratio of total federal tax to GDP.
We find that the tax burden tends to rise under Democratic presidents and fall under
Republican presidents. Under Democrats, the tax/GDP ratio rises by 0.44% per year, on
average, whereas under Republicans, it falls by 0.30% per year. The Democrat-Republican
difference of 0.74% per year is highly significant (t = 3.15). When we split the sample
into two equally-long subperiods, we find a positive and significant Democrat-Republican
difference in both of them. We tabulate the results in the Online Appendix, where we also
describe the data in detail. Overall, it seems reasonable to interpret Democratic presidents
as favoring more tax-based redistribution and Republican presidents as favoring less.
This interpretation is unaffected by the consideration of the federal government’s budget
19

For U.S. data, we can also measure whether the respondent has any investment in the stock market. We
find that stock owners are less likely to vote Democrat. This evidence is consistent with our model, in which
stock owners are entrepreneurs. See the Online Appendix for details.

23

deficit. While the deficit tends to be larger under Democratic presidents, the partisan difference is not statistically significant. See the Online Appendix for details.20 This evidence
suggests that our modeling assumption of no budget deficit is not unreasonable.
Proposition 8 predicts a more favorable stock market reaction to the election of a Republican president. This prediction is supported by the evidence of Snowberg et al. (2007).
The same proposition also predicts that electoral uncertainty commands a risk premium.
Support for that prediction is provided by Kelly et al. (2016).
Income is a key variable of interest in the literature on the determinants of voting behavior. Richer Americans are more likely to vote Republican, but the relation is far from perfect
(e.g., Gelman et al., 2007). This evidence is consistent with our model. Entrepreneurs vote
Republican (Proposition 1) and they tend to be richer than government workers because
agents who choose entrepreneurship are endowed with higher skill (Proposition 2). The
model thus implies a positive relation between income and voting Republican. The relation
is imperfect because some entrepreneurs draw large negative values of εi,t+1 in equation (3)
and end up with low income. In short, our model produces a positive but imperfect relation
between income and the Republican vote, just like in the data.
The relation between income and voting Republican is positive unconditionally, and
strongly positive within states, but it is negative across states: richer states are more likely
to vote Democrat in presidential elections (Gelman et al., 2007). This evidence does not
necessarily go against our model. In the model, it is not income but net position with
respect to fiscal redistribution that determines voting behavior. Some of the richer states
might be net beneficiaries of fiscal redistribution. For example, the state with the highest
average income in 2015, Maryland, has many residents with well-paid government jobs. The
role of fiscal redistribution in voting behavior clearly merits more research.

4. Conclusions
We develop an equilibrium model of political cycles driven by voters’ time-varying risk aversion. This novel mechanism generates the presidential puzzle of Santa-Clara and Valkanov
(2003). The model implies that both stock returns and economic growth should be higher
20

In the Online Appendix, we also extend our model by allowing the government to run a budget deficit.
By running deficits when risk aversion is high, and paying down debt when risk aversion is low, governments
can mitigate the effect of risk aversion shocks. Yet, that setting produces the same key predictions as
our baseline model, including the presidential puzzle. In addition, it predicts higher average deficits under
Democrats, for which there is statistically insignificant support in the data, as noted earlier.

24

under Democratic administrations, as we observe in the data. We also provide empirical
evidence, time-series and cross-sectional, linking risk aversion to voting preferences.
In our model, voting decisions are driven solely by economic considerations. This is in line
with the survey evidence of Ansolabehere et al. (2006) that economic issues matter more than
moral issues to U.S. voters. Yet, in reality, voters’ views on moral issues also matter, as do
the personal characteristics of the presidential candidates. Such non-economic considerations
can enter our model via the sunspot equilibrium. When risk aversion is neither high nor low,
the equilibrium is chosen by sunspots. Interpreting sunspots as random realizations of noneconomic factors creates a role for these factors in determining electoral outcomes.
Our model assumes a single policymaker, abstracting from the interaction between the
executive and the legislature. This assumption is often made for simplicity (e.g., Alesina,
Roubini, and Cohen, 1997), and it seems appropriate given our focus on the presidential
puzzle. While Santa-Clara and Valkanov (2003) find stock returns to be related to the presidential cycle, they find no relation to Congressional variables. Similarly, Blinder and Watson
(2016) find that the partisan advantage in GDP growth is correlated with Democratic control of the White House but not of Congress. Neither study provides an explanation for this
asymmetry. The lack of Congressional relevance is broadly consistent with our argument that
what matters is not what presidents do but when they get elected. If the stronger performance under Democratic administrations were caused by Democrats’ superior policymaking,
we would expect Congressional variables to matter because presidents need Congressional
support to implement reforms. That Congressional variables do not matter undermines the
superior-policymaking explanation. Our explanation is only partial, though, for two reasons.
First, we assume that the president is able to enact his party’s tax rate, which requires Congressional support. This is Congress’ only role in our explanation. Even that role can be
relaxed by modifying our model so that the election of a Republican president results in, say,
a 50% probability of a tax cut (if Congress is supportive) and a 50% probability of no tax
change (if Congress is not supportive). As long as voters expect taxes to fall (rise) when they
elect a Republican (Democratic) president, our model’s implications are unchanged. Second,
we do not have a full explanation for why risk aversion plays a larger role in presidential
elections than in Congressional ones. We speculate that Congressional elections are more
about local state-level issues whereas presidential elections are more reflective of the performance of the national economy. The role of Congress can be further examined in future
research. Future work can also extend our model by endogenizing tax rates, which might
help us understand their time variation, and by adding learning about government quality,
which could generate asymmetries between incumbents and challengers.

25

• Beginning of period t:
– Risk aversion γt drawn



Entrepreneur


 Occupation: Government worker

– Agents born, choose

High-tax


 Party: Low-tax

– Entrepreneurs start firms, invest, trade

• End of period t:
– Firms produce output Yi,t+1, pay taxes and dividends
– Agents consume Ci,t+1, die

Figure 1. Model overview and timeline.

26

Always G

E under L

Always E

G under H

_

L

_

H

i

Figure 2. Occupational choice. Agents whose entrepreneurial skill µi > µH always choose to be
entrepreneurs, regardless of which party is in power. Agents whose µi < µL always choose to be government
workers. Intermediate-skill agents, for whom µL < µi < µH , choose to be entrepreneurs when party L is in
power but government workers when party H is in power.

27

Skill ( i )

Unique eq.
L wins

Two eq.
possible

Unique eq.
H wins
_H
_L

_

_

Risk Aversion ( t )

Figure 3. Equilibrium outcomes. For γt > γ, both µH and µL are positive; as a result, there is a unique
equilibrium in which the median voter is a government worker and party H wins the election. For γt < γ,
both µH and µL are negative; as a result, there is a unique equilibrium in which the median voter is an
entrepreneur and party L wins the election. For γ < γt < γ, two equilibria, H and L, are possible.

28

Fast growth

Risk aversion low

Party H wins

Party L wins

Risk aversion high

Slow growth

Figure 4. Political cycles under endogenous risk aversion. This figure describes the formation of
political cycles in the model when risk aversion is modeled as negatively related to the state of the economy.

29

30

20

% Per Year

10

0

-10

-20

Democratic Presidents
Republican Presidents

-30

1927

1935

1944

1953

1962

1971

1980

1989

1998

2007

2015

Figure 5. Average market returns under Democrat vs Republican presidents. This figure plots
average U.S. excess stock market returns under each of the 23 administrations between 1927 and 2015, from
President Coolidge through President Obama. We plot log returns on the value-weighted market index in
excess of log returns on the three-month Treasury bill. Presidents are assumed to be in office until the end
of the month during which they leave office. The horizontal dotted line plots the unconditional mean return.

30

Table 1
Average Stock Market Returns under Democratic and Republican Presidents
This table reports average excess stock market returns under Democratic presidents, Republican presidents,
and the Democrat-Republican difference. Excess stock returns are computed monthly as the log return on
the value-weighted total stock market in excess of the log return on a 3-month T-bill. Returns are reported
in percent per year, for the full sample period as well as for subperiods. Presidents are assumed to be in
office until the end of the month during which they leave office. t-statistics, reported in parentheses, are
computed based on standard errors robust to heteroscedasticity and autocorrelation.

Democrat

Republican

Difference

1927:01–2015:12

10.69
(4.17)

-0.21
(-0.07)

10.90
(2.73)

1927:01–1971:06

10.80
(2.83)
10.52
(3.46)

-0.20
(-0.03)
-0.22
(-0.06)

11.00
(1.58)
10.74
(2.24)

12.58
(2.51)
5.94
(1.62)
11.99
(3.49)

-1.89
(-0.20)
1.38
(0.37)
-0.99
(-0.21)

14.46
(1.37)
4.57
(0.85)
12.98
(2.17)

10.52
(3.54)
11.37
(2.48)

1.15
(0.32)
-6.02
(-0.91)

9.38
(2.05)
17.39
(2.14)

1971:07–2015:12

1927:01–1956:08
1956:09–1986:04
1986:05–2015:12

1927:01–1998:12
1999:01–2015:12

31

Table 2
Average Stock Market Returns in the Presidents’ Early Years in Office
This table reports average excess stock market returns under Democratic presidents, Republican presidents,
and the Democrat-Republican difference over the full sample period of January 1927 to December 2015. The
results are computed over subsets of presidents’ terms corresponding to their first one, two, or three years
in office. Full-term results are identical to those reported in the first row of Table 1.

Democrat

Republican

Difference

Year 1 in office

21.75
(2.03)

-15.13
(-1.94)

36.88
(2.70)

Years 1 and 2 in office

11.47
(1.73)

-4.08
(-0.66)

15.55
(1.56)

Years 1, 2, and 3 in office

15.00
(3.11)

2.57
(0.56)

12.43
(1.67)

Full term

10.69
(4.17)

-0.21
(-0.07)

10.90
(2.73)

32

Table 3
International Evidence on the Presidential Puzzle
For each country, this table reports the difference between that country’s average excess stock market returns
in periods when the U.S. president is a Democrat versus a Republican. Stock return data are from Morgan
Stanley Capital International, covering the period 1970–2015. Excess stock returns are computed monthly
as the log return on the country’s market index minus the log of the country-specific 90-day interbank rates
from FRED. Returns are in percent per year. Presidents are assumed to be in office until the end of the
month during which they leave office. t-statistics, reported in parentheses, are computed based on standard
errors robust to heteroscedasticity and autocorrelation.

Dem-Rep

Australia

Canada

France

Germany

UK

11.31
(2.05)

13.62
(2.78)

13.78
(2.33)

11.63
(2.02)

7.33
(1.38)

33

Table 4
Average GDP Growth under Democratic and Republican Presidents
This table reports average GDP growth under Democratic presidents, Republican presidents, and the
Democrat-Republican difference. GDP growth is reported in percent per year for the full sample period
as well as for equally long subperiods. t-statistics, reported in parentheses, are computed based on standard
errors robust to heteroscedasticity and autocorrelation.

Democrat

Republican

Difference

1930:01–2015:12

4.86
(4.87)

1.70
(1.96)

3.16
(2.40)

1930:01–1972:12

6.11
(4.06)
3.02
(7.12)

0.36
(0.18)
2.54
(4.98)

5.75
(2.33)
0.47
(0.76)

6.46
(3.07)
4.64
(7.09)
2.91
(7.59)

-1.86
(-0.63)
3.16
(4.40)
2.21
(4.32)

8.31
(2.33)
1.47
(1.50)
0.70
(1.27)

1973:01–2015:12

1930:01–1958:08
1958:09–1987:04
1987:05–2015:12

34

Table 5
Predicting Electoral Transitions
This table reports the estimated slopes and their t-statistics from a logistic regression model. The lefthand side variables, given in column headings, are dummy variables that are equal to one if the given
electoral transition occurs in the current month and zero otherwise. The left column reports results for
elections resulting in transitions from a Republican president to a Democratic president. The right column
corresponds to transitions from a Democratic president to a Republican president. Each regression has a
single right-hand side variable. The right-hand side variables are log stock market return in excess of the
risk-free rate, real GDP growth, and realized market variance estimated from daily data within the month.
Each right-hand side variable is the average of the corresponding quantity computed over the previous m
months, where m ∈ {3, 6, 12, 36} varies across the four panels.

Transition from
Republicans to Democrats

Transition from
Democrats to Republicans

Panel A. Lag of 3 months
Stock return

-13.66
(-1.33)
-0.17∗∗
(-2.38)
10.66∗∗∗
(3.38)

GDP growth
Market variance

-0.32
(-0.02)
-0.01
(-0.12)
-10.00
(-0.43)

Panel B. Lag of 6 months
Stock return

-16.19
(-1.03)
-0.17∗∗
(-2.26)
12.35∗∗∗
(2.57)

GDP growth
Market variance

10.94
(0.48)
-0.04
(-0.38)
-11.39
(-0.47)

Panel C. Lag of 12 months
-36.44∗∗
(-2.09)
-0.14∗
(-1.80)
13.58∗∗
(2.02)

Stock return
GDP growth
Market variance

11.99
(0.39)
-0.02
(-0.22)
-6.67
(-0.34)

Panel D. Lag of 36 months
-66.33∗∗
(-2.46)
-0.17∗
(-1.95)
12.59
(1.15)

Stock return
GDP growth
Market variance

∗:

significant at 10% level;

∗∗ :

60.22
(0.93)
0.07
(0.66)
-20.56
(-0.65)

significant at 5% level;

35

∗∗∗ :

significant at 1% level

Table 6
Time Series of Risk Aversion
This table reports the slope coefficients from time-series regressions in which the left-hand side variables are
four proxies for risk aversion (columns 1 through 4) and four proxies for the equity risk premium (columns
5 through 8). The risk aversion proxies are “CC,” the negative of the surplus consumption ratio (Campbell
and Cochrane, 1999), “PVS,” the negative of the price of volatile stocks (Pflueger et al., 2018), “MR,” the
aggregate risk aversion measure of Miranda-Agrippino and Rey (2018), and “UNE,” the unemployment rate.
The risk premium proxies are “CAY” (Lettau and Ludvigson, 2001), “DP,” the aggregate dividend-price
ratio, “IM,” the one-year equity premium bound of Martin (2017), and the negative of IPO volume (Pástor
and Veronesi, 2005). The right-hand-side variables are the Democrat dummy D, which is equal to one if a
Democratic president is in office and zero otherwise, time in office, which is the number of months for which
the party in power has held the presidency, and the interaction of D and time in office. The intercept is
included in the regression. All slope coefficients are multiplied by 100. t-statistics, reported in parentheses,
are computed based on standard errors robust to heteroscedasticity and autocorrelation.

Proxies for Risk Aversion

Proxies for Equity Risk Premium

CC

PVS

MR

UNE

CAY

DP

IM

IPO

Democrat

1.09
(1.87)

45.19
(1.59)

138.19
(2.20)

118.60
(1.08)

0.40
(0.29)

-0.28
(-0.32)

2.37
(1.16)

11.82
(0.96)

Time in office

0.01
(1.33)

0.37
(1.57)

0.60
(0.92)

0.74
(0.73)

0.01
(0.71)

0.01
(0.92)

0.01
(0.34)

0.11
(1.07)

Interaction

-0.03
(-2.66)

-0.85
(-2.11)

-2.99
(-3.20)

-2.25
(-2.20)

-0.01
(-0.56)

0.00
(0.28)

-0.02
(-0.54)

-0.16
(-0.85)

683

183

252

816

256

1068

193

672

Observations

36

Table 7
Who Are the Democratic Voters?
This table reports the slope coefficients from logit regressions estimated across voters. In columns 1 through
4, the left-hand side variable represents the support for the U.S. Democratic Party among the respondents
to the 2014 Cooperative Congressional Election Survey. The variable is equal to one if the respondent voted
for the Democratic candidate (Obama) in the 2012 presidential election and zero otherwise. In columns 5
through 8, the left-hand side variable represents the support for the UK Labour Party among the respondents
to the 2014-2018 British Election Study. The variable is equal to one if the respondent expresses support
for the Labour Party and zero otherwise. The right-hand-side variables are listed in the first column. The
intercept is included in the regression. The t-statistics are in parentheses.
U.S. Democratic Voters

Risk Aversion

UK Labour Voters

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

0.13
(7.28)

0.12
(6.04)

0.12
(5.89)

0.12
(5.40)

0.14
(8.23)

0.14
(5.23)

0.16
(4.77)

0.14
(3.72)

-0.28
(-5.68)

-0.25
(-5.04)

-0.15
(-2.65)

-0.40
(-7.83)

-0.41
(-6.38)

-0.39
(-4.95)

0.19
(3.39)

0.12
(1.95)

0.22
(4.07)

0.26
(3.99)

Entrepreneur
Government Worker
Income

-0.03
(-3.47)

-0.10
(-12.86)

Education

0.26
(13.30)

0.44
(7.94)

Age

-0.01
(-4.50)

-0.01
(-4.83)

Gender (Male)

-0.62
(-11.62)

-0.16
(-3.02)

Observations

8855

7809

7771

6784

37

30301

12626

7949

6279

REFERENCES
Alesina, Alberto, 1987, Macroeconomic policy in a two-party system as a repeated game,
Quarterly Journal of Economics 102, 651–678.
Alesina, Alberto, and Howard Rosenthal, 1995, Partisan Politics, Divided Government, and
the Economy, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Alesina, Alberto, Nouriel Roubini, and Gerald D. Cohen, 1997, Political Cycles and the
Macroeconomy, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Alesina, Alberto, and Jeffrey Sachs, 1988, Political parties and the business cycle in the
United States, 1948-1984, Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 20, 63–82.
Aschauer, David Alan, 1989, Is public expenditure productive? Journal of Monetary Economics 23, 177–200.
Ansolabehere, Stephen, Jonathan Rodden, and James M. Snyder, 2006, Purple America,
Journal of Economic Perspectives 20, 97–118.
Baker, Scott R., Nicholas Bloom, and Steven J. Davis, 2016, Measuring economic policy
uncertainty, Quarterly Journal of Economics 131, 1593–1636.
Barro, Robert J., 1990, Government spending in a simple model of endogenous growth,
Journal of Political Economy 98, 103–125.
Belo, Frederico, Vito D. Gala, and Jun Li, 2013, Government spending, political cycles, and
the cross-section of stock returns, Journal of Financial Economics 107, 305–324.
Belo, Frederico, and Jianfeng Yu, 2013, Government investment and the stock market, Journal of Monetary Economics 60, 325–339.
Blinder, Alan S., and Mark W. Watson, 2016, Presidents and the US economy: An econometric exploration, American Economic Review 106, 1015–1045.
Bom, Pedro R.D., and Jenny E. Ligthart, 2014, What have we learned from three decades of
research on the productivity of public capital? Journal of Economic Surveys 28, 889–916.
Boutchkova, Maria, Hitesh Doshi, Art Durnev, and Alexander Molchanov, 2012, Precarious
politics and return volatility, Review of Financial Studies 25, 1111–1154.
Broz, J. Lawrence, 2013, Partisan financial cycles, Politics in the New Hard Times: The
Great Recession in Comparative Perspective, Edited by David A. Lake and Miles Kahler,
Cornell University Press, Ithaca, NY.
Campbell, John Y., and John H. Cochrane, 1999, By force of habit: A consumption-based
explanation of aggregate stock market behavior, Journal of Political Economy 107, 205–
251.
Cameron, David R., 1978, The expansion of the public economy: A comparative analysis,
American Political Science Review 72, 1243–1261.
Downs, Anthony, 1957, An economic theory of political action in a democracy, Journal of
Political Economy 65, 135–150.
Drazen, Allan, 2000a, The political business cycle after 25 years, NBER Macroeconomics
Annual 15, 75–117.
Drazen, Allan, 2000b, Political Economy in Macroeconomics, Princeton University Press,
Princeton, NJ.
38

Dubois, Eric, 2016, Political business cycles 40 years after Nordhaus, Public Choice 166,
235–259.
Fair, Ray C., 1978, The effect of economic events on votes for president, Review of Economics
and Statistics 55, 159–173.
Fernández-Villaverde, Jesus, Pablo Guerrón-Quintana, Keith Kuester, and Juan RubioRamı́rez, 2015, Fiscal volatility shocks and economic activity, American Economic Review
105, 3352-3384.
Gelman, Andrew, Boris Shor, Joseph Bafumi, and David Park, 2007, Rich state, poor state,
red state, blue state: What’s the matter with Connecticut?, Quarterly Journal of Political
Science 2, 345–367.
Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales, 2016, Time varying risk aversion, Journal
of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Hensel, Chris R., and William T. Ziemba, 1995, United States investment returns during
Democratic and Republican administrations, 1928-1993, Financial Analysts Journal 51,
61–69.
Hibbs, Douglas A., 1977, Political parties and macroeconomic policy, American Political
Science Review 71, 1467–1487.
Hibbs, Douglas A., 1987, The American Political Economy: Macroeconomics and Electoral
Politics, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.
Huang, Roger D., 1985, Common stock returns and presidential elections, Financial Analysts
Journal 41, 58–61.
Julio, Brandon, and Youngsuk Yook, 2012, Political uncertainty and corporate investment
cycles, Journal of Finance 67, 45–83.
Kelly, Bryan, Ľuboš Pástor, and Pietro Veronesi, 2016, The price of political uncertainty:
Theory and evidence from the option market, Journal of Finance 71, 2417–2480.
Knight, Brian, 2006, Are policy platforms capitalized into equity prices? Evidence from the
Bush/Gore 2000 presidential election, Journal of Public Economics 90, 751–773.
Koijen, Ralph S.J., Tomas J. Philipson, and Harald Uhlig, 2016, Financial health economics,
Econometrica 84, 195–242.
Lettau, Martin, and Sydney Ludvigson, 2001, Consumption, aggregate wealth, and expected
stock returns, Journal of Finance 56, 815–849.
Lynde, Catherine, and James Richmond, 1992, The role of public capital in production,
Review of Economics and Statistics 74, 37-45.
Martin, Ian, 2017, What is the expected return on the market? Quarterly Journal of Economics 132, 367–433.
Miranda-Agrippino, Silvia, and Helene Rey, 2018, US monetary policy and the global financial cycle, Working paper.
Niederhoffer, Victor, Steven Gibbs, and Jim Bullock, 1970, Presidential elections and the
stock market, Financial Analysts Journal 26, 111-113.
Nordhaus, William D., 1975, The political business cycle, Review of Economic Studies 42,
169–190.

39

Pástor, Ľuboš, and Pietro Veronesi, 2005, Rational IPO waves, Journal of Finance 60, 1713–
1757.
Pástor, Ľuboš, and Pietro Veronesi, 2012, Uncertainty about government policy and stock
prices, Journal of Finance 67, 1219–1264.
Pástor, Ľuboš, and Pietro Veronesi, 2013, Political uncertainty and risk premia, Journal of
Financial Economics 110, 520–545.
Pástor, Ľuboš, and Pietro Veronesi, 2016, Income inequality and asset prices under redistributive taxation, Journal of Monetary Economics 81, 1–20.
Pflueger, Carolin, Emil Siriwardane, and Adi Sunderam, 2018, A measure of risk appetite
for the macroeconomy, Working paper.
Potrafke, Niklas, 2017a, Partisan politics: The empirical evidence from OECD panel studies,
Journal of Comparative Economics, forthcoming.
Potrafke, Niklas, 2017b, Government ideology and economic policy-making in the United
States, Working paper.
Quadrini, Vincenzo, and Antonella Trigari, 2007, Public employment and the business cycle,
Scandinavian Journal of Economics 109, 723–742.
Reed, W. Robert, 2006, Democrats, Republicans, and taxes: Evidence that political parties
matter, Journal of Public Economics 90, 725–750.
Riley, William B., and William A. Luksetich, 1980, The market prefers republicans: Myth
or reality?, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 15, 541-560.
Rogoff, Kenneth, and Anne Sibert, 1988, Elections and macroeconomic policy cycles, Review
of Economic Studies 55, 1–16.
Santa-Clara, Pedro, and Rossen Valkanov, 2003, The presidential puzzle: Political cycles
and the stock market, Journal of Finance 58, 1841–1872.
Snowberg, Erik, Justin Wolfers, and Eric Zitzewitz, 2007, Partisan impacts on the economy:
Evidence from prediction markets and close elections, Quarterly Journal of Economics
122, 807–829.
Tavares, José, 2004, Does right or left matter? Cabinets, credibility and fiscal adjustments,
Journal of Public Economics 88, 2447–2468.
Wright, John R., 2012, Unemployment and the democratic electoral advantage, American
Political Science Review 106, 685–702.

40

