                           NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              FINANCIAL FRAGILITY
                           AND ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE




                                  Ben Bernanke

                                  Mark   Gertler




                             Working Paper No. 2318




                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July   1987




We thank Andrew Caplin, Douglas Diamond, Avinash Dixit, Mark Feldman, Greg Mankiw,
Robert Moore, Barry Nalebuff, and David Romer. The research reported here is
part of the NBER's research programs in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics
and Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                  NBER Working Paper #2318
                                                  July 1987




              Financial   Fragility and Economic Performance



                                 ABSTRACT

     Applied macroeconomists (e.g., Eckstein and Sinai (1986)) have
stressed the role of financial variables, such as firm balance sheet
positions, in the determination of investment spending and output. Our
paper presents a formal analysis of this link. We develop a model of
the process of. investment finance in which there is asymmetric information
between borrowers and lenders about the quality of investment projects
and about the borrower's effort. In this model, the cost of external
investment finance under the optimal contract is higher, the worse the
borrower's balance sheet position (i.e., the lower his net worth). In
general equilibrium, the lower is borrower net worth, the further the
number of projects initiated and the average quality of undertaken projects
will be from the unconstrained first—best.

     We characterize a "financially fragile" situation as one in which
balance sheets are so weak that the economy experiences substantial
underinvestment, misallocation of investment resources, and possibly even
a complete investment collapse. Our policy, analysis suggests that,
under some circumstances, government "bailouts" of insolvent debtors may
be a reasonable alternative in periods of extreme financial fragility.




Ben S. Bernanke                                   Mark Gertler
                                                  Department of Economics
Woodrow Wilson School
                                                  Social Science Building
Princeton University
Princeton NJ 08544
                                              .
                                                  1180 Observatory Drive
                                                  University of Wisconsin
                                                  Madison WI 53706
     1.   Introduction. Given tastes and productive technologies, is there some

sense in which general financial conditions (e.g., financial "stability") exert an

independent effect on the macroeconomy? Policy-makers appear to think so:

Concerns about financial stability are a principal motivation for regulation of

banking and securities markets and are a factor in monetary policy. Applied

macroeconomists, also, have stressed the role of financial conditions (specifical-

ly in most cases, the state of aggregate and sectoral balance sheets) in the

propagation of aggregate fluctuations. In the DRI model, for example, procyclical

movements in the ratio of net worth to liabilities of borrowers feed back into the

determination of real activity; Eckstein and Sinai (1986) claim that this mechan-

ism is in fact important for explaining the volatility of output. Kaufman (1987)

and Friedman (1987) have discussed the implications of the recent buildup of

aggregate and business-sector inside debt for the economy and for economic policy.

Mishkin (1978) and Bernanke (1983) have argued that balance-sheet factors

contributed to the severity of the Great Depression.

     Recently, the development of models of financial and credit markets which

focus on the assumption of asymmetric information has allowed economic theorists

to begin an investigation of the real effects of financial market imperfections.1

This growing theoretical literature, however, has so far not produced a consensus

on what mechanisms are most central for understanding the interactions of the real

and financial sides of the economy.

     Our own work (Bernanke and Gertler (1986, 1987)), like the applied litera-

ture, has pursued the notion that balance sheets are critical. In particular, we

have singled out the net worth positions of borrowers as the key factor. Our

basic argument is as follows: Generally, the more a borrower is able to invest in




1
     Recent articles with a macroeconomic emphasis include Smith (1983), Farmer
     (1984), Boyd and Prescott (1986), Williamson (1985), Mankiw (1986),
     Greenwald and Stiglitz (1986), Calomiris and Hubbard (1986), and de Men
     and Webb (1987). For a very general analysis of competitive markets under
     asymmetric information, see Prescott and Townsend (1984).
                                          —2-

his own 'project1 (equivalently, in the models we have used, the more he is able

to put up as collateral), the less his interests will diverge from the interests

of those who have lent to him. When the borrower has both superior information

than the lenders about his project, as well as the ability to take actions that

affect the distribution of project returns, a greater compatibility of interests

reduces the agency costs associated with the investment process. Thus, if

borrowers as a whole have stronger balance sheet positions (have a higher ratio of

net worth to liabilities) then, ceteris paribus, the macroeconomic equilibrium is

more efficient. In this view, a "financially fragile" situation is one in which

potential borrowers (those with most direct access to investment projects, or with

the greatest entrepreneurial skills) have low wealth relative to the size of their

projects. Such a situation (which might occur, e.g., after a prolonged recession

or a "debt-deflation"2) leads to high agency costs and thus to poor performance in
the investment sector and in the economy as a whole.3
     The present paper develops the financial fragility theme further. We study

an economy in which entrepreneurs (or, possibly, corporate managers) evaluate

potential   investment projects, then undertake   those projects which seem suffi-

ciently worthwhile. Evaluation is costly, with the cost varying across individu-

als. (Individuals with low evaluation costs endogenously become the

entrepreneurs.) An important assumption is that entrepreneurs (who must borrow in

order to finance projects) know more about the success probabilities of the

project they evaluate than do potential lenders. As in Myers and Majluf (1984)

and others, this informational asymmetry introduces an Akerlof (1970) "lemons"



2
     The term is due to Irving Fisher (1933); see Bernanke and Gertler (1986)
     for an analysis.
3               .
     As emphasized in Bernanke and Gertler (1986), the mechanism through which
     financial factors affect real activity need not involve credit rationing.
     The agency costs of investing could manifest themselves in an increased
     cost of capital, for example. We believe economists often incorrectly use
     "credit rationing" as a generic term to describe a situation where finan-
     cial factors matter. More importantly, whether credit rationing exists is
     not key to the debate over whether financial factors matter.
                                        -3-

problem in the issuance of securities. This lemons problem (which is more severe,

the lower is borrower net worth) raises the prospective costs of finance and thus

affects the willingness of entrepreneurs to evaluate projects in the first place.

We show that, in general equilibrium, both the quantity of investment spending and

its expected return will be sensitive to the net worth positions of potential

borrowers (i.e., the entrepreneurs). This result is quite robust to a number of

extensions of the model.

     The model used here is richer than those of our previous work in a number of

respects. Perhaps most importantly, the framework employed here applies to firms

which may issue a variety of liabilities, including equity as well as debt. In

our earlier papers (and in much of the literature on credit markets and imperfect

information), the analysis is limited to markets in which debt is the only instru-

ment for raising funds.4 Thus, the theoretical link that we establish here

between balance sheet positions and investment is potentially applicable to a

broad class of firms. The approach of this paper also makes it easier to motivate

quantitatively significant real effects for financial factors: Indeed, in this

setting, a decline in borrowers' net worth below an endogenously determined limit

will (in some variants of the model) precipitate a complete collapse of credit

markets and investment.

     The paper also contains some novel policy results. The most striking of

these is that, if good entrepreneurs are to some degree identifiable, then a

policy of transfers to these entrepreneurs (akin, perhaps, to the mass "bailout"

of debtors that occurred during the New Deal) may increase output and social

welfare.




     A distinction between the preponderance of the literature and our earlier
     work is that most authors have simply assumed that borrowing is done via
     debt, while we have focused on environments in which debt can be shown to
     be the optimal contract form.
                                            -4-
      We have organized the paper as follows: sections 2 through 4 develop the

basic model. Extensions of the model are taken up in section 5. Section 6

discusses optimal policy in this framework, and section 7 concludes.



      2. The basic model. This section begins our study of the process of invest-

ment finance. The context is a simple two-period general equilibrium model with

informational asymmetries. The analysis is intended to illustrate the relation

between the net worth-of entrepreneurs/borrowers and the degree to which capital

markets are able to allocate savings efficiently to alternative uses. In

particular we show that, the more that entrepreneurs must rely on external finance

in order to undertake projects, the greater are the agency costs of investment;

and the more likely it is that the economy will suffer from "underinvestment"

(relative to the first-best), or even experience an "investment collapse".

      The basic assumptions of the model follow:

      A.l. The economy consists of a countable infinity of agents indexed by the

non-negative integers. Individuals have identical preferences but differ in their

endowments and in their "entrepreneurial talent" (see A.2, A.4, and A.9 below).

      A.2. There are two periods, an investment period and a consumption period.

At the beginning of the first period (the investment period), each individual i is

endowed with a quantity Wi,   0 C w.   C   I,   of a nonconsumable input good. During

the   first period, this endowment may either be "stored" or "invested". The output
of either storage or investment is a consumption good. This good is "eaten" in
the second period.
      A.3. One unit of stored endowment yields r units      of the consumption good.

There   is no indivisibility, uncertainty, or asymmetric information associated with
the   storage process.

      A.4. The investment technology comes in indivisible packets called "pro-

jects". Projects are identical ex ante. No project can be successfully undertak-

en unless it is first evaluated by an individual. (Think of evaluation as
                                           —5—

essential to the proper setting up of the project.) Individuals differ in their

entrepreneurial skill, as reflected in their cost of evaluating a project: An

individual of type 0 has an evaluation cost of e(0) units of effort. We assume

that e() is continuous, positive, and nondecreasing. Individual types 0 (which

are given before contracting takes place) are drawn independently from a uniform

distribution on [0, 1]. These assumptions imply that, if m is the fraction of

individuals who evaluate projects, p capita evaluation costs can be approximated
                          m
arbitrarily well by f e(8)dO, and per capita marginal evaluation costs can be

approximated by e(m).5

     An entrepreneur (defined to be an individual who evaluates and operates a

project) can evaluate no more than one project during the investment period.

     A.5. The process of evaluation yields a probability, p, that the evaluated

project, if undertaken, will "succeed". Naturally, 0 C p C 1. The random variable

p is independent across projects and is drawn from a continuous cumulative distri-

bution function 11(p).

     A.6. Once the entrepreneur learns the project's quality, as measured by its

success probability p, he decides whether to undertake the project or not. A

project which is undertaken requires exactly one unit of the endowment good as

input.   (When each individual's endowment is less than one, this fixed input

requirement makes "external finance" necessary.) A project that is not undertaken

uses no input (beyond the initial evaluation effort); the entrepreneur is free to

store his full endowment or to lend it to other entrepreneurs.

     A.7. If an undertaken investment project succeeds (which it does with

probability p), it pays a gross return of R units of the consumption good in the

second period, R >   r.   If the project fails, it pays zero.6



     This uses a law of large numbers result on the convergence of sample to
     population distributions. See Theorem 5.5.1 in Chung (1974), p. 133.
6
     None of our results depend on the return in the bad outcome being zero, as
     opposed to some value less than r.
                                        -6-

    A.8 The quality of an individual entrepreneur's project (the "p") is private

information. It can also not be publicly observed whether an individual who

claims to have evaluated a project has in fact done so. Individual endowments w.

are observable.7 Also, whether a given project has been undertaken (i.e., is up

and running) and whether it succeeds or fails is assumed to be observable.

     We initially assume that the entrepreneur's cost of evaluation (his "skill")

is private information; however, as the scope for policy turns out to be very

sensitive to this assumption, we consider the alternative case as well. The

distribution of entrepreneurial skills in the population and the c.d.f. 11(p) are

assumed to be common knowledge.

     A.9. Individuals choose how to invest their endowments and whether to become

entrepreneurs. Each individual's objective is to maximize expected second-period

consumption less effort expended at project evaluation (i.e., individuals are

risk-neutral, and the cost of effort is measured in consumption equivalents.)

     Discussion. 1) The nonconsumable endowment w represents an individual's net

worth. Given that project sizes are fixed at unity, a borrower's balance sheet

position (the ratio of net worth to total liabilities) is w/(1-w), which increases

in w. Here, we take w as given; but it is not difficult to make this variable
                                                8
endogenous (see Bernanke and Gertler (1986)).

     2) Our modelling of the investment process as taking place in two stages, an

evaluation stage and an operational stage, differs from the standard assumption

that entrepreneurs are endowed with projects (so that there is no evaluation




     We could give individuals the ability to "hide" endowment, but it turns
     out that in the equilibria studied below they would have no incentive to
     do so.
8
     We emphasize that net worth is not measured by the total equity the firm
     issues, since the latter includes securities held by outside lenders. For
     large, publicly held firms our concept of borrower net worth corresponds
     best the personal stake of the managers and directors. Morck, Shleifer,
     and Vishny (1986) present evidence that managerial stake in many large
     corporations is non—trivial.
                                          —7—

stage).9 We include the evaluation stage in our formulation both because it is

realistic, and because a two-stage process appears necessary to generate the

intuitive and (probably) practically important result that pervasive informational

problems in a sector may lead to underinvestment in that sector.1°

       3) The key assumptions which give rise to the agency problem are: Ci) that

knowledge obtained about project quality is private to the entrepreneur, and (ii)

that it is possible for an individual to. claim falsely to have evaluated a

project. Many alternative specifications that give the entrepreneur the option of

enjoying   some type of unobservable "on-the-job consumption" at the expense of
outside lenders could have been used in place of Cii);   however,   some assumption
like   (ii) is required to rule out a flat compensation schedule for entrepreneurs

as a solution to the incentive problem introduced by assumption (i).11 It is not

strictly necessary to our analysis to allow project evaluation costs to differ

among individuals. Doing so does add considerable realism and interest to the

problem; it is also a technically simple way to ensure interior solutions (so that

resources are both invested and stored in equilibrium).

       4) Assuming that an entrepreneur can process only one project per period

simplifies the analysis without affecting the qualitative results. It is important

for our results, however, that scale diseconomies preclude the entrepreneur from

handling enough projects to completely diversify away the agency problem, as do

financial intermediaries in Diamond (1984).




       Boyd and Prescott (1986) and Hargraves and Romer (1986) also analyze
       two-stage investment processes in general equilibrium settings.
10                                              .
       DeNeza and Webb (1987) employ a model similar to ours but omit the
       evaluation stage, which allows them to obtain an "overinvestment" result.
       We elaborate on this issue in section 4.

       This differs from Flyers and Majluf (1984) in that we explicitly model the
       process by which borrowers obtain information about projects, and in that
       we permit contracting prior to information acquisition.
                                                       -8—

        3. The social optimum without asymmetric information. To provide a bench-

mark against which to measure the effects of information asymmetries, we first

consider the solution to the social planning problem of this economy when there is

no private information.

        Let w be per capita endowment; let m be the fraction of individuals who

evaluate projects; and let p* be the reservation success probability (i.e.,

projects with evaluated success probabilities equal to or above p* are to be

undertaken). Then E(p*) is the fraction of evaluated projects that is rejected

(and 1 -      H(p*) is the fraction accepted). Let p be the probability that a project
will yield a good outcome, conditional on being undertaken; that is,

p =   E(plp   >   p*).       Then



                  1

               [5 pR dE]/(1 -       H(p*))   E pE




is the average expected return (per unit of endowment invested) to undertaken

projects. Note that, here and below, p is a function of p*.

        With risk-neutrality, the utilitarian social planner cares only about expect-

ed per capita consumption, less per capita effort expended in evaluating projects.

Formally, the planner's problem is

                                                                                 m
(3.1)                  max     r[w - m(1 -   H(p*))]   + m(1 -   H(p*))pR   -   5 e(8)dO
                      p*,m                                                       0




where the first two terms are expected per capita returns to storage and to

"accepted" investment projects, respectively, and the final term is minus the per

capita project evaluation effort. Note that the final term imposes the obvious

feature of the optimal allocation that projects are evaluated by the most effi-

cient entrepreneurs.
                                                           —9—


        Let the subscript "fb" designate a "first-best" value. The first-order
necessary conditions are:


(3.2)                p1 - r =

(3.3)                (1 -
                              H(P;b))(PfbR
                                              -   r)   -
                                                           e(mfb)
                                                                    = 0



        These conditions are easily interpreted. (3.2) says that the optimal reser-

vation probability is such that the expected return of going ahead with the

project is just equal to the opportunity cost of the required input, if put into

storage. That is, the first-best reservation probability of success fb is given

by fb = rIR.         Any project whose evaluated probability of success is greater than

or equal to r/R should, in the first-best, be undertaken; others should be

rejected.

        In (3.3), the expression (1 -
                                                  H(pfb))(;fbR
                                                                     -    r)   gives the return, gross of

evaluation costs, to evaluating an additional project. In the planning solution,

this marginal benefit is equated with the marginal cost of evaluating a project,

e(mth). If the e(m) function takes a sufficiently broad range of values12 then

(3.3) will imply an interior solution, i.e., some endowment will stored and some

will be invested.
                            *
        The determination of p and                     is shown in Figure 1. The vertical line

graphs (3.2), p =              r/R   .   The curved line shows gross expected investment return

as a function of p*; note that this return is maximized at p* =                           rIR.   (3.3)

implies that, at the point where the two lines intersect, the effort level e(mfb)

can be read off the y—axis. Since e() is monotonic, knowledge of e(m) implies

knowledge of mth.




12
                must be positive for some m > 0, negative at m =                      mx    where
        m
         max
               =   w/(1   -
                              H(p*)).
e Cm)                   =




 e&n4)

                              eLm)
                     /fltfl




    0
                              1




         Figure 1.
                                          —10—

       Welfare maximization has no implications for income distribution in this

setup, since the risk-neutrality (constant marginal utility) assumption makes the

distribution of the consumption good irrelevant to the measure of total welfare.

Further, the optimum is independent (as is usually the case) of the initial

distribution of endowment. With private information, however, one feature of the

initial distribution -   the   correlation of endowment with entrepreneurial ability -

will   in fact have an important effect on the constrained optimum, as we shall see.



                                                                     solution. We now
       4. The model with asyimnetric information: a decentralized

re-introduce asymmetric information, as specified in assumption A.8. It is

convenient to consider first a particular decentralized (competitive) equilibrium

for our model economy, in which zero-profit financial intermediaries sign optimal

contingent contracts with individual entrepreneurs.      As noted in A.8, for the time

being we maintain the assumption that individual evaluation costs e(e) are private

 informatictfl. For expositional simplicity, we also temporarily impose the follow-

 ing restrictions: (I) Individuals all have the same endowment, i.e., w. = w, all

 i.    (2) Entrepreneurs deal with intermediaries only as individuals; entrepreneuri-

 al coalitions are not allowed.      (3) Randomized allocations ("lotteries") are ruled

 out. The case with observable evaluation costs and the implications of relaxing

 (l)-(3) are all developed below. Below we will also discuss the relations of the

 proposed competitive equilibria to the associated social planner's solutions.

        If w C 1, so that individual endowments are less than the input required to

 operate a project, entrepreneurs who evaluate projects and then decide to proceed

 must borrow endowment from non—entrepreneurs. We may think of this borrowing as
                                                               (These intermediaries
 being organized by competitive financial intermediaries.
                                                    in intermediation and will earn no
 are convenient fictions; they use no resources

 profits in equilibrium.) Let us consider now how such an inter'nedian' would

 behave.
                                               —11—

        Assuming that there is positive storage in equilibrium, intermediaries are
 able   to obtain "funds" (i.e., endowment) at opportunity cost r. The intermedi-

 ary's problem is how to structure credit
                                                arrangements with entrepreneurs so as to
 maximize expected profits.

        Without loss of generality, we
                                         may consider credit contracts of the following
 form. Intermediaries sign contracts with entrepreneurs (or potential entrepre-

 neurs) at the beginning of the investment
                                                 period, before any project evaluations
 have been done. Entrepreneurs "deposit" their endowment w with the intermediary.

 They also must give the intermediary the proceeds from
                                                              successful projects. The
 intermediary promises to fund the entrepreneur's project, if he decides to under-

 take it, and to pay the entrepreneur a
                                              quantity of consumption goods at the
beginning of the consumption period. This quantity of consumption goods is
contingent on what happens during the investment period.


            If:                The intermediary pays:          And   theintermediary's
                                                                      profit is:
A project is undertaken                   c
   and is successful                                                 R-r(1—w)-C

A project is undertaken
   and is not successful                  Cu

No project is undertaken                  C                                rw-C



Note that the three contingencies on which the consumption payment is based (as

well as the contingencies in which the intermediary must furnish input or receive

output)   are assumed to be distinguishable by the intermediary. Importantly,
though,   for the contingency "no project is undertaken", the intermediary cannot

tell whether the entrepreneur evaluated a project but decided not to go ahead, or

whether he simply did not evaluate in the first place.

     The intermediary's contract is a general contingent contract in form and

could be thought of as representing a variety of financial instruments. One
                                                           -12-

useful way to think of this contract is as a "credit line", in which the
                                                                          the net
entrepreneur is able to draw working capital as needed. In this contract,
                                                                      whether he uses the credit line and,
cost of credit to the entrepreneur depends on

if he does, on whether his project pays off or not.
                                                                                 For any given contract, let E
      4a. The intermediary's optimization problem.
                                                                            to be paid to the entrepreneur,
be the expected quantity of the consumption good

and   let V be the amount of expected consumption the entrepreneur can obtain
elsewhere in the economy. (V,                  which   is   exogenous to the intermediary, will be

                                                              the intermediary's maximization problem
determined in general equilibrium.) Then

 can be written out as follows:




 (4.1)            max                      -   (1_H(p*))LpR       -   r(l    -
                                                                                 w)1 +   H(p*)rw   -

              p*, C5 ,   C
                             o,
                                  C
                                      u,
                                           C




 subject to


                                                                                     =
                             H(p*))(pC5 + (1               p)C)
                                                       -              +                  C
 (4.2)             (1 -                                                   ll(p*)C0


  (4.3)



                   p*C ÷ (1 — p*)C                = C
  (4.4)


  (4.5)            C5—>CU


  (4.6)             Cu > 0



                                                                                 0
  (4.7)             max (C -           e(O), rw) C•
                                            -13-

      The intermediary's objective, given by (4.1), is to maximize expected prof-

 its. The intermediary's direct control variables (not all of which are

 independent) are the contingent payments, C, C, and C, and the expected

 payment, C. Although it is the entrepreneur who actually chooses the reservation

 success probability p*, the intermediary can indirectly choose p* (if the

entrepreneur responds rationally) by the values it assigns its direct controls.

For mathematical convenience, then, we also treat p* as under the control of the

intermediary.

     Equation (4.2) defines the expected payment to the entrepreneur, C, in terms

of the state-contingent payments and the state probabilities.

     (4.3) is a voluntary participation constraint. It is straightforward to show

that (4.3) will hold with equality at the optimum; we simply impose this below.

     Constraints (4.4) through (4.7) are relevant because of the asymmetry of

information. Equation (4.4) expresses the relationship between the reservation

success probability p* that will be chosen by the entrepreneur and the payments

offered by the intermediary: p* is the success probability such that the entre-

preneur is just indifferent between proceeding with the project (which has expect-

ed return p*C + (1   -
                         P*)Cu) and not proceeding (which has return C). The
inequality (4.5) is necessary to ensure that the entrepreneur will undertake

projects with success probabilities above p* rather than below p*.

     (4.6) is a non-negativity condition on the consumption of the entrepreneurs;

it is often interpreted as a limited liability condition. This restriction makes

borrower wealth a critical determinant of agency costs. (See Sappington (1983)).

(4.4), (4.5), and (4.6) together also imply that C > 0 and C > 0.

     Constraint (4.7) is an important one. Recall that intermediaries cannot tell

if an individual who does not proceed with a project has actually performed an

evaluation. (4.7) imposes truth-telling: It requires the contract to have the

property that any individual will prefer either to actually perform an evaluation

(which has expected return     -
                                   e(O)) or simply to store or lend to an intermediary
                                                -14-

                                                                     been perform-
(with return rw) rather than to claim falsely that an evaluation has
                                                                           will
ed (which yields C). Since we know that in equilibrium not all individuals

evaluate projects, (4.7) can here be simplified, without loss of generality, to




(4.8)            rw      C



                                                                                       We now solve the
        4b. haracteriZiflg the optimal financial arrangement.
                                                         the results to derive several proposi-
intermediary's optimization problem and use
                                                             First, it is easy to verify that
tions about the optimal financial contract.

 (4.5) is never binding, so we drop that constraint. Next, using (4.4) to elimi-
                                                 eliminate C, we can re-write the
nate C and (4.3) (which must bind) to

 constraints as follows:



                                           +                  -         +        = V
 (4.3)'           ((;/p*)(1 -     H(p*))       H(p*)1(C0          Cu)       Cu




 (4.6)'           Cu > 0




 (4.8)'           rw - (C - Cu ) + Cu
                         0


                                                                  expression for the intermediary's
 where the left side of (4.3)' is an alternative

 expected payments. These constraints are written in a form that facilitates
                                                                   (4.1) now
  thinking of Cu and (C0 - Cu) as control variables. The objective

  becomes




  (4.1)'        max              (1 -   H(p*))(pR   -   r)   + rw   -   V
                             C
              (C0••C):
                                                   —15—

  subject to (4.3)', (4.6)', and (4.8)'. Let the
                                                                non-negative multipliers associat-
 ed with the three constraints be
                                           p, W, and y, respectively. The first-order
 necessary conditions are



 (4.9)           (r -       p*R)dH(p*) = p(;/p*2)(1       -
                                                              H(p*))(c   -
                                                                             C)

 (4.10)          y =    p[(p/p*)(1    -
                                          H(p*))   + H(p*)]



 (4.11)          'P =   y   -
                                p



      We are now able to show:



      Proposition (4.1). The incentive compatible reservation success probability

for the entrepreneur is less than or equal to the socially efficient level; that

is, p* C r/R =
                 "fb    is induced by the optimal contract.



     Proof: According to (4.9), p* C r/R if p                   0. But p > 0 follows from the
Kuhn-Tucker theorem.
                                                                                  Q.E.D.



     Proposition (4.1) shows the nature of the
                                                              inefficiency induced by asymmetric
information; namely, that under the optimal contract the borrower may have an

incentive to be insufficiently selective when deciding whether to undertake his

project. The reasons for this inefficiency are, first, that the intermediary's

ability to reward entrepreneurs who turn down inferior projects is constrained:

Entrepreneurs who do not go ahead cannot be paid so much that it tempts

non-entrepreneurs to claim falsely that they have also evaluated (and turned down)

projects. Second, the limited liability constraint (C > 0) restricts the ability

of intermediaries to punish entrepreneurs who undertake inferior projects.

    We now characterize fully the intermediary's optimal contract.
                                                  -16-

    Proposition (4.2). [The optimal contract when evaluation costs are

unobservable]
                                                                            payoffs under the
     Ci)   If p   c r/R, then the entrepreneur's state contingent

optimal contract are Cu =        O C = rw, and C =             rw; further, p* is the

solution to



                     [(p/p*)(l -     H(p*))   + H(p*)lrw = V
(4.12)



                                                                                             there
     (ii) If p =        r/R,   then the state-contingent payoffs are indeterminate;

exist multiple solutions that satisfy the requirement that the expected payoff

equals the entrepreneur's opportunity cost.



      Proof: Part (i) follows directly from the constraints on the intermediary's
                                                                              So we must show
 maximization problem, if the multipliers y and P are positive.

 y > 0, P > 0.       (4.9) implies that p > 0 when p* C r/R.           (4.10) then implies


 y > p      0; this together with (4.11) implies P             0.

                                                                      follows that in
         When p* =   r/R,   p = 0 by (4.9). From (4.10) and (4.11) it

 this case y = 0 and 'P =       0.    Thus the constraints (4.6)' and (4.8)' do not bind.

 Since only (4.3)' holds with equality, there is only one equation to determine C0
                                                                (4.3)' and the inequality
 and C. Any combination (C, Cu) that satisfies

 constraints is consistent with the optimality conditions. This proves (ii.)
                                                                                Q.E.D.




         The difference between the inefficient and efficient cases (p* C r/R and

  p* =   r/R,   respectively) is that in the inefficient case the incentive constraints

  bind, whereas in the efficient case they do not. In the inefficient case (with p*
                                                         reward entrepreneurs who are selective
  "too low"), the intermediary would like to
                                                               from doing so as much as it would
  and punish those who are not, but is prevented
                                                           —17—

     like by the moral hazard constraint rw )                C    and the limited liability constraint
     Cu >   O   The optimal contract in the
                                                      inefficient case goes as far in this
     direction as possible by setting C = rw and C =
                                                     0.13                    Thus entrepreneurs who
     "fail" receive no consumption, while those who do not
                                                                           proceed with projects "get
     their deposit back". C and p* are then uniquely determined
                                                                by the requirement
     that entrepreneurs receive the opportunity cost of the marginal borrower,
                                                                                and by
     the incentive constraint that relates p* to the three
                                                           contingent payments.
      4c. General equilibrium. We now consider the equilibrium of this
                                                                       economy
 under competition. The difference
                                   between general and partial                      equilibrium is that
 V, the expected consumption
                             payment required to induce an entrepreneur to sign
 with an intermediary, becomes
                               endogenous. The extra condition that allows V to be
 determined is that expected
                             intermediary profits equal zero. We focus on the
 inefficient case, in which p* C r/R in equilibrium. The efficient
                                                                   case is simple,
 and is discussed below.

         Again, let m be the fraction of individuals
                                                                     who evaluate projects in equilib-
 rium. Then e(m) is the
                               marginal evaluation cost. Since e() is continuous, in
equilibrium the marginal entrepreneur
                                                     must be just indifferent between
                                                                                           evaluating
a project and storing (or lending) his endowment. This implies



(4.13)              V — e(m)   = rw



     Using (4.13), intermediary expected profits per borrower can be written
                                                                             as
(see (4.1)'):



(4.14)              (1 -   H(p*))(pR   -
                                           r)   -
                                                    e(m)


13
       We emphasize that the result Cu = 0 does not arise because the
       yields a zero return in the unsuccessful                       project
                                                state. It occurs because the
       limited liability constraint is binding. If unsuccessful projects did
       yield positive returns, then under the optimal contract the lender(s)
       would receive all the proceeds in the
                                             bad state; the borrower would still
       receive nothing.
                                                      -18-



                                                            intermediaries must earn zero expected
        With free entry into intermediation,

profitsl4 in equilibrium. Zero expected profits implies the equilibrium condition



                      (1 —   H(p*))(pR    —   r)   = e(m)                  (zero expected profits)
(4.15)



        From Proposition (4.2), we also know that the incentive-compatible p* satis-

fies the following equation (which is (4.12) re—arranged):



                                              -    1)rw = e(m)             (incentive-compatible p*)
 (4.16)               (1 -   H(p*))(plp*

                                                            the equilibrium values of p' and in. We
            (4.15) and (4.16) jointly determine
                                                                 solution. This solution turns out to
 can now characterize the general equilibrium

 be sensitive to the value of borrower net worth (endowment) w.



                                                       when evaluation costs are unobservable]
            Proposition (4.3). [Equilibrium

            (i) If w C 1, then both p* and investment m are below their respective
                                                                               in
 socially efficient levels. Further, both p and m are monotonically increasing
                                                     exists.15
 w, assuming an equilibrium with positive investment
                                                                      optimum;
            (ii) If w = 1, then the economy attains the unconstrained

        =         =    and     =
            r/R                    mth.


                                                                 into (4.16) to obtain the following
             Proof: (1) substitute (4.15) for e(m)

  expression for p*:




  14         Because of universal j-neutrality and the observability of intermediary
                                                                           expected
             profits, we need not worry about the distinction between zero    be
             profits and zero realized profits.  For example, depositors will
             perfectly willing to bear intermediary profit risk.

   15                                                          for which investment is zero in
             Proposition (4.4) describes the case
             equilibrium.
                                                              —19—



  (4.17)             p* =   [p*/p   + w(l -



  If w C 1, then [p*/p + w(1 - p*/;)] C 1 and hence p* C r/R. If p* C r/R then the
  expected gross surplus from investment (1 -
                                              }J(p*))(pR - r) is below its maximum
  value; hence e(m), and therefore m, are below the unconstrained social
                                                                                                       optimum.

  Straightforward differentiation of (4.15) and (4.16) yields
                                                                                            > ,         >
  when w C 1, given that both (4.15) and (4.16) hold.

         If w =   1, then (2.7) implies p' = r/R.                    Since p* =   r/R,   the gross expected
 surplus from investment is at maximum.
                                                              It follows from (2.15) that m is also at
 the unconstrained maximum.
                                                                                            Q.E.D.



         Proposition (4.4). ["Investment collapse"]

         Suppose that the unconditional
                                     gross project return (the expected gross
 return if p* = 0) is less than the evaluation
                                               cost of the most-efficient
                               1                          A
 entrepreneur; that is 5 pRdK(p)                -   r   pUR -        r   C e(0). Then there exists a
                               0
positive level of borrower net worth (call this level w), such
                                                               that, for levels of
net worth w < w, the investment
                                market "collapses"; no positive investment is
sustainable in equilibrium. The minimum wealth level w and the
                                                               associated success
probability p are the values of w and p* that satisfy the equilibrium
                                                                      conditions
(4.14) and (4.15) at in =      0.      Specifically, w and Q* are given by



(4.18)             (1 -
                          }1(E*))(2R   -
                                           r)    = e(0)


(4.19)             (1 —                    —
                                                1))rw = e(O)
                          H(p*)((p/p*


     Proof: To see first that w > 0, suppose w = 0.
                                                                             Then, by (4.16), p* = 0.
Then the expected net surplus from
                                                evaluating an investment is ptIR -             r   -
                                                                                                       e(0),
                                       -20-

which is negative by assumption. Thus there can be no investment if w = 0.     By

continuity, this is also true for sufficiently small positive w. Hence w > 0.

     To see that (4.18) and (4.19) define w and p, compare these equations with

(4.15) and (4.16). Clearly, w is the value of borrower wealth such that only the

most efficient entrepreneur could generate a surplus net of evaluation costs. By

Proposition (4.3), p' and e(m) are increasing in w. Thus if w C w, then

e(m) C e(O). This implies m = 0, i.e., investment "collapses" if w C w.      Q.E.D.




     The possible equilibrium solutions are depicted graphically in Figure 2. The

hump-shaped curve (equation (4.15)) gives the expected surplus from initiating a

project, gross of evaluation effort, as a function of p*; this same curve appeared

in Figure 1. The downward-sloping line (equation (4.16)) gives the relation

between p' and e(m) as determined by the optimal intermediary contract.16 When

w < 1, the equilibrium lies to the left of the socially efficient point E (as

drawn, the equilibrium is at point A), with m and p* below their first-best

levels. (Recall that e(m) is monotonically increasing in m.)

     The reason that m is less than the social optimum is that, with w < 1, there

is an agency problem: As we have seen, entrepreneurs have an incentive to be

insufficiently selective when deciding whether to proceed with projects. But,

since lenders recognize this problem, and since lenders are always able to earn a

return of r by storing, this agency cost is reflected only in the equilibrium cost

of capital. The lower expected net return to initiating projects reduces m in

equilibrium.

     To see how the equilibrium depends on borrower wealth w, note that increases

in w cause the downward-sloping curve in Figure 2 to move up and to the right.

(As we have seen, for a given e(m), greater borrower wealth leads to a higher p*

under the optimal contract.) As w increases, p* and m approach their first-best




16
     The slope of this curve is _(p/p*2)(l -   H(p*))rw   C 0.
            efri) = ( /ps_t)(tNtp*Iru)
eLm)




                        C
e



    e (a)                     ,___,l e(nm)r(?R_r)(c_I4(p))




    0
                                  1
                                           Fm




            Figure 2.
                                        -21-

levels; that is, the agency problems become less serious. When w =      1   (full

collateralization), the equilibrium is at point E, the first-best.

     In contrast, suppose that borrower net worth w declines so far that the

downward-sloping curve in Figure 2 intersects the hump-shaped curve at point C or

below. In that case, the potential gross surplus generated by initiating a

project is less than the evaluation cost of the most efficient entrepreneur. Here

there can be no positive investment in equilibrium Cm =   0);   this is the "invest-

ment collapset' described by Proposition (4•4)•l7 The minimal value of w which

permits positive investment, w, is the value of w which causes the two curves to

intersect at point C. Thus, declines in borrower net worth induce a "financially
                      18
fragile" situation.

     There has been some controversy as to whether the presence of asymmetric

information   typically leads to "underinvestment" or "overinvestment" (deMeza and
Webb (1987)). Our basic    result is that in economies with w < 1,   there will be
underinvestment   in the sense that entrepreneurs will initiate too few projects

relative to the first-best, i.e., m C m. For macroeconomic analysis, however,

it is also worthwhile to consider the behavior of investment spending, as measured

by the total resources devoted to investment. Although entrepreneurs initiate too

few projects, they are also insufficiently selective when deciding to proceed with

the projects which they do evaluate (p* c ph), so that investment spending,

m(1_H(p*)), is not in general unambiguously greater or less than in the




17
     Hankiw (1986) obtains a similar result, which, like ours, is in the spirit
     of the Akerlof (1970) "lemons" model. Mankiw's model is rather different
     from ours in that he restricts attention to debt contracts and does not
     link lenders' payoffs to borrowers' returns. Our paper and Nankiw's both
     make a case for government intervention in financial markets, but we
     differ in the specific recommendations.
18
     In analogy to Nankiw (1986), a collapse is more likely if the payoff to
     successful projects R is low and if the riskless interest rate r is high.
     This can be seen by noting that the hump-shaped curve in Figure 2 moves up
     with an increase in R and down with an increase in r.
                                                 -22-

first-best.19 Building on the investment collapse result, however, we can show

that, for w sufficiently low and for convex e(), there will always be

underinvestment (in the sense that total spending is too low).



           Proposition (4.5) [IJnderinvestment or overinvestment?]

           Let I = m(1 - H(p*)) be the total quantity of endowment devoted to invest-

ment, and let               be the first-best value of this variable. If e(m) is convex in

m, then there exists some common endowment level ;, w C                    < 1, such that

           (i) for w C ;, I C I (underinvestment)

           (ii) for 1 > w >         > tfb (overinvestinent)



           Proof. Use (4.15) to define the equilibrium relationship in =             m(p*).   Implic-

it differentiation of (4.15) yields m'(p*) =            (r   -
                                                                 p*R)H'(p*)/e'(m).
           Since I = m(1 - H(p*)), we have       = [m'(p*)       _
                                                                     mH'(p*)}    =
[(r    -
           p*R)/e'Øn)   -
                            m]H'(p*) —, using the expression for m'(p*). Since
Hh(p*) ) 0, — > 0, then 5has the same sign as [(r - p*fi)/e'(m) - ml. We

know that this latter expression is positive at w = w, negative at w = 1, and

(given that e() is convex) continuously decreasing in w in the intermediate

range.

Thus         is first positive and then negative. Since I = 0 when w = w and I =

when w = 1, by continuity there must exist some ;, w < w C 1, such that I < 'fb

for w C w and I > 'fi, for w > w.                                                Q.E.D.




19
       De Fleza and Webb's (1987) '1overinvestment" result is essentially the same
       as our finding that p < p, i.e., given that they have evaluated,
       entrepreneurs are too eager to proceed with projects. But this result
       depends on the number of evaluations (m) being given exogenously in their
       model. When the investment process includes a costly evaluation stage,
       entrepreneurs internalize the cost of insufficient selectivity, so that
       underinvestment can occur.
                                             -23-

     The relation of I to 'lb as w changes is shown in Figure 3. The important

point here is that, even if investment doesn't "collapse", a "financially fragile"

situation implies both that investment spending is low and that the investment

which is undertaken is inefficient.

     Finally, we may ask who bears the welfare losses associated with financial

fragility. The distribution of expected utility in equilibrium is straightforward

to determine. Non-entrepreneurs receive rw, as does the marginal entrepreneur

(who by definition is just indifferent between evaluating a project on the one

hand and lending or storing his endowment on the other). The inframarginal

entrepreneur's return is the expected consumption payment V, less his evaluation

e(8). By (4.13) this return can be written as



(4.20)         V —   e(6)   = rw + e(m) — e(G)




or, substituting for e(m) from (4.15),



(4.21)         V —   e(&) = rw + (1   -
                                          H(p*))(pR   —
                                                          r)   —   e(O)



     (4.21) shows that all of the social surplus associated with the existence of

investment projects is appropriated by the efficient entrepreneurs in equilibrium;

thus, in this model it is the entrepreneurs who bear the deadweight losses created

by asymmetric information.



     5. Generalizations. The last section adopted a number of simplifying

assumptions for expositional purposes. We turn now to a brief discussion of the

effects of relaxing these restrictions.




20
     Figure 3 also shows that investment spending will be increasing in
     borrower net worth ("procyclical") whenever w is less than the value at
     which I is maximal.
I.

                           IrmO.Htp'')
                     #47




     0                     I.      '4



         Figure 3.
                                                        -24-

        5a. Variable endowments. The analysis of the last section is easily gener-

alized to allow for an arbitrary distribution of initial endowments. The main

modification is that intermediary contracts now depend on the borrower's

endowment. For each w, the form of the optimal intermediary contract is precisely

analogous to the contract described in Proposition (4.2). For example, for the

interesting case where p* C r/R, the contingent payoffs under the optimal contract

are C' =    0,    =   rw,     and       =   rw/p',    where the w superscripts and subscripts

indicate dependence on w. Further, in analogy to (4.12), p is given by


                          *                           *
                                                 + H(p )]rw = Vw
(5.1)             EPw/Pw)(1 -           H(P))


where Vw is the reservation expected consumption level required by an entrepreneur

with wealth w.

        To calculate the general equilibrium, impose zero expected intermediary

profits contract            contract. This implies


                               *                                w
(5.2)             (1 -    H(p))(pR          —   r)   ÷ rw = V



Conditions (5.1) and (5.2) uniquely determine p and

        Which entrepreneurs will borrow in this equilibrium? The evaluation cost of

the marginal borrower is determined by



(5.3)                 -   e(m) = rw


For any given endowment level w, individuals with evaluation costs less than or

equal to e(m) will borrow, others will not. In analogy to (4.21), the expected

utility of an entrepreneur of type 0 and with wealth w is given by



(5.4)            V' -     e(0)      =   rtc+ (1- H(P))(PwR_ r) - e(0)
                                            -25-

which equals rw for 0 = m       and exceeds rw for 0 C at
                            w                               w
     The basic features of the equilibrium with uniform endowments are replicated
               *
here. First, p and in are below the first-best levels for borrowers with w C 1.
               w      w
         *
Second, p and m are increasing in w and attain the first-best for w = 1.             Third,

individuals whose endowments fall below a critical lower bound will be unable to

undertake any investment (their credit will be "cut off").

     The equilibrium with variable endqwments also makes clear an important

implication of asymmetric information in this setup: Unlike the first-best case,

here the pattern of initial endowments --      in   particular, the correlation of

endowments with entrepreneurial skill --      is   a determinant of the best feasible

outcome. Two   points   are worth emphasizing: First, in the equilibrium with

variable endowments, it is not necessarily the case that those evaluations which

are done will be done by the most efficient entrepreneurs; rather, relatively

inefficient entrepreneurs with high endowments may displace more efficient entre-

preneurs with lower endowments. Second, pure redistributions of endowment which

reduce the correlation of skill and endowment will tend to reduce output and

investment efficiency.21

     5b. Observable evaluation costs. If individual evaluation costs e(0) are

public knowledge, then intermediary contracts will be conditioned on the e(0) of

the individual borrower (as well as on the borrower's w, if that differs among

individuals). It turns out that the intermediary's optimization problem in this

case differs from the case with unobservable e(0)'s in only two respects: First,

the intermediary's controls (p*, C, C, C, Cu) and the reservation consumption

level (V) all become functions of 0. Second, since non-entrepreneurs can be

directly excluded from signing contracts, constraint (4.7) in the intermediary's

problem simplifies to




21                      .
     Greenwald and Stiglitz (1986) make a related argument.
                                                        -26-

                     —   e(O)    >
(55)


(where the B superscript signifies dependence on the borrowerTs type 8), instead

of to (4.8) as before.

        For the case p* C r/R, the contingent payoffs under the optimal contract are
        8       0   0                 0     0                       *         *
now Cu =    0, C = V     -   e(0) and C = IV             -
                                                             e(0)]/p8,   with p0 determined by


                        *                    *           *
(5.6)             [(p0/p0)(l -                     + H(p8)][V8 -    e(8)]   = V8
                                          H(p0))

Zero expected intermediary profits, contract by contract, implies


                             *       -.


(5.7)             (1 -                       -   r)   + rw = Va
                         H(p0fl(p0R


For each 8, (5.6) and (5.7) determine the general equilibrium values of p and V9.

        V0 is decreasing in 0. This implies that, for any given wealth level w,

there exists some m such that



(5.8)             V" — e(m) = rw




Individuals with wealth w whose evaluation costs are equal to or less than the

e(m) defined by (5.8) will borrow in equilibrium; others will not. The expected

utility of an individual entrepreneur is given by an expression exactly analogous

to (4.21) and (5.4).

        If we compare the equilibrium with observable evaluation costs to the equi-

librium with unobservable costs (but the same initial wealth distribution), some

interesting results emerge.22 First, the total number of project evaluations and

the reservation success probability of the marginal entrepreneur are precisely the




22
        These results are only summarized here. Detailed statements and proofs
        are available on request.
                                               —27—

same in the two economies. Thus, the observability of evaluation costs is not in

itself sufficient to take the decentralized economy to the first-best, or even to

avoid investment collapse, if borrower wealth levels are sufficiently low.

liowever, it is the case that inframarginal entrepreneurs are more efficient when

their e(O)'s are observable than when they are not. This is because, with observ-

able e(O)'s, t is easy for the intermediary to screen out high-e(O) individuals

who would have an incentive to pretend to evaluate and to collect C. Thus the

constraint C C rw, which binds in the unobservable e(O) case, can be relaxed here
                                                                         *
for   inframarginal borrowers. The relaxation of this constraint allows p0 to

increase as 0 falls, i.e., the moral hazard problem is reduced for more efficient

entrepreneurs. Indeed, inframarginal borrowers (but not the marginal borrower)

may attain the first-best reservation success probability         = r/R)   for w

strictly less than one.

        Thus, in general equilibrium, observable evaluation costs may ameliorate, but

cannot eliminate, the inefficiencies arising from the combination of asymmetric

information and imperfect collateralization.

        5c. Entrepreneurial coalitions. We have assumed throughout that intermed-

iaries deal with borrowers on an individual basis. However, if individuals can

observe the evaluation costs of others, and if evaluation costs are sufficiently

low, potential borrowers may Eind it profitable to form coalitions.23

      To take a simple example, suppose that two individuals each have w =

These   individuals might agree to pool endowment and projects, to fund the project
(of   their two) with the highest success probability (or perhaps to store if

neither    project   is good), and to share total returns. If the rule for sharing

returns    is independent of whose project is undertaken, then neither individual has
an incentive to mis-report his success probability to the other. At one level at

least, the moral hazard problem is eliminated.




23                                     .   .
      We   thank Barry Nalebuff for pointing this out to us.
                                            -28-

      Further elaboration of this example would be worthwhile (e.g., as part of an

explanation of why intermediaries do not diversify away agency risk, as in Diamond

(1984).) Indeed, we did something of this sort in Bernanke-Gertler (1986).

However, we do not find it important to undertake this elaboration here, for two

reasons.

      First, the formation of coalitions is itself subject to an incentive problem:

The coalition must ensure that each member has an incentive actually to evaluate

his   project, and not to "free ride" on the projects' of others. The free rider
problem worsens as the coalition size grows and when evaluation costs are high,
and   it   is   likely to become fatal to coalition formation when evaluation costs are

unobservable (so that non-entrepreneurs are able to free-ride). Thus, as a formal

matter, we can exclude coalition formation for many sets of parameter values when

the e(O)'s are observable, and in almost all cases of interest when the e(O)'s are

unobservable.

       Second, since the coalition of two individuals might find that it has two

good projects instead of just one, it will in general want to sign a contingent

contract with an intermediary, in order to allow for possible additional financ-

ing. Formal analysis of this contract suggests that the same sorts of moral

hazard problems will arise between the coalition and the intermediary as arise

between individual borrowers and the intermediary in our basic analysis. Allowing

for entrepreneurial coalitions thus would not seem to affect the qualitative

nature of our results; at most, it changes the fundamental unit of observation

from the individual entrepreneur to a coalition.

       Sd. Lotteries. A number of recent studies of models with asymmetric infor-

mation have stressed the importance of allowing for random consumption alloca-

 tions, or lotteries, in the analysis; see, e.g., Prescott and Townsend (1984).

 Because of our assumption of universal risk neutrality, consumption lotteries

 would have no effect on decisions or social welfare in our model. It turns out,

 however, that lotteries in endowment (done before evaluations are undertaken) are
                                                 -29—

potentially quite helpful, at a theoretical level at least, in the present

setting.

        Consider the case in which endowments are variable and evaluation costs e(O)

are observable. For a given individual of type 0, expected utility as a function

of his endowment w can be written as




                                r rw          for w— >
(5.9)            EU9(w) =       1         1
                                       + 5 (pR   -
                                                     r)dH(p)   -
                                                                   e(0)   for w c




where w is the endowment below which the individual cannot invest, and the

expected utility for the case w > w is analogous to the expression given in (5.4).

Note that p* depends on w, and that both p* and w depend on 0. Assume for

simplicity that 5(pR -     r)dH(p) is concave in w.24 Then the individual's expected
utility as a function of his endowment is given by the curve OAB in Figure 4.

Note the kink in expected utility at A (where w =              w).    Note also that the slope of

the curve   is r for w C   w,   that it   exceeds r but is declining in the region w >

and that it equals r again at point B, where w1.25

     Because the expected utility curve is not concave in w, individuals will want

to take fair bets when 0 C w c w*, where w* corresponds to the point where a ray

from the origin is tangent to the expected utility curve (see Figure 4). By the

usual arguments, the individual's preferred fair lottery is the one that pays w*

with probability w/w* and zero with probability 1 - w/w*,                 where w is initial
wealth. Further, it can be seen from the diagram (or shown algebraically) that:




24
     Similar results can be obtained for the non-concave case.
25
     The derivative of expected utility with respect to w equals r at point B
     since the derivative of the integral term in (5.9) is zero when w = 1; at
     w=1, p* = r/R and the surplus from evaluating a project is maximum.
£,iptctt4

                    1,
                                       9—

                         II       I—
                     II.—
                      -e
                    —ii
                         I   I


                         I   I
                         I    I



            0        u*i.                   'a

                Figure 4.
                                        -30-

     (1) For a given skill level, w is independent of initial wealth w; i.e. ,   all
lottery winners of a given ability will have the same endowment when they sign

contracts with intermediaries.

     (2) w* > w; lottery winners will always have enough endowment to proceed with

a project evaluation.

     (3) w* c 1; individuals will not attempt to fully collateralize themselves,
                                                                      26
so that borrowing from intermediaries will occur in final equilibrium.

     Finally, it can also be shown that

     (4) w* is increasing in e(G); less able entrepreneurs will prefer riskier
            27
lotteries

     The main way in which the introduction of a lottery modifies our previous

results is that the investment collapse described in Proposition (4.4) is much

less likely to occur; the collapse will be prevented by the "pooling" of endowment

(via the lottery), except in the case where entrepreneurial net worth is zero.

The other results of Section 4 remain qualitatively true: In particular, entre-

preneurs will not be fully collateralized even after the lottery, so that the

basic agency problem remains.28

     Lotteries of the sort described here do not seem to occur in practice or to

have obvious institutional counterparts. A possible explanation for this absence

of lotteries is risk aversion, from which we have abstracted. Another possibility




26
     This is proved by noting that the ray 00 must have a slope greater than r,
     while (as noted above) the slope of the expected utility curve at w1
     equals r.
27
     To see this in the figure, note that an increase in e(O) shifts the
     humpshaped part of the expected utility line down, which moves the tangen-
     cy point 0 to the right.
28
     As in Section 5a, it is also true in the lottery equilibrium that some
     projects will be undertaken by relatively less efficient entrepreneurs
     (who happen to win the lottery).
                                       -31-

is that the willingness of an entrepreneur to enter lotteries may send an adverse
                                                      29
signal (e.g., lack of prudence?) to potential lenders.

     The revelation of information by lotteries can also be beneficial, however.

In the version of our model in which evaluation costs are unobserved, it is

possible for the introduction of a lottery to induce a separating equilibrium (in

which entrepreneurs credibly reveal their types by their choices of lotteries),

which Pareto - dominates the equilibrium without a lottery. Like the analogous

equilibrium with public evaluation costs, however, this equilibrium does not

attain the first-best.

     Se. Summary. This section has considered a variety of extensions of the

basic model, including variable endowments, observable entrepreneurial skill,

entrepreneurial coalitions, and lotteries in endowment. The only significant

modification of the basic results is that, as a theoretical matter, the admission

of endowment lotteries and entrepreneurial coalitions (the latter when the e(O)'s

are observable) may eliminate the "investment collapse" equilibrium. However, the

principal messages of sections 2 through 4 remain qualitatively unaffected: Under

all of the extensions, it remains true that insufficient borrower wealth and the

resulting necessity of external finance lead to too few evaluations and

insufficient selectivity in equilibrium; and that these capital market

inefficiencies disappear only as borrowers' endowments approach the level of full

collateralization of projects.



     6. The role of policy. An advantage of the sort of formal setup we have

used here is that normative policy analysis can be done in a straightforward way,

by comparison of the allocations arising in decentralized equilibria with those

implied by the social planner's solution. An earlier version of this paper

(available on request) develops this comparison explicitly. To conserve space, we



29
     Stiglitz and Weiss (1981) make a similar point in their discussion of the
     role of collateral.
                                        -32-

 here only describe our results. Fortunately, our principal policy Conclusion is

 easy to demonstrate without formal apparatus.

      An important preliminary point is that, for the classes of economies studied

 (e.g., in section 4, for the class in which entrepreneurial skill is unobservable,.

 and lotteries and coalitions are excluded), the decentralized equilibria derived

 in sections 4 and 5 are Pareto optima.3° Thus we will not be able to find a

policy which alters the equilibrium outcome that would receive unanimous approval.

However, policy will be able to increase social welfare, investment
                                                                      efficiency,
and output (which, in this context, are all the same thing). Also, by definition,

welfare-improving policies are policies that would be unanimously approved if

people could vote before knowing their types (endowments and evaluation costs).

Such policies seem worthy of study, even if they are not Pareto-improving.

     The critical determinant of the potential effectiveness of policy, it turns

out, is the degree of observability of individual entrepreneurial skills. If

entrepreneurial ability is not observed at all, policy can do little. Perfect

observability of skill levels implies, remarkably, that policy can drive the

economy to the unconstrained social optimum. Intermediate levels of observability

imply, in general, intermediate policy effectiveness.

     6a. Unobservable entrepreneurial skill. Consider first .the case analyzed in

sections 3 and 4, in which entrepreneurial skill (as measured by evaluation costs)

is unobserved. Endowments may be either identical or variable across

individuals.31 The welfare-maximizing policy may be obtained by solving the


30
     The equilibria of sections 4 and S can be reproduced as solutions to
     social planning problems, in which positive weights are assigned to the
     utilities of those who become entrepreneurs in equilibrium and zero
     weights are assigned to the utilities of non-entrepreneurs. The zero
     weight assigned to non-entrepreneurs implies that, in the planner's
     solution, the non-entrepreneurs' voluntary participation constraints will
     be binding; i.e., each non-entrepreneur will receive consumption equal to
     exactly r times his endowment, just as in the decentralized outcomes.
31
     Throughout this section we exclude coalitions and lotteries, for
     simplicity; these extensions can be handled by similar methods, however,
     and would not affect the nature of the results.
                                       -33—

social planner's problem as done in Section 3, but this time imposing all applica-

ble infonnation constraints. This procedure yields the following results, stated

without proof:

     (1) Unless the endowments of all individuals who would be borrowers in the

first-best equilibrium happen to equal one, the first-best outcome is not attain-

able by the planner. Further, the social planner's choices of m and p* are both

below their respective first-best levels, as occurred in the decentralized case.

     (2) The solution to the planner's problem and the outcome of the decentral-

ized competitive solution are, however, not identical. The formal analysis

implies that the planner can improve social welfare (relative to the decentralized

case) by imposing a tax on successful investment projects and using the proceeds

to subsidize storage. The reason that the tax is helpful is that it permits a

subsidy to non-entrepreneurs, which relaxes the constraint on what can be paid to

entrepreneurs who decide not to proceed with their projects. Both the loosening

of this constraint and the tax on investments itself tend to raise p*; at the same

time, the tax on investments lowers m in equilibrium. Thus the planner is trading

off a lower number of projects initiated against a higher quality of projects

undertaken.

     The policy suggested by this analysis is interesting in one respect, in that

it shows that an investment subsidy (which would be the opposite of the optimal

policy in this case) does not help when the economy is suffering from under-

investment. In the present case, an investment subsidy would raise the number of

evaluations, which is desirable; but it would also reduce the selectivity of

entrepreneurs (i.e., lower p*), leading on net to a decrease in social welfare.

     Overall, though, we don't take the tax policy implied by this analysis very

seriously, for several reasons. First, it is very much a "second-order" policy:

If the fraction of the population who are entrepreneurs is small, then the average

subsidy paid to non-entrepreneurs must also be small. Further, as was noted, the

gains in p* achieved by the policy are offset to some degree by reductions in m.
                                       -34-

The net welfare effect of this policy, starting from the decentralized solution,

would likely be insignificant.

     Second, and more importantly, this policy arises from a somewhat artificial

constraint that we have imposed on the planner -   specifically,   that he has no

information at all about which individuals (or firms, in reality) are potentially

efficient investors. Because of the assumption that there is no information about

entrepreneurs, the only available policy is one that works through the very

indirect channel of trying to raise the opportunity cost of undertaking ineffi-

cient investments. If we assume (more realistically) that the planner has at

least some information about individual skill, the scope for policy increases

substantially.

     6b. Observable entrepreneurial skill. Suppose now that the planner can

perfectly observe individual evaluation costs. As was shown in Section Sb above,

observability of evaluation costs does change the competitive equilibrium somewhat

but is not sufficient to cure the agency problems created by external finance.

However, observability of evaluation costs does have a very dramatic impact on the

capability of the planner. Consider the following simple policy:32 The planner

calculates the value of m,       corresponding to the (unconstrained) first—best.

Using lump-sum taxes, he then provides a net subsidy of l-w. to any individual i

whose cost of evaluating projects is e(mfb) or less. The planner's policy thus

fully collateralizes borrowers, which sends the economy to the unconstrained

first-best! This result cannot be achieved by the private economy alone, even by

using lotteries, coalitions, or other devices. The policy works because it

directly attacks the cause of financial fragility, low borrower net worth.

     The transfer policy seems to retain at least a degree of efficacy even when

entrepreneurial skills are only imperfectly observed. We have studied a number of

cases. For example, suppose that the planner can tell only whether an individu-



32
     This policy can be derived as the solution to the planner's problem, but
     it is transparent without the aid of formal apparatus.
                                       —35—

al's evaluation cost is above or below the marginal evaluation cost in the

first-best. Alternatively, suppose that individuals can pretend to be less

skilled but not more skilled than they actually are (e.g., one can always inten-

tionally fail a test but cannot do better than is given by one's ability). In

either of these cases, it is elementary to show that the planner's "full

collateralization policy" is still feasible and the economy attains the

first-best. Not much is changed if individual evaluation costs are measured with

a random error.

     Another example we have analyzed assumes that there is no direct

observability of entrepreneurial skill, but that there is a costly signal that

individuals can emit about their abilities. (In practice, this might involve

undertaking marginally unprofitable projects and incurring debt in order to build

a "track record".) Our working paper proves two results:   (1) If the economy is

initially in an inefficient region (p* C r/R), and the signalling costs are not

too large, the planner will generally be able to increase welfare by subsidizing

individuals who signal themselves to be entrepreneurs. (2) However, when there

are signalling costs, it is never desirable to fully collateralize entrepreneurs

(that is, to bring their endowments all the way up to one.)33

     To reiterate, our main policy result is that if there is some observability

of entrepreneurial skill (here, evaluation costs), transfers to entrepreneurs!

borrowers may increase financial market efficiency, output, and welfare (although

these transfers will not induce Pareto improvements). Some implications of this

and our other formal results are drawn out in the next and final section.




     The reason for this result is that, as m and p* approach their first-best
     levels, the additional reductions in agency cost achieved by increasing
     the subsidy approach zero, while the marginal signalling costs rise (as
     entrepreneurs signal more intensely in order to compete for the increased
     subsidy). Thus with signalling it is never optimal to try to eliminate
     all agency costs by setting borrowers' wealth at one.
                                       -36-

     7.   Conclusion. Most discussions of financial fragility have focused on

what is often termed the "excessive" buildup of debt (Kaufman (1987)). Our

approach suggests that fragility (or stability) is, at a deeper level, a product

of the level and distribution of national wealth: The financial system is less

efficient, and contributes to inferior macroeconomic equilibria, when potential

borrowers have low levels of net worth. Debt is significant only if it indicates

declining borrower net worth; or if, in the absence of complete indexing, the debt

level creates a potential for large and systematic redistribution away from

borrowers (e.g., if there is an unanticipated fall in prices). Indeed, because

our analysis assumes contingent contracting and observable returns, our model

economy may be interpreted as a pure equity economy; thus, all our results go

through even in the complete absence of debt instruments.

     To what extent is financial fragility important to real activity? Tt seems

to have been at least a portion of the explanation of the Great Depression

(Bernanke (1983)), a period during which debt-deflation greatly reduced the

general level of credit-worthiness. Postwar examples of financially-based prob-

lems having real effects are harder to pinpoint, although casual empiricism

suggests a number of candidates (such as in the agricultural credit crisis; see

Calomiris, Hubbard, and Stock (1986)), as well as possible dangers (e.g., deple-

tion of the net worth of banks and savings and loans). Although the empirical

work needs to be done, it is possible that changes in borrower net worth play a

role in the ordinary business cycle: Bernanke and Gertler (1986) show in a formal

setting how real shocks to the economy can be amplified, as declining net worth

during a downswing leads to higher agency costs and lower investment demand.

Finally, this approach may be of empirical relevance in the study of the

apparently close link between financial development and general economic

development: It may be, for example, that an important cause of the primitive and

fragmented state of LDC financial markets is the generally low wealth level of

potential borrowers. Our approach may also explain why the emergence of a
                                       -37-

relatively wealthy mercantile class (from which spring credit-worthy

entrepreneurs) has historically been an important pre-condition for the

development process.

     As was discussed in the previous section, the most distinctive result of our

formal policy analysis is that, in a financially fragile situation, transfers to

borrowers can improve welfare and increase output. We interpret this as support-

ing the view that, in the face of large and imperfectly provided for shocks to

borrower net worth, debtor "bailouts" by the government are sometimes a useful

alternative to letting the financial system collapse or operate at an inefficient

level.

     Conditions like those that prevailed in the U.S. in the 1930's are probably

most conducive to a bailout policy: At that time, those in need of help were

easily identified; the source of distress was clearly systemic rather than

idiosyncratic to individuals; and it could credibly be argued that New Deal "debt

re-adjustments" were a one-time-only policy. Transfers restored the financial

system without excessive signalling costs and without greatly increasing subjec-

tive probabilities of future bailouts (a cost not captured in this one-period

setting).

     We emphasize, though, that we do not want to be interpreted as favoring a

generalized and ongoing bailout policy, with the obvious costs that would entail.

The government's decision to help borrowers must balance the short-run benefits to

the financial system against the excessive risk-taking and other inefficiencies

that the prospect of future bailouts creates. Thus, optimal bailouts will be rare

and will be in response only to large, systematic shocks.

     The policy of transfers to borrowers might be objected to on equity grounds,

since (according to our analysis) they are not Pareto-improving and tend to help

borrowers at the expense of the rest of the population. This objection is valid,

but we offer two qualifications: First, it is not generally true that transfers

to borrowers involve taking from the poor to give to the rich; the primary
                                       -38—

beneficiaries of the New Deal policies, for example, were small and deeply

indebted businesses, farmers, and homeowners. Second, if there are increasing

returns or aggregate demand externalities, then the benefits of a healthy

investment sector may be conferred more broadly than is implied by our simple

model -

      Various extensions of the analysis of this paper are possible. For example,
the implications of this approach for the way we think about standard policies

such as banking regulation, monetary policy, and lender-of-last-resort policy are

interesting, and remain to be more completely explored. An extension that we are

currently pursuing is the multi-period analogue of the model of this paper (i.e.,

we allow entrepreneurs to invest more than once, and to maintain continuing

relationships with intermediaries). The purpose of doing this is to see if

long-term lender-borrower relationships would eliminate or reduce the agency

problem. The basic messages of the present paper seem to be largely unchanged by

this extension: Low borrower wealth reduces the efficiency of the investment

process, and there is scope for government policy. The multi-period model does

yield some interesting dynamics, however. For example, we can show that financial

factors provide an independent source of output persistence; this arises because

current economic conditions affect net worth, which in turn affects economic

performance in subsequent periods.
                                        -39—

                                     References


Akerlof, George, "The Market for Lemons: Qualitative Uncertainty and the

    Market Mechanism", Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1970, vol. 84, pp.

     488-500.




Bernanke, Ben, "Non-Monetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in the

     Propagation of the Great Depression," American Economic Review, June 1983,

    vol. 73, pp. 257—76.



Bernanke, Ben and Hark Gertler, "Agency Costs, Collateral, and Business

    Fluctuations", NBER working paper no. 2015, September 1986.



______________   "Banking and Macroeconomic Equilibrium", in William Barnett
     and Kenneth Singleton, eds., New Approaches to Monetary Economics, Cambridge

     Press, forthcoming 1987.



Boyd, John and Edward Prescott, "Financial Intermediary-Coalitions", Journal of

    Economic Theory, April 1986, vol. 38, pp. 211-232.



Calomiris, Charles and Glenn Hubbard, "Imperfect Information, Multiple Loan

    Markets, and Credit Rationing", unpublished, Northwestern University,

     1986.




_____________    and James Stock, "The Farm Debt Crisis and Public Policy",

    Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, I986:2, pp. 441-79.



Chung, Kai Lai, A Course in Probability Theory, New York: Academic Press, 1974.
                                         -40-

defleza, David and David Webb, "Too Much Investment: A Problem of Asymmetric

     Information", Quarterly Journal of Economics, flay 1987, vol. 102, pp.

     281—292.




Diamond, Douglas, "Financial Intermediation and Delegated Monitoring",

     Review of Economic Studies, July 1984, vol. 51, pp. 393-414.



Eckstein, Otto, and Allen Sinai, "The Mechanisms of the Business Cycle in the

     Postwar Era" in Robert Gordon, The American Business Cycle: Continuity

     and Change, University of Chicago Press for NBER, 1986.



Farmer, Roger, "A New Theory of Aggregate Supply", American Economic Review,

     December 1984, vol. 74, pp. 920-30.



Fisher, Irving, "The Debt-Deflation Theory of Great Depressions", Econometrica,

     October 1933, vol. 1, pp. 337—57.



Friedman, Ben, "Increasing Indebtedness and Financial Stability in the United

     States", NBER working paper no. 2072, November 1986.



Greenwald, Bruce and Joseph Stiglitz, "Information, Finance Constraints, and

     Business Fluctuations", unpublished, June 1986.



Hargraves, Monica, and Paul Romer, "Information Production, Evaluation Risk, and

     Optimal Contracts", University of Rochester working paper no. 59, September

     1986.




Kaufman, Henry, "Debt: The Threat to Economic and Financial Stability",
                                       -41-

     Economic Review, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, December 1987, pp.

     3-11.




Mankiw, Gregory, "The Allocation of Credit and Financial Collapse", Quarterly

     Journal of Economics, August 1986, vol. 101, pp. 455—470.



Mishkin, Frederic, "The Household Balance Sheet and the Great Depression",

     Journal of Economic History, December 1978, Vol. 38, pp. 918-37.



Myers, S.C., and N.S. Majluf, "Corporate Financing and Investment Decisions When

     Firms Have Information that Investors Do Not Have", Journal of Financial

     Economics, June 1984, Vol. 13, pp. 187-221.



Morck, Randall, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, "Management Ownership and

     Corporate Performance: An Empirical Analysis", NEER Working Paper No.

     2055, October 1986.



Prescott, Edward and Robert Townsend, "Pareto Optima and Competitive Equilibrium

    with Adverse Selection and Moral Hazard", Econometrica, January 1984, vol.

    52, pp. 21-45.



Sappington, David, "Limited Liability Contracts Between Principal and Agent",

    Journal of Economic Theory, February 1983, vol. 29, pp. 1-21.



Smith, Bruce, "Limited Information, Credit Rationing, and Government Lending

    Policy", American Economic Review, June 1983, vol. 73, pp. 305—318.



Stiglitz, Joseph and Andrew Weiss, "Credit Rationing in Markets with Imperfect

    Information", American Economic Review, June 1981, vol. 71, pp. 393-410.
                                      -42-

Williamson, Stephen, "Financial Intermediation, Business Failures, and Real

    Business Cycles", working paper, University of Western Ontario, 1985.
