                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 MACROECONOMIC CONDITIONS AND OPIOID ABUSE

                                     Alex Hollingsworth
                                     Christopher J. Ruhm
                                        Kosali Simon

                                      Working Paper 23192
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23192


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                          February 2017, Revised March 2017




We thank seminar participants at Georgia State University and the joint Indiana University-
Vanderbilt University-University of Louisville Health Economics Workshop; we also thank
Coady Wing and Emily Zarse (MD) for helpful conversations. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Alex Hollingsworth, Christopher J. Ruhm, and Kosali Simon. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Macroeconomic Conditions and Opioid Abuse
Alex Hollingsworth, Christopher J. Ruhm, and Kosali Simon
NBER Working Paper No. 23192
February 2017, Revised March 2017
JEL No. I1,I12,I15

                                        ABSTRACT

We examine how deaths and emergency department (ED) visits related to use of opioid
analgesics (opioids) and other drugs vary with macroeconomic conditions. As the county
unemployment rate increases by one percentage point, the opioid death rate per 100,000 rises by
0.19 (3.6%) and the opioid overdose ED visit rate per 100,000 increases by 0.95 (7.0%).
Macroeconomic shocks also increase the overall drug death rate, but this increase is driven by
rising opioid deaths. Our findings hold when performing a state-level analysis, rather than
county-level; are primarily driven by adverse events among whites; and are stable across time
periods.

Alex Hollingsworth                                  Kosali Simon
School of Public and Environmental Affairs          School of Public and Environmental Affairs
375C                                                Indiana University
1315 E. Tenth St.                                   Rm 443
Bloomington, IN 47405                               1315 East Tenth Street
hollinal@indiana.edu                                Bloomington, IN 47405-1701
                                                    and NBER
Christopher J. Ruhm                                 simonkos@indiana.edu
Frank Batten School of
Leadership and Public Policy
University of Virginia
235 McCormick Rd.
P.O. Box 400893
Charlottesville, VA 22904-4893
and NBER
ruhm@virginia.edu
    I.           Introduction

         Covering a variety of countries and time periods, voluminous research conducted over the

last two decades indicates that physical health improves when economic conditions temporarily

deteriorate.1 In the case of mental health, however, research shows apparent declines during

periods of economic weakness (Ruhm, 2000; Ruhm, 2003; Charles & DeCicca, 2008; and Modrek

et al., 2015). Some evidence suggests, moreover, that the procyclicality of physical health has

declined considerably in recent years (Stevens et al., 2015; McInerney and Mellor, 2012; Lam and

Piérard, 2015; Ruhm, 2015) just as drug poisoning deaths, often involving opioid analgesics

(henceforth opioids) such as hydrocodone and oxycodone, have trended sharply upwards (Rudd et

al., 2016).2

         Understanding the relationship between local economic conditions and drug-related

adverse outcomes is important because the United States is “experiencing an epidemic of drug

overdose (poisoning) deaths” (Rudd et al., 2016, p. 1378), with fatal drug poisonings increasing

by 146% from 1999 to 2014 (Figure 1). Poisoning deaths, around 90% of which are now caused

by drugs (Warner et al., 2011), were the most important source of growth in the all-cause mortality

rates of 45-54 year old non-Hispanic whites between 1999 and 2013 (Case and Deaton, 2015). The

involvement of opioids and, more recently, heroin in these deaths has received particular attention

(Volkow et al., 2014; Jones et al. 2015; and Rudd et al., 2016), including a White House Summit

in August 2014 (Hardesty, 2014). Drug poisoning deaths are higher for males than females, but

have been rising rapidly over time for both sexes, as well as for almost all age groups, but



1
  This literature often dates from Ruhm (2000)’s study of the US for the 1972-1991 period. However, there are
indications that mortality was procyclical in research from as early as the 1920s (Ogburn & Thomas, 1922).
2
  Heroin is classified as a separate category of narcotics. Heroin deaths have risen extremely rapidly since 2010 but
were relatively stable before that (Ruhm, 2017). This increase is too recent to be adequately captured in our study’s
timeframe.
                                                         2
particularly rapidly for 25-64 year olds (Ruhm, 2017). One notable feature is that non-Hispanic

white (hereafter simply “white”) and non-Hispanic black (hereafter “black”) drug fatality rates

closely tracked each other during the 1980s and 1990s, but since 1999 (the period examined here),

white mortality rates have grown much faster. Figure 2 illustrates this divergence. From 1999 to

2014 the U.S. white drug death rate per 100,000 grew by 203%, while the black and Hispanic drug

death rates increased by 49% and 31%, respectively. Rising deaths are not the only indication of

serious health consequences related to the growing use of opioids. Emergency department (ED)

visits involving narcotic pain relievers increased 117% between 2005 and 2011 (Crane, 2015) and

opioid-related ED visits grew by 39.5% from 2006 to 2014 (see Figure 3). While this rise has

mostly occurred among prime-aged adults, all age groups have seen an increase in the risk of

opioid poisoning ED visits (Tadros et al., 2016).

       This analysis examines how serious adverse health outcomes related to opioid and other

drugs vary with short-term fluctuations in macroeconomic conditions. Specifically, we study how

deaths and ED visits due to opioids and other drugs are related to local unemployment rates. Our

main findings are that opioid deaths and ED visits are predicted to rise when county unemployment

rates temporarily increase. The same is true for all sources of drug poisoning mortality, and

consistent results are obtained when performing the analysis at the state-level rather than the

county-level, proxying for macroeconomic conditions with employment-to-population ratios

rather than unemployment rates, and conducting a variety of other robustness and sensitivity

checks. Importantly, our findings are relatively stable regardless of the time period considered,

indicating that they represent a general connection between economic conditions and severe

adverse consequences of substance abuse that is not restricted to periods of recession. Moreover,




                                                3
our results are predominantly driven by changes among whites (rather than blacks or Hispanics)

in most specifications.

II.           Prior Research and Contribution of this Investigation

        The vast literature examining the connection between economic fluctuations and health has

considered effects on mortality and morbidity, health-related behaviors, health insurance and

health care use.3 Mortality has been found to be procyclical in investigations covering a wide

variety of countries and time periods (e.g. Ruhm, 2000; Neumayer, 2004; Tapia Granados, 2005;

Gerdtham & Ruhm, 2006; Buchmueller et al., 2007; Lin, 2009; Gonzalez & Quast, 2011; and

Ariizumi & Schirle, 2012). Similarly, many (though not all) studies suggest that lifestyle factors

such as exercise, obesity, smoking and heavy drinking improve in bad economic times (e.g. see

Freeman, 1999; Ruhm & Black, 2002; Ruhm, 2005; Gruber & Frakes, 2006; and Xu, 2013).4

However, some current research suggests that these patterns have weakened or reversed in recent

years for both mortality (McInerney & Mellor, 2012; Stevens et al., 2015; Lam & Piérard, 2015;

and Ruhm, 2015) and health behaviors (Dávalos et al., 2012; Colman & Dave, 2013; and Tekin et

al., 2013).

        Particularly relevant to the current analysis is suggestive evidence, provided by Ruhm

(2015), that one of the main reasons deaths shifted from being sharply procyclical to acyclical or

countercyclical in recent years is because poisoning fatalities have been rapidly increasing and

now exhibit a strong countercyclical pattern. However, the precision of these estimates is low and

the analysis did not separately examine drug (rather than more general poisoning) fatalities or the

involvement of specific drugs, such as opioids.5


3
  See Ruhm (2012) for a review of much of this research.
4
  However, there are exceptions (e.g. Dee, 2001; and Johansson et al., 2006).
5
  More recently, Pierce & Schott (2016) provide evidence that accidental poisoning deaths rise when local economic
conditions deteriorate.
                                                        4
        There has been substantial investigation of the relationship between macroeconomic

conditions and a variety of health behaviors – including drinking, smoking and exercise, as

discussed above – but corresponding effects on drug use have received less attention, largely

because of data limitations. Arkes (2007) provides evidence that teenage use of both marijuana

and harder (illicit) drugs rises in economic downturns. Using data from 2002-2013 and a broader

age range, Carpenter et al. (2016) find that such downturns are associated with increases in self-

reported use of hallucinogens (particularly ecstasy) but with insignificant effects for most other

drugs, and with self-reported substance-use disorders related to analgesics (including opioid and

non-opioid forms) as well as hallucinogens. Whether these estimated effects are large enough to

result in higher rates of ED visits or deaths is unclear. Similarly, using survey data, Martin Bassols

and Vall Castelló (2016) find that in Spain, the Great Recession caused increases in the reported

use of both marijuana and cocaine. Frijters et al. (2013) show that internet searches for terms

related to alcohol abuse and treatment increase when economic conditions deteriorate. However,

Maclean, Cantor, and Pacula’s (2015) analysis of 1992-2010 data suggests that alcohol and illicit

drug admissions to (non-ED) substance abuse programs decrease in such periods. The exact

mechanisms driving this reduction are unclear, as the utilization of substance abuse programs

depends on both underlying health status and changes in the availability of treatment.6 If temporary

economic downturns simultaneously increase the demand for but lower access to treatment, the

net result might be a rise in both deaths and ED visits.

        Our analysis extends beyond prior research by focusing on drug poisonings, which have

grown rapidly in the past fifteen years and are likely to be related to economic conditions in



6
 For example, Cawley et al. (2015) show that increases in state unemployment rates during the 2004-2010 period
were associated with sharp decreases in health insurance coverage, especially for 50-64-year-old men and college-
educated individuals.
                                                       5
different ways than other types of poisoning. Furthermore, we study the severe outcomes of ED

visits and deaths. While examining all types of drug overdoses, we pay particular attention to those

involving opioids. We do so because opioids comprise the majority of drug overdose deaths and

are quite possibly the most sensitive to macroeconomic conditions. For example, opioids were

estimated to be involved in 53% of fatal drug overdoses in 2014 and to play a role in 64% of the

increase in drug deaths occurring between 1999 and 2014 (Ruhm, 2017). Next most important was

heroin, which was estimated to be involved in 30% of 2014 drug fatalities. We do not focus on

heroin, however, because rates of deaths and ED visits were relatively low for most of our study

period (until 2010) after which they rose extremely rapidly.7

        We separately examine the connection between economic conditions and severe adverse

drug outcomes for whites, blacks, and Hispanics. Differences across racial groups may be

important given recent evidence by Case and Deaton (2015) that mortality rates increased for 45-

54-year-old whites, even while rapidly decreasing for blacks and Hispanics. Although poisonings

are an important source of the observed changes in mortality rates, it is not obvious that the effects

of macroeconomic conditions on deaths or emergency department visits involving opioids

necessarily follow the same pattern. For instance, to the extent that minorities are more affected

by economic downturns, we might anticipate stronger patterns for nonwhites than whites. On the

other hand, drug deaths have increased more slowly for nonwhites than for whites since 1999

(Ruhm, 2017), which might predict a weaker relationship.

III.         Data and Descriptive Statistics




7
 These statistics refer to any involvement of these drugs rather than the exclusive involvement of a particular drug.
The distinction is important because many drug poisoning deaths involve combinations of drug classes (e.g. 49% in
2014 according to Ruhm, 2017).
                                                         6
          Mortality data come from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Multiple Cause

of Death (MCOD) files for 1999-2014, which provide information from the universe of death

certificates (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2016). Mortality data are one of the few

health measures collected over a long time period and in a relatively comparable manner across

areas of the country. The MCOD provide information on a single underlying cause of death (UCD),

up to twenty additional causes, and basic demographics. Cause of death is categorized using a

four-digit International Classification of Diseases, Tenth Revision (ICD-10) code. Details are also

provided on place of residence, age, race/ethnicity, gender, year, and weekday of death. We

obtained a restricted-use version of the data with information on state and county of residence for

this study.

          Drug poisoning deaths were defined using ICD-10 UCD codes, where the underlying cause

is the “disease or injury that initiated the chain of morbid events that led directly and inevitably to

death” (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2014). Drug poisonings occur when the

underlying cause of death is X40-X44, X60-X64, X85, Y10-Y14, or Y35.2 (World Health

Organization, 2014). In cases of drug poisoning, the death certificate lists one or more drugs

involved as immediate or contributory causes of death. These are identified as ICD-10 cause of

death “T codes,” with opioids defined to be involved for T-codes 40.2-40.4 and heroin for T-code

40.1.8

          Death certificate information tends to understate the involvement of opioids (and other

drug categories) because the type or types of drugs involved are left unspecified (ICD-10 code,

T50.9) in 20%-25% of fatal overdoses (Ruhm, 2017). To correct for this undercount, we follow

Ruhm (2017) and impute opioid involvement in cases where the death certificate indicated only



8
    See http://www.icd10data.com/ICD10CM/Codes/S00-T88 for additional details.
                                                       7
unspecified drugs. To do so, we estimated year-specific probit models on the sample of fatal

overdoses where at least one drug was specified. The dichotomous dependent variable was set to

one if opioids were mentioned and to zero if they were not. The explanatory variables included

dichotomous indicators for: sex, race (white, black, other nonwhite), Hispanic origin, currently

married, education (high school dropout, high school graduate, some college, college graduate),

age category (≤20, 21-30, 31-40, 41-50, 51-60, 61-70, 71-80, >80), day of the week of death (seven

dummy variables) and a vector of state fixed-effects. Next, we used the probit results to calculate

year-specific predicted probabilities of opioid-involvement for cases where no drug was specified

on the death certificate. We then calculated adjusted mortality rates using reported involvement

for deaths where at least one specific drug was mentioned and the imputed probabilities where no

drug was specified.9

        There is no comprehensive national source of ED data comparable to the Mortality files.

ED data are only made available to researchers for specific states, who decide terms of access

individually. We have assembled what, to our knowledge, is the most comprehensive currently

available data on ED visits related to opioid and other drug use, covering 16 states in total. Our

main dataset consists of counts of ED visits occurring in a given county and year, aggregated from

microdata available for 5 states over some or all of the 2002-2014 period. We supplement this with

a collection of aggregated state-level data for 15 states available for all or a portion of the 2000-

2013 period.

        Our microdata come from the State Emergency Department Databases (SEDD) for five

states, assembled by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) Healthcare Cost



9
 Over the full time period (1999-2014), the overall drug mortality rate was 10.77 per 100,000. The opioid-involved
death rate without imputations was 4.04 per 100,000. The adjustments increased this by around one third, to 5.35 per
100,000. The same procedure was used to adjust estimates of heroin involvement.
                                                         8
and Utilization Project (HCUP).10 These were derived from uniform medical billings at the ED

visit level, but only for visits that did not result in an inpatient stay. By comparing this information

to available state-level aggregate data on both inpatient and outpatient ED visits, we determined

that our microdata contains one-half to two-thirds of all ED visits for opioid overdoses, depending

on the state and year.11 The ED visit microdata include information on patient characteristics,

diagnoses, procedures, and charges. Since the SEDD are not available for every year, and some

state files are prohibitively expensive, our micro data cover the following states and years: Arizona

(2005-2014), Kentucky (2008-2012), Florida (2005-2014), Maryland (2002-2012), and New

Jersey (2004, 2006-2103). To increase the geographical representation of our data, we also

obtained state-level aggregated ED visit records from the HCUPnet system (which provides a

click-through public-access system for these counts) for 15 states in select years. Specifically,

these include counts of ED visits (regardless of whether or not they subsequently resulted in an

inpatient admission) for the following states and years: Arizona (2005-2013), Florida (2005-2013),

Hawaii (2003-2010, 2013), Iowa (2004-2013), Illinois (2009-2013), Kentucky (2008-2013),

Maryland (2005-2013), Minnesota (2001-2013), North Carolina (2007-2013), Nebraska (2001-

2013), New Hampshire (2003-2009), South Carolina (2005-2013, Tennessee (2005-2013), Utah

(2000-2011, 2013), and Vermont (2002-2013). The level of data available for each state and year

combination is displayed in Table 1.

        Unlike the mortality data, which use ICD-10 codes to classify reason for death, the ED data

use ICD-9-CM codes. To ensure that our ED results are comparable to our mortality data, we used

a CDC crosswalk that links ICD-10 cause of death and ICD-9-CM diagnosis codes for various



10
  Further information on the HCUP online aggregated data access system is available at: http://hcupnet.ahrq.gov.
11
  Obtaining information on ED visits resulting in an inpatient stay would have required the purchase of the inpatient
discharge records from HCUP for each state and year.
                                                         9
categories of drug poisoning (CDC 2013). In the ED data, drug poisonings corresponded to ICD-

9 codes 960.00 through 979.99;opioid overdoses to ICD-9 codes 965.00, 965.02, 965.09, E850.1,

and E850.2; and heroin overdoses to codes 965.01and E850.0.

        Our county-level mortality data covered 3,138 counties over 16 years, with almost every

county reporting each year, yielding a maximum of 50,148 observations. When we examined

deaths among specific racial or ethnic groups, our sample size decreased as some counties had no

black or Hispanic residents.12 The county-level ED information (obtained from the microdata)

included 1,873 county-year observations from the 5 states in the SEDD sample. From 2005 to

2008, Arizona did not report patient race, so we omit Arizona from the ED analyses examining

race. In addition, we discovered inconsistency in the reporting of Hispanic ethnicity across states

and years, so were unable to separately estimate specifications for Hispanics using the ED data.13

Our state-level ED data contain 140 state-year cells for the 15 states providing aggregated ED visit

data.

        We compiled additional data on county characteristics that we use either as right-hand side

control variables or to explore heterogeneity in the estimated effects. We obtained county

population data from the National Cancer Institute’s Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results

Program (SEER) to turn counts of deaths or ED visits into rates per 100,000.14 In addition to the

full sample rates, we separately computed mortality and ED rates for whites and blacks, as well as

death (but not ED) rates for Hispanics. Information on county and state unemployment rates, our

main proxy for macroeconomic conditions, came from the Bureau of Labor Statistics’ Local Area

Unemployment Statistics (www.bls.gov/lau/lauov.htm). County level median incomes were


12
   The number of counties with either no black or no Hispanic residents decreased over our sample, from 265 in 1999
to 2 in 2014.
13
   We verified this issue through personal communications with AHRQ researchers.
14
   Further information is available at http://www.seer.cancer.gov/data.
                                                        10
obtained from the U.S. Census Bureau’s Small Area Income and Poverty Estimates

(www.census.gov/did/www/saipe/). Table 2 contains summary statistics for our county-level data.

          Figure 1 illustrates the relationship between the unemployment rate, our primary proxy

for macroeconomic conditions, and death rates (per 100,000) from all drugs and from opioids.

Over the 1999-2014 period, 49.7% of drug deaths involved opioids, 17.1% involved heroin, and

38.7% involved only drugs other than heroin or opioids.15 All three rates have risen over time.16 At

this national level of aggregation, Figure 1 does not reveal an obvious relationship between the

economic climate and drug poisoning death rates. Although the average unemployment rate was

on the rise during this time period, drug-related mortality increased even when the national

unemployment rate decreased between recessions and especially during the steep decline in

unemployment after 2011. However, the strong upwards trend in drug mortality may conceal any

macroeconomic effects.

        Figure 2 separates opioid mortality rates (the largest component of all drug deaths) by race,

and demonstrates that white opioid death rates have risen considerably (closely tracking the all-

drug death rate) while the rates for blacks, and especially for Hispanics have been low and

relatively flat over this time period.

        Figure 3 shows nationwide trends in ED visits (per 100,000) for opioid overdoses and all

drug poisonings from 2006 to 2014. Both series display a similar, increasing trend. From 2006 to

2014, the rate of opioid-related ED visits grew by 6.82 per 100,000 (39.50%) and the rate of all

drug-related ED visits rose by 13.70 per 100,000 (8.0%). These data come from the National

Emergency Department Sample (NEDS), a 20% sample of records from all participating states



15
  These numbers sum to more than 100% because 2.6% of drug deaths involved the use of both opioids and heroin.
16
  In 2014, the drug death rate per 100,000 was 14.76, of which 7.34 were opioid related, 4.05 involved heroin, and
4.25 involved only drugs other than opioids or heroin.
                                                       11
(but not containing state identifiers) disseminated through HCUP. The NEDS estimates are based

upon the entire set of SID and SEDD data and are weighted to be nationally representative. For

expositional clarity, we plot the national estimates based upon the NEDS here, rather than state-

level estimates based upon the SEDD data for the five states used in our analysis.17

         Figure 3 also highlights a key distinction between the mortality and ED data. Opioid deaths

are responsible for roughly half of all drug deaths in any given year, but opioids ED visits account

for fewer than 14% of all drug-related ED visits. Breaking down drug-related ED visits further,

we find that eight drug categories constitute approximately 60% of the drug poisoning ED visits

in any given year: opioids, benzodiazepines, heroin, anti-depressants, aromatic analgesics (e.g.

acetaminophen), insulin, anti-psychotics, and cocaine. Figure 4 displays the nationwide ED visit

rate for each drug category from 2006 to 2014. While both opioid and heroin overdose ED rates

have risen since 2006, the rate of overdose visits to the ED for all other majority drug categories

remained constant or declined.18

         The NEDS further allow us to determine the percentage of in-hospital deaths that occur

after an ED overdose visit for each drug type.19 Cocaine, heroin, and opioids are by far the deadliest

of the eight major drug categories, resulting in around two to three times more deaths per visit than

the other four top drug categories. For every one-hundred ED visits for cocaine poisoning there

are approximately 1.5 in-hospital deaths. Similarly, 1.4% of heroin and 1.2% of opioid overdose

ED visits result in an in-hospital death. The death rate associated with an ED visit for a



17
   When a similar figure is created for each state, a clear relationship between the ED visit rate for opioids and for all
drugs is still present. However, some states in our sample do not exhibit strictly increasing trends over this time period.
As we only have data for 5 states for county-level ED visits, we verified that the mortality trends were similar for
these states as for the U.S. average. When we limit the mortality data from Fig 1 to these same 5 states: there is a 117
% increase in drug-related death rates and a larger (339%) rise in opioid deaths.
18
   Similar figures created for each state using the micro-data display consistent results.
19
   This includes all deaths that occur in the ED as well as all deaths that occur during any related inpatient stay
following an admission from the ED.
                                                            12
benzodiazepine overdose is roughly one-third as large or 0.4%. The weighted average death rate

of an ED visit for the remaining four categories (anti-depressants, aromatic analgesics, anti-

psychotics, and insulin) is <0.4%. One implication of these results is that the relationship between

overall drug-related ED visit and death rates may be quite weak, since many of the most important

sources of visits rarely result in death, whereas the relationship between opioid-related ED visits

and deaths may be considerably stronger.

IV.       Empirical Approach

       We perform both a county and state-level analysis of the relationship between

macroeconomic conditions and adverse drug outcomes. We first describe the county-level analysis

and subsequently discuss the modifications required when using state data.

       Our main regression specifications take the form:

                                       !"# = &'"# + )" + *# + +,# + -"# ,                     (1)

where the dependent variable, Yjt is the mortality or ED visit rate, per 100,000, in county j and year

t; Ujt, the county annual unemployment rate, is the main proxy for macroeconomic conditions. We

include county and year fixed-effects (ηj and .t) in all models, to control for potential confounding

factors that vary across counties but are fixed over time, as well as determinants of mortality or

ED visits that differ nationally across time, and we report results from these specifications in our

full sample analysis.

       One concern is that local policies influencing drug mortality or ED visits could have

changed over time in ways that are spuriously correlated with unemployment rates. The most

important of these – such as prescription drug monitoring programs, recreational or medical

marijuana legalization, and Medicaid policies – occur at the state rather than county level (Rees et

al., 2017; Dowell et al., 2016; and Buchmueller and Carey, 2017). Therefore, our preferred


                                                 13
specifications also include state-by-year fixed effects (µst). In alternative specifications, we instead

include a vector of county-specific linear time trends.

        Macroeconomic conditions may have worsened (or improved) in areas that for other

reasons were on different trajectories in terms of drug mortality. If so, a model with county, year

and state-by-year fixed effects could still incorrectly attribute a continuing pre-existing trend in

mortality to changes in unemployment rates. Theoretically, we could address this by

simultaneously controlling for both county-specific time trends and state-by-year fixed-effects.

However, doing so for every county in the United States would leave our model with virtually no

useful variation.20 We address this issue in section VII, when describing our robustness checks.

        Several points about our preferred regression specification deserve mention. First, given

comprehensive controls for location and time-specific determinants, we generally do not include

additional supplementary covariates. Second, we use levels, rather than natural logs, as the

dependent variable. We do so because some counties (particularly smaller ones) will have zero

values for the dependent variables in at least some years.21 Third, we weight observations by

population, to obtain nationally representative treatment effects. Unweighted estimates would

overstate the influence of treatment effects in small counties. Fourth, the tables display robust

standard errors clustered at the county level, which is the level of variation for our key regressor,

the unemployment rate.

        There are pros and cons to using counties, rather than larger geographic aggregates such as

states, as the unit of observation. On the one hand, there is likely to be more error in the



20
   A regression of county unemployment rates over this time on a set of county FE, year FE, state by year FE and
county-specific linear time trends has an R2 of 0.96.
21
   Prior related research (e.g. Ruhm, 2000) shows that comparable predicted effects are obtained using linear versus
log-linear specifications. An alternative would be to estimate zero-inflated negative binomial models, although the
interpretation of the coefficients in such specifications would be less transparent.
                                                        14
measurement of both mortality and unemployment rates for smaller geographic units.22 On the

other hand, counties within the same state could face different economic climates, and what

happens far away may not affect lives as much as what occurs nearby (e.g. in funding of public

health). However, a further question involves the level of geographic aggregation at which the

macroeconomic effects actually take place. In this regard, Lindo’s (2015) conclusion that more

disaggregated analyses often understate the extent to which downturns affect health is particularly

instructive. For our application, an additional advantage to using a broader level of geography is

that we only have ED visit data at the county level for 5 states, while we have state level data for

15. For these reasons, we provide a full replication of analysis at the state level. When doing so,

we are naturally no longer able to include state-by-year fixed effects and so we instead estimate

specifications with and without state-specific linear time trends, and include state and year fixed

effects in all specifications.

        As mentioned, we also performed a series of robustness and sensitivity checks. These are

summarized in Section VII and detailed in the supplementary appendix.



V.        County-Level Results

        Table 3 shows three county-level specifications for our dependent variables of primary

interest: opioid-involved drug-related death rates, all drug-related mortality rates, opioid overdose

ED visit rates, and all drug overdose ED visit rates. The first column shows the specification with

only county and year fixed effects. The second column adds county specific time trends, while the

third instead includes state-by-year fixed-effects, and corresponds to Equation 1. We view the



22
  The greater measurement error in county as opposed to state unemployment rates is well known (see for example
Ganong and Liebman, 2013). Errors in classifying county of residence at death have been less studied, but Pierce and
Denison (2006) provide evidence of substantial misrecording of counties using mortality data from Texas.
                                                        15
models in columns (2) and (3) as superior to column (1) because they better control for possible

confounding factors. However, we generally prefer models that include state-by-year fixed effects

since, as mentioned, many potential policy determinants are likely to vary across both time and

states, but less so across counties within states.

        Turning to the primary findings in column (3) of the first panel for opioid-involved drug-

related deaths, the coefficient of 0.19 implies that a one percentage point rise in the county

unemployment rate is predicted to increase opioid fatalities by a statistically significant 0.19 per

100,000. This represents a 3.55 percent growth from the sample average of 5.35 per 100,000. A

one standard deviation change in the unemployment rate corresponds to 2.59 percentage points,

suggesting effect sizes of around a 0.49 per 100,000, or an 9.2 percent, increase in fatal opioid

overdoses. This also implies an unemployment rate elasticity of around 0.23.23

        The estimated unemployment rate effect for all drug fatalities is also highly significant but

somewhat sensitive to the inclusion of state-year fixed-effects versus county-specific time trends.

In the preferred model (column 3), a one-point rise in unemployment predicts a 0.36 per 100,000

increase in drug mortality rates, corresponding to a 3.3 percent increase from the sample average

of 10.77 per 100,000, and an unemployment rate elasticity of around 0.21 Results from this

specification suggest that around half of the macroeconomic effect on drug mortality operates

through opioid-related deaths. We confirmed this by estimating our preferred specification where

the dependent variable was non-opioid related drug deaths. The unemployment coefficient is (a

statistically significant) 0.17, accounting for the remainder of the total effect. (Details are provided

in the supplementary appendix.) Conversely, in the model with county time trends, rather than

state-by-year fixed effects, the one-point rise in unemployment predicts a much smaller, 0.18 per


23
   A one percentage point rise in unemployment represents a 15.65 percent increase from the sample mean rate of
6.39 percent, yielding an elasticity of 0.23 (3.55%/15.65%).
                                                      16
100,000, increase in the all drug death rate, which is then dominated by changes in fatalities

involving opioids.

         The two lower panels of Table 3 show results for drug-related ED visits, rather than deaths.

Being restricted to selected county-year observations from five states, the samples are smaller,

leading us to anticipate less precise estimates. Nevertheless, we find that, as with mortality rates,

there is a strong and significant positive relationship between opioid-related overdose ED visits

and unemployment rates that is relatively robust across specifications. In the model with state-year

fixed-effects (column 3), a one percentage point rise in unemployment predicts a 0.95 per 100,000,

or 7.0 percent, increase in opioid overdose ED visits, corresponding to an elasticity of around 0.56.

         The results for all drug-related ED visits are more sensitive to choice of specification, but

still suggestive of a countercyclical macroeconomic effect. In our preferred model, a one-point rise

in unemployment predicts a statistically insignificant 1.19 per 100,000, or 1.2 percent, increase in

drug-related ED visits. This imprecision of results is not unexpected since, as discussed above, a

large set of drugs cause individuals to seek ED care; however, many of these drugs relatively

infrequently result in death. One consequence is that opioid overdose ED visits reflect a small

share (13.9%) of all drug overdose ED visits, and it is unlikely that our analysis will have sufficient

statistical power to detect any plausible minimum effect size. Put differently, opioid overdose ED

visits would need to be implausibly sensitive to the unemployment rate for there to be statistically

significant effects of the unemployment rate in the large category of ‘all drug’ ED visits.24


24
  To show this more formally, we conducted a simulated power analysis, where we estimated the minimum detectable
effect size across all power levels and for a range of type-I error thresholds. Following conventional standards, for
80% power and a 0.05 type-I error threshold, the minimum detectable effect size in the county-level all-drug overdose
ED visit specification was just below 3.5 visits per 100,000 caused by a one percentage point increase in the
unemployment rate. The minimum detectable effect size for all power levels and for a variety of type-I error thresholds
(0.1, 0.05, 0.01, and 0.001) is reported in the supplementary appendix. To put this in context, in our preferred model,
a one percentage point increase in the unemployment rate predicts a 0.95 per 100,000 (or 7.0%) increase in the mean
opioid overdose ED visit rate, from the baseline average of 13.54. Such an increase in the opioid ED rate, ceteris
paribus, would imply a 0.97% increase in the mean “all drug” overdose ED rate (from 97.52 to 98.47. This expected
                                                          17
         Substance use disorders are a public health threat and are thought to have an uneven toll

across different segments of the population (Wu et al. 2011). Therefore, we next examine whether

the effects of macroeconomic decline on opioid adverse events differ across race/ethnicity groups.

Table 4 provides results from our preferred specification for each race/ethnic group.25 The first

column repeats the full sample results (from column 3 of Table 3). The remaining columns

separately present the findings for whites, blacks, and Hispanics. As mentioned, we do not present

ED visit results for Hispanics because this category is not classified consistently in the ED data.

         The countercyclical variation in opioid-involved deaths is primarily driven by effects on

whites, where a one-point rise in unemployment predicts a highly significant 0.23 per 100,000 (or

3.6 percent) mortality increase. The predicted effects are negative for blacks (-0.14 per 100,000)

and positive but smaller for Hispanics (0.04 per 100,000). This finding is consistent with the

common trends in white and total opioid death rates as depicted in Figure 2.26 It is worth pointing

out that the smaller estimates for nonwhites often represent lower levels for mortality risk, rather

than smaller percentage effects. For instance, the 0.04 unemployment coefficient for Hispanics in

the model corresponds to a 2.5 percent growth from the relatively low average rate of 1.60 per

100,000, which is similar to the corresponding relative change for whites.

         The predicted macroeconomic effects on all drug deaths are also dominated by whites with

a 0.48 per 100,000 (4.5 percent) increase anticipated to result from a one-point rise in the

unemployment rate. Corresponding estimates are -0.13 per 100,000 for blacks and 0.11 per

100,000 for Hispanics. For opioid-related ED visits the patterns are somewhat different, with




effect size of 0.95 is well below the minimum detectable effect size of 3.5. (Our power simulations show that for a
minimum detectable effect size of 1 and a type-I error threshold of 0.05, the power is below 6%) Indeed, the point
estimate we recover, 1.19, is quite near the expected effect size, but it is imprecisely estimated due to a lack of power.
25
   Tables in the supplementary appendix report results across a variety of specifications by race, mirroring Table 3.
26
   There are similar observable common trends between the total and white opioid ED visit rates.
                                                           18
strong countercyclical predicted effects for both whites and blacks: a one-point increase in

unemployment is expected to raise white ED visits by 0.91 per 100,000, or 4.8% percent, and black

visits by 1.25 per 100,000, or 17.4% percent. However, the results for nonwhites should be

interpreted with caution as they are often reasonably sensitive to choice of specifications. For

instance, when examining all-drug or opioid-related mortality rates, small and statistically

insignificant unemployment coefficients are obtained for blacks in models that include county and

year fixed effects and county-specific time trends, but not when state-by-year fixed effects replace

the county-specific trends.



VI.      State-Level Results

       Table 5 replicates the previous analysis at the state rather than county-level. Aggregated

information on ED visits is used here for 15 states (rather than for the 5 states for which we have

micro-data). Observations are weighted by relevant state (rather than county) population and

standard errors are clustered at the state-level. Our preferred specification includes state and year

fixed-effects, as well as state-specific time trends. See the supplementary appendix for a table

reporting the relevant sample means for the outcomes and explanatory variables.

       The first two columns of Table 5 present full-sample estimates. Separate findings for

whites, blacks and Hispanics are shown in columns (3) through (8). The full sample results largely

correspond to those observed using county-level data. Specifically, drug and opioid-related drug

deaths, as well as opioid-related ED visits, are all strongly countercyclical. For example, a one-

point increase in the unemployment rate is predicted to raise the opioid-related mortality rate by

0.33 per 100,000, a growth of 6.2 percent and an elasticity of around 0.39. Similarly, a one-point

increase in the unemployment rate increases the predicted opioid ED visit rate by 3.12 per 100,000


                                                 19
(6.2%) and an implied elasticity of 0.22, with small positive (but statistically insignificant)

predicted effects on drug ED visits. Although this pattern of results is similar to our county-level

findings, the magnitude is larger for each coefficient. This is consistent with Lindo’s (2015)

evidence that macroeconomic effects are often understated when using county-level data.27 These

estimates further suggest that almost all of the predicted increase in drug deaths is due to opioid-

related mortality, as evidenced by the similar (0.35 vs. 0.33) unemployment coefficients for the

two dependent variables.

          The third through eighth columns of Table 5 again indicate that the mortality effects are

primarily due to changes among whites and, more generally, that the countercyclical variation in

opioid-related deaths and ED visits is very strong for this group. Interestingly, while the

unemployment coefficients on drug and opioid mortality were negative for blacks in some

specifications when using county-level data, they reverse sign (but are often insignificant) with

state-level analysis. This provides further evidence of the sensitivity of the estimates for blacks to

changes in samples or specifications, suggesting that we should be cautious about making

conclusive statements about macroeconomic effects for them. Conversely, evidence of

countercyclical variation in Hispanic drug deaths is obtained using both county and state level

data.28




27
   Another important driver of the difference in coefficient size for opioid ED visit rates between our preferred county-
level specification (0.95) and our preferred state-level specification (3.12) is a difference in data. The county-level ED
data count the number of individuals with an opioid overdose diagnosis, whereas the state-level ED data count the
number of opioid overdose ED visits (of which there could be more than one per individual). However, a one
percentage point increase in the unemployment rate has similar percentage effects on county-level opioid ED visits
(7.0%) and state-level ED visits (6.2%).
28
   We also estimated models for heroin-related ED visits. These showed no clear pattern, ranging from strongly and
significantly positive to strongly and significantly negative, and were highly sensitive to the choice of specifications.
These results are displayed in the supplementary appendix. The majority of the coefficients were not statistically
different from zero. Thus we cannot make statements about the relationship between heroin abuse and local
macroeconomic conditions.
                                                           20
VII.        Robustness Checks

Our results to this point indicate that drug mortality is strongly counter-cyclical, with the most

important role being played by deaths involving opioids in most specifications. Opioid-related ED

visits are also counter-cyclical and both of these effects are strongly driven by changes among

whites. Conversely, the results for Hispanics and, particularly, blacks are more sensitive to model

choices. We conducted a variety of further tests of the robustness of our main results to various

changes in samples or specifications. We summarize these results here, with full discussion and

details of the estimates provided in the supplementary appendix.

        All of our county-level specifications include county and year fixed-effects, and most

contain either state-by-year fixed effects (in our preferred specification) or county-specific linear

time trends. Unfortunately, it is not possible to simultaneously control for both together, because

doing so leaves our model with no useful variation.29 As an alternative, we examined the robustness

of our results to incorporating alternative, but more limited, sets of time trends. These included

separate trends for counties by population quintiles (5 trends) or percentiles (100 trends).

Alternatively, we allowed the top 1% of counties (by population size) to have their own individual

trends, with separate trends by percentile for the other 99% of counties. We estimated models with

individual trends for the top 5% of counties, and with separate trends by population vigintile (5%

bins) for the other 95% of counties. Finally, we ran models that incorporated consumer zone rather

than county time trends. Countercyclical variations in opioid death and ED visit rates were

obtained in all of these specifications. The estimates were almost always statistically significant,

although sometimes smaller than in the main specifications. For instance, the unemployment




29
   A regression of county unemployment rates on a full set of county, year, state-by-year fixed-effect, and county
linear time trends, has an adjusted R2 of 0.96.
                                                       21
coefficient on opioid death rates was 0.19 in the preferred model and ranged from 0.12 to 0.19 in

the alternative specifications just described.30

         We allowed for heterogeneous relationships between the economic climate and adverse

drug outcomes – across factors such as time, county population density, education level, and

industrial structure – by estimating models that excluded categories of counties. The first of these

examined whether the relationship between macroeconomic shocks and opioid abuse differed by

time period. This was done by systematically removing sets of three years at a time from the

analysis sample.31 For drug deaths, the unemployment coefficients and 95% confidence intervals

were always well above zero, although they did fluctuate a bit. Importantly, the estimate that

excluded 2008-2010 was typical of those obtained when removing other periods, indicating that

the results were not driven by unusual effects occurring during the Great Recession. For opioid-

related deaths and ED visits, we obtained a similar story of fairly consistent and strong (although

not always statistically significant) effects when removing sub-periods. We did not find significant

results for any drug ED visit specifications.32

         We next investigated sensitivity of the results to the proxy used for macroeconomic

conditions by running a model where the key explanatory variables is employment-to-population

(EP) ratios.33 Since there is no readily available series of county level EP ratios, specifications that


30
   Similarly, the ED findings were robust to a majority of alternative time trends, but given the smaller number of
counties in our sample, the results were insignificant when using commuter-zone-specific trends.
31
   Three year bins (as opposed to other numbers of years) were chosen to ensure that the full great recession period
was removed in one specification, to insure that our results are not driven by that recession or other short-run
macroeconomic events.
32
   It is possible that adverse events may respond asymmetrically to short term increases, rather than decreases, in the
unemployment rate. To test for asymmetry, we perform our analysis on two subsamples of the data, one where the
county-level unemployment rate has decreased relative to the previous year and the other where it has increased. For
the mortality specifications, we find some evidence that economic downturns are driving the magnitude of our
findings, but not the significance. For our ED specifications, we find no statistical difference between the results of
the two sub-samples. The results from this check are reported in the supplementary appendix.
33
   Results for EP ratios could differ from those using unemployment rates because, for instance, declines in labor force
participation rates were particularly pronounced during the “Great Recession” that began in 2007, when compared to
other economic downturns (Shierholz, 2012).
                                                          22
included them were run at the state level. As expected, they provided coefficient estimates that

were of the opposite sign and slightly smaller in magnitude than those obtained when controlling

for unemployment rates.34 We also decompose our sample into areas differentially impacted by

changes in manufacturing employment and import exposure (Autor et al. 2013), we followed a

strategy analogous to that used for different time periods, by examining how the results changed

when successively omitting sample county quintiles for each variable. We obtained consistent

coefficients across these for both proxies, indicating that our findings were not being driven by

areas with the greatest loss of manufacturing jobs or largest increase in imports.

        We explored potential heterogeneity in the effects across urban and rural areas by

successively excluding quintiles of counties based on 2010 population density.35 The mortality

findings were not driven by population density, except that the estimated effects for opioid deaths

were slightly weaker (and statistically significant at the 10% but not the 5% level) when excluding

the densest areas. The results for all-drug ED visits were noisier and centered around zero, while

those for opioid-related ED visits were statistically significant and consistent in magnitude across

all quintiles. Next, we performed the same exercise but systematically dropped counties by

quintile of 2010 high school graduation status and percent nonwhite. Our main results were robust

to these exclusions.

        As the reported number of opioid deaths is an undercount of the true number, we use an

imputation procedure to more accurately capture the correct number. In the Appendix we show

that the uncertainty from the imputation process is of minimal concern to the statistical significance



34
   Slightly smaller magnitudes were expected since a one-percentage point rise in the unemployment rate usually
translates into a more than one point reduction in EP ratios (since some discouraged jobless individuals drop out of
the labor force in bad times).
35
   County characteristics, including percent of persons aged 25 and over who had graduated high school and land area
(to calculate population density) were extracted from the 2010 U.S. decennial census.
(www.census.gov/2010census/data/).
                                                        23
of our main findings. As expected, accounting for this additional source of uncertainty increases

our standard errors, but only by a miniscule amount.

        We attempted to decompose the effect of the unemployment rate on opioid-related ED

visits by age and payer type group. The opioid ED visits results were consistent across all age

groups and payer types, except for the elderly, for whom both an age group analysis and the

Medicare payer type estimates were positive but not statistically different from zero.36

        Finally, we performed a series of placebo tests, examining the unemployment coefficients

on ED visit rates for causes not anticipated to be related to macroeconomic conditions. These

included: vomiting during pregnancy, open head wounds, broken legs or arms and broken noses.

With the exception of broken noses, none of these outcomes were statistically related to

macroeconomic conditions.

VIII.          Discussion

        Overall, we obtain strong evidence that opioid-related deaths and ED visits increase during

times of economic weakness, although the results vary somewhat with the unit of observation

(county vs. state) and the exact specifications estimated. In the main county-level models, our

preferred specification indicates that a one percentage point increase in the unemployment rate

raises predicted opioid-involved mortality rates by 0.19 per 100,000, corresponding to a 3.6

percent growth and an unemployment elasticity of mortality of around 0.23. These effects are

largely driven by changes in the death rates of whites in most estimates, with much smaller (but

still mostly positive) increases predicted for Hispanics. Opioid-related ED visits are also

anticipated to rise in economic downturns, with strong effects here observed for blacks as well as

whites. There are weaker, and less consistent, results for other mortality and ED outcomes (e.g.


36
  This null finding makes sense, since job losses and economic declines during recessions should affect the working
age population and children more than the elderly.
                                                        24
heroin-involved or other drug deaths), although often these results are in the same direction as for

opioids.

       We find negative economic shocks to have larger adverse effects on drug related mortality

and ED visits when we conduct our analysis at the state (rather than county) level. A one-point

rise in unemployment is predicted to increase overall opioid-related mortality by 0.33 per 100,000,

over one and a half times the size of the county-level estimates, corresponding to growth of 6.2

percent and an unemployment elasticity of around 0.39. These larger estimates could occur

because counties are too narrow a unit of observation to observe the full macroeconomic effects

(Lindo, 2015) or because the county-level models are more fully able to control for potential

confounding factors.

       Our results should be interpreted in light of several limitations. First, while we have data

for all deaths to US residents, the information on ED visits is more restricted, especially in our

county level analysis. Second, although we use the two proxies of macroeconomic conditions most

often used in the related literature (unemployment rates and employment to population ratios), and

provide a limited investigation using changes over time in manufacturing employment or import

penetration, a variety of other macroeconomic variables could be considered. These include

measures like home foreclosures at the zip-code level (Currie and Tekin, 2015) and stock market

losses at the national level (Schwartz et al., 2012) that capture different dimensions of economic

decline. Third, there could be errors in the recording of the specific drugs involved in fatal

overdoses and in the reasons for ED visits. We use imputation procedures to minimize effects of

the former, but cannot be sure that our methods are completely successful. Finally, it is unclear

which model specification or unit of analysis is the “best”. We have attempted to address this issue

by providing estimates for a wide variety of models and samples. Most results are robust to these


                                                25
alternatives, but some are not. In particular, unemployment rates are negatively correlated with

black drug mortality rates in the county-level models but not in the state-based specifications and

most, but not all, specifications suggest that the countercyclical variation in drug mortality rates is

predominantly due to changes in opioid-related related deaths, as opposed to other types of drug

fatalities.

         There are numerous potential causal pathways linking macroeconomic developments to

health behaviors and their consequences but we know little about the mechanisms for the effects

observed here. For instance, lower incomes might lead to reduced purchases and use of legal or

illicit drugs during periods of economic weakness (Riddell and Riddell, 2006; Dobkin and Puller,

2007) and explanations emphasizing reductions in time costs (e.g. having more time to engage in

time-intensive health-improving behaviors like exercise or recovery treatment programs) would

lead to better outcomes in economic downturns. Neither of these appear to be a dominant factor

for opioids or other drugs that lead to ED visits or deaths, since both are predicted to increase as a

result of negative macroeconomic shocks.37 On the other hand, our results could be consistent with

a role for supply-side factors, such as the loss of health insurance or of public health funding for

treatment or prevention during periods of economic weakness.

         Notwithstanding the possible pathways just described, we suspect that the dominant factor

linking macroeconomic conditions to adverse drug outcomes is that fatal and near fatal abuse of

opioids often (and increasingly over time) reflects a physical manifestation of mental health

problems that have long been known to rise during periods of economic decline.38 In this regard,

we note that although opioids are prescribed to treat pain, there are strong linkages between pain,


37
   However, worsening economic conditions could lead to reductions in some types of drug use, while increasing
adverse events through changes in composition towards more lethal types of drugs.
38
   This dates back to Durkheim’s (1897) work on suicides and includes a great deal of later research including that by
Hamermesh and Soss (1974), and in the more closely related literature, to Ruhm (2000) and others.
                                                         26
mental health problems and the use of analgesics.39 With the increased availability of prescription

opioids (and reductions in heroin prices), it seems likely that consumption of these drugs rise when

economic conditions worsen and that some of this increased use leads to adverse outcomes

including emergency department visits or death. Developing a better understanding of the causal

pathways for the results we observe is an important direction for future research.




39
  Depression and other forms of mental illnesses increase the experience of pain; pain is associated with more
depressive symptoms and the two share many of the same biological pathways (Bair et al. 2003). Persons with
depression, dysthymia and generalized anxiety or panic disorders use narcotics at relatively high rates (Sullivan et al.,
2006; Braden et al., 2009) and opioids have been shown to have a palliative effect on mental health problems such as
depression and obsessive-compulsive disorder (Koran et al. 2005; Bodkin, Zornberg, and Lukas, 1995).
                                                           27
References
Alpert, Abby, David Powell, and Rosalie Liccardo Pacula (2017) “Supply-Side Drug Policy in the
  Presence of Substitutes: Evidence from the Introduction of Abuse-Deterrent Opioids,” NBER
  Working Paper Series, No. 23031.
Ariizumi, Hideki and Tammy Schirle (2012) “Are Recessions Really Good for Your Health? Evi-
  dence from Canada,” Social Science & Medicine, Vol. 74, No. 8, pp. 1224–1231.
Arkes, Jeremy (2007) “Does the Economy Affect Teenage Substance Use?,” Health Economics,
  Vol. 16, No. 1, pp. 19–36.
Autor, David H., David Dorn, and Gordon H. Hanson (2013) “The China Syndrome: Local Labor
  Market Effects of Import Competition in the United States,” American Economic Review, Vol.
  103, No. 6, pp. 2121–2168.
Bair, Matthew J., Rebecca L. Robinson, Wayne Katon, and Kurt Kroenke (2003) “Depression and
  Pain Comorbidity,” Archives of Internal Medicine, Vol. 163, No. 20, p. 2433.
Bodkin, J. Alexander, Gwen Zornberg, and Scott Lukas (1995) “Buprenorphine Treatment of Re-
  fractory Depression,” Journal of Clinical Psychopharmacology, Vol. 15, pp. 49–57.
Braden, Jennifer Brennan, Mark D. Sullivan, G. Thomas Ray, Kathleen Saunders, Joseph Mer-
  rill, Michael J. Silverberg, Carolyn M. Rutter, Constance Weisner, Caleb Banta-Green, Cynthia
  Campbell, and Michael Von Korff (2009) “Trends in Long-Term Opioid Therapy for Noncancer
  Pain Among Persons with a History of Depression,” General Hospital Psychiatry, Vol. 31, No.
  6, pp. 564–570.
Buchmueller, Thomas C. and Colleen Carey (2017) “The Effect of Prescription Drug Monitoring
  Programs on Opioid Utilization in Medicare,” NBER Working Paper Series, No. 23148.
Buchmueller, Thomas C., Michel Grignon, and Florence Jusot (2007) “Unemployment and Mor-
  tality in France, 1982–2002,”Technical Report 07-04, McMaster University.
Carpenter, Christopher, Chandler McClellan, and Daniel Rees (2016) “Economic Conditions, Il-
  licit Drug Use, and Substance Use Disorders in the United States,” NBER Working Paper Series,
  No. 22051, pp. 1–30.
Case, Anne and Angus Deaton (2015) “Rising Morbidity and Mortality in Midlife Among White
  non-Hispanic Americans in the 21st Century,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
  Vol. 112, No. 49, pp. 15078–15083.
Cawley, John, Asako S. Moriya, and Kosali Simon (2015) “The Impact of the Macroeconomy on
  Health Insurance Coverage: Evidence from the Great Recession,” Health Economics, Vol. 24,
  pp. 206–223.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2016) “Wonder, Multiple Cause of Death 1999-2014.”
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and National Center for Health Statistics“Instructions
  for Completing the Cause-of-Death Section of the Death Certificate.”

                                               28
Charles, Kerwin Kofi and Philip DeCicca (2008) “Local Labor Market Fluctuations and Health: Is
  There a Connection and for Whom?,” Journal of Health Economics, Vol. 27, No. 6, pp. 1532–
  1550.

Chen, Li Hui, Holly Hedegaard, and Margaret Warner (2014) “Drug-Poisoning Deaths Involving
  Opioid Analgesics: United States, 1999-2011,”Technical Report 166, U.S. Department of Health
  and Human Services. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. National Center for Health
  Statistics.

Colman, Gregory and Dhaval Dave (2013) “Exercise, Physical Activity, and Exertion Over the
  Business Cycle,” Social Science & Medicine, Vol. 93, pp. 11–20.

Crane, Elizabeth H. (2015) “Emergency Department Visits Involving Narcotic Pain Reliev-
  ers,”Technical report, Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, Center for
  Behavioral Health Statistics and Quality, Rockville, MD.

Currie, Janet and Erdal Tekin (2015) “Is There a Link between Foreclosure and Health?,” American
  Economic Journal: Economic Policy, Vol. 7, No. 1, pp. 63–94.

Dávalos, Marı́a E., Hai Fang, and Michael T. French (2012) “Easing The Pain of an Economic
  Downturn: Macroeconomic Conditions and Excessive Alcohol Consumption,” Health Eco-
  nomics, Vol. 21, No. 11, pp. 1318–1335.

Dee, Thomas S. (2001) “Alcohol Abuse and Economic Conditions: Evidence from Repeated
  Cross-Sections of Individual-Level Data,” Health Economics, Vol. 10, No. 3, pp. 257–270.

Dobkin, Carlos and Steven L. Puller (2007) “The Effects of Government Transfers on Monthly
  Cycles in Drug Abuse, Hospitalization, and Mortality,” Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 91,
  No. 11-12, pp. 2137–2157.

Dowell, Deborah, Kun Zhang, Rita K Noonan, and Jason M Hockenberry (2016) “Mandatory
  Provider Review and Pain Clinic Laws Reduce The Amounts Of Opioids Prescribed And Over-
  dose Death Rates,” Health Affairs, Vol. 35, No. 10, pp. 1876–1883.

Durkheim, Emile (1897) Suicide: A Study in Sociology, Paris, pp.416.

Embassy, A M and Washington Hilton (2016) “Panel Paper : The Effect of Prescription Drug
 Monitoring Programs on Opioid Utilization in Medicare.”

Freeman, Donald G. (1999) “A Note on ‘Economic Conditions and Alcohol Problems’,” Journal
  of Health Economics, Vol. 18, No. 5, pp. 661–670.

Frijters, Paul, David W. Johnston, Grace Lordan, and Michael A. Shields (2013) “Exploring the Re-
  lationship Between Macroeconomic Conditions and Problem Drinking as Captured by Google
  Searches in the US,” Social Science & Medicine, Vol. 84, pp. 61–68.

Ganong, Peter and Jeffrey Liebman (2013) “The Decline, Rebound, and Further Rise in SNAP
  Enrollment: Disentangling Business Cycle Fluctuations and Policy Changes,” NBER Working
  Paper, No. 19363.

                                               29
Gerdtham, Ulf-G. and Christopher J. Ruhm (2006) “Deaths Rise in Good Economic Times: Evi-
  dence from the OECD,” Economics & Human Biology, Vol. 4, No. 3, pp. 298–316.

Gonzalez, Fidel and Troy Quast (2011) “Macroeconomic Changes and Mortality in Mexico,” Em-
  pirical Economics, Vol. 40, No. 2, pp. 305–319.

Gruber, Jonathan and Michael Frakes (2006) “Does Falling Smoking Lead to Rising Obesity?,”
  Journal of Health Economics, Vol. 25, No. 2, pp. 183–197.

Hamermesh, Daniel S and Neal M Soss (1974) “An Economic Theory of Suicide,” Journal of
  Political Economy, Vol. 82, No. 1, pp. 83–98.

Hardesty, Cameron (2014) “White House Summit on the Opioid Epidemic.”

Johansson, Edvard, Petri Böckerman, Ritva Prättälä, and Antti Uutela (2006) “Alcohol-Related
  Mortality, Drinking Behavior, and Business Cycles: Are Slumps Really Dry Seasons?,” The
  European Journal of Health Economics, Vol. 7, No. 3, pp. 212–217.

Jones, Christopher M, Joseph Logan, R Matthew Gladden, and Michele K Bohm (2015) “Vital
  Signs: Demographic and Substance Use Trends Among Heroin Users- United States, 2002 –
  2013,”Technical Report 26.

Koran, Lorrin M., Elias Aboujaoude, Kim D. Bullock, Bettina Franz, Nona Gamel, and Michael
  Elliott (2005) “Double-Blind Treatment With Oral Morphine in Treatment-Resistant Obsessive-
  Compulsive Disorder,” The Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, Vol. 66, No. 03, pp. 353–359.

Lam, Jean-Paul and Emmanuelle Piérard (2015) “The Time-Varying Relationship between Mor-
  tality and Business Cycles in the USA,” Health Economics, Vol. 19, No. 11, pp. n/a–n/a.

Lin, Shin-Jong (2009) “Economic Fluctuations and Health Outcome a Panel Analysis of Asia-
  Pacific Countries,” Applied Economics, Vol. 41, No. 4, pp. 519–530.

Lindo, Jason M. (2015) “Aggregation and the Estimated Effects of Economic Conditions on
  Health,” Journal of Health Economics, Vol. 40, pp. 83–96.

Maclean, Johanna Catherine, Jonathan H. Cantor, and Rosalie Liccardo Pacula (2015) “Economic
 Downturns and Substance Abuse Treatment: Evidence from Admissions Data,” NBER Working
 Paper Series, No. 19115.

Martin Bassols, Nicolau and Judit Vall Castelló (2016) “Effects of the Great Recession on Drugs
 Consumption in Spain,” Economics & Human Biology, Vol. 22, pp. 103–116.

McInerney, Melissa and Jennifer M. Mellor (2012) “Recessions and Seniors’ Health, Health Be-
 haviors, and Healthcare Use: Analysis of the Medicare Current Beneficiary Survey,” Journal of
 Health Economics, Vol. 31, No. 5, pp. 744–751.

Modrek, Sepideh, Rita Hamad, and Mark R. Cullen (2015) “Psychological Well-Being During
 the Great Recession: Changes in Mental Health Care Utilization in an Occupational Cohort,”
 American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 105, No. 2, pp. 304–310.

                                              30
Neumayer, Eric (2004) “Recessions Lower (Some) Mortality Rates: Evidence from Germany,”
  Social Science and Medicine, Vol. 58, No. 6, pp. 1037–1047.

Ogburn, William F. and Dorothy S. Thomas (1922) “The Influence of the Business Cycle on Cer-
  tain Social Conditions,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, Vol. 18, No. 139, p.
  324.

Pierce Jr., J. Rush and Anne V. Denison (2006) “Place-of-Residence Errors on Death Certificates
  for Two Contiguous U.S. Counties,” Population Health Metrics, Vol. 4, No. 1, p. 6.

Pierce, Justin R. and Peter K. Schott (2016) “Trade Liberalization and Mortality: Evidence from
  U.S. Counties,” NBER Working Paper Series, No. 22849, p. 66.

Rees, Daniel, Joseph Sabia, Laura Argys, Joshua Latshaw, and Dhaval Dave (2017) “With a Little
  Help from My Friends: The Effects of Naloxone Access and Good Samaritan Laws on Opioid-
  Related Deaths,” NBER Working Paper Series, No. 23171.

Riddell, Chris and Rosemarie Riddell (2006) “Welfare Checks, Drug Consumption, and Health:
  Evidence from Vancouver Injection Drug Users,” Journal of Human Resources, Vol. XLI, No.
  1, pp. 138–161.

Rubin, Donald B. (1987) Multiple Imputation for Nonresponse in Surveys, New York: John Wiley
  & Sons, 1st edition.

Rudd, Rose A, Noah Aleshire, Jon E Zibbell, and R Matthew Gladden (2016) “Increases in Drug
  and Opioid Overdose Deaths-United States, 2000–2014,” Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Re-
  port, Vol. 64, No. 50-51, pp. 1378–1382.

Ruhm, Christopher J. (2000) “Are Recessions Good for Your Health?,” The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, Vol. 115, No. 2, pp. 617–650.

        (2003) “Good Times Make You Sick,” Journal of Health Economics, Vol. 22, No. 4, pp.
  637–658.

         (2005) “Healthy Living in Hard Times,” Journal of Health Economics, Vol. 24, No. 2,
  pp. 341–363.

         (2012) “Understanding the Relationship Between Macroeconomic Conditions and
  Health,” in The Elgar Companion to Health Economics, Second Edition: Edward Elgar Pub-
  lishing, pp. 5–14.

         (2015) “Recessions, Healthy No More?,” Journal of Health Economics, Vol. 42, pp. 17–
  28.

        (2016) “Drug Poisoning Deaths in the United States, 1999–2012: A Statistical Adjust-
  ment Analysis,” Population Health Metrics, Vol. 14, No. 1, p. 2.

       (2017) “Drug Involvement in Fatal Overdoses,” SSM - Population Health, Vol. 3, No.
  December, pp. 219–226.

                                              31
Ruhm, Christopher J. and William E. Black (2002) “Does Drinking Really Decrease in Bad
  Times?,” Journal of Health Economics, Vol. 21, No. 4, pp. 659–678.

Schuckit, Marc A. (2016) “Treatment of Opioid-Use Disorders,” New England Journal of
  Medicine, Vol. 375, No. 4, pp. 357–368.

Schwartz, Bryan Glen, John Christopher Pezzullo, Scott Andrew McDonald, William Kenneth
  Poole, and Robert Alan Kloner (2012) “How the 2008 Stock Market Crash and Seasons Affect
  Total and Cardiac Deaths in Los Angeles County,” The American Journal of Cardiology, Vol.
  109, No. 10, pp. 1445–1448.

Shierholz, Heidi (2012) “Labor Force Participation: Cyclical Versus Structural Changes Since the
  Start of the Great Recession,”Technical Report 333, Economic Policy Institute.

Singhal, Astha, Yu-Yu Tien, and Renee Y. Hsia (2016) “Racial-Ethnic Disparities in Opioid Pre-
  scriptions at Emergency Department Visits for Conditions Commonly Associated with Prescrip-
  tion Drug Abuse,” PLOS ONE, Vol. 11, No. 8, p. e0159224.

Stevens, Ann H., Douglas L. Miller, Marianne E. Page, and Mateusz Filipski (2015) “The Best
  of Times, The Worst of Times: Understanding Pro-cyclical Mortality,” American Economic
  Journal: Economic Policy, Vol. 7, No. 4, pp. 279–311.

Sullivan, Mark D, Mark J Edlund, Lily Zhang, Jürgen Unützer, and Kenneth B Wells (2006) “Asso-
  ciation Between Mental Health Disorders, Problem Drug Use, and Regular Prescription Opioid
  Use,” Archives of Internal Medicine, Vol. 166, No. 19, p. 2087.

Tapia Granados, José A. (2005) “Recessions and Mortality in Spain, 1980-1997,” European Jour-
  nal of Population, Vol. 21, No. 4, pp. 393–422.

Tekin, Erdal, Chandler McClellan, and Karen Jean Minyard (2013) “Health and Health Behaviors
  During the Worst of Times,” NBER Working Paper Series, No. 19234.

Volkow, Nora D., Thomas R. Frieden, Pamela S. Hyde, and Stephen S. Cha (2014) “Medication-
  Assisted Therapies — Tackling the Opioid-Overdose Epidemic,” New England Journal of
  Medicine, Vol. 370, No. 22, pp. 2063–2066.

Warner, Margaret, Li Hui Chen, Diane M. Makuc, Robert N. Anderson, and Arialdi M. Miniño
 (2011) “Drug Poisoning Deaths in the United States, 1980-2008,”Technical Report 81, U.S. De-
 partment of Health and Human Services. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. National
 Center for Health Statistics.

White, Ian R., Patrick Royston, and Angela M. Wood (2011) “Multiple Imputation Using Chained
 Equations: Issues and Guidance for Practice,” Statistics in Medicine, Vol. 30, No. 4, pp. 377–
 399.

Xu, Xin (2013) “The Business Cycle and Health Behaviors,” Social Science & Medicine, Vol. 77,
  No. 1, pp. 126–136.



                                              32
            Figure 1: U.S. Unemployment Rate and Drug Death Rates by Type, 1999-2014

        Unemployment Rate, [0-100]; Death Rates are Deaths per 100k
   15                                                                                 All Drugs




   10



                                                                                      Opioids
                                                                                      Unemployment Rate

    5




    0

        1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
                                              Year



Source: Author calculations using National Vital Statistics System of the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention Multiple Cause of Death (MCOD) files for 1999-2014, together with unemployment rates from
the Bureau of Labor Statistics.




                                                         33
                             Figure 2: Total Opioid Death Rate by Race, 1999-2014

        Death Rates are Deaths per 100k in Group
   10                                                                                                            White




    8
                                                                                                                 Total


    6




    4                                                                                                            Black



                                                                                                                 Hispanic
    2




    0

        1999   2000   2001   2002   2003   2004   2005   2006 2007   2008   2009   2010   2011   2012   2013   2014
                                                            Year



Source: Author calculations using National Vital Statistics System of the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention Multiple Cause of Death (MCOD) files for 1999-2014.




                                                            34
                   Figure 3: Opioid and All Drug Overdose ED Visit Rate, 2006-2014

         ED Visit Rates are Visits per 100k
   185                                                                                All Drugs     26
                                                                                      (Left Axis)


                                                                                      Opioids
   180                                                                                (Right Axis) 24




                                                                                                    22
   175



                                                                                                    20
   170



                                                                                                    18

   165
         2006      2007        2008       2009   2010          2011   2012   2013   2014
                                                        Year


Source: Author calculations using the Healthcare Cost and Utilization Project’s Nationwide Emergency
Department Sample for 2006-2014.




                                                        35
               Figure 4: Drug Overdose ED Visit Rate by Major Drug Type, 2006-2014

        ED Visit Rates are Visits per 100k
   30

                                                                                   Heroin

                                                                                   Opioids


   20                                                                              Benzos




                                                                                   Anti-depressants
   10                                                                              Aromatic Analgesics


                                                                                   Anti-psychotics
                                                                                   Insulin

                                                                                   Cocaine

    0
        2006      2007        2008       2009   2010        2011   2012   2013   2014
                                                Year


Source: Author calculations using the Healthcare Cost and Utilization Project’s Nationwide Emergency
Department Sample for 2006-2014.




                                                       36
     Table 1: Emergency Department Data: Geographic Detail and Years Used in Analysis

     State          County-Level Data               Years           State-Level Data             Years
   Arizona                   Yes                 2005-2014                  Yes              2005-2013
    Florida                  Yes                 2005-2014                  Yes              2005-2013
    Hawaii                   No                                             Yes            2003-2010, 2013
     Iowa                    No                                             Yes               2004-2013
    Illinois                 No                                             Yes               2009-2013
   Kentucky                  Yes                 2008-2012                  Yes              2008-2013
  Maryland                   Yes                 2002-2012                  Yes              2005-2013
  Minnesota                  No                                             Yes               2001-2013
North Carolina               No                                             Yes              2007-2013
   Nebraska                  No                                             Yes            2001-2011, 2013
New Hampshire                No                                             Yes              2003-2009
  New Jersey                 Yes             2004, 2006-2013                No
South Carolina               No                                             Yes               2005-2013
  Tennessee                  No                                             Yes               2005-2013
     Utah                    No                                             Yes               2000-2013
   Vermont                   No                                             Yes               2002-2013
 Note: County-level data are constructed from the micro-data (visit-level) provided by the Healthcare Cost and
 Utilization Project’s (HCUP) State Emergency Department Databases (SEDD). The state-level data is taken directly
 from the “State Statistics on All ED Visits” portion of HCUPNet, available at https://hcupnet-archive.ahrq.gov.




                                                      37
       Table 2: County-Level Summary Statistics for Drug Related Deaths and ED Visits

                                                   Mean         S.D.        Min.        Max.            N
Mortality Data
  Unemployment Rate, [0-100]                       6.39         2.59        0.70       30.30    50148
  Year                                          2006.50         4.61     1999.00     2014.00    50162
  All
      Population, in 100k                          0.95         3.07        0.00      101.17    50162
      Opioid Death Rate per 100k                   5.35         4.84        0.00      127.80    50162
      Drug Death Rate per 100k                    10.77         6.92        0.00      194.46    50162
  White
      Population, in 100k                          0.63         1.48        0.00       31.22    50162
      Opioid Death Rate per 100k                   7.03         6.14        0.00      161.64    50162
      Drug Death Rate per 100k                    13.07         8.61        0.00      234.19    50162
  Black
      Population, in 100k                           0.12        0.54        0.00       14.08    50162
      Opioid Death Rate per 100k                    2.28        4.65        0.00     4166.67    49661
      Drug Death Rate per 100k                      8.50        9.67        0.00     8333.33    49661
  Hispanic
      Population, in 100k                           0.14        1.10        0.00       48.98    50162
      Opioid Death Rate per 100k                    2.00        3.87        0.00     1492.54    50120
      Drug Death Rate per 100k                      5.25        6.53        0.00     3571.43    50120
Emergency Department Data
   Unemployment Rate, [0-100]                    7.95           3.25        2.20       25.50     1873
   Year                                       2009.50           2.86     2002.00     2014.00     1873
   All
       Population, in 100k                       2.21           4.24        0.02       40.87     1873
       Opioid Overdose ED Visit Rate per 100k   13.54           8.41        0.00      145.84     1873
       Drug Overdose ED Visit Rate per 100k     97.52          36.91        0.00      460.87     1873
   White
       Population, in 100k                       1.34           2.29        0.02       23.73     1873
       Opioid Overdose ED Visit Rate per 100k   17.18          10.31        0.00      152.56     1828
       Drug Overdose ED Visit Rate per 100k    109.05          42.06        0.00      464.01     1828
   Black
       Population, in 100k                       0.34           0.82        0.00        5.69     1873
       Opioid Overdose ED Visit Rate per 100k    9.46           7.93        0.00      246.31     1828
       Drug Overdose ED Visit Rate per 100k     90.60          38.24        0.00     4347.83     1828

Source: Mortality data are at the county-year and come from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s
Multiple Cause of Death files from 1999-2014 and are adjusted as in text. ED data at the county-year level and
are provided via the Healthcare Cost and Utilization Project’s State Emergency Department Databases (SEDD).
SEDD data come from Arizona (2005-2014), Kentucky (2008, 2010-2012), Florida (2005-2014), Maryland
(2002-2012), and New Jersey (2004, 2006-2103). See text for ICD-9 definitions of outcomes. County level un-
employment data come from Bureau for Labor Statistics. Unemployment rate, death rates, and ED visit rates are
all weighted by total county population of group. Hispanic ED visits are omitted as the ED data do not contain
a reliable indicator of Hispanic ethnicity.




                                                    38
Table 3: The estimated effect of county-level unemployment on the rate of opioid/drug mortality
and emergency department visits across multiple specifications.

                                                              (1)          (2)          (3)

            Opioid Death Rate per 100k
               Unemployment Rate, [0-100]                    0.22***      0.19***       0.19***
                                                            (0.05)       (0.04)        (0.05)
               Mean of Dependent Variable                    5.35         5.35          5.35
               Observations                                 50148        50148         50148

            Drug Death Rate per 100k
               Unemployment Rate, [0-100]                    0.29***      0.18***       0.36***
                                                            (0.08)       (0.05)        (0.07)
               Mean of Dependent Variable                   10.77        10.77         10.77
               Observations                                 50148        50148         50148

            Opioid Overdose ED Visit Rate per 100k
               Unemployment Rate, [0-100]                    0.57**       1.10***       0.95***
                                                            (0.26)       (0.30)        (0.28)
               Mean of Dependent Variable                   13.54         13.54        13.54
               Observations                                 1873          1873         1873

            Drug Overdose ED Visit Rate per 100k
               Unemployment Rate, [0-100]                    0.71         1.54          1.19
                                                            (0.88)       (1.04)        (1.20)
               Mean of Dependent Variable                   97.52         97.52        97.52
               Observations                                 1873          1873         1873
            County Fixed-Effects                             Yes           Yes          Yes
            Year Fixed-Effects                               Yes           Yes          Yes
            County Specific Time Trends                      No            Yes          No
            State-by-Year Fixed-Effects                      No            No           Yes

             Note: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Robust standard errors clustered at the
             county level in parentheses. Each regression is weighted by total county population.




                                                    39
Table 4: The estimated effect of county-level unemployment on the rate of opioid/drug mortality
and emergency department visits for our preferred specification across race/ethnicity.

                                                             (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)
                                                             All         White         Black        Hispanic

          Opioid Death Rate per 100k
            Unemployment Rate, [0-100]                      0.19***       0.23***      –0.14**        0.04
                                                           (0.05)        (0.05)        (0.07)        (0.03)
            Mean of Dependent Variable                      5.46          6.33          2.19          1.60
            Observations                                   50132         50132         49630         50090

          Drug Death Rate per 100k
            Unemployment Rate, [0-100]                      0.36***       0.48***      –0.13          0.11*
                                                           (0.07)        (0.08)        (0.10)        (0.06)
            Mean of Dependent Variable                      9.46         10.71          6.16          3.45
            Observations                                   50132         50132         49630         50090

          Opioid Overdose ED Visit Rate per 100k
            Unemployment Rate, [0-100]                      0.95***       0.91**        1.25***
                                                           (0.28)        (0.37)        (0.45)
            Mean of Dependent Variable                     16.91         18.92          7.18
            Observations                                   1873          1828           1828

          Drug Overdose ED Visit Rate per 100k
            Unemployment Rate, [0-100]                      1.19          1.01         –1.07
                                                           (1.20)        (1.29)        (1.97)
            Mean of Dependent Variable                     117.43        123.45        99.26
            Observations                                    1873          1828         1828

          Note: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Robust standard errors clustered at the county level
          in parentheses. All specifications include county fixed-effects, year fixed-effects, and state-by-year
          fixed effects. Each regression is weighted by county population of group. Hispanic ED visits are
          omitted as the ED data do not contain a reliable indicator of Hispanic ethnicity.




                                                          40
Table 5: The estimated effect of state-level unemployment on the rate of opioid/drug mortality and
emergency department visits across multiple specifications and race/ethnicity.

                                                  All                       White                         Black                        Hispanic
                                          (1)            (2)         (3)             (4)          (5)              (6)         (7)                (8)
Opioid Death Rate per 100k
    Unemployment Rate, [0-100]           0.24***         0.33***    0.45***          0.41***      0.08             0.13        0.05            0.14***
                                        (0.08)          (0.08)     (0.10)           (0.11)       (0.06)           (0.09)      (0.05)          (0.05)
    Mean of Dependent Variable           5.35            5.35       7.03            7.03          2.28            2.28         2.00            2.00
    Observations                         816             816        816             816           816             816          816             816
Drug Death Rate per 100k
    Unemployment Rate, [0-100]           0.24**          0.35***    0.54***          0.40***      0.18             0.33**      0.05            0.18**
                                        (0.10)          (0.11)     (0.11)           (0.14)       (0.12)           (0.14)      (0.07)          (0.09)
    Mean of Dependent Variable           10.75          10.75       13.06           13.06         8.50            8.50         5.25            5.25
    Observations                          816            816         816             816          816             816          816             816
Opioid ED Visit Rate per 100k
    Unemployment Rate, [0-100]           3.24***         3.12***    5.45***          4.52***      0.73             1.05
                                        (0.58)          (0.82)     (1.14)           (1.58)       (0.69)           (0.81)
    Mean of Dependent Variable           50.50          50.50       65.98           65.98        29.05            29.05
    Observations                          138            138         101             101          73               73
Drug ED Visit Rate per 100k
    Unemployment Rate, [0-100]           2.46            5.03       5.19             4.10         8.23             3.60
                                        (2.65)          (3.25)     (6.48)           (6.72)       (5.22)           (5.17)
    Mean of Dependent Variable          318.67          318.67     352.22         352.22        264.87         264.87
    Observations                         139             139        106            106           100            100
State Fixed-Effects                      Yes             Yes        Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes                Yes
Year Fixed-Effects                       Yes             Yes        Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes                Yes
State Specific Time Trends                No             Yes         No            Yes            No            Yes            No                 Yes

 Note: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Robust standard errors clustered at the state level in parentheses. Each regression is weighted by total state
 population of group. Hispanic ED visits are omitted as the ED data do not contain a reliable indicator of Hispanic ethnicity.




                                                                            41
                                    Supplementary Appendix

Our main analysis results indicate that drug mortality is strongly counter-cyclical, with deaths

involving opioids playing the most important role. Opioid-related ED visits are also counter-

cyclical and both the mortality and ED effects are strongly driven by the changes among whites.

The results for Hispanics and, especially, blacks are more sensitive to the choice of model

specification, suggesting difficulties in making conclusive statements for these demographic

groups. We conducted a variety of tests of the robustness of our results to changes in samples or

specifications.

       Given that our main specifications do not simultaneously include both a full set of county

linear time trends and state-by-year fixed effects, we replicated our full sample analysis using

controls for state and year fixed-effects, state-by-year fixed effects and a variety of time trend

specifications. The results from this exercise, presented in Appendix Table A1, show that the

findings are robust. As in Table 3, each specification contains county, year, and state-by-year

fixed-effects, with standard errors clustered at the county level. The number of time trends included

increases as we move down the table and, when doing so, the coefficients of interest gradually

attenuate towards zero. However, our mortality findings are robust to every alternative linear time

trend specification, except in the last row which includes a separate trend for each county. As

discussed, the inclusion of this large number of time trends removes all remaining useful variation.

Similarly, our ED findings are robust to a majority of alternative time trends, but given the smaller

number of counties in our sample, the results are also statistically insignificant when using

commuter zone specific time trends.

       We next examined whether the relationship between macroeconomic shocks and opioid

abuse differed by time period. This is investigated in Figure A1 which shows, for our preferred



                                                 42
county-level specification, the effect on the coefficients of systematically removing sets of three

years at a time. Three year bins are chosen to ensure that the full great recession period is removed

in one specification, to insure that our results are not driven by the recession or other short run

macroeconomic events. The left side column has all deaths and the right side column shows

corresponding effects for the ED visits.

       For drug deaths, the coefficients and 95% confidence intervals are always well above 0,

although they do fluctuate a bit. The estimate that excludes the Great Recession is marked by “08-

10” is typical of the estimates obtained when removing other sub-periods. For opioid deaths we

obtain a similar story of fairly consistent and strong effects. Opioid-related ED visits show a

similar, consistent and significant estimates when removing sub-periods but we do not find

significant results for any drug ED visit specifications.

       Table A2 in the Appendix summarizes the data used in the remaining robustness checks.

County characteristics, including percent of persons aged 25 and over who have graduated high

school and land area (to calculate population density) are extracted from the 2010 U.S. decennial

census. (www.census.gov/2010census/data/). Information on county level median income comes

from the Census’ Small Area Income & Poverty Estimates. County characteristics intending to

capture alternative measures of local economic conditions are obtained from Autor et al. (2013)

and include the percent change in manufacturing and percent change in import exposure (from

1990-2007).

       The next robustness check we performed is to include median income as an additional

control variable in our specification of interest. This check is reported in Appendix Table A3 and

follows Table 4 except with the addition of median income. We include this check as median

income represents a potential mechanism for some of the effect of changing macroeconomic



                                                 43
conditions. The income coefficient is negative and statistically significant when the dependent

variable is mortality. A comparison of the unemployment coefficients in from Table 4 and Table

A3 indicates that its inclusion generally does not material affect the estimated macroeconomic

effect of unemployment, consistent with the results often obtained in previous related research

(e.g. Ruhm, 2000).

          We next tested whether the results were robust to using employment-to-population (EP)

ratios rather than unemployment rates as the proxy for macroeconomics conditions. These results,

summarized in Appendix Table A4, are conducted at the state level since there is no readily

available series of county EP ratios. These results are a virtual mirror (although slightly smaller in

absolute value) of the findings in Table 5, showing that the estimates are not sensitive to this

choice.

          We also explored whether the effects differ across urban and rural areas by successively

excluding quintiles of counties based upon 2010 population density. For these results, shown in

Figure A2 the right column again refers to ED visits and the left column to deaths. The mortality

findings are not driven by population density, with the slight exception that the coefficient on

opioid deaths falls slightly (and remains significant at the 10% but not the 5% level) when

excluding the densest areas. The results for ED visits for all drugs are again noisier and centered

around zero, while those for opioid-related ED visits are statistically significant and consistent in

magnitude across all quintiles. Next, we performed the same exercise except systematically

dropping counties by quintile of 2010 high school graduation status (Figure A3) and percent non-

white (Figure A4). Our main results are robust to these exclusions.

          Figures A5 and A6 examine the robustness of our results to dropping counties that

experienced different levels in the percent change in manufacturing employment and the percent



                                                 44
change in import exposure, (changes are calculated from 1990 to 2007). These variables, which

were obtained from Autor et. al (2013), were only available as a cross-section and so could not be

used as an independent variable in our main analysis. Instead, we followed the previously

described strategy of examining whether areas most or least impacted by changes in manufacturing

employment or foreign imports were driving our main findings. Once again, we obtained

consistent coefficients across the omitted quintiles for each variable, indicating that those areas

with the greatest loss of manufacturing jobs or the largest increase in imports did not drive our

findings.

       Figure A7 performs a series of placebo tests, examining the unemployment coefficients on

ED visit rates for causes not anticipated to be related to macroeconomic conditions. These

included: vomiting during pregnancy, open head wounds, broken legs or arms and broken noses.

With the exception of broken noses, none of these were related to unemployment rates. Finally,

Figure A8 decomposes the effect of the unemployment rate by age and payer type group for ED

opioid overdose admission rates. The results show that opioid-related ED visits are driven by

increases across all age groups and payer types, except for the elderly. While the point estimates

for the elderly (and for Medicare as an expected payer type) are positive, they are not statistically

different from zero. This null finding makes sense, since job losses and economic declines during

recessions should affect the working age population and children more than the elderly.

       In addition to the robustness checks just described, we conducted a number of other

descriptive and econometric analyses. Figure A9 shows that all drug deaths follow similar patterns

(although with higher rates) than fatal overdoses involving opioids – with faster growth and higher

rates for whites than for blacks and Hispanics. Figure A10 provides details of our simulated power

analysis, summarized briefly in footnote 25 of the main text.



                                                 45
       Tables A5 and A6 summarize county-level analyses for other drug outcomes including

mortality or ED visit rates related to heroin, drugs other than opioids and drug other than either

heroin or opioids. These results confirm a countercyclical variation in most types of drug death

rates, although with somewhat less consistent patterns for ED visits.

       Tables A7 through A9 provide detailed results for race/ethnicity-specific adverse drug

outcomes. A countercyclical variation is observed for whites for virtually all outcomes and

specification (although it is not always statistically significant for all drug ED visits). For blacks,

the mortality rates are more sensitive to the choice of specifications and, while opioid-related ED

visits are always strongly countercyclical, overall drug death rates or ED visits are generally

statistically insignificant. The point estimates always suggest a countercyclical pattern of Hispanic

drug or opioid mortality but the coefficients are not always statistically significant.

       Table A10 provides separate estimates for periods of decreasing versus increasing

unemployment. The general result of a countercyclical variation in adverse drug outcomes holds

across both periods, with no clear pattern of differences.

       As mentioned in the paper, data using death certificates will understate the involvement of

opioids (or any other drug category) because in 20%-25% of fatal overdoses the type(s) of drug(s)

responsible for the overdose is(are) left unspecified (Ruhm, 2017). As previously outlined, to

correct for the undercount in opioid deaths, we use an imputation procedure. Table A11 examines

the sensitivity of our findings to accounting for the uncertainty introduced in the imputation stage.

The first panel in Table A11 reports our estimates from Table 4. The second panel displays the

results from a multiple imputation analysis with standard errors that account for fact that some of

the opioid deaths are estimated. This process follows a standard multiple imputation framework

(Rubin, 1987). Following White et al. (2011), we first generate 100 different datasets each of which



                                                  46
is imputed (only for those individuals who died of a drug overdose and whose death certificate is

missing information on the specific drug(s) responsible) via a draw from a probit model estimated

conditional on the observed data. We then re-estimate our specification of interest using each of

these 100 simulated datasets, storing the coefficient and standard error from each iteration. Each

final coefficient and standard error is calculated by combining the vector of results using Rubin’s

(1987) rules. The final, corrected standard error accounts for both within specification variation

and between specification variation. The between specification variation is driven by the difference

in estimated coefficients across the 100 datasets and is identical to the square of the bootstrapped

standard error (the standard deviation of the coefficient). The results presented in A11 demonstrate

that the uncertainty from the imputation process is of minimal concern to the statistical significance

of our main findings. As expected, accounting for this additional source of uncertainty increases

the standard errors, but only minimally. Most differences are only salient once the number decimal

places reported is extended to four.

       Finally, Table A12 shows county-level estimates for ED visits due to drugs other than

opioids or heroin. The unemployment coefficients vary in sign and are usually statistically

insignificant, except for benzodiazepine-related visits, which vary countercyclically. This finding

is unsurprising as benzodiazepines are often taken with opioids. A CDC report found that in 2011,

benzodiazepines were present in 31% of the opioid deaths (Chen et al. 2014).




                                                 47
Figure A1: The estimated effect of county-level unemployment on the rate of opioid/drug mortality
and emergency department visits excluding various three-year bins.

       Opioid Death Rate                                                                            Opioid Overdose ED Visit Rate per 100k
  .4                                                                                           2


  .3                                                                                          1.5


  .2                                                                                           1


  .1                                                                                           .5


  0                                                                                            0
   99-01 00-02 01-03 02-04 03-05 04-06 05-07 06-08 07-09 08-10 09-11 10-12 11-13 12-14             02-04    03-05    04-06   05-07   06-08   07-09   08-10   09-11   10-12   11-13   12-14
                                    Excluded Years                                                                                     Excluded Years


       Drug Death Rate                                                                             Drug Overdose ED Visit Rate per 100k
  .6                                                                                          6

  .5
                                                                                              4
  .4


  .3                                                                                          2

  .2
                                                                                              0
  .1


  0                                                                                           -2
   99-01 00-02 01-03 02-04 03-05 04-06 05-07 06-08 07-09 08-10 09-11 10-12 11-13 12-14         02-04       03-05    04-06    05-07   06-08   07-09   08-10   09-11   10-12   11-13   12-14
                                    Excluded Years                                                                                    Excluded Years

Note: Each point is from a separate regression that corresponds to our preferred specification in the text.
Each regression has county fixed-effects, year fixed-effects, and state-by-year fixed effects. Each regression
excludes the years noted. 95% confidence intervals are displayed by dashed lines and are calculated using
robust standard errors clustered at the county level. Each regression is weighted by total county population.




                                                                                         48
Figure A2: The estimated effect of county-level unemployment on the rate of opioid/drug mortality
and emergency department visits excluding population density quintiles.

       Opioid Death Rate                                                 Opioid Overdose ED Visit Rate
  .4                                                                2




  .3                                                               1.5




  .2
                                                                    1



  .1
                                                                    .5



  0
                                                                    0

       1            2               3                 4   5              1            2                3                 4   5
                   Excluded Population Density Quintile                               Excluded Population Density Quintile


       Drug Death Rate                                                   Drug Overdose ED Visit Rate
  .6                                                               4




                                                                   2
  .4




                                                                   0
  .2




                                                                   -2

  0

       1            2               3                 4   5              1           2                 3                4    5
                   Excluded Population Density Quintile                              Excluded Population Density Quintile

Note: Each point is from a separate regression that corresponds to our preferred specification in the text.
Each regression has county fixed-effects, year fixed-effects, and state-by-year fixed effects. Each regression
excludes the quintile noted. 95% confidence intervals are displayed by dashed lines and are calculated using
robust standard errors clustered at the county level. Each regression is weighted by total county population.




                                                              49
Figure A3: The estimated effect of county-level unemployment on the rate of opioid/drug mortality
and emergency department visits excluding % graduated high school quintiles

           Opioid Death Rate                                                    Opioid Overdose ED Visit Rate
   .3                                                                      2



  .25
                                                                          1.5

   .2



  .15                                                                      1



   .1
                                                                           .5

  .05



       0                                                                   0

               1        2                3                4      5              1            2                3                4      5
                     Excluded % Graduated High School Quintile                            Excluded % Graduated High School Quintile


       Drug Death Rate                                                          Drug Overdose ED Visit Rate
  .6                                                                      4




                                                                          2
  .4




                                                                          0
  .2




                                                                          -2

  0

           1            2                3                4      5              1            2                3                4      5
                     Excluded % Graduated High School Quintile                            Excluded % Graduated High School Quintile

Note: Each point is from a separate regression that corresponds to our preferred specification in the text.
Each regression has county fixed-effects, year fixed-effects, and state-by-year fixed effects. Each regression
excludes the quintile noted. 95% confidence intervals are displayed by dashed lines and are calculated using
robust standard errors clustered at the county level. Each regression is weighted by total county population.




                                                                     50
Figure A4: The estimated effect of county-level unemployment on the rate of opioid/drug mortality
and emergency department visits excluding % non-white quintiles

       Opioid Death Rate                                                   Opioid Overdose ED Visit Rate
  .3                                                                  2




                                                                     1.5

  .2



                                                                      1



  .1

                                                                      .5




  0                                                                   0

       1            2                 3                 4   5              1            2                 3                 4   5
                        Excluded % Non-White Quintile                                       Excluded % Non-White Quintile


       Drug Death Rate                                                     Drug Overdose ED Visit Rate
  .6                                                                 6



  .5

                                                                     4

  .4



  .3                                                                 2



  .2
                                                                     0

  .1



  0                                                                  -2

       1            2                 3                 4   5              1           2                  3                 4   5
                        Excluded % Non-White Quintile                                       Excluded % Non-White Quintile

Note: Each point is from a separate regression that corresponds to our preferred specification in the text.
Each regression has county fixed-effects, year fixed-effects, and state-by-year fixed effects. Each regression
excludes the quintile noted. 95% confidence intervals are displayed by dashed lines and are calculated using
robust standard errors clustered at the county level. Each regression is weighted by total county population.




                                                                51
Figure A5: The estimated effect of county-level unemployment on the rate of opioid/drug mortality
and emergency department visits excluding change in % manufacturing employment (1990-2007)
quintiles

       Opioid Death Rate                                                                    Opioid Overdose ED Visit Rate
  .4                                                                                   2




                                                                                      1.5




  .2                                                                                   1




                                                                                       .5




  0                                                                                    0

       1                 2                3               4                  5              1                  2               3               4                  5
           Excluded % Manufacturing Employment Change (1990-2007) Quintile                      Excluded % Manufacturing Employment Change (1990-2007) Quintile


       Drug Death Rate                                                                      Drug Overdose ED Visit Rate
  .6                                                                                  6




                                                                                      4

  .4



                                                                                      2



  .2

                                                                                      0




  0                                                                                   -2

       1                 2                3               4                  5              1                 2                3               4                  5
           Excluded % Manufacturing Employment Change (1990-2007) Quintile                      Excluded % Manufacturing Employment Change (1990-2007) Quintile

Note: Each point is from a separate regression that corresponds to our preferred specification in the text.
Each regression has county fixed-effects, year fixed-effects, and state-by-year fixed effects. Each regression
excludes the quintile noted. 95% confidence intervals are displayed by dashed lines and are calculated using
robust standard errors clustered at the county level. Each regression is weighted by total county population.
Data on change in manufacturing employment come from Autor et al. (2013). The lower the quintile, the
larger the decrease in the share of manufacturing employment.




                                                                                 52
Figure A6: The estimated effect of county-level unemployment on the rate of opioid/drug mortality
and emergency department visits excluding change in import exposure (1990-2007) quintiles

       Opioid Death Rate                                                                    Opioid Overdose ED Visit Rate
  .4
                                                                                      1.5




                                                                                       1

  .2



                                                                                       .5




  0                                                                                    0

       1                 2                3                4                 5              1                 2                3                4                 5
           Excluded Import Exposure per Worker Change (1990-2007) Quintile                      Excluded Import Exposure per Worker Change (1990-2007) Quintile


       Drug Death Rate                                                                      Drug Overdose ED Visit Rate
  .6                                                                                  6




                                                                                      4

  .4



                                                                                      2



  .2

                                                                                      0




  0                                                                                   -2

       1                 2                3                4                 5              1                 2                3                4                 5
           Excluded Import Exposure per Worker Change (1990-2007) Quintile                      Excluded Import Exposure per Worker Change (1990-2007) Quintile

Note: Each point is from a separate regression that corresponds to our preferred specification in the text.
Each regression has county fixed-effects, year fixed-effects, and state-by-year fixed effects. Each regression
excludes the quintile noted. 95% confidence intervals are displayed by dashed lines and are calculated using
robust standard errors clustered at the county level. Each regression is weighted by total county population.
Data on change in manufacturing employment come from Autor et al. (2013). The lower the quintile, the
smaller the change in import exposure.




                                                                                 53
Figure A7: The effect of county-level unemployment on the rate of opioid ED visits and the rate
of ED visits for various placebos.

                               Effect of 1% Increase in Unemployment Rate on ED Visit Rate for:
    10




     5




     0




    -5




   -10




         Opioid Overdoses   Vomiting During Pregnancy Open Head Wounds      Broken Legs    Broken Arms   Broken Noses


Note: Each point is from a separate regression that corresponds to our preferred specification in the text.
Each regression has county fixed-effects, year fixed-effects, and state-by-year fixed effects. 95% confidence
intervals are displayed by bracketed lines and are calculated using robust standard errors clustered at the
county level. Each regression is weighted by total county population.




                                                          54
Figure A8: The effect of county-level unemployment on the opioid ED visit rate across various
age groups and expected payer.

                         Effect of 1% Increase in Unemployment Rate on Opioid Overdose ED Visit Rate
  1.5




    1




    .5




    0


                                                    Unemployment Rate


         Total   Age:1-17 Age:18-25 Age:26-45 Age:46-64 Age:65+ Private Ins. Uninsured Medicaid Medicare


Note: Each point is from a separate regression that corresponds to our preferred specification in the text.
Each regression has county fixed-effects, year fixed-effects, and state-by-year fixed effects. 95% confidence
intervals are displayed by bracketed lines and are calculated using robust standard errors clustered at the
county level. Each regression is weighted by total county population.




                                                          55
                          Figure A9: All Drug Death Rate by Race, 1999-2014

     Death Rates are Deaths per 100k in Group
20
                                                                                                              White




15                                                                                                            Total




                                                                                                              Black
10




                                                                                                              Hispanic

 5


     1999   2000   2001   2002   2003   2004   2005   2006 2007   2008   2009   2010   2011   2012   2013   2014
                                                         Year




                                                         56
             Figure A10: Simulated Power Analysis For All Drug Overdose ED Visit Rate

        Power (% of cases where imposed true treatment effect is correctly identified)
    1




   .8
                                                                  α =.01        α =.001
                                                    α =.05
                                        α =.1
   .6




   .4




   .2




    0

        0             1             2             3             4             5           6   7          8
                                                Imposed True Treatment Effect Size




Note: The dashed vertical line is the estimated effect size of 1 percentage point increase in the unemployment
rate on the opioid overdose ED visit rate. a is the probability of a type I error.




                                                             57
Table A1: The estimated effect of county-level unemployment on the rate of opioid/drug mortality
and emergency department visits across various types of time trends.

                                                  Opioid Death Rate All Drug Death Rate Opioid ED Visit Rate Drug ED Visit Rate
                                                         (1)                (2)                 (3)                 (4)
All Races/Ethnicities
    No Time Trends                                        0.19***               0.36***                 0.95***                1.19
                                                         (0.05)                (0.07)                  (0.28)                 (1.20)
    5 County Time Trends by Pop. Quintile                 0.19***               0.36***                 0.92***                1.28
                                                         (0.05)                (0.07)                  (0.28)                 (1.29)
    100 County Time Trends by Pop. Percentile             0.18***               0.33***                 0.66**                –0.32
                                                         (0.04)                (0.06)                  (0.29)                 (0.97)
    Top 1% of Counties Have a Specific Trend,
                                                          0.16***               0.26***                 0.68**                –0.78
      99 Other Trends by Pop. Percentile
                                                         (0.04)                (0.06)                  (0.30)                 (0.95)
    Top 5% of Counties Have a Specific Trend,
                                                          0.12***               0.18***                 0.82***                0.44
      19 Other Trends by Pop. Vigintile
                                                         (0.04)                (0.05)                  (0.27)                 (1.06)
    Commuter Zone Specific Time Trends                    0.12***               0.18***                 0.38                  –1.86
                                                         (0.04)                (0.06)                  (0.31)                 (1.17)
    County Specific Time Trends                           0.03                  0.01                    0.49                  –1.49
                                                         (0.04)                (0.05)                  (0.38)                 (1.33)
Observations                                             50148                 50148                    1873                   1873
County Fixed-Effects                                      Yes                   Yes                      Yes                    Yes
Year Fixed-Effects                                        Yes                   Yes                      Yes                    Yes
State-by-Year Fixed-Effects                               Yes                   Yes                      Yes                    Yes

 Note: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Robust standard errors clustered at the county level in parentheses. Each regression is weighted
 by total county population.




                                                                    58
                       Table A2: Summary Statistics for Appendix

                                                                Mean       S.D.      Min.      Max.           N
State-Level Mortality Data
    Unemployment Rate, [0-100]                                   6.31      2.14      2.30      13.70   815
    Median Income, $1000s                                       48.06      7.66     29.30      76.17   815
    Employment to Population Ratio                              70.20      4.23     46.67      83.48   815
    Year                                                      2006.51      4.61   1999.00    2014.00   815
    All
        Population, in 100k                                     58.73     65.69      4.92     388.02   815
        Opioid Death Rate per 100k                               5.35      3.11      0.00      28.70   815
        Heroin Death Rate per 100k                               1.53      1.59      0.00      11.76   815
        Drug Death Death Rate per 100k                          10.77      4.18      1.82      34.23   815
        Drug Death Rate per 100k, Exluding Opioids               5.41      2.00      0.34      15.60   815
        Drug Death Rate per 100k, Exluding Opioids and Her       4.17      1.43      0.34      15.14   815
    White
        Population, in 100k                                     39.05     34.80      1.62     163.90   815
        Opioid Death Rate per 100k                               7.03      4.13      0.00      29.70   815
        Heroin Death Rate per 100k                               1.75      1.87      0.00      13.06   815
        Drug Death Rate per 100k                                13.07      5.58      0.97      35.37   815
    Black
        Population, in 100k                                      7.46      8.71      0.03      32.49   815
        Opioid Death Rate per 100k                               2.28      1.81      0.00      25.79   815
        Heroin Death Rate per 100k                               1.26      1.58      0.00      19.73   815
        Drug Death Rate per 100k                                 8.50      4.59      0.00      39.58   815
    Hispanic
        Population, in 100k                                      8.86     21.85      0.05     149.89   815
        Opioid Death Rate per 100k                               2.00      1.86      0.00      21.57   815
        Heroin Death Rate per 100k                               1.22      1.13      0.00      11.55   815
        Drug Death Rate per 100k                                 5.25      3.33      0.00      28.37   815
State-Level Emergency Department Data
   Unemployment Rate, [0-100]                                    6.99      2.57      2.60      11.20   140
   Median Income, $1000s                                        49.07      7.39     38.59      71.84   140
   Employment to Population Ratio                               70.82      5.25     61.70      82.41   140
   Year                                                       2008.11      3.30   2000.00    2013.00   140
   All
       Population, in 100k                                      51.01     45.58      6.15     196.00    140
       Opioid ED Visit Rate per 100k                            50.50     18.85      9.07      87.22    139
       Heroin ED Visit Rate per 100k                             9.79     10.57      0.54      52.10    131
       Drug ED Visit Rate per 100k                             318.67     58.18    139.17     493.38    140
   White
       Population, in 100k                                      35.10     27.28      2.72     111.87    140
       Opioid ED Visit Rate per 100k                            65.98     28.06      3.94     115.12    103
       Heroin ED Visit Rate per 100k                            11.25     12.38      0.63      64.21     99
       Drug ED Visit Rate per 100k                             352.23     98.26      2.52     557.93    108
   Black
       Population, in 100k                                       6.99      8.95      0.05      31.37    140
       Opioid ED Visit Rate per 100k                            29.05     12.54     10.03      82.50     74
       Heroin ED Visit Rate per 100k                            12.37     17.58      0.48      60.70     46
       Drug ED Visit Rate per 100k                             264.87     62.22     87.78     522.99    101
   Hispanic
       Population, in 100k                                       6.43     10.65      0.07      46.48    140
       Opioid ED Visit Rate per 100k                            18.85     11.20      4.19      73.56     70
       Heroin ED Visit Rate per 100k                             6.95      7.20      1.32      70.13     37
       Drug ED Visit Rate per 100k                             161.30     67.82     18.45     610.70     93
County-Level Variables for Mortality Data
   % High School Graduates, 2010                                77.36      8.84      0.00      97.00   3135
   Population per sq. Mile, 2010                               215.51   1224.37      0.04   47038.61   3134
   % Non-White, 2010                                             0.21      0.20      0.00       0.97   3135
   Median Income, $1000s                                        43.14     10.75     20.58     119.08   3135
County-Level Variables for Emergency Department Data
   % High School Graduates, 2010                                73.18     10.17     49.20      93.10    247
   Population per sq. Mile, 2010                               364.23   1006.97      4.51   10192.12    247
   % Non-White, 2010                                             0.20      0.18      0.01       0.85    247
   Median Income, $1000s                                        45.75     15.06     19.83     108.23   1873
   Heroin Overdose ED Visits per 100k                            4.72     12.72      0.00     180.18   1873
   White Heroin Overdose ED Visits per 100k                      4.04     11.84      0.00     180.18   1828
   Black Heroin Overdose ED Visits per 100k                      0.38      1.95      0.00      31.07   1828
   Hispanic Heroin Overdose ED Visits per 100k                   0.25      1.13      0.00      24.78   1828
   Drug ED Visit Rate per 100k, Exluding Opioids               100.52     46.63      0.00     441.26   1873
   Drug ED Visit Rate per 100k, Exluding Opioids and Heroin     95.92     48.76    –67.95     441.26   1873
   Vomiting During Pregnancy ED Visits per 100k                 95.30     44.62      0.00     332.43   1873
   Open Head Wound ED Visits per 100k                          851.25    162.30    246.09    1954.58   1873
   Broken Leg ED Visits per 100k                               284.51     75.39    105.89     882.06   1873
   Broken Arm ED Visits per 100k                               583.51    126.05    209.62    1462.88   1873
   Broken Nose ED Visits per 100k                               63.51     16.62      6.92     242.00   1873


                                                         59
Table A3: The estimated effect of county-level unemployment on the rate of opioid/drug mortal-
ity and emergency department visits for our preferred specification with median income across
race/ethnicity.

                                                             (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)
                                                             All         White         Black        Hispanic

          Opioid Death Rate per 100k
            Unemployment Rate, [0-100]                      0.16***       0.19***      –0.15**        0.03
                                                           (0.05)        (0.05)        (0.07)        (0.03)
            Median Income, $1000s                          –0.04**       –0.08***      –0.02         –0.01
                                                           (0.02)        (0.02)        (0.04)        (0.01)
            Mean of Dependent Variable                      5.46          6.33          2.19          1.60
            Observations                                   50132         50132         49630         50090

          Drug Death Rate per 100k
            Unemployment Rate, [0-100]                      0.34***       0.42***      –0.09          0.11*
                                                           (0.07)        (0.08)        (0.09)        (0.06)
            Median Income, $1000s                          –0.04         –0.11***       0.08         –0.01
                                                           (0.04)        (0.04)        (0.06)        (0.02)
            Mean of Dependent Variable                      9.46         10.71          6.16          3.45
            Observations                                   50132         50132         49630         50090

          Opioid Overdose ED Visit Rate per 100k
            Unemployment Rate, [0-100]                      0.92***       0.90**        1.10***
                                                           (0.28)        (0.36)        (0.41)
            Median Income, $1000s                          –0.09         –0.05         –0.32***
                                                           (0.10)        (0.12)        (0.12)
            Mean of Dependent Variable                     16.91         18.92          7.18
            Observations                                   1873          1828           1828

          Drug Overdose ED Visit Rate per 100k
            Unemployment Rate, [0-100]                      1.25          0.98         –0.50
                                                           (1.19)        (1.27)        (1.88)
            Median Income, $1000s                           0.20         –0.07          1.17*
                                                           (0.37)        (0.38)        (0.70)
             Mean of Dependent Variable                    117.43        123.45        99.26
             Observations                                   1873          1828         1828
          County Fixed-Effects                               Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes
          Year Fixed-Effects                                 Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes
          County Specific Time Trends                        No            No           No            No
          State-by-Year Fixed-Effects                        Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes

          Note: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Robust standard errors clustered at the county level
          in parentheses. All specifications include county fixed-effects, year fixed-effects, and state-by-year
          fixed effects. Each regression is weighted by county population of group. Hispanic ED visits are
          omitted as the ED data do not contain a reliable indicator of Hispanic ethnicity.




                                                          60
Table A4: The estimated effect of state-level employment-to-population ratio on the rate of opi-
oid/drug mortality and emergency department.

                                                  All                       White                      Black                      Hispanic
                                           (1)           (2)        (3)              (4)        (5)             (6)        (7)               (8)
Opioid Death Rate per 100k
   Employment to Population Ratio        –0.09***       –0.12***   –0.21***     –0.18***       0.01        –0.02          0.02          –0.02
                                         (0.03)         (0.03)     (0.03)       (0.04)        (0.02)       (0.02)        (0.03)         (0.03)
   Mean of Dependent Variable             5.35           5.35       7.03            7.03       2.28            2.28       2.00           2.00
   Observations                           816            816        816             816        816             816        816            816
Drug Death Rate per 100k
   Employment to Population Ratio        –0.12***       –0.14***   –0.27***     –0.21***      –0.02             0.01     –0.02          –0.04
                                         (0.04)         (0.04)     (0.04)       (0.05)        (0.04)           (0.03)    (0.04)         (0.05)
   Mean of Dependent Variable            10.75          10.75      13.06            13.06      8.50            8.50       5.25           5.25
   Observations                           816            816        816              816       816             816        816            816
Opioid ED Visit Rate per 100k
   Employment to Population Ratio        –1.15***       –0.32      –1.64*       –1.58         –0.04        –1.11*
                                         (0.38)         (0.58)     (0.88)       (1.20)        (0.58)       (0.59)
   Mean of Dependent Variable            50.50          50.50      65.98            65.98     29.05            29.05
   Observations                           138            138        101              101       73               73
Drug ED Visit Rate per 100k
   Employment to Population Ratio        –0.06           1.38      –2.51             1.44     –6.40*       –1.05
                                         (1.38)         (1.55)     (3.41)           (4.68)    (3.80)       (3.64)
    Mean of Dependent Variable           318.67         318.67     352.22       352.22        264.87       264.87
    Observations                          139            139        106          106           100          100
State Fixed-Effects                       Yes            Yes        Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes            Yes               Yes
Year Fixed-Effects                        Yes            Yes        Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes            Yes               Yes
State Specific Time Trends                 No            Yes         No          Yes            No          Yes            No                Yes

 Note: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Robust standard errors clustered at the state level in parentheses. Each regression is weighted by total
 state population of group. Hispanic ED visits are omitted as the ED data do not contain a reliable indicator of Hispanic ethnicity.




                                                                          61
Table A5: The estimated effect of county-level unemployment on the rate of non-opioid and non-
heroin drug mortality and emergency department visits.

                                     (1)           (2)            (3)                (4)                    (5)
                                 All Drugs    Only Opioids    Only Heroin   All Excluding Opioids   All Excluding Both

Deaths per 100k
   Unemployment Rate, [0-100]       0.36***       0.19***        0.07***            0.17***                0.10***
                                   (0.07)        (0.05)         (0.02)             (0.04)                 (0.03)
   Mean of Dependent Variable      10.77          5.35           1.53               5.41                   4.17
   Observations                    50148         50148          50148              50148                  50148

ED Visits per 100k
   Unemployment Rate, [0-100]       1.19          0.95***       –0.68**             0.25                   0.94
                                   (1.20)        (0.28)         (0.31)             (1.12)                 (1.19)
   Mean of Dependent Variable      97.52         13.54           5.81              83.98                  78.28
   Observations                    1873          1873            1873              1873                   1873
County Fixed-Effects                Yes           Yes             Yes               Yes                    Yes
Year Fixed-Effects                  Yes           Yes             Yes               Yes                    Yes
County Specific Time Trends         No            No              No                No                     No
State-by-Year Fixed-Effects         Yes           Yes             Yes               Yes                    Yes

 Note: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Robust standard errors clustered at the county level in parentheses. Each
 regression is weighted by county population of group.




                                                         62
Table A6: The estimated effect of county-level unemployment on the rate of heroin mortality and
emergency department visits across multiple specifications.

                                                           (1)         (2)          (3)

            Heroin Death Rate per 100k
               Unemployment Rate, [0-100]                 0.01       –0.01         0.07***
                                                         (0.03)      (0.02)       (0.02)
               Mean of Dependent Variable                 1.53         1.53        1.53
               Observations                              50148        50148       50148

            Heroin Overdose ED Visit Rate per 100k
               Unemployment Rate, [0-100]                 0.37         1.08**     –0.68**
                                                         (0.38)       (0.47)      (0.31)
               Mean of Dependent Variable                 5.81        5.81         5.81
               Observations                               1873        1873         1873
            County Fixed-Effects                           Yes         Yes          Yes
            Year Fixed-Effects                             Yes         Yes          Yes
            County Specific Time Trends                    No          Yes          No
            State-by-Year Fixed-Effects                    No          No           Yes

             Note: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Robust standard errors clustered
             at the county level in parentheses. Each regression is weighted by total county
             population.




                                                  63
Table A7: The estimated effect of county-level unemployment on the white rate of opioid/drug
mortality and emergency department visits across multiple specificationsn.

                                                               (1)          (2)         (3)

            White Opioid Death Rate per 100k
              Unemployment Rate, [0-100]                       0.37***     0.23***     0.23***
                                                              (0.05)      (0.05)      (0.05)
              Mean of Dependent Variable                       7.03        7.03        7.03
              Observations                                    50148       50148       50148

            White Drug Death Rate per 100k
              Unemployment Rate, [0-100]                       0.51***     0.22***     0.48***
                                                              (0.07)      (0.06)      (0.08)
              Mean of Dependent Variable                      13.07       13.07       13.07
              Observations                                    50148       50148       50148

            White Opioid Overdose ED Visit Rate per 100k
              Unemployment Rate, [0-100]                       0.69**      1.43***     0.91**
                                                              (0.31)      (0.36)      (0.37)
              Mean of Dependent Variable                      17.18       17.18        17.18
              Observations                                    1828        1828         1828

            White Drug Overdose ED Visit Rate per 100k
              Unemployment Rate, [0-100]                       1.20        2.30*       1.01
                                                              (0.98)      (1.18)      (1.29)
               Mean of Dependent Variable                    109.05       109.05      109.05
               Observations                                   1828         1828        1828
            County Fixed-Effects                               Yes          Yes         Yes
            Year Fixed-Effects                                 Yes          Yes         Yes
            County Specific Time Trends                        No           Yes         No
            State-by-Year Fixed-Effects                        No           No          Yes

            Note: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Robust standard errors clustered at the
            county level in parentheses. Each regression is weighted by total white county popu-
            lation.




                                                   64
Table A8: The estimated effect of county-level unemployment on the black rate of opioid/drug
mortality and emergency department visits across multiple specifications.

                                                               (1)         (2)          (3)

            Black Opioid Death Rate per 100k
              Unemployment Rate, [0-100]                     –0.01         0.01       –0.14**
                                                             (0.04)       (0.05)      (0.07)
              Mean of Dependent Variable                      2.28         2.28        2.28
              Observations                                   49646        49646       49647

            Black Drug Death Rate per 100k
              Unemployment Rate, [0-100]                       0.08        0.05       –0.13
                                                              (0.10)      (0.08)      (0.10)
              Mean of Dependent Variable                      8.50         8.50        8.50
              Observations                                   49646        49646       49647

            Black Opioid Overdose ED Visit Rate per 100k
              Unemployment Rate, [0-100]                       0.33*       0.76**      1.25***
                                                              (0.18)      (0.31)      (0.45)
              Mean of Dependent Variable                      9.46        9.46         9.46
              Observations                                    1828        1828         1828

            Black Drug Overdose ED Visit Rate per 100k
              Unemployment Rate, [0-100]                     –1.12         0.20       –1.07
                                                             (1.49)       (1.31)      (1.97)
               Mean of Dependent Variable                     90.60       90.60        90.60
               Observations                                   1828        1828         1828
            County Fixed-Effects                               Yes         Yes          Yes
            Year Fixed-Effects                                 Yes         Yes          Yes
            County Specific Time Trends                        No          Yes          No
            State-by-Year Fixed-Effects                        No          No           Yes

            Note: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Robust standard errors clustered at the
            county level in parentheses. Each regression is weighted by total black county popu-
            lation.




                                                   65
Table A9: The estimated effect of county-level unemployment on the Hispanic rate of opioid/drug
mortality across multiple specifications.

                                                         (1)          (2)          (3)

             Hispanic Opioid Death Rate per 100k
               Unemployment Rate, [0-100]               0.03         0.08**       0.04
                                                       (0.04)       (0.03)       (0.03)
               Mean of Dependent Variable               2.00         2.00         2.00
               Observations                            50106        50106        50106

             Hispanic Drug Death Rate per 100k
               Unemployment Rate, [0-100]               0.03         0.08         0.11*
                                                       (0.07)       (0.06)       (0.06)
                Mean of Dependent Variable              5.25         5.25         5.25
                Observations                           50106        50106        50106
             County Fixed-Effects                       Yes          Yes          Yes
             Year Fixed-Effects                         Yes          Yes          Yes
             County Specific Time Trends                 No          Yes           No
             State-by-Year Fixed-Effects                 No           No          Yes

             Note: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Robust standard errors clus-
             tered at the county level in parentheses. Each regression is weighted by total
             Hispanic county population. Hispanic ED visits are omitted as the ED data
             do not contain a reliable indicator of Hispanic ethnicity.




                                                 66
Table A10: The estimated effect of county-level unemployment on the rate of opioid/drug mortality
and emergency department across decreasing/increasing unemployment rate relative to prior year.

                                                      (1)                   (2)                             (3)
                                                 Full Sample     Decreasing Unemployment         Increasing Unemployment

   Opioid Death Rate per 100k
     Unemployment Rate, [0-100]                      0.19***                 0.10                            0.25***
                                                    (0.05)                  (0.07)                          (0.05)
     Observations                                   50132                   24287                           23709

   Drug Death Rate per 100k
     Unemployment Rate, [0-100]                      0.36***                 0.22**                          0.43***
                                                    (0.07)                  (0.10)                          (0.08)
     Observations                                   50132                   24287                           23709

   Opioid Overdose ED Visit Rate per 100k
     Unemployment Rate, [1-100]                      0.95***                 1.21***                         0.97**
                                                    (0.28)                  (0.32)                          (0.38)
     Observations                                    1873                     874                             929

   Drug Overdose ED Visit Rate per 100k
     Unemployment Rate, [1-100]                      1.19                    2.04*                           0.88
                                                    (1.20)                  (1.23)                          (1.51)
      Observations                                   1873                     874                             929
   County Fixed-Effects                               Yes                     Yes                             Yes
   Year Fixed-Effects                                 Yes                     Yes                             Yes
   County Specific Time Trends                        No                      No                              No
   State-by-Year Fixed-Effects                        Yes                     Yes                             Yes

   Note: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Robust standard errors clustered at the county level in parentheses. Each regres-
   sion is weighted by total county population.




                                                               67
Table A11: The estimated effect of county-level unemployment on moratality rate from opioids,
baseline and accounting for variance in imputation procedure.

                                                      (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)
                                                      All           White          Black        Hispanic

     Baseline:
                                                      0.1889***      0.2350***    –0.1411**        0.0399
                                                     (0.0453)       (0.0516)      (0.0718)        (0.0289)

     Accounting for uncertainty in imputation:
                                                      0.1901***      0.2363***    –0.1397**        0.0414
                                                     (0.0460)       (0.0528)      (0.0735)        (0.0304)
     Observations                                    50132          50132          49630          50090
     County Fixed-Effects                             Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes
     Year Fixed-Effects                               Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes
     County Specific Time Trends                      No             No             No             No
     State-by-Year Fixed-Effects                      Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes

      Note: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Robust standard errors clustered at the county level in
      parentheses. Each regression is weighted by county population of group. The specification that ac-
      counts for imputation uncertainty is an average of 100 different specifications, each identical except
      using a different dataset. Each datasets is drawn from the imputed variables to capture the uncertainty
      in the measurement. Coefficients and standards errors are calculated using Rubin’s (1987) rules as out-
      lined in White et al. (2011). Coefficients and standard errors are reported to four decimal points so
      differences are salient.




                                                       68
Table A12: The estimated effect of county-level unemployment on the rate of emergency depart-
ment visits for each of the top ED categories.

                                                                     (1)         (2)          (3)

              Pharmaceutical Overdose ED Visit Rate per 100k
                 Unemployment Rate, [0-100]                         0.34         0.78        0.48
                                                                   (0.72)       (0.87)      (0.85)
                 Mean of Dependent Variable                         66.29       66.29        66.29
                 Observations                                       1873        1873         1873

              Benzo Overdose ED Visit Rate per 100k
                 Unemployment Rate, [0-100]                         0.52         0.85**      0.95**
                                                                   (0.32)       (0.39)      (0.37)
                 Mean of Dependent Variable                         18.84       18.84        18.84
                 Observations                                       1873        1873         1873

              Aro. Analgesic Overdose ED Visit Rate per 100k
                 Unemployment Rate, [0-100]                        –0.20*      –0.31**       0.02
                                                                   (0.11)      (0.14)       (0.17)
                 Mean of Dependent Variable                         9.87        9.87         9.87
                 Observations                                       1873        1873         1873

              Anti-depressant Overdose ED Visit Rate per 100k
                 Unemployment Rate, [0-100]                         0.17       –0.01        –0.03
                                                                   (0.19)      (0.10)       (0.23)
                 Mean of Dependent Variable                         3.83        3.83         3.83
                 Observations                                       1873        1873         1873

              Insulin Overdose ED Visit Rate per 100k
                 Unemployment Rate, [0-100]                        –0.04       –0.02        –0.02
                                                                   (0.06)      (0.06)       (0.08)
                 Mean of Dependent Variable                         3.54        3.54         3.54
                 Observations                                       1873        1873         1873

              Cocaine Overdose ED Visit Rate per 100k
                 Unemployment Rate, [0-100]                        –0.10       –0.11        –0.04
                                                                   (0.14)      (0.11)       (0.17)
                 Mean of Dependent Variable                         2.41        2.41         2.41
                 Observations                                       1873        1873         1873

              Anti-Psychotic Overdose ED Visit Rate per 100k
                 Unemployment Rate, [0-100]                        –0.08       –0.06        –0.01
                                                                   (0.06)      (0.08)       (0.09)
                 Mean of Dependent Variable                         4.05        4.05         4.05
                 Observations                                       1873        1873         1873
              County Fixed-Effects                                   Yes         Yes          Yes
              Year Fixed-Effects                                     Yes         Yes          Yes
              County Specific Time Trends                            No          Yes          No
              State-by-Year Fixed-Effects                            No          No           Yes

               Note: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Robust standard errors clustered at the
               county level in parentheses. Each regression is weighted by county population of group.



                                                        69
