NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE MACROGENOECONOMICS OF COMPARATIVE DEVELOPMENT
Quamrul H. Ashraf
Oded Galor
Working Paper 23199
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23199

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2017, Revised April 2018

We are grateful to Omer Moav, Ömer Özak, and especially the editor, Steven Durlauf, for helpful
comments. Greg Casey and Matthew Jang provided superlative research assistance. Ashraf
acknowledges research support from the NSF (SES 1338738), the Hellman Fellows Program, and
the Oakley Center for Humanities and Social Sciences at Williams College. Galor acknowledges
research support from the NSF (SES 1338426) and the Population Studies and Training Center
(PSTC) at Brown University. The PSTC receives core support from the Eunice Kennedy Shriver
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (5R24HD041020). We are
responsible for any errors. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Quamrul H. Ashraf and Oded Galor. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Macrogenoeconomics of Comparative Development
Quamrul H. Ashraf and Oded Galor
NBER Working Paper No. 23199
February 2017, Revised April 2018
JEL No. N10,N30,O11,Z10
ABSTRACT
The importance of evolutionary forces for comparative economic performance across societies
has been the focus of a vibrant literature, highlighting the roles played by the Neolithic
Revolution and the prehistoric “out of Africa” migration of anatomically modern humans in
generating worldwide variations in the composition of human traits. This essay provides an
overview of the literature on the macrogenoeconomics of comparative development, underscoring
the significance of evolutionary processes and of human population diversity in generating
differential paths of economic development across societies. Furthermore, it examines the
contribution of a recent hypothesis set forth by Nicholas Wade, regarding the evolutionary origins
of comparative development, to this important line of research.

Quamrul H. Ashraf
Williams College
Department of Economics
24 Hopkins Hall Drive
Williamstown, MA 01267
Quamrul.H.Ashraf@williams.edu
Oded Galor
Department of Economics
Brown University
Box B
Providence, RI 02912
and CEPR
and also NBER
oded_galor@brown.edu

1.

Introduction

The past two decades have witnessed the emergence of a large and influential body of research that has
focused on uncovering the roots of comparative economic development across regions, countries, and
ethnic groups. A significant portion of this line of inquiry has explored the influences of human evolution
and the composition of human traits on comparative economic development across societies, highlighting
the roles played by the Neolithic Revolution and the prehistoric “out of Africa” migration of anatomically
modern humans in shaping variations in the composition of human traits among populations around the
globe.
The exploration of the interaction between human evolution and the process of economic development
has centered around two fundamental lines of injury. The first avenue examines the effect of the
environment on the evolution of human traits as well as the contribution of this evolutionary process to
economic development in the long run. The central hypothesis in this research avenue suggests that in
the era following the Neolithic Revolution, Malthusian pressures acted as a key determinant of the size of
a population and conceivably shaped, via the forces of natural selection, its composition as well. Lineages
of individuals whose traits were complementary to the economic environment generated higher levels of
income and, thus, a larger number of surviving offspring. Consequently, the gradual increase in the
representation of these complementary traits in the population contributed to the process of
development, the pace of the transition from stagnation to growth, and comparative economic
development across societies. However, due to the egalitarian nature of hunter‐gatherer societies, the
forces of evolutionary selection within a society were largely muted prior to the Neolithic Revolution and
the emergence of the nuclear family.
Subjecting hypothetical evolutionary processes to the scrutiny of evolutionary growth models, this body
of research has identified several traits that may have been subjected to positive selection during the
Malthusian era due to their conduciveness to human capital formation and economic development. In
particular, these studies have highlighted the selection of innate preferences for quality rather than
quantity of offspring, resistance to infectious diseases, human body size, predisposition towards
entrepreneurial spirit, lactase persistence, conspicuous consumption, and time preference.
The second research avenue on the interaction between human evolution and the process of economic
development has explored the persistent effect of the prehistoric exodus of Homo sapiens from Africa on
the composition of traits and comparative economic development across societies from the dawn of
civilization to the contemporary era. In particular, this line of research suggests that migratory distances
from the cradle of mankind in East Africa to indigenous settlements across the globe diminished their
levels of interpersonal diversity and, thereby, generated a persistent hump‐shaped influence on
development outcomes, reflecting a fundamental trade‐off between beneficial and detrimental effects of
diversity on productivity at the societal level. Although diversity may reduce interpersonal trust,
cooperation, and social cohesiveness, and can thus adversely affect the productivity of society,
complementarity across diverse productive traits may stimulate innovations and gains from specialization,
and can thereby contribute to society’s economic performance. Therefore, in the presence of diminishing
marginal effects of diversity and homogeneity on productivity, the aggregate economic performance of
2

ethnic groups, countries, or regions that are characterized by intermediate levels of diversity would be
expected to be higher than that associated with excessively homogenous or heterogeneous societies.
Consistent with each of the fundamental building blocks of this hypothesis, interpersonal diversity, as
proxied by diversity in genetic markers, appears to have contributed to ethnic and cultural heterogeneity,
diminished interpersonal trust, and the emergence of civil conflicts. Moreover, evidence suggests that
interpersonal diversity may foster innovative activity, occupational heterogeneity, and gains from
specialization. Further, interpersonal diversity may have shaped the nature of both precolonial and
contemporary political institutions. In particular, although diversity may have triggered the development
of institutions for mitigating the adverse influence of population diversity on social cohesion, the
contribution of diversity to economic inequality and class stratification may have ultimately led to the
formation and persistence of extractive and autocratic institutions.
Recently, in A Troublesome Inheritance: Genes, Race and Human History, Nicholas Wade advances an
intriguing hypothesis regarding the evolutionary origins of comparative economic development. Citing a
wide range of evidence from evolutionary biology on the nature and pace of recent genetic adaptions in
human populations, as well as evidence from evolutionary psychology and behavioral genetics on the
association between somatic traits and social behaviors at the individual level, Wade argues that variation
in selective pressures across regions of the globe has given rise to enduring differences in social behaviors
across groups, thereby differentially shaping the nature of their institutions and, thus, their level of
economic development. In particular, his hypothesis of comparative development suggests that in regions
of the world that were historically characterized by higher population density and early statehood,
favorable genetic traits (e.g., nonviolence, cooperation, and trust) that were initially concentrated among
the rich elites gained an evolutionary advantage, proliferated over time, and contributed to the
emergence of growth‐enhancing institutions and a superior development trajectory.
This essay surveys the existing literature on the role of human evolutionary processes in comparative
economic development and examines the contribution of Wade’s hypothesis to this prominent body of
research. Section 2 summarizes pertinent concepts and evidence from the field of human population
genetics, highlighting differential evolutionary process across the globe. Section 3 provides an overview
of the literature on the macrogenoeconomics of comparative development, underscoring the roles played
by evolutionary processes and human diversity in generating differential development trajectories across
societies.1 Section 4 summarizes Wade’s thesis and provides a conceptual critique of his hypothesized
1

The current review focuses on research that has been exploring the interaction of human evolution and the process
of development at the societal level as well as the influence of the macrogenetic structure of human populations on
comparative economic development across societies. It may be noted, however, that there exists a distinct but
tangentially related literature that has been employing “genome‐wide association studies” to explore the potential
links between molecular genetics and either individual social behaviors in experimental settings or individual
economic outcomes in observational data, including dispositions of fairness in ultimatum games (Wallace et al.
2007), cooperative behavior in trust games (Cesarini et al. 2008), risk preferences and giving behavior in dictator
games (Cesarini et al. 2009), risk‐taking in observed financial decisions (Cesarini et al. 2010), and observed levels of
educational attainment (Rietveld et al. 2013; Okbay et al. 2016) and fertility behavior (Barban et al. 2016). The reader
is referred to Beauchamp et al. (2011), Sacerdote (2011), Benjamin et al. (2012), and Conley and Fletcher (2017) for
relevant surveys of this line of inquiry.

3

evolutionary roots of comparative economic development. Section 5 conducts a discriminatory empirical
examination of a fundamental prediction of the Wade’s hypothesis versus alternative evolutionary
theories of comparative development. Section 6 concludes.

2.

Pertinent Concepts and Evidence from the Field of Human Population Genetics

2.1. Differential Evolutionary Processes in Human Societies since the Neolithic Revolution
Existing evidence suggests that the composition of genetic traits within a population has evolved rather
swiftly in the course of human history and that differential evolutionary processes have transpired in
human populations since the onset of the Neolithic Revolution. 2 The transition from hunting and
gathering to sedentary agriculture apparently triggered selection at genetic loci associated with skin
pigmentation, resistance to infectious diseases, height, and diet. The differential onset of the Neolithic
transition across regions has therefore contributed to the emergence of variations across populations in
their composition of genetic traits.
Lactase persistence emerged among European and Near Eastern populations due to their early
domestication of dairy‐producing animals during the Neolithic Revolution, whereas in regions that
experienced a delayed exposure to these domesticates, a larger fraction of the contemporary adult
population continues to experience lactose intolerance (Bersaglieri et al. 2004; Burger et al. 2007; Tishkoff
et al. 2007). Similarly, genetic immunity to malaria provided by the sickle cell trait is highly prevalent
among the descendants of African populations whose early engagement in agriculture provided fertile
breeding grounds for mosquitoes and, thus, elevated the incidence of malaria, whereas this trait is largely
absent among descendants of populations that did not practice early agriculture (Livingstone 1958;
Wiesenfeld 1967; Tishkoff et al. 2001).
Moreover, evidence based on comparing the genomes of ancient West Eurasians, dated to have lived
between 6500 BCE and 300 BCE, with the genomes of present‐day Europeans indicates that adaptive
immunity was apparently favored by natural selection due to the rise in population density and the
associated increase in the prevalence of infectious diseases over the course of the Neolithic Revolution.
In addition, lactase persistence, reduced blood plasma triglyceride levels, and regulators of vitamin D
levels were selected to provide protection against the ergothioneine deficiency associated with the shift
from hunter‐gatherer to agricultural diets. Furthermore, lighter skin pigmentation (and to a lesser extent,
lighter eye color) was subject to strong positive selection in some regions of the world, and early Neolithic
migrants to southern Europe were under selection pressures that favored decreased height, while

2

Voight et al. (2006) detected about 700 regions of the human genome in which genetic loci appear to have been
reshaped by natural selection within the past 5,000 to 15,000 years. Moreover, Mekel‐Bobrov et al. (2005) reports
that a variant of the ASPM gene (a specific regulator of brain size in the lineage leading to Homo sapiens) arose in
humans merely about 5,800 years ago and has since swept into high frequency under strong positive selection.
Additional evidence on recent human adaptive evolution is provided by Sabeti et al. (2006), Hawks et al. (2007), and
Nielsen et al. (2007).

4

selection of increased height operated on the steppe populations that ultimately migrated to northern
Europe (Mathieson et al. 2015).3

2.2. The “Out of Africa” Origins of Worldwide Variations in Human Population Diversity
The composition of individual traits within a population has also evolved in the course of the exodus of
anatomically modern human from Africa. According to the widely accepted “out of Africa” hypothesis of
human origins, the human species, having evolved to its anatomically modern form in East Africa nearly
200,000 years ago, embarked on populating the entire globe in a stepwise migration process commencing
90,000–60,000 BP. The world map in Figure 1 depicts the approximate migration routes that characterized
this prehistoric demic diffusion process.
[INSERT FIGURE 1 HERE]
The “out of Africa” migration was inherently associated with a reduction in the extent of genetic diversity
in populations that settled at greater migratory distances from Africa. In particular, as follows from a serial
founder effect, since the spatial diffusion of humans to the rest of the world occurred in a series of discrete
steps, where in each step a subgroup of individuals left their parental colony to establish a new settlement
farther away, carrying with them only a subset of the traits of their parental colony, the extent of genetic
diversity observed within a geographically indigenous contemporary ethnic group decreases with distance
along ancient migratory paths from East Africa (e.g., Harpending and Rogers 2000; Ramachandran et al.
2005; Prugnolle, Manica, and Balloux 2005; Ashraf and Galor 2013a).
Reflecting this chain of ancient population bottlenecks originating in East Africa, the scatter plot in Figure
2 depicts the negative influence of migratory distance from the cradle of mankind on intrapopulation
genetic diversity in a sample comprising 53 globally representative ethnic groups from the HGDP‐CEPH
Human Genome Diversity Cell Line Panel (Cann et al. 2002). According to population geneticists, these
groups have not only been indigenous to their current geographical locations but have also been largely
isolated from genetic flows from other ethnic groups.
[INSERT FIGURE 2 HERE]
In order to measure the extent of diversity in genetic material across individuals in a given population
(e.g., an ethnic group), population geneticists employ an index known as expected heterozygosity, which
captures the probability that two individuals, selected at random from the relevant population, are
genetically different from one another with respect to a given spectrum of genetic traits. In particular, a
gene‐specific expected heterozygosity index (i.e., the probability that two randomly selected individuals
differ with respect to the genetic trait in question) is first constructed, based on the proportional
representations of different alleles of this trait in the population, and upon measuring heterozygosity for
a large number of genes or DNA loci, this information is averaged across loci to yield the overall expected
heterozygosity for the relevant population.

3

Independently of the Neolithic Revolution, natural selection led to the emergence of hemoglobin‐regulating high‐
altitude adaptations among Tibetans, allowing carriers to survive in low‐oxygen conditions (Simonson et al. 2010).

5

The measure of expected heterozygosity for geographically indigenous ethnic groups is constructed by
population geneticists using data on allelic frequencies for a particular class of DNA loci known as
microsatellites. These DNA loci reside in non‐protein‐coding regions of the human genome (i.e., regions
that do not directly result in phenotypic expression) and are therefore viewed as selectively neutral. For
the purposes of examining the influence of interpersonal diversity on socioeconomic outcomes across
populations, this measure possesses a key advantage of not being tainted by any unobserved
heterogeneity in the forces of natural selection that may have operated on these populations since their
exodus from Africa; forces that could have obscured the relationship predicted by the ancient serial
founder effect. In addition, differential selection and its underlying forces could have also influenced
socioeconomic outcomes, thus making it difficult to identify the causal socioeconomic influence of
interpersonal diversity.
Nevertheless, to be conceptually meaningful for socioeconomic outcomes, the measure of neutral genetic
diversity ought to serve as a valid proxy for diversity in phenotypically and behaviorally expressed traits.
Reassuringly, as argued by Ashraf and Galor (2013a), the observed socioeconomic influence of expected
heterozygosity in microsatellites reflects the positive relationship between diversity in microsatellites and
intrapopulation heterogeneity in observable individual traits. This latent relationship can be inferred from
mounting evidence in the fields of physical and cognitive anthropology on the existence of an ancient
serial founder effect originating in East Africa on the observed worldwide patterns in various forms of
intragroup morphological and cognitive diversity (Henn, Cavalli‐Sforza, and Feldman 2012), including
interpersonal diversity in skeletal features pertaining to cranial characteristics (Manica et al. 2007; von
Cramon‐Taubadel and Lycett 2008; Betti et al. 2009), dental attributes (Hanihara 2008), and pelvic traits
(Betti et al. 2013), as well as intralingual phonemic diversity (Atkinson 2011).4 Importantly, in light of gene‐
culture coevolution and transgenerational epigenetic inheritance, the socioeconomic influence of genetic
diversity may be interpreted as reflecting the impact of interpersonal diversity in traits rooted in both
“nature” and “nurture” as well as the interaction between the two.5
In addition to giving rise to the worldwide variation in interpersonal diversity within human societies, the
prehistoric “out of Africa” dispersal also imparted a deep and long‐lasting influence on the extent of
genetic differentiation between societies, as measured by population geneticists using an index called FST
genetic distance. For any two populations, this index captures the extent of their combined genetic
diversity that is unexplained by the population‐weighted average of their respective expected
heterozygosities. Following the splitting up of populations from one another during the “out of Africa”
migration process, this residual genetic variation between populations arose from (i) random mutations
that caused genetic drift within each population over time; and (ii) heterogeneity in environmentally
driven selective pressures across their different eventual habitations. In particular, since migratory
4

Moreover, a serial founder effect associated with the initial expansion of humans across Polynesian islands has
been shown to exist in the context of intrapopulation diversity in functional markers pertaining to material culture
(Rogers, Feldman, and Ehrlich 2009).
5
For instance, introducing the concept of “genetic nurture,” Kong et al. (2018) find that parental genotype
associated with the educational attainment of parents in turn affects the educational attainment of children even
when the latter do not carry the relevant allelic variants, thus suggesting the intergenerational propagation of traits
that may initially be rooted in “nature” through the transmission mechanism of “nurture.”

6

distance between a pair of populations partly reflects the length of time elapsed since they diverged from
their common ancestral population, and because it also reduces the likelihood that they would have
subsequently come into contact with one another, a direct implication of the “out of Africa” hypothesis is
that pairwise FST genetic distance increases with the pairwise migratory distance between populations.
Using a measure of FST genetic distance based on selectively neutral genetic markers (i.e., distance that
only captures genetic drift due to random mutations), the scatter plot in Figure 3 depicts the
aforementioned relationship arising from “isolation by distance” across all pairs of 53 ethnic groups from
the HGDP‐CEPH Human Genome Diversity Cell Line Panel.
[INSERT FIGURE 3 HERE]

3.

Evolution, Diversity, and Comparative Development

3.1. Human Evolution and Long‐Run Economic Growth
The impact of the economic environment on the evolution of human traits and the contribution of this
evolutionary process to long‐run economic development has been the subject of an intensive research
program over the past two decades. The fundamental hypothesis in this body of research, originating in
Galor and Moav (2002), suggests that in the era following the Neolithic Revolution, Malthusian pressures
not only acted as a key determinant of the size of a population but conceivably shaped, via the forces of
natural selection, its composition as well. Lineages of individuals whose traits were complementary to the
economic environment may have generated higher levels of income and, thus, a larger number of
surviving offspring. Consequently, the gradual increase in the representation of these traits in the
population over time may have contributed to the process of development, the pace of the transition
from stagnation to growth, and comparative economic development across societies.
In line with the evidence discussed in Section 2.1, regarding human evolutionary adaptations since the
onset of the Neolithic Revolution, this research additionally suggests that due to the egalitarian nature of
hunter‐gatherer societies, the forces of evolutionary selection within a society were largely muted prior
to the adoption of farming and the emergence of the nuclear family. The transition to sedentary
agriculture and the emergence of property rights, however, may have subsequently reinforced the
association between parental income and reproductive success and, thus, amplified the pace of these
evolutionary processes (Galor and Moav 2002).
Subjecting hypothetical evolutionary processes to the scrutiny of evolutionary growth models, this body
of research has identified several traits that may have been subjected to positive selection during the
Malthusian era due to their conduciveness to human capital formation and economic development. In
particular, these studies have highlighted the selection of innate preferences for quality rather than
quantity of offspring (Galor and Moav 2002), resistance to infectious diseases (Galor and Moav 2007),
human body size (Lagerlöf 2007), predisposition towards entrepreneurial spirit (Galor and Michalopoulos

7

2012), lactase persistence (Cook 2014), conspicuous consumption (Collins, Baer, and Weber 2015), and
time preference (Galor and Özak 2016).6
In particular, Galor and Moav (2002) have advanced the hypothesis that during the Malthusian epoch,
natural selection may have brought about a gradual increase in the prevalence of traits associated with
predispositions towards the quality rather than quantity of offspring. The positive influence of this
evolutionary process on investment in human capital may have stimulated technological progress and
contributed to the reinforcing interaction between human‐capital investment and technological progress
that ultimately triggered the demographic transition and brought about a state of sustained economic
growth. The quantitative analysis of Collins, Baer, and Weber (2014) corroborates this hypothesis.
An empirical test of the hypothesis advanced by Galor and Moav (2002) has recently been conducted by
Galor and Klemp (2014). Using an extensive data set of genealogical records for nearly half a million
individuals in Quebec between the 16th and 18th centuries, their study suggests that moderate fecundity,
and thus predisposition towards investment in child quality, was conducive for long‐run reproductive
success, reflecting the negative influence of higher fecundity on the survivability, marital age, and
education of each offspring. Interestingly, the conditions that were faced by the founder population of
Quebec during this time period of high fertility may have resembled the environment that anatomically
modern humans confronted during their migration from Africa, as they settled new territories where the
carrying capacity of the environment was an order of magnitude greater than the size of the founder
population. Thus, the findings suggest that during the high‐fertility regime of the Malthusian epoch, in
which evolutionary forces could have had a significant impact on the composition of the population (e.g.,
during the Neolithic transition and the formation of sedentary agricultural communities), natural selection
favored individuals with a larger predisposition towards child quality, contributing to human capital
formation, the onset of the demographic transition, and the evolution of societies from an epoch of
stagnation to sustained economic growth.7
The evolutionary origins of worldwide variations in the resistance to infectious diseases, as well as their
implications for comparative development, have been examined by Galor and Moav (2007). This research
hypothesizes and provides empirical evidence that the socioeconomic transformations associated with
the Neolithic Revolution triggered an evolutionary process that imparted positive selective pressures on
the resistance to infectious diseases. Consequently, heterogeneity across societies in their length of
exposure to this evolutionary process, as captured by their differential timing of the transition to
sedentary agriculture, may have significantly shaped the contemporary global distribution of human

6

It may be noted that the interaction between human evolution and the process of development, as emphasized by
this literature, may capture both cultural and genetic propagation mechanisms for the intergenerational
transmission of individual traits (Weibull and Salomonsson 2006; Bisin and Verdier 2011; Bowles and Gintis 2011;
Robson and Samuelson 2011; Doepke and Zilibotti 2014).
7
While Galor and Klemp (2014) uncover evidence in line with Galor and Moav’s (2002) theoretical predictions for
the pre‐demographic‐transition Malthusian epoch, the findings of Kong et al. (2017) are consistent with their
predictions for the post‐demographic‐transition era. Specifically, based on data for Icelandic individuals born
between 1910 and 1990, Kong et al. (2017) uncover evidence that the lower fertility linked with higher investment
in child quality has led to the negative selection of genomic variants associated with educational attainment.

8

longevity. In a related paper, Cook (2015) further links this evolutionary process to the degree of
intrapopulation genetic diversity in the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) system.
Galor and Michalopoulos (2012) have explored the coevolution of entrepreneurial spirit and the process
of long‐run economic development. Their analysis suggests that Darwinian selection of entrepreneurial
traits may have played a significant role in the process of economic development and influenced the
dynamics of inequality both within and across societies. Specifically, they argue that entrepreneurial spirit
evolved nonmonotonically over the course of human history. In early stages of development, risk‐tolerant
growth‐promoting traits may have possessed an evolutionary advantage, and their increased
representation in the population over time accelerated the pace of technological progress and, thereby,
the process of economic development. In mature stages of development, however, risk‐averse traits may
have gained an evolutionary advantage, diminishing the growth potential of advanced economies and
contributing to convergence in economic growth across countries.
The coevolution of subsistence consumption, the ability to engage in efficient and diversified food
procurement strategies, and the process of development has also been examined by this line of research.
Specifically, Lagerlöf (2007) has argued that resource depletion associated with technological progress
and rising population density during the Malthusian epoch may have triggered a shift in reproductive
advantage from large to small body sizes, thereby generating an endogenous reversal of the long‐run time
trend in human body mass. In addition, Cook (2014) has provided empirical evidence documenting that
heterogeneity across regions in the contemporary prevalence of the lactase persistence trait is positively
associated with differences in the level of precolonial economic development, presumably reflecting the
reproductive success and the productivity‐enhancing benefits associated with this post‐Neolithic
adaptation that confers the ability of digest milk into adulthood.8 Further, Collins, Baer, and Weber (2015)
have argued that female mating preferences may have increased the reproductive success of males
predisposed to engage in conspicuous consumption in order to credibly signal their quality, and because
conspicuous consumption is funded through increased participation in the labor force, the increase in the
prevalence of signaling males in the population may have given rise to an increase in economic activity
that contributed to long‐run economic growth.
Finally, Galor and Özak (2016) have explored the evolutionary origins of the contemporary distribution of
time preference across regions. They advance the hypothesis and provide empirical evidence that
geographical variation in the natural return to agricultural investment may have had a persistent effect
on the distribution of time preference across societies. In particular, exploiting a natural experiment
associated with the expansion of suitable crops for cultivation in the course of the Columbian Exchange,
these authors find that preindustrial agro‐climatic characteristics that were conducive to higher returns
from agricultural investment may have triggered selection and learning processes that have had a
persistent positive effect on the prevalence of long‐term orientation.

8

The long‐run codetermination of human physiology and economic development is explored further by Dalgaard
and Strulik (2015, 2016).

9

In contrast to the literature on the interaction between human evolution and the process of development
that emphasizes the “direct effects” of the composition of human traits in society on economic outcomes,
a complementary line of research, originating in Spolaore and Wacziarg (2009), has exploited human
evolutionary data to empirically examine the “barrier effects” of the extent of cultural and biological
divergence between societies on their relative ability to adopt technological and institutional innovations
from the global frontier and, thus, on the diffusion of economic development. Notably, in these
contributions (surveyed in Spolaore and Wacziarg 2014), the extent of divergence between societies is
proxied by their pairwise or dyadic FST genetic distance in genetic markers that are mostly selectively
neutral. Hence, this measure predominantly captures the time elapsed since two societies diverged from
a common ancestral population and, therefore, the time over which intersocietal cultural and biological
differences could have accumulated due to the forces of cultural and genetic drift, differential selection,
and divergent gene‐culture coevolution. In line with the “barrier effects” arising from cultural and
biological divergence, this area of inquiry has established the reduced‐form contribution of pairwise FST
genetic distance between societies to dyadic differences in income per capita, technology adoption, and
institutional quality, amongst other outcomes.9

3.2. Interpersonal Diversity and Comparative Development across Societies
The importance of interpersonal diversity within populations has been the focus of a recent but vibrant
research program in the academic literature on the deep roots of comparative development, originating
in Ashraf and Galor (2013a). This research has advanced the hypothesis that greater migratory distances
from the cradle of mankind in East Africa to indigenous settlements across the globe reduced their levels
of interpersonal diversity and, thereby, generated a persistent hump‐shaped influence on development
outcomes, reflecting the trade‐off between beneficial and detrimental effects of diversity on productivity
at the societal level. Diversity may have enhanced economic development by widening the spectrum of
individual skills, abilities, and cognitive approaches, which may have fostered innovative activity,
stimulated specialization, and facilitated more rapid adaptation to changing technological environments.
Conversely, by widening the spectrum of individual values, beliefs, preferences, and predispositions in
social interactions, diversity may have reduced trust and social cohesion, generated inefficiencies in the
provision of public goods, hampered economic coordination, and, therefore, adversely affected economic
performance.
If the social benefits and costs of diversity are diminishing at the margin, diversity would be expected to
confer a hump‐shaped effect on economic development. Thus, the aggregate economic performance of
ethnic groups, countries, or regions that are characterized by intermediate levels of diversity is expected
to be higher than that associated with excessively homogenous or heterogeneous societies.
Exploiting the data on genetic diversity discussed in Section 2.2 as a proxy measure of interpersonal
diversity, Ashraf and Galor (2013a) empirically examine their prediction regarding the trade‐off between
9

The study by Becker, Enke, and Falk (2018) is another example of the application of pairwise FST genetic distance as
a measure of the temporal divergence between societies. Specifically, the authors uncover evidence linking this
measure with dyadic intersocietal differences in economic preferences, particularly risk aversion and the prosocial
traits of altruism, positive reciprocity, and trust.

10

the beneficial and detrimental effects of the degree of diversity on productivity at the societal level.
Consistent with their hypothesis, they find that interpersonal diversity, as determined predominantly by
the serial founder effect associated with the prehistoric “out of Africa” migration process, does indeed
confer a significant hump‐shaped influence on income per capita, explaining 16 percent of the worldwide
cross‐country variation in the standard of living in the year 2000.
Although Ashraf and Galor’s main focus is on contemporary comparative development, they confirm the
hump‐shaped influence of diversity on economic development in both historical and contemporary time
periods, demonstrating that diversity within societies has shaped their comparative development since
well before the advent of the Industrial Revolution. In the preindustrial era, comparative development
was characterized by Malthusian forces – namely, gains in productivity at the societal level were
channeled primarily towards population growth rather than growth in income per capita. During this era,
more developed societies were therefore characterized by higher population density, rather than a higher
standard of living (Ashraf and Galor 2011). Thus, Ashraf and Galor’s historical analysis of the influence of
interpersonal diversity on comparative development focuses on explaining the variation across
preindustrial societies in population density in the year 1500.
To overcome sample limitations and potential concerns about reverse causality associated with the use
of observed genetic diversity, the authors exploit the strong explanatory power of migratory distance from
East Africa for the worldwide variation in observed genetic diversity across ethnic groups in the HGDP‐
CEPH sample in order to generate a measure of predicted interpersonal diversity for all societies around
the world, based on their respective geographical locations in the year 1500. Importantly, prior to the
discovery of the New World and the great intercontinental migrations of the colonial era, the geographical
locations of historical societies largely reflected the locations to which their ancestral populations had
arrived at the end of their prehistoric “out of Africa” migration from the cradle of mankind, and as such,
the diversity of a precolonial society was presumably determined overwhelmingly by the ancient serial
founder effect originating in East Africa.
As depicted by the scatter plot in Panel A of Figure 4, employing the measure of predicted diversity, the
authors document a hump‐shaped influence of diversity on productivity in the year 1500, as captured by
population density, in a sample of observations spanning the entire globe. Notably, the depicted
relationship accounts for the potentially confounding effects due to heterogeneity across societies in the
timing of the Neolithic Revolution and in various geographical factors relevant for their historical
development, as well as the confounding effects arising from unobserved cross‐continental differences.
This finding is robust to a large number of sensitivity checks, including “placebo tests” showing that a
similar hump‐shaped pattern does not exist when employing either aerial distance from East Africa or
migratory distances from other geographical locations. In addition, as depicted by the scatter plot in Panel
B of Figure 4, the finding also holds when urbanization rate in the year 1500 is employed as an alternative
measure of comparative development across preindustrial societies.
[INSERT FIGURE 4 HERE]

11

Ashraf and Galor’s analysis of contemporary comparative development exploits data on the ethnic
compositions of modern national populations, which reflect the great intercontinental and interregional
migrations over the past half millennium. Specifically, it incorporates this information to construct a
country‐level measure of contemporary population diversity that takes into account not only the expected
heterozygosity of each ethnic group in a national population but also the pairwise genetic distances
amongst these constituent ethnic groups.10 Applying their measure of contemporary population diversity,
the authors find a significant hump‐shaped influence of diversity on income per capita in the year 2000.
This relationship, depicted by the scatter plot in Panel A of Figure 5, accounts for the potentially
confounding effects arising from cross‐country heterogeneity in the timing of the Neolithic Revolution,
various geographical, cultural, and institutional correlates of contemporary economic development, and
unobserved continent‐specific characteristics. The relationship is additionally robust to controlling for
population density in the year 1500, indicating that the hump‐shaped influence of diversity does not
merely reflect long‐run persistence in economic development. Moreover, it continues to hold when
limiting the sample to countries in which the overwhelming majority of the population has remained
geographically native since the precolonial era, thus alleviating concerns regarding the endogeneity of
international population flows over the past five hundred years. Further, the level of diversity most
conducive to economic development is found to be higher in the contemporary period relative to the
preindustrial era, consistently with the underlying premise that the benefits of diversity should be more
pronounced in an increasingly demanding technological environment, while the costs of diversity can be
mitigated by modern education systems that promote social cohesiveness.
[INSERT FIGURE 5 HERE]
Confronting the possibility that income per capita in the modern world could be noisily measured,
especially for less‐developed economies, Ashraf, Galor, and Klemp (2014) find that the hump‐shaped
influence of diversity on contemporary comparative development additionally holds when relative
prosperity is measured by the cross‐country variation in per‐capita adjusted nighttime luminosity, as
observed by satellites from outer space. These findings lend further credence to the hypothesis that
diversity may account for a significant portion of the worldwide variation in contemporary living
standards.
Moreover, Ashraf, Galor, and Klemp (2015) have empirically examined the influence of diversity on
productivity at the ethnic group level, while accounting for the potentially confounding effects arising
from observed heterogeneity in various ethnicity‐specific geographical, cultural, and institutional factors,
as well as unobserved heterogeneity in country‐specific characteristics. This research finds that observed
diversity in a worldwide sample of 230 ethnic groups (Pemberton, DeGiorgio, and Rosenberg 2013), as
well as predicted diversity (based on migratory distance from East Africa) in a global sample of 1,331
ethnic groups, confers a significant hump‐shaped influence on economic prosperity, suggesting that the
variation in interpersonal diversity across ethnic homelands has contributed to variations in economic
development across ethnic groups and regions at the subnational level. The hump‐shaped influence of
10

Additional details regarding the construction of this measure of contemporary population diversity are provided
in the online appendix of Ashraf and Galor (2013a).

12

observed diversity on productivity at the ethnic group level, as reflected by the per‐capita adjusted
nighttime luminosity of an ethnic homeland, is depicted by the scatter plot presented in Panel B of Figure
5.
This analysis at the ethnic group level provides the first‐best setting for confirming the robustness of the
main prediction of Ashraf and Galor’s hypothesis to using Pemberton, DeGiorgio, and Rosenberg’s (2013)
data on observed diversity in the extended sample of ethnic groups. Nevertheless, the results for the
influence of interpersonal diversity on comparative development in both precolonial and modern periods
are robust in a second‐best country‐level setting. In particular, following Ashraf and Galor’s (2013a)
methodology, one can generate measures of predicted diversity for a globally representative sample of
countries, based on their respective migratory distances from East Africa. Since the coefficients of the
estimated relationship between migratory distance and observed diversity are virtually identical in the
HGDP‐CEPH sample versus the extended sample of ethnic groups, the hump‐shaped influence of
predicted diversity on both historical and contemporary cross‐country comparative development remains
unaffected.11
Finally, it has also been shown that migratory distance from the cradle of mankind may have imparted a
reduced‐form hump‐shaped influence on comparative economic development (Ashraf and Galor 2013a).
Although the reduced‐form influence of migratory distance from East Africa appears to operate through
its impact on interpersonal diversity as observed in the HGDP‐CEPH sample, it is plausible that migratory
distance per se has had direct effects on economic development, independently of its influence through
interpersonal diversity, potentially reflecting the self‐selection of individuals into migration and
differential evolutionary processes that may have taken place in the course of the demic expansion of
anatomically modern humans from Africa.

11

A third‐best approach would be to conduct a preliminary (noninferential) exploration of the association between
observed diversity and economic prosperity at the country level. This is the approach taken by Rosenberg and Kang
(2015), who argue that the hump‐shaped pattern between observed diversity and historical population density is
statistically insignificant in a 39‐country sample, constructed by averaging expected heterozygosity across the subset
of ethnic groups that are observed within each country. However, their attempt to use this approach to test for the
hump‐shaped influence of interpersonal diversity on economic prosperity is fundamentally flawed for two major
reasons. First, because the subset of only observed ethnic groups in a country is not necessarily representative of
the country’s entire population, and since the ethnic groups from their extended sample span only 39 (globally
nonrepresentative) countries, their study is severely marred by sample selection bias at the country level.
Specifically, the actual presence of a hump‐shaped cross‐country association between observed diversity and
economic prosperity cannot be confirmed or rejected based on a nonrepresentative sample of country populations.
Second, observed diversity may reflect past socioeconomic outcomes such as intraregional social conflicts and
migrations that are themselves driven by past economic prosperity. Thus, Rosenberg and Kang’s explorative analysis
is afflicted by issues of reverse causality and omitted variables that serve to mask the existence of a hump‐shaped
relationship between diversity and economic prosperity. Indeed, even in the context of their nonrepresentative
sample of country populations, Ashraf, Galor, and Klemp (2018) have found that a highly significant hump‐shaped
association emerges between observed diversity and historical population density once a sufficient set of potential
geographical confounders is accounted for. Moreover, as discussed in the main text and depicted in Panel B of Figure
5, conditional on employing a valid statistical methodology, the main prediction of Ashraf and Galor’s hypothesis is
fully robust to exploiting genetic data from the extended sample of ethnic groups.

13

Mechanisms: The reduced‐form hump‐shaped impact of diversity on productivity suggests several
potential mechanisms through which diversity can influence economic performance, reflecting various
elements of the trade‐off between the social costs and benefits of diversity. Ashraf and Galor (2013a)
furnish cross‐country empirical evidence for two such mechanisms. Specifically, their analysis suggests
that contemporary population diversity imparts (i) a positive influence on innovative activity (as reflected
by the average annual number of scientific articles per capita in the 1981–2000 time period); and (ii) a
negative influence on the degree of social cohesion (as reflected by the prevalence of interpersonal trust
in survey data on individual values, collected over the 1981–2008 time period). These relationships
between diversity, on the one hand, and either innovative activity or the prevalence of trust, on the other,
are depicted by the scatter plots in Panels A and B of Figure 6.
[INSERT FIGURE 6 HERE]
Further evidence on some of the mechanisms through which diversity can affect economic prosperity is
provided by several other papers in this research program. Bearing in mind that ethnic diversity has been
shown to be associated with various dimensions of economic underperformance at the national level (e.g.,
Easterly and Levine 1997; Alesina et al. 2003; Alesina and La Ferrara 2005), the evidence uncovered by
Ashraf and Galor (2013b) suggests that prehistorically determined interpersonal diversity could be an
underlying cause of different manifestations of the ethnolinguistic fragmentation of national populations.
Specifically, their hypothesis suggests that following the “out of Africa” migration, the initial endowment
of population diversity in a given location may have catalyzed the formation of distinct groups at that
location through a process of endogenous group selection, reflecting the trade‐off associated with the
scale and internal cohesion of each group. Although a larger group can benefit from economies of scale,
it is more likely to be less cohesive due to costly coordination. Thus, in light of the added contribution of
interpersonal diversity to the lack of cohesiveness of a group, a larger initial endowment of population
diversity in a given location may have given rise to a larger number of groups. Over time, due to the forces
of “cultural drift” and “biased transmission” of cultural markers that serve to distinguish “insiders” from
“outsiders” of a group (e.g., language dialects, customs and traditions, norms of social conduct),
intergroup divergence in such markers became more pronounced, leading to the formation of distinct
collective identities along ethnic lines.
In line with this hypothesis, interpersonal diversity at the national level is found to impart a strong positive
influence on various alternative measures of ethnolinguistic diversity, while accounting for the potentially
confounding influence of the timing of the Neolithic Revolution, the time elapsed since initial human
settlement, colonial history, the geographical determinants of ethnic diversity, and unobserved continent‐
specific factors. Further, to address the issue of causality, the findings are shown to hold in a sample
restricted to only countries from the Old World, which were largely immune from the potentially
endogenous intercontinental migrations of the colonial era. In the same vein, the findings are also shown
to be robust to employing prehistoric migratory distance from East Africa as a plausibly exogenous source
of variation in contemporary diversity in a global sample of countries. The positive influence of
interpersonal diversity on the number of ethnic groups at the national level, as uncovered by Ashraf and
Galor (2013b), is depicted by the scatter plot in Panel C of Figure 6.

14

Intrasocietal conflicts are another mechanism though which the interpersonal diversity of a population
can lead to its economic underperformance. Exploiting variations across countries and ethnic groups,
Arbatlı et al. (2018) find that population diversity has been a significant contributor to the risk and
intensity of both historical and contemporary internal conflicts, conditional on various geographical,
cultural, and institutional correlates of conflict, outcomes of economic development, and unobserved
continental or regional characteristics. Importantly, because unlike standard measures of ethnic diversity,
interpersonal diversity captures both intergroup and intragroup differences in individual traits, the latter
possesses explanatory power for not only intergroup conflicts but intragroup conflicts as well. This
research additionally shows that interpersonal diversity may have contributed to conflicts in society
through the channels of greater ethnic fragmentation, reduced interpersonal trust, and sharper
divergence in preferences for public goods and redistributive policies. The scatter plots in Panels D and E
of Figure 6 respectively depict the positive influence of interpersonal diversity on the frequency of civil
conflicts and on heterogeneity in political preferences at the national level.
The emergence and persistence of autocratic forms of societal governance is yet another mechanism
through which interpersonal diversity may have given rise to contemporary economic underperformance.
Specifically, Galor and Klemp (2017) advance the hypothesis that although prehistorically determined
interpersonal diversity may have raised society’s demand for formal institutions that mitigated the
adverse influence of diversity on social cohesion, the contribution of diversity to economic inequality and
class stratification within societies may have also shaped institutional development towards more
extractive and autocratic forms of governance. Exploiting variations across precolonial ethnic homelands,
the authors find that conditional on the potentially confounding effects of various geographical factors
and unobserved continental characteristics, interpersonal diversity imparts a positive influence on the
prevalence of precolonial autocratic institutions and that this relationship plausibly reflects the dual
impact of diversity on the demand for formal institutions and the emergence of social stratification.
Furthermore, the authors document that the spatial variation in interpersonal diversity across the globe
may have contributed to the cross‐country variation in contemporary degrees of autocracy, partly
reflecting the persistence of institutional, cultural, and compositional characteristics of populations over
time.
Beyond the aforementioned studies that highlight some of the mechanisms associated with the social
costs of interpersonal diversity, Depetris‐Chauvin and Özak (2017) present evidence in support of its social
benefits.12 In particular, the authors empirically examine Ashraf and Galor’s hypothesis that interpersonal

12

The beneficial effects of interpersonal diversity on economic development are also documented empirically by
Ager and Brückner (forthcoming). Exploiting variations across counties in the United States in the late nineteenth‐
century, these authors find that county‐level populations that experienced a larger initial increase in their genetic
diversity due to the arrival of European immigrants also subsequently experienced higher rates of growth in both
income and scientific patents per capita during the 1870–1920 time horizon. In another interesting study by Delis et
al. (2017), the authors exploit panel variations across firms listed in the stock markets of North America and the
United Kingdom to show that adding members to a firm’s board of directors from countries of origin with differing
levels of genetic diversity increases its corporate performance. The authors hypothesize that their finding reflects
the productivity‐enhancing benefits of interpersonal differences in cultural, psychological, physiological, and other
traits that cannot be captured by alternative measured indices of diversity.

15

diversity could have fostered the division of labor in society by widening the spectrum of individual skills,
abilities, and cognitive approaches. Exploiting variations observed across precolonial ethnic homelands,
they document that, consistently with Ashraf and Galor’s initial hypothesis, prehistorically determined
interpersonal diversity may have conferred a positive influence on the degree of economic specialization
in different production activities in a society, thereby fostering its proclivity to engage in and reap the
economic benefits of market‐based exchange. 13 The authors additionally show that present‐day
populations residing in regions that were characterized by a higher degree of precolonial economic
specialization tend to exhibit significantly greater occupational heterogeneity and a higher level of
economic development.
Interestingly, the beneficial impact of interpersonal diversity on productivity has also been documented
at a much lower level of aggregation than countries or ethnic groups. Specifically, exploiting variations
across high schools in the state of Wisconsin, Cook and Fletcher (2017) find that the heterozygosity of the
student body of a high school in 1957 may have conferred a significant positive influence on the economic
performance of the school’s graduates later in life, as captured by completed years of schooling, measures
of occupational prestige of the graduate’s first job, and family income in 1974 and 1992.14 Importantly,
because these findings are established by exploiting variations within a single state, they are unaffected
by cross‐country (and even within‐country cross‐state) confounders. In addition, because the high‐school
student bodies in the authors’ data set were entirely comprised of individuals of European ancestry, the
results are unlikely to be afflicted by issues of population stratification that could otherwise conflate the
influence of heterozygosity with those of ethnicity or ancestral origins on economic outcomes.
Criticism: The literature on the influence of interpersonal diversity on comparative development across
societies has attracted the attention of the scholarly community beyond the discipline of economics and,
given methodological divisions, has perhaps unsurprisingly generated unfounded criticisms. In particular,
three criticisms have been raised: (a) the precolonial population data employed for the analysis of
historical development are imperfectly measured, and in particular, the population sizes of precolonial
Amerindian societies are underestimated; (b) expected heterozygosity in neutral genetic markers,
employed to capture the degree of interpersonal diversity within a population, does not reflect diversity
in functional (phenotypic) markers and, therefore, cannot influence behavioral and social interactions;
and (c) the findings can be used to justify disturbing policy prescriptions, designed to “engineer” an
“optimal” diversity level in a population.
These criticisms, however, are unfounded for the following reasons:

13

Interestingly, as one would expect from preindustrial production activities, in which characteristics of the physical
environment and individual abilities behave as complementary inputs, the research also documents that the degree
of agro‐ecological and agro‐climatic heterogeneity reinforces the positive influence of interpersonal diversity on the
emergence of economic specialization in precolonial societies.
14
The authors additionally provide evidence in line with a novel behavioral mechanism – namely, that exposure to
more genetically diverse schooling environments may have shaped individual personality traits towards greater
creativity and openness to new ideas and, thus, behaviorally conditioned the individual for greater socioeconomic
success later in life.

16

a. Ashraf and Galor’s historical analysis accounts for the possibility that the data on population density
in the year 1500 could be afflicted by measurement errors, demonstrating that this issue has no
bearing on the validity of their empirical findings. First, population density is the dependent variable
in their historical analysis, and as such, classical measurement error in this variable does not introduce
any bias to the estimates of the hump‐shaped influence of diversity on historical development. In fact,
in the absence of classical measurement error, the statistical significance of their estimates would be
even higher. Second, if there are systematic differences across continents in the noisy measurement
of historical population density (e.g., if historical population density in the Americas is indeed
consistently underestimated), bias arising from these differences is accounted for by the continent
fixed effects in their analysis. Specifically, the influence of diversity on historical development is
identified by exploiting intersocietal variations within continents rather than across continents. Third,
as depicted by the scatter plot in Panel B of Figure 4, employing an alternative measure of historical
development – namely, the extent of urbanization in the year 1500 (obtained from sources that are
entirely independent of the source for historical population density data) – does not qualitatively alter
the hump‐shaped influence of interpersonal diversity on historical development. Lastly, issues related
to the noisy measurement of historical population density are irrelevant for Ashraf and Galor’s main
analysis of contemporary comparative development, in which the dependent variable is income per
capita in the year 2000.
b. Indeed, expected heterozygosity in neutral genetic markers, employed for the measurement of the
degree of interpersonal diversity within a population, does not directly reflect diversity in functional
(phenotypic) markers. Nevertheless, as elaborated in Section 2.2, the observed socioeconomic
influence of expected heterozygosity in microsatellites reflects the positive relationship between
diversity in microsatellites and intrapopulation heterogeneity in morphologically and behaviorally
expressed individual traits. In particular, as is the case with expected heterozygosity in neutral genetic
markers, evidence suggests that migratory distance from East Africa imparts a negative influence on
various forms of intragroup phenotypic diversity (Henn, Cavalli‐Sforza, and Feldman 2012), including
intralingual phonemic diversity, as well as interpersonal diversity in skeletal features pertaining to
cranial characteristics, dental attributes, and pelvic traits.
c. The view that Ashraf and Galor’s research can be used to justify disturbing policy prescriptions is
distorted because (i) it disregards the proximate mechanisms though which interpersonal diversity
affects economic outcomes, and (ii) it fails to recognize that one of the fundamental insights of this
research program is the increasing importance of diversity for economic prosperity over the course
of human history. As elaborated in the following section, there exists a far more nuanced view of the
possible broader implications for economic policy from this research.
Policy Implications: Ashraf and Galor’s analysis documents a fundamental trade‐off associated with the
influence of interpersonal diversity, as reflected by genetic diversity, on economic performance. The fact
that diversity has been a deep determinant of economic development, however, does not imply that the
composition of hereditary traits in a population governs its economic destiny. As explained in Section 2.2,
the influence of diversity on productivity reflects both genetic and cultural components, implying that a
society can shape the context in which the existing diversity of its population influences socioeconomic
17

outcomes, by enacting policies to harness the beneficial effects of the existing level of diversity and
mitigate its potentially detrimental consequences.
The controversy over the implications of Ashraf and Galor’s findings has focused on their assertion that
intermediate levels of interpersonal diversity in heritable traits tend to be most conducive to economic
development, thereby leading uninformed critics to suggest that this work could be used to justify the
forcible movement or “engineering” of populations. This viewpoint, however, disregards the key
argument that the influence of diversity on development operates through various proximate
mechanisms. Instead, the implications for policymaking from Ashraf and Galor’s analysis are that policies
should be aimed at conditioning the intervening channels. Specifically, overly diverse societies could focus
on fostering interpersonal trust and mediating the potential for social conflict, by encouraging civic
participation, improving the quality of political institutions, and mitigating inefficiencies and distortions in
the provision of public goods. Overly homogenous societies, on the other hand, could aim to increase
diversity in skills, occupations, and training programs in order to foster specialization and innovative
activity. In both cases, the orientation of the educational system appears to be the most promising
avenue: education can help instill the cultural values of tolerance needed in overly diverse societies, and
it can also promote cultural receptiveness to different types of productivity‐enhancing knowledge that
may be lacking in overly homogenous societies.

4.

Wade’s Hypothesis of Comparative Development

4.1. Overview
Nicholas Wade’s A Troublesome Inheritance: Genes, Race and Human History is composed of two
substantive parts. The first part of the book provides an accessible, engaging, and mostly credible account
of human evolutionary history, citing much of the scientific evidence discussed earlier in Section 2 on
differential genetic adaptions across populations since the onset of the Neolithic Revolution (e.g., lactase
persistence, resistance to infectious diseases, and high‐altitude adaptations), as well as the evidence on
the impact of the prehistoric “out of Africa” migration in generating worldwide patterns of human genetic
variation. Furthermore, it discusses some intriguing evidence from evolutionary psychology and
behavioral genetics on the association between somatic traits and social behaviors such as cooperation
and aggression.
The second part of the book is more speculative, extrapolating from the different pieces of evidence
revealed in the first part to weave together an evolutionary hypothesis about the roots of comparative
economic development across world regions. Wade’s hypothesis suggests that heterogeneity across
regions in the selection of genetic traits, associated with the social behaviors of nonviolence, cooperation,
and trust, has given rise to interregional variation in the nature of institutions and, thus, in the level of
economic development. Specifically, he posits that the genetic predispositions of European and East Asian
societies towards economic prosperity, as well as the genetically determined unsuitability of African
societies to adopt market‐friendly Western institutions, have governed the differential development
trajectories across world regions.

18

For instance, Wade asserts that: “[w]hen North Korea adopts market‐friendly institutions, a safe
prediction is that it would in time become as prosperous as South Korea. It would be far less safe to predict
that Equatorial Guinea or Haiti needs only better institutions to attain a modern economy; their people
may not have yet had the opportunity to develop ingrained behaviors of trust, nonviolence and thrift that
a productive economy requires” (p. 188).15 He further argues that: “[t]he fact that China, Japan and South
Korea developed modern economies so easily, once the appropriate institutions were in place, is evidence
that their populations, like those of Europe, had undergone equivalent behavioral changes to those
documented in England” (p. 178). In addition, Wade also hypothesizes that genetic differences between
East Asians and Europeans have favored Europeans in comparative development, highlighting genetic
predispositions towards “openness to new ideas” among European societies versus predispositions
towards excessive conformity in East Asian societies (pp. 166, 218).16

4.2. Evolutionary Processes during the Malthusian Epoch
Wade’s general narrative on human evolution and economic development echoes the economic literature
surveyed in Section 3.1 that has examined the interaction between human evolution and the process of
economic development.
Wade’s hypothesis of comparative economic development highlights regional variation in the intensity of
selection of individual traits that are conducive to growth‐enhancing institutions. In line with insights from
evolutionary growth theory, and consistent with evidence on evolutionary processes triggered by the
Neolithic Revolution, Wade focuses on selection during the Malthusian stage of economic development.
He plausibly argues that natural selection favored growth‐enhancing traits during this era when richer
individuals enjoyed higher reproductive success than poorer ones, thereby increasing the representation
of their traits in the population over time.17 In addition, mirroring earlier arguments from evolutionary
growth theory, Wade posits that due to the egalitarian nature of hunter‐gatherer societies, the forces of
evolutionary selection within a society were likely to have been muted prior to the onset of the Neolithic
Revolution.
In particular, generalizing based on evidence from England in the 17th century, which suggests that the
rich had more surviving offspring than the poor (Clark 2007), Wade hypothesizes that in regions of the
world that were historically characterized by higher population density and early statehood, favorable
genetic traits (e.g., nonviolence, cooperation, and trust) that were initially concentrated among the rich
elites gained an evolutionary advantage, proliferated over time, and contributed to the emergence of
growth‐enhancing institutions and a superior development trajectory.
Nevertheless, the traits that are central to Wade’s argument (e.g., nonviolence and cooperation) need not
necessarily generate higher incomes in a Malthusian environment and, thus, may not necessarily lead to
15

All unattributed page references throughout the text are to Wade (2014).
For instance, Wade argues that China’s long history of civil service examinations exerted positive selection
pressures on traits like “excellent memory, high intelligence and unwavering conformity” (p. 166).
17
It is important to note, however, that in contrast to Wade’s hypothesis, the intergenerational transmission of
behavioral traits in evolutionary growth theory could be the result of cultural rather than purely genetic propagation
mechanisms.
16

19

higher reproductive success. In particular, in the violent society of medieval England (p. 167), where
militancy and subjugation of the masses were integral to the livelihood of the aristocracy, it is likely that
pacifism and trust would have hindered rather than promoted individual wealth accumulation among the
elites and, thus, would not have been favored by the forces of natural selection.
The application of proper theoretical foundations could have detected whether the particular traits
emphasized by Wade made individuals richer and, therefore, whether they generated higher reproductive
success during the Malthusian stage of economic development. Moreover, proper theoretical foundations
could also have illuminated whether the potential selection of these traits persisted once Malthusian
constraints were relaxed in the transition from the epoch of stagnation in income per capita to the modern
regime of sustained economic growth. Indeed, evolutionary growth theory has suggested that traits
associated with higher evolutionary fitness during the Malthusian era may eventually place individuals at
a disadvantage, once societies emerge into the modern growth regime (Galor and Moav 2002, 2007; Galor
and Michalopoulos 2012).

4.3. The Biological Basis of Race and Its Classification along Continental Lines
Wade’s evolutionary hypothesis underlines differential evolutionary processes across races. Citing
evidence from the field of population genetics (Rosenberg et al. 2002) that genetic traits tend to be
clustered at the continent level, Wade asserts that “[a]t least at the level of continental populations, races
can be distinguished genetically, and this is sufficient to establish that they exist” (p. 122). In particular,
Wade argues that there exists a biological underpinning to his “five‐race, continent‐based” classification
of populations (p. 98), interpreting the evidence from population genetics as indicative of differential
evolutionary processes across these groups.
Although it is conceivable that gene‐culture coevolution has had a major influence on comparative
development across populations and societies, it appears speculative that race in general, and Wade’s
classification of race in particular, is the right unit of analysis for understanding the interrelationship
between human evolutionary processes and comparative development.
Importantly, the unit of analysis (i.e., race) in Wade’s framework is subject to two conceptual concerns.
First, the evidence from population genetics on the spatial clustering of genetic traits across major
geographical regions of the world is not sufficiently well‐established to support Wade’s five‐race,
continent‐based model. In particular, based on the observation that the vast majority of human genetic
variation is continuously distributed across the globe, exhibiting relatively smooth “clines” or gradients
generated by the “out of Africa” migration and the associated serial founder effect, several studies in
population genetics have argued that classification schemes that attempt to spatially partition the
worldwide human genetic variation are sensitive to methodological design, thus necessarily identifying
“artificial” clusters (Kittles and Weiss 2003; Serre and Pääbo 2004). Other studies have maintained that
the worldwide human genetic variation can be explained by both smooth clines within continents and
clusters across continents but clarify that the portion of the overall variation explained by differences
between such clusters is exceedingly small (Rosenberg et al. 2005; Li et al. 2008). Nevertheless, despite

20

the fact that the genetic evidence has been contentious, Wade posits that “the five‐race, continent‐based
scheme seems the most practical for most purposes” (p. 98).
Second, it appears that Wade’s classification of populations is ultimately based on the observed variation
in socioeconomic outcomes rather than on biological underpinnings per se. Wade hypothesizes that
human history and comparative development are best understood in the context of five major races or
“civilizations,” because differences in institutions and economic development are seemingly most
pronounced across major geographical regions or continents.18 Thus, in Wade’s conceptual framework,
the unit of analysis itself is chosen based on the ex post realization of the very outcomes (i.e.,
contemporary institutions and economic prosperity) that his hypothesis is attempting to explain.19

4.4. The Causes of Institutional Variation
Wade’s evolutionary hypothesis of comparative economic development suggests that interregional
variation in the selection of genetic traits forms the basis of differences in social behaviors across races,
thereby shaping the variation in the nature of institutions and, thus, in long‐run development outcomes
across the globe.
In particular, in his attempt to establish that the worldwide variation in institutions is rooted in genetically
determined differences in social behaviors across societies, Wade appeals to studies from evolutionary
psychology and behavioral genetics that have associated the oxytocin hormone and the MAO‐A promoter
gene with cooperative and aggressive individual behavior, respectively (e.g., De Dreu et al. 2011; Beaver
et al. 2013). However, an important shortcoming of these studies, particularly in the context of their
broader applicability to an evolutionary hypothesis of worldwide differences in social behaviors, is that
they do not establish associations between the comparative prevalence of oxytocin or the MAO‐A
promoter gene and the comparative prevalence of cooperative or aggressive behavior across societies. In
particular, these studies focus on small localized samples of individuals and are therefore not only subject
to issues of external validity but are also uninformative about the presence of the intersocietal somatic
variations that are necessary for the credibility of Wade’s hypothesis. For instance, the experimental study
by De Dreu et al. (2011), which finds an elevated response in terms of in‐group regard and out‐group
disregard amongst subjects “treated” with oxytocin, was only conducted on a sample of young Dutch men.
Similarly, the study by Beaver et al. (2013), which finds an association between the 2‐repeat allele of the
MAO‐A promoter gene and various indicators of aggressive or antisocial behaviors, was restricted to a
sample of African‐American men drawn from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health. Thus,

18

For instance, Wade asserts that: “history has little coherence when analyzed in terms of individuals or even
nations. But when seen in terms of the institutions developed by different civilizations and races, the outline of a
logical development emerges” (p. 134).
19
In particular, Wade’s post hoc classification scheme, where the unit of observation is chosen to accentuate the
realized variation in outcomes, gives rise to a selection bias. Namely, any potential falsification test will be a priori
biased against the null hypothesis of no association between genetic traits and socioeconomic outcomes across
continents, even if the cross‐continental variation in the prevalence of functionally important traits is exceedingly
small.

21

these studies can only be taken as providing suggestive evidence for the possibility that variations in social
behaviors across societies may be driven by their biological differences.
Further, Wade’s assertion that institutional variation across societies must be rooted in differences in the
prevalence of favorable genetic traits, based on the observation that a society’s institutions tend to be
highly persistent over time, disregards the role of cultural persistence and the well‐documented role of
economic incentives in shaping institutional persistence. Moreover, in contrast to Wade’s hypothesis,
existing findings in the economic literature tend to support the contribution of the interpersonal diversity
of traits within a society to the emergence and persistence of institutions (Galor and Klemp 2017).
Incentives: In his narrative on the causes and consequences of institutional variations, Wade refers to the
view of Acemoglu and Robinson (2012) that institutions are central amongst the deep determinants of
comparative development. Acemoglu and Robinson have argued that a society’s political elites harbor the
incentive to propagate extractive institutions over time, in order to sustain and benefit from existing
structures of economic and political inequality. Thus, as long as the socioeconomic environment does not
alter the incentives of the elites, institutions may exhibit long‐run persistence, and variations in
institutions across societies and over time can only arise from “critical junctures,” when an exogenous
event alters this path. Although Wade acknowledges the fundamental importance of institutions for
economic development, he disregards the role of economic incentives in generating institutional
persistence, arguing that Acemoglu and Robinson’s framework is largely unsatisfactory because it relies
on the “luck” associated with historical accidents to explain differential institutional dynamics and, thus,
comparative development across societies.
Wade’s rejection of Acemoglu and Robinson’s emphasis on historical contingencies, however, does not
justify disregarding the role of economic incentives in shaping differential paths of institutional evolution
across societies. Specifically, as highlighted by research in the area of unified growth theory (Galor 2011),
institutional change in a society may emerge as a natural by‐product of the process of development, even
without appealing to the incidence of “critical junctures.” In particular, Galor and Moav (2006) have
argued that physical capital accumulation in the process of industrialization enhanced the importance of
human capital in the production process and, thereby, generated incentives for capitalists to support the
provision of public education for the masses, triggering the emergence of human capital promoting
institutions.20 Further, Galor, Moav, and Vollrath (2009) have suggested that inequality in the distribution
of landownership adversely affected the advent of human capital promoting institutions and, thus, the
pace of the transition from an agricultural to an industrial economy. Wade’s potential unfamiliarity with
other plausible determinants of institutional variation across societies, leading him to consider only
genetic underpinnings, undermines a crucial building block of his proposed hypothesis of comparative
development.

20

Ashraf et al. (2018) uncover complementary evidence suggesting the operation of similar incentives among
capitalist elites in facilitating the decline of coercive labor institutions.

22

Culture: The “dual inheritance theory” of gene‐culture coevolution suggests that it is inherently
challenging to disentangle the influence of genes and culture on institutions.21 As Wade himself notes, the
concern regarding gene‐culture separability is further complicated by the lack of scientific evidence
directly linking genes to specific social behaviors: “[w]ithout knowing the nature of genes involved in social
behavior, it’s impossible at present to disentangle the respective roles of culture and genetics in shaping
social institutions” (p. 124).
Wade nevertheless diminishes the potential for culture to impart a major influence on institutions,
independently of genetic traits. In particular, Wade states that “[i]f running a productive, Western‐style
economy were simply a matter of culture, it should be possible for African and Middle‐Eastern countries
to import Western institutions and business methods, just as East Asian countries have done. But this is
evidently not a straightforward task” (p. 177). Wade’s dismissal of the importance of the cultural channel
in institutional development is based on two assertions: first, institutional persistence is much too
protracted to be explained by culture, and second, the transference of institutions across societies would
have been more prevalent if they were indeed based solely on culture.
Although Wade acknowledges that cultural traits can influence a society’s institutions, he maintains that
given the persistence of both institutions and genetic traits, institutional differences across societies must
necessarily be rooted in genetic differences. For instance, he states that “when a civilization produces a
distinctive set of institutions that endures for many generations, that is the sign of a supporting suite of
variations in the genes that influence human social behavior” (p. 150). This argument implicitly assumes
that cultural traits cannot exhibit long‐term persistence, in contrast to the views of prominent scholars in
the social sciences.
For instance, Weber (1930) argued that Protestantism and its emphasis on material rewards contributed
in the long run to the emergence of modern capitalism in Western societies, and Putnam (1993) suggests
that idiosyncratic differences between the medieval histories of Northern vs. Southern Italy led to a sharp
divergence in the degree of social capital that persists to the modern era. In addition, as emphasized by
studies in evolutionary anthropology (e.g., Boyd and Richerson 1985; Henrich and Boyd 1998), cultural
persistence in society could be an endogenously chosen outcome when the geographical environment is
relatively stable over time, since the customs and traditions of previous generations can provide valuable
information for adapting to and productively exploiting the current environment without having to
engage in costly learning.
Wade further suggests that in light of existing barriers to the transfer of institutions across societies,
culture cannot be a fundamental cause of institutions. He states: “[o]ne indication of such a genetic effect
is that, if institutions were purely cultural, it should be easy to transfer an institution from one society to
another” (p. 126). This view, however, underestimates the substantial coordination problem associated
with cultural change – namely, the possibility that long‐run persistence in the set of norms, values, beliefs,
21

For the purposes of the present discussion, culture is viewed as the particular set of society’s norms, values, beliefs,
and preferences that arise from repeated social interactions amongst individuals and that can persist over time
through purely “memetic” as opposed to genetic propagation, although the two transmission mechanisms are
clearly highly correlated.

23

and preferences in a given society may prevent the de facto adoption of culture and institutions from
other societies in the first place.22
Thus, despite being initially transparent about the current state of knowledge regarding the inseparability
of the influence of genes versus culture on socioeconomic outcomes, Wade’s line of argumentation
implicitly ends up assuming quite the opposite, an assumption that runs contrary to long‐standing
research from the fields of evolutionary anthropology and population genetics that has emphasized the
notion of gene‐culture coevolution (e.g., Cavalli‐Sforza and Feldman 1981; Boyd and Richerson 1985;
Durham 1991; Henrich and McElreath 2003).

4.5. Comparative Development
Wade’s evolutionary hypothesis of comparative development suggests that regional variation in the
forces of evolutionary selection gave rise to variation across societies in the prevalence of genetically
determined behavioral traits that are conducive to growth‐enhancing institutions. Since the forces of
natural selection were largely muted in egalitarian hunter‐gatherer societies, this selection process
became fortified only after the transition to sedentary agriculture, and as such, the time elapsed since a
society (or region) experienced the Neolithic Revolution governs its exposure to evolutionary processes
associated with the positive selection of favorable behavioral traits. In particular, since Europe and Asia
are both characterized by a long history of settled societies, Wade hypothesizes that societies in these
regions have come to harbor the genetic makeup conducive to the development or adoption of growth‐
enhancing institutions, in contrast to societies in Sub‐Saharan Africa.
Instead of proposing that variation across societies in the prevalence of favorable genetic traits is a purely
deterministic force in comparative development, Wade offers a more nuanced approach in which
development occurs only when societies with the “proper” genetic predisposition actually implement
growth‐promoting institutions. In particular, Wade argues that unlike Africa, East Asia experienced
economic growth and development since the mid‐twentieth century because of their genetically
determined ability to adopt market‐friendly institutions from the West. This argument, however, is based
on the existing distribution of institutions across societies rather than underlying forces that brought
about such a realization. Specifically, Wade hypothesizes that African societies are unable to adopt
growth‐enhancing institutions based on the observation that they have not adopted them, but this form
of reasoning implies that any society that has not yet adopted virtuous institutions is necessarily unable
to do so. In addition, Wade’s conjectures are based on the supposition that societies are generally willing
to unilaterally adopt virtuous institutions (but are often unable to do so because of inappropriate genetic
predispositions), disregarding the incentives of those with economic and political power in society to block
institutional reform.

22

In contrast to the dominant view in the social and economic sciences regarding the importance of cultural barriers
to the transferability of institutions across societies, when discussing the causes of income disparities across the
globe, Wade states that “in situations where culture and political institutions can flow freely across borders, long
enduring disparities are harder to explain” (p. 13).

24

Regardless of the somewhat speculative nature of Wade’s hypothesis of comparative development, or
the fragility of its individual building blocks, the credibility of his overarching thesis as a scientific
proposition boils down to whether it is empirically falsifiable. In this respect, the fact that Wade’s
framework emphasizes intercontinental differences (based on his classification of race) implies that the
hypothesis does not lend itself well to falsification. Setting aside the issue that his classification scheme is
based on socioeconomic outcomes, the existence of only five data points (one for each continent), does
not provide the necessary statistical degrees of freedom to properly account for the confounding
influence of cross‐continental heterogeneity in various geographical and historical forces that could have
affected both the genetic‐cultural makeup of societies and their economic development.
Nevertheless, Wade’s narrative that economic disparities across societies may emerge from slight
variations in social behaviors, due to differential selective pressures and location‐specific genetic
adaptations, permits a falsification test of his hypothesis based on cross‐national variations (both across
and within continents) in economic development and the genetic makeup of populations. Such a setup
would possess the key advantage of exploiting a much larger sample size, providing the statistical degrees
of freedom necessary to account for the potentially confounding influence of heterogeneity in a wide
variety of geographical and historical factors, and perhaps most importantly, in other aspects of the
heritable structure of human populations (namely, the degree of interpersonal diversity within
populations) that were partly codetermined with the extent of genetic differentiation between
populations during the prehistoric “out of Africa” diffusion of anatomically modern humans. The analysis
in Section 5 below implements such a falsification test.

5.

Interpersonal Diversity, Genetic Distance to the Frontier, and Comparative Development

This section conducts a discriminatory empirical examination of a fundamental prediction of Wade’s
hypothesis versus alternative evolutionary theories of comparative development. The analysis exploits
contemporary variations across national populations in income per capita, interpersonal diversity, and
genetic distance to the economic frontier to test whether patterns consistent with Wade’s hypothesis
exist in the cross‐country data and whether these patterns have any bearing on the existing evidence
regarding the influence of diversity on economic development, while accounting for various geographical,
historical, and cultural correlates of economic development (including cultural confounders of
interpersonal diversity and of genetic distance to the frontier).
Wade’s evolutionary hypothesis of comparative development suggests that economically more advanced
contemporary societies should be characterized by a higher prevalence of genetic traits associated with
social behaviors that are conducive to economic development. To the extent that the FST genetic distance
between any pair of contemporary populations can serve as a reasonable metric of the difference in the
prevalence of such traits, an empirically falsifiable prediction of Wade’s hypothesis is that poorer
contemporary societies should be characterized by a greater FST genetic distance to societies that occupy
the frontier of economic development in the modern world, reflecting the hypothesized lower prevalence
of those favorable traits in less‐developed societies.

25

Although existing measures of FST genetic distance for pairs of contemporary national populations are
primarily based on selectively neutral genetic markers, they can be utilized to examine the effect of
differences in the prevalence of functional traits on economic outcomes for two main reasons. First, since
FST genetic distance serves as a “molecular clock” of the time elapsed since two populations diverged from
a common ancestral population, it captures the time over which interpopulation cultural and biological
differences could have accumulated due to the forces of cultural and genetic drift, differential selection,
and divergent gene‐culture coevolution. Second, standard measures of FST genetic distance for pairs of
contemporary national populations (Spolaore and Wacziarg 2009) are based on underlying genetic
distance data at the level of ethnic group pairs (Cavalli‐Sforza, Menozzi, and Piazza 1994), incorporating
information on not only selectively neutral genetic markers, thereby capturing intergroup drift due to
random mutations, but also “classic” phenotypically expressed markers (e.g., ABO blood groups, Rhesus
antigens, HLA, and immunoglobulins), thus further capturing potential intergroup divergence due to
differential selection.
Insofar as genetically determined individual predispositions are empirically separable from the influence
of culture on associated social behaviors, any credible falsification test of Wade’s hypothesis would need
to account for the confounding influence of cultural distance (as could be proxied by linguistic and
religious distances) to the population at the economic frontier. Accounting for the influence of cultural
distance is particularly important in light of the fact that the FST genetic distance between any pair of
populations is expected to be highly correlated with the extent of cultural divergence that arises from the
forces of “cultural drift” and “isolation by distance” between the two populations (Cavalli‐Sforza, Menozzi,
and Piazza 1994). Moreover, because the worldwide variations in intrapopulation genetic diversity and
interpopulation genetic distance were partly codetermined by the prehistoric “out of Africa” migration
process, a credible empirical assessment of Wade’s hypothesis cannot be made independently of the
influence of interpersonal diversity on development, as documented by Ashraf and Galor (2013a).
Needless to say, such an assessment also ought to account for the potentially confounding influence of
various geographical characteristics and historical forces that could have shaped both the process of
economic development and the composition of individual traits within societies since the completion of
the “out of Africa” expansion of anatomically modern humans.
Table 1 reports the results from a cross‐country analysis that simultaneously examines the influence of
genetic distance to the economic frontier and the hump‐shaped influence of interpersonal diversity on
contemporary comparative development, while accounting for the potentially confounding effects of
various geographical, historical, and cultural forces. 23 The analysis considers four variations on the
definition of the economic frontier, including the population of (i) the United States (columns 1–2); (ii) the
United Kingdom (columns 3–4); (iii) the representative Western European or Western “offshoot” nation
(columns 5–6); and (iv) the representative member nation of the OECD, including member nations from

23

The data on income per capita for the 2000–2009 time period is from version 8.1 of the Penn World Table
(Feenstra, Inklaar, and Timmer 2015), whereas the data on genetic, linguistic, and religious distances are sourced
from Spolaore and Wacziarg (2016). The data for all other variables in the analysis in Table 1 are based on the data
sets constructed by Ashraf and Galor (2013a, 2013b). The size of the cross‐country sample is conditioned by the
availability of data on all the variables considered by the analysis in Table 1.

26

East Asia and Latin America (columns 7–8). For each of these variants, two separate regression models
are estimated using the ordinary least squares.
The first model accounts for the potentially confounding effects of cultural distance (proxied by linguistic
and religious distances) to the economic frontier; various forms of cultural diversity (including measures
of fractionalization across groups differentiated by ethnic, linguistic, and religious markers in the national
population); unobserved factors associated with being a previous European colony or possessing a
particular legal origin (e.g., British common law vs. French civil law); and geographical characteristics (i.e.,
absolute latitude, agricultural suitability, terrain ruggedness, distance to the coast, temperature,
precipitation, shares of land in tropical and temperate climatic zones, disease prevalence, and unobserved
factors associated with being landlocked or being a small island).
The second model introduces regional dummies to account for unobserved heterogeneity across world
regions. Therefore, it only exploits cross‐country variations within world regions to assure that the
estimated influences of interpersonal diversity and genetic distance to the economic frontier will not be
confounded by cross‐regional heterogeneity in unobserved geographical, cultural, and institutional
factors that may have exerted an independent impact on comparative development. For instance,
Diamond’s (1997) hypothesis suggests that cross‐continental comparative development partly reflects the
role of biogeographical endowments in giving rise to the differential timing of the Neolithic Revolution
across major world regions. Favorable biogeographical endowments that were associated with a larger
variety of domesticable species of plants and animals, as well as continental characteristics that
complemented the spatial diffusion of agricultural practices across similar climatological environments,
contributed to the earlier emergence of sedentary agriculture in some regions and, thus, generated a
technological head start for these regions that persisted over time. Indeed, empirical evidence from the
economic literature suggests that the biogeographically driven variation in the timing of the Neolithic
Revolution is instrumental for the understanding of comparative development across precolonial societies
(Ashraf and Galor 2011). Thus, in the absence of regional dummies from the specification, the estimated
influences of interpersonal diversity and genetic distance to the economic frontier may, for instance,
capture the latent impact of unobserved biogeographical forces associated with the transition to
agriculture rather than the influence of evolutionary processes per se.
In addition, although the intraregional analysis implied by the second regression model may be viewed as
a deviation from the strict narrative of Wade’s hypothesis, given its focus on interregional variations, it
appears counterfactual that the forces of natural selection only operated differentially across continents,
rather than within them as well. Indeed, much of the scientific evidence cited by Wade from human
evolutionary biology points to differential genetic adaptations within world regions (e.g., prevalence of
the sickle cell trait in malaria endemic areas of sub‐Saharan Africa and its obscurity in other areas of the
region; resistance to high‐altitude sickness amongst Tibetans populations and its absence from nearby
Asian populations). Therefore, barring the dilution of differences between populations as a result of
genetic admixture, one would expect that the substantial heterogeneity in geographical environments
within world regions generated significant variation in selective pressures and, thus, in persistent genetic
adaptations across populations within continents.

27

[INSERT TABLE 1 HERE]
Turning to the findings, the results reported in the odd‐numbered columns of Table 1 indicate that in the
absence of regional dummies from the specifications, regardless of the definition adopted for the
economic frontier, the influence of genetic distance to the frontier is significantly negative, while
interpersonal diversity maintains its significant hump‐shaped influence on income per capita. In addition,
based on the partial R2 statistics, interpersonal diversity explains between 8.9 and 11.1 percent of the
cross‐country variation in the standard of living, while the explanatory power of genetic distance to the
frontier for comparative development ranges between 5.3 and 9.4 percent.
However, the results reported in the even‐numbered columns of Table 1 indicate that once the
specifications are augmented to account for the potentially confounding effects of unobserved
heterogeneity across world regions, the negative influence of genetic distance to the frontier on income
per capita is no longer statistically distinguishable from zero, whereas the significant hump‐shaped
influence of interpersonal diversity remains qualitatively and quantitatively robust. Further, the partial R2
statistics now reveal that interpersonal diversity explains between 13.3 and 15.9 percent of the
intraregional cross‐country variation in the standard of living, while the explanatory power of genetic
distance to the frontier for intraregional comparative development is consistently below 1 percent. These
regressions therefore demonstrate that in contrast to Ashraf and Galor’s hypothesized hump‐shaped
influence of interpersonal diversity on aggregate productivity, Wade’s evolutionary hypothesis of
comparative development does not appear to hold within world regions.
In sum, to the extent that FST genetic distance to the economic frontier captures a lower prevalence of
favorable genetic traits in a national population, the cross‐country evidence fails to support Wade’s
evolutionary hypothesis of comparative development. Importantly, although unobserved differences in
genetic traits across major world regions could potentially still play a role in explaining broad patterns of
interregional comparative development, at present these potential effects of genetic traits cannot be
separately identified from the statistically correlated but nonevolutionary effects on economic
development that are attributable to unobserved differences across world regions in geographical,
cultural, and institutional factors.

6.

Concluding Remarks

The past two decades have witnessed the emergence of a large and influential body of research that has
focused on uncovering the evolutionary roots of comparative economic development across regions,
countries, and ethnic groups. This line of inquiry has been exploring the influences of human evolution
and the composition of human traits on comparative economic development across societies, highlighting
the roles played by the Neolithic Revolution and the prehistoric “out of Africa” migration of anatomically
modern humans in shaping variations in the composition of human traits among populations around the
globe.
This exploration of the interaction between human evolution and the process of economic development
has centered around two major lines of injury. The first suggests that in the era following the Neolithic
Revolution, Malthusian pressures not only acted as a key determinant of the size of a population but
28

conceivably shaped, via the forces of natural selection, its composition as well. Lineages of individuals
whose traits were complementary to the economic environment may have generated higher levels of
income and, thus, a larger number of surviving offspring. Consequently, the gradual increase in the
representation of these traits in the population over time may have contributed to the process of
development, the pace of the transition from stagnation to growth, and comparative economic
development across societies.
The second line of research advances the hypothesis that migratory distances from the cradle of mankind
in East Africa to indigenous settlements across the globe diminished their levels of interpersonal diversity
and, thereby, generated a persistent hump‐shaped influence on development outcomes, reflecting a
fundamental trade‐off between beneficial and detrimental effects of diversity on productivity at the
societal level. Although diversity may reduce interpersonal trust, cooperation, and social cohesiveness,
and can thus adversely affect the productivity of society, complementarity across diverse productive traits
may stimulate innovations and gains from specialization, and can thereby contribute to society’s
economic performance.
In the context of this prominent body of research, Nicholas Wade has recently advanced a hypothesis
regarding the origins of comparative development, suggesting that variation in human evolutionary
processes across major continental regions since the Neolithic Revolution – particularly, in the selection
of traits associated with nonviolence, cooperation, and trust – has given rise to enduring differences in
social behaviors across races, thereby shaping variations in the nature of institutions and, thus, the level
of economic development. As argued by this essay, however, the building blocks of Wade’s hypothesis
are not substantiated by the evidence. Moreover, a discriminatory empirical evaluation of existing
evolutionary theories of comparative development versus Wade’s hypothesis lends further credence to
the hump‐shaped impact of interpersonal diversity on aggregate productivity while failing to find support
for Wade’s evolutionary hypothesis of comparative development.

29

REFERENCES
Acemoglu, Daron, and James A. Robinson. 2012. Why Nations Fail: The Origins of Power, Prosperity, and
Poverty. New York: Crown Publishers.
Ager, Philipp, and Markus Brückner. Forthcoming. “Immigrants’ Genes: Genetic Diversity and Economic
Development in the U.S.” Economic Inquiry.
Alesina, Alberto, Arnaud Devleeschauwer, William Easterly, Sergio Kurlat, and Romain Wacziarg. 2003.
“Fractionalization.” Journal of Economic Growth, 8(2): 155–194.
Alesina, Alberto, and Eliana La Ferrara. 2005. “Ethnic Diversity and Economic Performance.” Journal of
Economic Literature, 43(3): 762–800.
Arbatlı, Cemal Eren, Quamrul H. Ashraf, Oded Galor, and Marc Klemp. 2018. “Diversity and Conflict.”
https://ssrn.com/abstract=3138492
Ashraf, Quamrul H., Francesco Cinnirella, Oded Galor, Boris Gershman, and Erik Hornung. 2018.
“Capital‐Skill Complementarity and the Emergence of Labor Emancipation.” Centre for Economic
Policy Research Discussion Paper 12822.
Ashraf, Quamrul, and Oded Galor. 2011. “Dynamics and Stagnation in the Malthusian Epoch.” American
Economic Review, 101(5): 2003–2041.
Ashraf, Quamrul, and Oded Galor. 2013a. “The ‘Out of Africa’ Hypothesis, Human Genetic Diversity, and
Comparative Economic Development.” American Economic Review, 103(1): 1–46.
Ashraf, Quamrul, and Oded Galor. 2013b. “Genetic Diversity and the Origins of Cultural Fragmentation,”
American Economic Review, 103(3): 528–533.
Ashraf, Quamrul, Oded Galor, and Marc Klemp. 2014. “The ‘Out of Africa’ Hypothesis of Comparative
Development Reflected by Nighttime Light Intensity.” Brown University Department of Economics
Working Paper 2014‐4.
Ashraf, Quamrul, Oded Galor, and Marc Klemp. 2015. “Heterogeneity and Productivity.” Brown
University Department of Economics Working Paper 2015‐4.
Ashraf, Quamrul, Oded Galor, and Marc Klemp. 2018. “Interpersonal Diversity and Societally Important
Disparities across Populations: A Reply to Rosenberg and Kang.” Unpublished.
Atkinson, Quentin D. 2011. “Phonemic Diversity Supports a Serial Founder Effect Model of Language
Expansion from Africa.” Science, 332(6027): 346–349.
Barban, Nicola, et al. 2016. “Genome‐Wide Analysis Identifies 12 Loci Influencing Human Reproductive
Behavior.” Nature Genetics, 48(12): 1462–1472.
Beauchamp, Jonathan P., et al. 2011. “Molecular Genetics and Economics.” Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 25(4): 57–82.
Beaver, Kevin M., John Paul Wright, Brian B. Boutwell, J. C. Barnes, Matt DeLisi, and Michael G. Vaughn.
2013. “Exploring the Association Between the 2‐Repeat Allele of the MAOA Gene Promoter
Polymorphism and Psychopathic Personality Traits, Arrests, Incarceration, and Lifetime Antisocial
Behavior.” Personality and Individual Differences, 54(2): 164–168.
30

Becker, Anke, Benjamin Enke, and Armin Falk. 2018. “Ancient Origins of the Global Variation in Economic
Preferences.” https://sites.google.com/site/benjaminenke/
Benjamin, Daniel J., et al. 2012. “The Genetic Architecture of Economic and Political Preferences.”
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 109(21): 8026–8031.
Bersaglieri, Todd, et al. 2004. “Genetic Signatures of Strong Recent Positive Selection at the Lactase
Gene.” American Journal of Human Genetics, 74(6): 1111–1120.
Betti, Lia, François Balloux, William Amos, Tsunehiko Hanihara, and Andrea Manica. 2009. “Distance
from Africa, Not Climate, Explains Within‐Population Phenotypic Diversity in Humans.” Proceedings
of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 276(1658): 809–814.
Betti, Lia, Noreen von Cramon‐Taubadel, Andrea Manica, and Stephen J. Lycett. 2013. “Global Geometric
Morphometric Analyses of the Human Pelvis Reveal Substantial Neutral Population History Effects,
Even across Sexes.” PLoS ONE, 8(2): e55909.
Bisin, Alberto, and Thierry Verdier. 2011. “The Economics of Cultural Transmission and Socialization.” In
Handbook of Social Economics, Volume 1A, edited by Jess Benhabib, Alberto Bisin, and Matthew O.
Jackson, 339–416. Amsterdam: North‐Holland.
Bowles, Samuel, and Herbert Gintis. 2011. A Cooperative Species: Human Reciprocity and Its Evolution.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Boyd, Robert, and Peter J. Richerson. 1985. Culture and the Evolutionary Process. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Burger, Joachim, Martina Kirchner, Barbara Bramanti, Wolfgang Haak, and Mark G. Thomas. 2007.
“Absence of the Lactase‐Persistence‐Associated Allele in Early Neolithic Europeans.” Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences, 104(10): 3736–3741.
Cann, Howard M., et al. 2002. “A Human Genome Diversity Cell Line Panel.” Science, 296(5566): 261–262.
Cavalli‐Sforza, L. Luca, and Marcus W. Feldman. 1981. Cultural Transmission and Evolution: A
Quantitative Approach. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Cavalli‐Sforza, L. Luca, Paolo Menozzi, and Alberto Piazza. 1994. The History and Geography of Human
Genes. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Cesarini, David, Christopher T. Dawes, James H. Fowler, Magnus Johannesson, Paul Lichtenstein, and
Björn Wallace. 2008. “Heritability of Cooperative Behavior in the Trust Game.” Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 105(10): 3721–3726.
Cesarini, David, Christopher T. Dawes, Magnus Johannesson, Paul Lichtenstein, and Björn Wallace.
2009. “Genetic Variation in Preferences for Giving and Risk Taking.” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
124(2): 809–842.
Cesarini, David, Magnus Johannesson, Paul Lichtenstein, Örjan Sandewall, and Björn Wallace. 2010.
“Genetic Variation in Financial Decision‐Making.” Journal of Finance, 65(5): 1725–1754.
Clark, Gregory. 2007. A Farewell to Alms: A Brief Economic History of the World. Princeton: Princeton
University Press.

31

Collins, Jason, Boris Baer, and Ernst Juerg Weber. 2014. “Economic Growth and Evolution: Parental
Preference for Quality and Quantity of Offspring.” Macroeconomic Dynamics, 18(8): 1773–1796.
Collins, Jason, Boris Baer, and Ernst Juerg Weber. 2015. “Sexual Selection, Conspicuous Consumption,
and Economic Growth.” Journal of Bioeconomics, 17(2): 189–206.
Conley, Dalton, and Jason Fletcher. 2017. The Genome Factor: What the Social Genomics Revolution
Reveals about Ourselves, Our History, and the Future. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Cook, C. Justin. 2014. “The Role of Lactase Persistence in Precolonial Development.” Journal of Economic
Growth, 19(4): 369–406.
Cook, C. Justin. 2015. “The Natural Selection of Infectious Disease Resistance and Its Effect on
Contemporary Health.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 97(4): 742–757.
Cook, C. Justin, and Jason M. Fletcher. 2017. “High School Genetic Diversity and Later‐life Student
Outcomes: Micro‐level Evidence from the Wisconsin Longitudinal Study.” National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper 23520.
Dalgaard, Carl‐Johan, and Holger Strulik. 2015. “The Physiological Foundations of the Wealth of Nations.”
Journal of Economic Growth, 20(1): 37–73.
Dalgaard, Carl‐Johan, and Holger Strulik. 2016. “Physiology and Development: Why the West is Taller
Than the Rest.” Economic Journal, 126(598): 2292–2323.
De Dreu, Carsten K. W., Lindred L. Greer, Gerben A. Van Kleef, Shaul Shalvi, and Michel J. J. Handgraaf.
2011. “Oxytocin Promotes Human Ethnocentrism.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
108(4): 1262–1266.
Delis, Manthos D., Chrysovalantis Gaganis, Iftekhar Hasan, and Fotios Pasiouras. 2017. “The Effect of
Board Directors from Countries with Different Genetic Diversity Levels on Corporate Performance.”
Management Science, 63(1): 231–249.
Depetris‐Chauvin, Emilio, and Ömer Özak. 2017. “The Origins and Long‐Run Consequences of the Division
of Labor.” Southern Methodist University Department of Economics Working Paper 1610.
Diamond, Jared. 1997. Guns, Germs, and Steel: The Fates of Human Societies. New York: W. W. Norton &
Company.
Doepke, Matthias, and Fabrizio Zilibotti. 2014. “Culture, Entrepreneurship, and Growth.” In Handbook of
Economic Growth, Volume 2A, edited by Philippe Aghion and Steven N. Durlauf, 1–48. Amsterdam:
North‐Holland.
Durham, William H. 1991. Coevolution: Genes, Culture, and Human Diversity. Stanford: Stanford
University Press.
Easterly, William, and Ross Levine. 1997. “Africa’s Growth Tragedy: Policies and Ethnic Divisions.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(4): 1203–1250.
Feenstra, Robert C., Robert Inklaar, and Marcel P. Timmer. 2015. “The Next Generation of the Penn
World Table.” American Economic Review, 105(10): 3150–3182.
Galor, Oded. 2011. Unified Growth Theory. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
32

Galor, Oded, and Marc Klemp. 2014. “The Biocultural Origins of Human Capital Formation.” National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 20474.
Galor, Oded, and Marc Klemp. 2017. “The Roots of Autocracy.” National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper 23301.
Galor, Oded, and Stelios Michalopoulos. 2012. “Evolution and the Growth Process: Natural Selection of
Entrepreneurial Traits.” Journal of Economic Theory, 147(2): 759–780.
Galor, Oded, and Omer Moav. 2002. “Natural Selection and the Origin of Economic Growth.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 117(4): 1133–1191.
Galor, Oded, and Omer Moav. 2006. “Das Human‐Kapital: A Theory of the Demise of the Class Structure.”
Review of Economic Studies, 73(1): 85–117.
Galor, Oded, and Omer Moav. 2007. “The Neolithic Revolution and Contemporary Variations in Life
Expectancy.” Brown University Department of Economics Working Paper 2007‐14.
Galor, Oded, and Ömer Özak. 2016. “The Agricultural Origins of Time Preference.” American Economic
Review, 106(10): 3064–3103.
Galor, Oded, Omer Moav, and Dietrich Vollrath. 2009. “Inequality in Landownership, the Emergence of
Human‐Capital Promoting Institutions, and the Great Divergence.” Review of Economic Studies, 76(1):
143–179.
Hanihara, Tsunehiko. 2008. “Morphological Variation of Major Human Populations Based on Nonmetric
Dental Traits.” American Journal of Physical Anthropology, 136(2): 169–182.
Harpending, Henry, and Alan Rogers. 2000. “Genetic Perspectives on Human Origins and Differentiation.”
Annual Review of Genomics and Human Genetics, 1: 361–385.
Hawks, John, Eric T. Wang, Gregory M. Cochran, Henry C. Harpending, and Robert K. Moyzis. 2007.
“Recent Acceleration of Human Adaptive Evolution.” Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 104(52): 20753–20758.
Henn, Brenna M., L. Luca Cavalli‐Sforza, and Marcus W. Feldman. 2012. “The Great Human Expansion.”
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 109(44): 17758–17764.
Henrich, Joe, and Robert Boyd. 1998. “The Evolution of Conformist Transmission and the Emergence of
Between‐Group Differences.” Evolution and Human Behavior, 19(4): 215–241.
Henrich, Joseph, and Richard McElreath. 2003. “The Evolution of Cultural Evolution.” Evolutionary
Anthropology, 12(3): 123–135.
Kittles, Rick A., and Kenneth M. Weiss. 2003. “Race, Ancestry, and Genes: Implications for Defining
Disease Risk.” Annual Review of Genomics and Human Genetics, 4: 33–67.
Kong, Augustine, et al. 2017. “Selection Against Variants in the Genome Associated with Educational
Attainment.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 114(5): E727–E732.
Kong, Augustine, et al. 2018. “The Nature of Nurture: Effects of Parental Genotypes.” Science, 359(6374):
424–428.

33

Lagerlöf, Nils‐Petter. 2007. “Long‐Run Trends in Human Body Mass.” Macroeconomic Dynamics, 11(3):
367–387.
Li, Jun Z., et al. 2008. “Worldwide Human Relationships Inferred from Genome‐Wide Patterns of
Variation.” Science, 319(5866): 1100–1104.
Livingstone, Frank B. 1958. “Anthropological Implications of Sickle Cell Gene Distribution in West Africa.”
American Anthropologist, 60(3): 533–562.
Manica, Andrea, William Amos, François Balloux, and Tsunehiko Hanihara. 2007. “The Effect of Ancient
Population Bottlenecks on Human Phenotypic Variation.” Nature, 448(7151): 346–348.
Mathieson, Iain, et al. 2015. “Genome‐Wide Patterns of Selection in 230 Ancient Eurasians.” Nature,
528(7583): 499–503.
Mekel‐Bobrov, Nitzan, et al. 2005. “Ongoing Adaptive Evolution of ASPM, a Brain Size Determinant in
Homo sapiens.” Science, 309(5741): 1720–1722.
Nielsen, Rasmus, Ines Hellmann, Melissa Hubisz, Carlos Bustamante, and Andrew G. Clark. 2007.
“Recent and Ongoing Selection in the Human Genome.” Nature Reviews Genetics, 8(11): 857–868.
Okbay, Aysu, et al. 2016. “Genome‐Wide Association Study Identifies 74 Loci Associated with Educational
Attainment.” Nature, 533(7604): 539–542.
Pemberton, Trevor J., Michael DeGiorgio, and Noah A. Rosenberg. 2013. “Population Structure in a
Comprehensive Genomic Data Set on Human Microsatellite Variation.” G3: Genes, Genomes,
Genetics, 3(5): 891–907.
Prugnolle, Franck, Andrea Manica, and François Balloux. 2005. “Geography Predicts Neutral Genetic
Diversity of Human Populations.” Current Biology, 15(5): R159–R160.
Putnam, Robert D. 1993. Making Democracy Work: Civic Traditions in Modern Italy. Princeton: Princeton
University Press.
Ramachandran, Sohini, Omkar Deshpande, Charles C. Roseman, Noah A. Rosenberg, Marcus W.
Feldman, and L. Luca Cavalli‐Sforza. 2005. “Support from the Relationship of Genetic and Geographic
Distance in Human Populations for a Serial Founder Effect Originating in Africa.” Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 102(44): 15942–15947.
Rietveld, Cornelius A., et al. 2013. “GWAS of 126,559 Individuals Identifies Genetic Variants Associated
with Educational Attainment.” Science, 340(6139): 1467–1471.
Robson, Arthur J., and Larry Samuelson. 2011. “The Evolutionary Foundations of Preferences.” In
Handbook of Social Economics, Volume 1A, edited by Jess Benhabib, Alberto Bisin, and Matthew O.
Jackson, 221–310. Amsterdam: North‐Holland.
Rogers, Deborah S., Marcus W. Feldman, and Paul R. Ehrlich. 2009. “Inferring Population Histories using
Cultural Data.” Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 276(1674): 3835–3843.
Rosenberg, Noah A., and Jonathan T. L. Kang. 2015. “Genetic Diversity and Societally Important
Disparities.” Genetics, 201(1): 1–12.

34

Rosenberg, Noah A., et al. 2002. “Genetic Structure of Human Populations.” Science, 298(5602): 2381–
2385.
Rosenberg, Noah A., Saurabh Mahajan, Sohini Ramachandran, Chengfeng Zhao, Jonathan K. Pritchard,
and Marcus W. Feldman. 2005. “Clines, Clusters, and the Effect of Study Design on the Inference of
Human Population Structure.” PLoS Genetics, 1(6): e70.
Sabeti, Pardis C., et al. 2006. “Positive Natural Selection in the Human Lineage.” Science, 312(5780):
1614–1620.
Sacerdote, Bruce. 2011. “Nature and Nurture Effects on Children’s Outcomes: What Have We Learned
from Studies of Twins and Adoptees?” In Handbook of Social Economics, Volume 1A, edited by Jess
Benhabib, Alberto Bisin, and Matthew O. Jackson, 1–30. Amsterdam: North‐Holland.
Serre, David, and Svante Pääbo. 2004. “Evidence for Gradients of Human Genetic Diversity Within and
Among Continents.” Genome Research, 14(9): 1679–1685.
Simonson, Tatum S., et al. 2010. “Genetic Evidence for High‐Altitude Adaptation in Tibet.” Science,
329(5987): 72–75.
Spolaore, Enrico, and Romain Wacziarg. 2009. “The Diffusion of Development.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 124(2): 469–529.
Spolaore, Enrico, and Romain Wacziarg. 2014. “Long‐Term Barriers to Economic Development.” In
Handbook of Economic Growth, Volume 2A, edited by Philippe Aghion and Steven N. Durlauf, 121–
176. Amsterdam: North‐Holland.
Spolaore, Enrico, and Romain Wacziarg. 2016. “Ancestry, Language, and Culture.” In The Palgrave
Handbook of Economics and Language, edited by Victor Ginsburgh and Shlomo Weber, 174–211.
London: Palgrave Macmillian.
Tishkoff, Sarah A., et al. 2001. “Haplotype Diversity and Linkage Disequilibrium at Human G6PD: Recent
Origin of Alleles That Confer Malarial Resistance.” Science, 293(5529): 455–462.
Tishkoff, Sarah A., et al. 2007. “Convergent Adaptation of Human Lactase Persistence in Africa and
Europe.” Nature Genetics, 39(1): 31–40.
Voight, Benjamin F., Sridhar Kudaravalli, Xiaoquan Wen, Jonathan K. Pritchard. 2006. “A Map of Recent
Positive Selection in the Human Genome.” PLoS Biology, 4(3): e72.
von Cramon‐Taubadel, Noreen, and Stephen J. Lycett. 2008. “Brief Communication: Human Cranial
Variation Fits Iterative Founder Effect Model with African Origin.” American Journal of Physical
Anthropology, 136(1): 108–113.
Wade, Nicholas. 2014. A Troublesome Inheritance: Genes, Race and Human History. New York: Penguin
Books.
Wallace, Björn, David Cesarini, Paul Lichtenstein, and Magnus Johannesson. 2007. “Heritability of
Ultimatum Game Responder Behavior.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 104(40):
15631–15634.
Weber, Max. 1930. The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism. London: Allen and Unwin.

35

Weibull, Jörgen W., and Marcus Salomonsson. 2006. “Natural Selection and Social Preferences.” Journal
of Theoretical Biology, 239(1): 79–92.
Wiesenfeld, Stephen L. 1967. “Sickle‐Cell Trait in Human Biological and Cultural Evolution: Development
of Agriculture Causing Increased Malaria is Bound to Gene‐Pool Changes Causing Malaria Reduction.”
Science, 157(3793): 1134–1140.

36

Figures and Tables

Figure 1. The “Out of Africa” Migration from the Cradle of Mankind
Notes: This figure depicts on a world map (i) the locations (denoted by crosses) of the 53 ethnic groups that constitute the HGDP‐CEPH
Human Genome Diversity Cell Line Panel; (ii) the locations (denoted by circles) of the intermediate waypoints used to construct the
land‐connected migratory paths from Addis Ababa to these ethnic groups; and (iii) some migratory paths (denoted by solid lines) based
on these waypoints.
Source: Ashraf and Galor (2013a).

37

Bantu-SE

.75

Yoruba
Bantu-SW
Bantu-Kenya
Biaka-Pygmy

Mandenka

.7

San
Mozabite
Makrani
Tuscan Sindhi
Bedouin
Palestinian
Pathan
Balochi
Russian Uygur
Brahui
French
Adygei Italian
Burusho
Hazara
Druze
Sardinian Orcadian
Basque
Xibo
Kalash

Mongola
Han-NChina
Daur
Tu Yi Cambodian
Han Hezhen
Yakut
Japanese
Dai Tujia
Miao
Naxi
Oroqen
She
Lahu
Papuan

.65

Maya
Melanesian

.6

Expected heterozygosity

Mbuti-Pygmy

Colombian

.55

Pima

Karitiana

0

5

10

15

20

25

Migratory distance from East Africa (in thousand km)
Africa

Middle East

Europe

Asia

Oceania

Americas

Figure 2. Expected Heterozygosity and Migratory Distance from East Africa
Notes: This figure depicts the negative influence of migratory distance from East Africa on expected heterozygosity (genetic diversity)
across the 53 ethnic groups that constitute the HGDP‐CEPH Human Genome Diversity Cell Line Panel.
Source: Ashraf and Galor (2013a).

38

.25
.2
.15
.1

Pairwise Fst genetic distance

.05
0
0

10

20

30

Pairwise migratory distance (in thousand km)

Figure 3. Pairwise FST Genetic Distance and Pairwise Migratory Distance
Notes: This figure depicts the positive influence of pairwise migratory distance on pairwise FST genetic distance across all 1,378 ethnic
group pairs from the set of 53 ethnic groups that constitute the HGDP‐CEPH Human Genome Diversity Cell Line Panel.
Source: Ashraf and Galor (2013a).

39

Panel B:

17

31

Panel A:
JPN

BEL
THA

NZL

HTI

LKA
CHN
KHM

BLZ

MMR

MEX

PNG

DOM
CRI
PAN

CHL

PER
HND

VNM

NIC

IDN

BOL

GTM
MNG
THA

SLV

LAO

AUS

COL
ECU

VEN

PRY
SUR

PHL
MYS

UKR
MDA

30

ESP
PRT
IND
FRAPAK
FIN
MAR GBR

IDN
NZL

VNM JPN
LAO
CAN

LKA
BGD

MEX
USA

PHL
AUS

NOR
DEU
SWE
CHE
DNK
DZA
POL
CZE
AUT
LTU
LVA
RUS
HUN
EST
BLR
EGY

TUNUKR
HRV
MKDSVN
IRN

SYR
ISR

PAN
ECU
CRI
NIC
HND
SLV
GTM
COL
BLZ

PER BOL

HTI

UZBKAZ

DOM

GRC
ROM
MDA
SAU
ALB

GUY

BRA

12

CAN

BGR
TUR

29

CUB
NPLBGD

(Control variables held at zero)

15

GBR
IRL
CZE ITA
BDI
OMN
FRA IND
DEU
ISR
ARE
MRT
MOZ
LBR
GIN PRT
DNK
SEN
TUN
KWT
SVN
QAT
BFA
POL
SOM
SLE
MAR
NOR
SAU
GNB
MDG
ESP
SYR BWA CIV
JOR
ZWE
GMB
NGA BIH
HUN
MKD
LBN
BEN
GEO
TUR
SWE
NAM
HRV
TZA
GHA
EST
CAF
AFG
LVA
IRN
ZMB ROM
ALB
COG GRC
BGRDZA
TGO
TCD IRQ
LTU
UGA
TKM
GABSWZ
MLI
ARM
ZAF BLR
LSO
KGZ
SDN
AZE
NER
CMRLBY
UZB
TJK
MWI
ETH
RUS KAZ
KEN
FIN

14

(Control variables held at zero)

RWA

AUT
AGO YEM

KOR
MYS
CHN

ITA

28

Log urbanization rate in 1500

16

KOR
PRK
BELPAK
CHE
NLD
EGY

13

Log population density in 1500

NLD

GUY

ARG
CHL URY
PRY

27

VEN
BRA

ARG
URY

USA

.2

.25

.3

.35

.4

.45

.25

.3

Predicted homogeneity
Africa

Europe

Asia

Oceania

.35

.4

.45

Predicted homogeneity
Americas

Africa

Europe

Asia

Oceania

Americas

Figure 4. Interpersonal Diversity and Historical Comparative Development across Countries
Notes: This figure depicts the cross‐country hump‐shaped influence of predicted homogeneity (i.e., 1 minus interpersonal diversity
predicted by migratory distance from East Africa) on economic development in the year 1500, as reflected by either log population
density (Panel A) or log urbanization rate (Panel B), conditional on the timing of the Neolithic Revolution, land productivity, and
continent/regional fixed effects. Please refer to Ashraf and Galor (2013a) for additional details.
Source: Ashraf and Galor (2013a).

40

ZAF

CIV
TUN
SWZ
TUR IRN

OMN

ZWE

SEN

USA
BEL CAN
DOM
DNK
PAK
GBR
NZL
IRL
RWA
NLD
BGR
FRA ARG
MLI
NAM
HTI DZA
POL
ESP
NOR
URY
UGA
BEN
ITA
AUS
BGD
SDN
BRA
NER
FIN
GMB
ROM
NGA BFAAUT SWE
AGO
DEUMRT
CHE
CYP
MOZ
GRC
TGO
PRT
MAR GUY
LKA
GHA
CAFCOG
TCD
JAM
GNB IND
EGY
MWI
IRQ

15

SAU
BWA
HUN

14.5

(Control variables held at zero)

15.5

CMR

TZA
KENBDI

PAN

MYS
KOR

JPN
PHL
MEX
COL

THA

IDN

SLV

CHNCRI
CHL

SLE

ZMB

GTM
PRY

SOM

MDG
SYR
VEN

ETH

NIC
PNG
PER

JOR

LSO

13.5

HND

BOL
ECU

.2

.25

.3

.35

370

Samoans
Tolai Tolai
(Vunairoto)
(Kabakada)
Nakanai (Bileki)
Xibo

Europe

Asia

Oceania

Nakanai (Loso)
Zenu
Mixe

Tu

Aymara
Ata (Lugei)Ata (Uasilau)
Taruko
Maya
Pima
Dai
Daur
Ojibwa
Oroqen
Mixtec
Cree
KoveWayuu
Quechua
Inga
Naxi
Baining (Rangulit)
Anem (Keraiai)
Anem (Purailing)
Kaqchikel
Mamusi (Kisiluvi)
Mamusi (Lingite)
Melamela
Kuot (Lamalaua)
Kuot
(Kabil)
Maoris
Piapoco
Hezhen Mangseng
Zapotec
Japanese Sulka
Sulka
(Ganai)
(Watwat)
Palestinian
KolNasioi
Mussau
Madak
Cabecar
Aita
Chipewyan
Basque
Mongola
Kalash
Huilliche
Orcadian
She
Lavongai
Lavongai
(South)
(North)
Kaingang
Punjabi
Mengen
Teop
Baining (Malasait)
Lahu
Baining (Marabu)
Sindhi
Embera
Mozabite
Sardinian
Adygei
Tujia
Waunana
Uygur
Guarani
Burusho
Cambodian
BalochiGujarati
Tuscan
Tundra Nentsi
Arhuaco
Miao
!Xun/Kxoe
Italian
Kashmiri
Konkani
Telugu
Bengali
Malayalam
Nyimang
Hazara
Batanga
Yi
Pathan
Assamese
Hindi
Bedouin
Temani
Druze
Iyassa
Podokwo
Brahui
Oriya
Tamil
Kannada
Marwari
Kotoko
Marathi
Yakut
Mandara
Makrani
Han (N. China)
Han
Dorobo
Okiek
Xhosa
Dioula
Gwari
Venda San
Russian
Mada
Giziga
Zulgo Koma
Sengwer
French
Ouldeme
Yaaku
Lemande
Shilook
Zime
Rendille
Fulani (Mbororo)
Tupuri
Mbum
Tugen
Nandi
Rangi
Igala
Maasai
Maasai
Samburu
Maasai
(Mumonyot)
(Ilchamus)
(Ilgwesi)
Bulala
Yakoma
Mbugwe
Kikuyu
Mbugu
Datoga
Banen
Beja
(Hadandawa) Hadza
Sandawe
Tikar
Tikar
(South)
Bakola
Bedzan
Brong
(North)
Baggara
Yoruba
Yoruba
Bamoun
Turu Bafia
Yambassa
Burunge
Akie
Tutsi/Hutu
Wimbum
Marakwet
Pokot
Laka
Kanembou
Fiome
(Gorowa)
Fulani
(Adamawa)
Ngumba
Mabea
Mvae
Ntumu
Fang
Turkana
Bulu
Konso
Ngambaye
Kanuri
Burji
Gabra
Sambaa
Maasai (Tanzania)
Luhya
Igbo
Kongo
Biaka
Wata
Pygmy
Iraqw
Beja (Banuamir)
Massa
Pare Bassange
Beta
Israel
Sabaot
Luo
Baka
Sara
Kaba
Batie
(various)
Ashanti
Bantu
(Kenya)
Gogo
Nuer
Mbuti
Pygmy
Dinka
Hausa
(Nigeria)
Nalik
Notsi
Saposa

.4

Americas

Kogi
Ticuna
Ticuna(Arara)
(Tarapaca)

Karitiana
Guaymi

Borana
Baluba
Sukuma
Gbaya
Mandenka

.25

.3

Predicted ancestry-adjusted homogeneity
Africa

Ami

Tigak

365

GIN

ISR

14

Log income per capita in 2000

16

TTO

360

GAB

(Control variables held at zero)

Log average luminosity per capita, 1992-2013

Panel B:

355

Panel A:

.35

.4

.45

Observed homogeneity
Africa

Europe

Asia

Oceania

N. America

S. America

Figure 5. Interpersonal Diversity and Contemporary Comparative Development across Countries and Ethnic Groups
Notes: This figure depicts the hump‐shaped influence of interpersonal diversity on contemporary economic development across
countries and ethnic groups. Panel A depicts the relationship across countries between predicted ancestry‐adjusted homogeneity (i.e.,
1 minus interpersonal diversity predicted by the migratory distances of a country’s ancestral populations from East Africa and the
pairwise migratory distances among them) and log income per capita in the year 2000, conditional on the ancestry‐adjusted timing of
the Neolithic Revolution, land productivity, a vector of institutional, cultural, and geographical determinants of development, and
continent/regional fixed effects. Panel B depicts the relationship across ethnic groups between observed homogeneity (i.e., 1 minus
expected heterozygosity) and log average light intensity per capita in the 1992–2013 time horizon, conditional on absolute latitude,
soil quality, type of landmass, group size, institutional characteristics (extent of jurisdictional hierarchy and type of class stratification),
and regional fixed effects. Please refer to Ashraf and Galor (2013a) and Ashraf, Galor, and Klemp (2015) for additional details.
Sources: Ashraf and Galor (2013a) and Ashraf, Galor, and Klemp (2015).

41

.3

Panel B:

.4

Panel A:
SWE

CHE

CHL

SLV
PER
GTM
PRY

MRT
IND
ZAF
JPN
PAK
FRA
TGO BDI

HND

TUN
MMR
BEN

IDN

SDN

GMB
ECU
NER

BGR

PRT

SYR

BRA
AUT

MYS
BWA

DEU
ROMKOR
POL

PNG

MOZ
URY

AUS

CAF

ZMB
NIC
ESP
HUN

IRL
MLI

BOL
CYP

URY

.2

SAU
THA
NZL

IDN

NLD

FIN

.1

HTI
DOM

GUY

ARG

SWZ
VEN
LSO
BEL
GRC
CMR

ITA
DZA

GHA

IRN
FIN

RWA
CAN
EGY
PAN COL
NOR
LKA
ZWE
MWI
CRI

UGA

SEN

MEX
CHN

TUR
TTO

VNM

JPN

CHE
GTM

MEX

IRQ

ETH

AUS
RWA

SLV

KOR

IRL
CAN
GBR

BGD

MLI

NGA
ARM

ESP

ZMB
USA
BEL

KGZ

0

SLE

COG
ETH

CHN

(Control variables held at zero)

ZAR

NOR
SWE

IRN

UKR AZE

LUX
BLR

ZAF

ZWE LTU

PER

CHL

UGA
IND
ITA

HUN
DEU

BFA
AUT
CZE
HRV

-.1

IRQ KEN

BGD

Prevalence of interpersonal trust

.2

USA

NZL

PHL

0

(Control variables held at zero)

NLD
DNK

-.2

Scientific articles per capita

DNK

GBR

GHA

POL

BGR

VEN

COL

ALB
JOR
TZA
YUG

GRC

ARG

BIH
SVK
FRA

RUS

SVN
MAR

EST

ISR

PAK

MDA

EGY

GEO
ROM

PRT
MKD
THA

LVA

BRA

TUR

-.4

-.2

MYS

DZA

-.05

0

Africa

.05

0

.02

(Control variables held at zero)

Europe

Asia

Oceania

N. America

S. America

Africa

Europe

Asia

Oceania

.04

N. America

S. America

.5

RUS

HUN

GMB

VNM
HND
ESP

GNB

0

PER
MNG

GTM

PRY

MEX

BWAAFG
MLI CAN
KAZ

LAO
DZA
MRT

ZARLTU
AUS
MKD BGR
SYR

IRL
EGY ALB
ZMB
TUN
NLD
BGD
FIN

DNK
MAR

CHL

-.5

GEO
NPL

IND
BLR
CRI
TJK
TCD
KWT
CZE
JOR GRC
KENCOL
ROMPAN
SVN
UZB
TUR
ECU
CMR
BIH
NIC
OMN
PHL
THA
NGA
BTN
KGZ
ARE
CIV
UKR
MWI ARM
HRV
SEN
MOZ
AUT
PAK USA SOM
BEN
IRQTKM
ISR
COG
DEUNER
POL
MYS
LBY
AGO
VEN
LSOKHM FRA
GIN
IDN

SLV
BOL

NZL
UGA

CHE
IRN
BFASLE EST
LVA
YUG
GAB
MDA
MMR BEL
SAU

AZE
DOM

ETH

GUY

HTI

BRA
ARG

SDN
CAF
CUB

SWE
LKA

SWZ

KOR
PRK

ZWE

JPN

NOR
CHN
ITA
RWA

-1

PNG
PRT
BDI

.15

ETH

.1

GBR
LBR
NAM
GHA
ZAF

IND
GEO

AZE

RUS

.05

URY

(Control variables held at zero)

TGO

BIH

NGA
MDA
YUG ZAR
MKD HRV
AGO

0

PRY

PER
GTM MNG
ECU

BOL

.05

HND

CHN

-.1

-.05

(Control variables held at zero)

Asia

0

.05

(Control variables held at zero)

Predicted ancestry-adjusted diversity
Europe

IDN
PAK
MAR
TJKUZB
IRN ZAF
LKA
TUR
LSO
GNB
GBR
GMB
SDN
BGD OMN
TUN ISR EGY
MOZ
ZWE SYR
URY SLESAU
SEN
ROM
MMR
YEM
LBR
COG
TGO GAB
IRQ
ESP
CIV
SOM
BDI
BFA GIN RWA GHA FRA
MYS
KHM
NIC
THA FIN EST
PAN
MDG
LVA MLI
KWT
QAT
BLR
HTI
LTU
UGA
CMR
DZA
IRL
DNK
NLD
ARE
PHL
LUX
JOR
CAF
KEN
DOM
CZE
VEN SWE
BEL
NOR
POL HUN
BWA
AFGDEU
GNQ
TCD
SWZ
SVK
PRT
SVN
CHLCOL
NAM
ARM LBYUSA
NPL
AUT
UKR BGR
LBN
KOR
ALB
NZL
BEN
CHE
BLZ
LAO
GRC
JPN
GUY
ZMB
PRK
CUB MWI
VNM
AUS
ITA
CRITKM
TZA
BRA
BTN
ARG
KGZ
CAN
MRT

SLV
PNG
MEX

KAZ

-.05

Africa

ERI

NER

0

Log civil conflict onsets per year, 1960-2008

LBN
MDG

-.05

1

Panel D:
TZA

(Control variables held at zero)

-.02

Predicted ancestry-adjusted diversity

Panel C:

Log number of ethnic groups

-.04

(Control variables held at zero)

Predicted ancestry-adjusted diversity

Oceania

Predicted ancestry-adjusted diversity

N. America

S. America

Africa

Europe

Asia

Oceania

N. America

S. America

TZA

1

IND

TUR
JOR
ALB
GEO
YUG
UGA
BGR ITA
DZA
MKD
IRN
SVK
NGA
CZE
CHEUKR AZE
ROM
FRA

SWE
SLV
BGD
ZAF

0

LTU
PRT
BLR
NOR

KGZ
FIN

IDN

ZWE
NZL

-1

GTM

RUS

CAN

NLD
BFA
ARM
BEL
DNK
GBRESP

GRC

EGY

COL

BIH
SVN

GHA
DEU

IRL
JPN

BRA

POL

URY
CHL

USA

PER

VEN

MAR

MEX

KOR

ISR
IRQ

MDA

MLI

LVA
AUS
LUX

EST

ZMB

RWA
HUN

HRV

ARG

AUT

ETH

THA

-2

(Control variables held at zero)

Heterogeneity in political preferences

2

Panel E:

PAK
VNM

-.04

-.02

0

.02

.04

(Control variables held at zero)

Predicted ancestry-adjusted diversity
Africa

Europe

Asia

Oceania

N. America

S. America

Figure 6. Mechanisms of the Impact of Interpersonal Diversity on Aggregate Productivity
42

Notes: This figure depicts the cross‐country associations between predicted ancestry‐adjusted diversity and (i) the average annual
number of scientific articles per capita in the 1981–2000 time horizon (Panel A); (ii) the prevalence of interpersonal trust in data from
the World Values Survey, 1981–2008 (Panel B); (iii) the number of ethnic groups (Panel C); (iv) the annual frequency of new civil conflict
onsets in the 1960–2008 time horizon (Panel D); and (v) the intracountry dispersion in individual political attitudes (expressed on a
politically “left”–“right” categorical scale) in data from the World Values Survey (Panel E). Each relationship is conditioned on a sizeable
vector of control variables relevant for explaining the outcome of interest. Please refer to Ashraf and Galor (2013a, 2013b) and Arbatlı
et al. (2018) for additional details.
Sources: Ashraf and Galor (2013a, 2013b) and Arbatlı et al. (2018).

43

TABLE 1
Interpersonal Diversity, Genetic Distance to the Frontier, and Comparative Development
(1)

(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
Dependent variable is log of average real GDP per capita, 2000‐2009

Frontier = U.S.
Predicted diversity
Predicted diversity squared
Genetic distance to the frontier
Linguistic distance to the frontier
Religious distance to the frontier
Ethnic fractionalization
Linguistic fractionalization
Religious fractionalization
Absolute latitude
Agricultural suitability
Terrain ruggedness
Distance to coast
Mean monthly temperature
Mean monthly precipitation
% land area in tropical and subtropical zones
% land area in temperate zones
Disease richness

Landlocked and small island fixed effects
Colonial history and legal origin fixed effects
Regional fixed effects
Observations
Partial R2 of predicted diversity
Partial R2 of genetic distance
Partial R2 sum of all distance measures
Adjusted R2

Frontier = U.K.

Frontier = Western

(8)

Frontier = OECD

239.402*** 299.374*** 278.323*** 296.325*** 268.883*** 307.484*** 255.392*** 285.992***
(80.920)
(82.710)
(86.736)
(82.002)
(88.444)
(84.966)
(93.376)
(88.979)
‐177.836*** ‐213.209*** ‐205.565*** ‐211.081*** ‐198.069*** ‐219.301*** ‐187.765*** ‐204.178***
(58.334)
(59.678)
(62.390)
(59.100)
(63.640)
(61.257)
(67.164)
(64.041)
‐5.262***
1.368
‐4.937***
0.919
‐4.386**
1.621
‐4.513**
2.410
(1.944)
(2.177)
(1.535)
(1.798)
(1.948)
(2.200)
(2.098)
(2.343)
0.555
0.869
1.166
1.372*
‐0.838
0.344
‐1.660
‐1.475
(0.701)
(0.636)
(0.925)
(0.722)
(2.033)
(1.800)
(2.619)
(2.160)
‐1.391*
‐1.890**
‐1.406
‐2.024*** ‐1.712**
‐2.070***
‐1.720*
‐2.102***
(0.603)
(0.720)
(0.750)
(0.937)
(0.657)
(0.845)
(0.724)
(0.876)
‐0.547
‐0.192
‐0.431
‐0.244
‐0.500
‐0.187
‐0.542
‐0.201
(0.451)
(0.392)
(0.457)
(0.399)
(0.414)
(0.379)
(0.413)
(0.373)
‐0.372
‐0.106
‐0.442
‐0.098
‐0.328
‐0.090
‐0.261
‐0.044
(0.390)
(0.320)
(0.409)
(0.326)
(0.365)
(0.303)
(0.366)
(0.296)
1.077*** 1.013***
1.204*** 1.068***
1.072*** 0.964***
1.059*** 0.912***
(0.400)
(0.322)
(0.403)
(0.323)
(0.404)
(0.320)
(0.402)
(0.315)
‐0.003
‐0.007
‐0.010
‐0.008
‐0.006
‐0.007
‐0.004
‐0.004
(0.017)
(0.014)
(0.017)
(0.014)
(0.016)
(0.014)
(0.017)
(0.015)
‐1.035*** ‐0.878**
‐0.960**
‐0.933**
‐0.988**
‐0.819**
‐1.036*** ‐0.794**
(0.392)
(0.363)
(0.398)
(0.372)
(0.382)
(0.363)
(0.371)
(0.353)
‐0.001*
‐0.001*
‐0.001**
‐0.001*
‐0.001*
‐0.001*
‐0.001
‐0.001*
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
‐0.394*
‐0.383
‐0.487**
‐0.412*
‐0.459**
‐0.386*
‐0.435*
‐0.365
(0.229)
(0.231)
(0.223)
(0.224)
(0.228)
(0.231)
(0.228)
(0.232)
‐0.897
0.725
‐2.754
0.716
‐0.976
0.938
‐0.597
1.313
(2.594)
(2.153)
(2.676)
(2.166)
(2.448)
(2.166)
(2.489)
(2.219)
‐0.212
‐0.242
‐0.281
‐0.263
‐0.264
‐0.226
‐0.253
‐0.197
(0.269)
(0.209)
(0.274)
(0.207)
(0.263)
(0.210)
(0.262)
(0.210)
‐0.512**
‐0.424
‐0.525**
‐0.410
‐0.497*
‐0.437
‐0.488*
‐0.429
(0.328)
(0.253)
(0.321)
(0.254)
(0.321)
(0.253)
(0.326)
(0.255)
0.293
0.423
0.353
0.438
0.294
0.413
0.296
0.378
(0.320)
(0.271)
(0.320)
(0.278)
(0.316)
(0.269)
(0.313)
(0.264)
‐0.003
‐0.003
0.000
‐0.003
0.001
‐0.001
0.000
‐0.000
(0.006)
(0.006)
(0.007)
(0.006)
(0.006)
(0.006)
(0.006)
(0.006)
Yes
Yes
No
127
0.091
0.068
0.162
0.751

Yes
Yes
Yes
127
0.159
0.003
0.049
0.809

Yes
Yes
No
127
0.111
0.094
0.170
0.740

Yes
Yes
Yes
127
0.152
0.002
0.051
0.807

Yes
Yes
No
127
0.104
0.057
0.130
0.758

Yes
Yes
Yes
127
0.157
0.005
0.051
0.810

Yes
Yes
No
127
0.089
0.053
0.121
0.761

Yes
Yes
Yes
127
0.133
0.009
0.056
0.813

Notes: The analysis in this table exploits cross‐country variations to examine the influences of predicted ancestry‐adjusted
interpersonal diversity (based on the migratory distances of a country’s ancestral populations from East Africa and the pairwise
migratory distances among them) and genetic distance to the economic frontier on economic development, conditional on the
potentially confounding effects of cultural distance (as proxied by linguistic and religious distances) to the frontier; measures of ethnic,
linguistic, and religious fractionalization; various geographical, topographical, and climatological characteristics; and institutional

44

factors associated with historical colonial experience. The specifications presented in even‐numbered columns additionally control for
regional fixed effects. The various measures of genetic, linguistic, and religious distances considered by the analysis include (a)
distances to the contemporary population of the U.S. [columns 1–2]; (b) distances to the contemporary population of the U.K.
[columns 3–4]; (c) mean distances to the contemporary populations of Western European and Western offshoot nations [columns 5–
6]; and (d) mean distances to the contemporary populations of the OECD member nations, including nations from Asia and Latin
America [columns 7–8]. The set of legal origin fixed effects include dummies for British, French, Socialist, and Scandinavian legal
origins. The set of regional fixed effects include dummies for the Sub‐Saharan Africa, Middle East and North Africa, Europe and Central
Asia, South Asia, East Asia and Pacific, North America, and Latin America and Caribbean regions. Heteroskedasticity robust standard
errors are reported in parentheses. *** denotes statistical significant at the 1 percent level, ** at the 5 percent level, and * at the 10
percent level.

45

