                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    CHINA'S GRADUALISTIC ECONOMIC APPROACH AND FINANCIAL MARKETS

                                    Markus K. Brunnermeier
                                       Michael Sockin
                                         Wei Xiong

                                       Working Paper 23194
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w23194


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2017




We would like to thank participants at the AEA 2017 annual meetings and especially our
discussant Darrell Duffie. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w23194.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Markus K. Brunnermeier, Michael Sockin, and Wei Xiong. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
China's Gradualistic Economic Approach and Financial Markets
Markus K. Brunnermeier, Michael Sockin, and Wei Xiong
NBER Working Paper No. 23194
February 2017
JEL No. E5,G10

                                          ABSTRACT

China’s gradualistic approach allowed the government to learn how the economy reacts to small
policy changes, and to adjust its reforms before implementing them in full. With fully developed
financial markets, however, private actors’ may front-run future policy changes making it
impossible for the implement policies gradually. With financial markets the government faces a
time-inconsistency problem. The government would like to commit to a gradualistic approach,
but after it observes the economy’s quick reaction, it has no incentive to implement its policies in
small steps.

Markus K. Brunnermeier                           Wei Xiong
Princeton University                             Princeton University
Department of Economics                          Department of Economics
Bendheim Center for Finance                      Bendheim Center for Finance
Princeton, NJ 08540                              Princeton, NJ 08450
and NBER                                         and NBER
markus@princeton.edu                             wxiong@princeton.edu

Michael Sockin
University of Texas at Austin
2110 Speedway
Austin, TX 78701
michael.sockin@mccombs.utexas.edu
      A key approach successfully employed by China to reform its economy in the past
thirty years is the so-called “crossing the river by touching the stones” approach, a
gradualistic method that optimizes policy through experimentation. The government
will start with an initial (usually small) policy change, and gradually modify the
policy based on the reaction from the economy to this change. This approach has
worked well because it typically takes months, and even quarters, for the economy
to react to a change in policy. This gives policy makers enough time to study the
economy’s reaction, and to discern appropriate policy adjustments. With China
still largely a combination of central planning and free markets, the government
continues to play a central role in many aspects of the economy. After thirty years
of rapid growth, however, its economy has become increasingly complex. Realizing
its limitation in managing this complex economy, the government has made it a high
priority to fully develop China’s financial system and, in particular, to let financial
markets play a greater role in determining the allocation of capital and economic
resources. Can China continue to use its gradualistic approach in the presence of
active financial markets?
      China’s post 2008 stimulus program provides a salient example of how financial
markets may cause a temporary policy initiative to have a larger and more perma-
nent impact on the economy than the government intended. In response to the global
financial crisis in 2008, the Chinese government loosened financial regulations to al-
low local governments to fund infrastructure investment by borrowing from banks
and a shadow banking system. This led to a rapid expansion of this shadow bank-
ing system, which in turn, substantially increased leverage across the economy, not
just through the credit received by local governments for infrastructure investment.1
  1
    See Hachem and Song (2015), Chen, Ren, and Zha (2015), Bai, Hsieh, and Song (2016), Cong
and Ponticelli (2016), Chen, He, and Liu (2016), Acharya, Qian, and Yang (2016), Huang, Pagano,


                                              2
The liberated financial system did not allow the government to experiment with a
temporary stimulus that could be reversed easily soon after its inception.
   The breakdown of the new installed circuit breakers in China’s stock market in
January 2016 illustrates that the speed with which financial markets react under-
mines the gradualist approach. The circuit breakers were activated on their first
day of being put in place, and then again two days later, even though they were
intended only for extreme situations. This fast reaction brought frequent disruptions
to the stock market. As a consequence, the circuit breakers were discarded after only
four days, which greatly embarrassed policy makers and led to the removal of the
chairman of the China Securities Regulatory Commission (CSRC). This fast reaction
demonstrates that policy makers may not have adequate time to gradually adjust
underdeveloped policy schemes in reforming the financial system.
   In this paper, we present a simple model to illustrate a tension between the
government’s gradualistic approach and the incentive of financial market participants
to front-run gradual policy changes. As financial markets offer participants greater
flexibility to obtain financing and to trade, market participants can actively engage in
speculation about future policy changes. This may, in turn, render the government’s
gradualistic approach ineffective. Our model builds on several key ingredients. First,
a policy maker uses investment decisions taken by private agents in the economy as
a signal to infer their information about economic fundamentals, and more gradual
investment reduces the noise in this signal. This feature motivates the policy maker
to adopt gradual policy changes, even though they are inefficient ex-post after the
private agents make their investment decisions.
   Second, the availability of financial markets alters the timing of actions taken by
and Panizza (2016), Liang et al. (2016), and Wang et al. (2016) for a series of studies on the
expansion of shadow banking and private sector leverage in China.


                                              3
private agents and the policy maker. In the absence of financial markets, private
agents make investment decisions only after the policy maker announces his policy
decision. In this case, the policy maker can use gradual policy changes to optimize
the information extracted from private agents’ investment decisions. When private
agents have access to financial markets, however, the greater financing flexibility
allows them to choose investment ahead of the policy maker’s policy decision. In this
case, the effectiveness of the policy maker’s gradual policy changes depends crucially
on whether the policy maker can pre-commit to a policy rule. If the policy maker
can commit, the timing of actions is irrelevant as the policy maker can pre-commit
to a gradual policy rule, and later adhere to this rule by ignoring the potential gain
from using an ex-post efficient policy after private agents have made their investment
decisions. In this way, the gradual policy rule would still force private agents to adopt
gradual investment decisions, and thus allow the policy maker to efficiently extract
information.
   If the policy maker cannot commit to a policy rule, however, there arises the well-
known time-inconsistency problem, highlighted in Kydland and Prescott (1977) and
Barro and Gordon (1983). As it is ex-post efficient for the policy maker to abandon
the gradual policy change after private agents have made their investment decisions,
private agents, in turn, anticipate the policy maker to do so, and choose to front-run
the policy maker. This front-running by private agents renders the policy maker’s
gradualistic approach ineffective.
   China is now facing many challenges in developing and managing its financial sys-
tem, ranging from rising leverage across the country and increasing capital outflows
to large volatility in the stock market and growing instability in the housing market.
A common theme of these challenges is the intensive interaction between market par-


                                           4
ticipants and government policies. In particular, financial markets provide market
participants not only financing for their investments, but also instruments to engage
in speculation about government policies. This paper describes a mechanism through
which market speculation can render the government’s gradualistic approach of policy
making ineffective. In a companion paper, Brunnermeier, Sockin and Xiong (2016)
develop a model to illustrate another type of interaction—intensive government in-
tervention in financial markets can induce market participants to acquire information
about persistent noise in the government’s policy, and distracts them from analyzing
economic fundamentals. Through this mechanism, the well-intentioned government
intervention to stabilize markets may lead to reduced, rather than improved, infor-
mation efficiency of asset prices. Taken together, these two papers highlight that, in
financial development, it is important for the government to account for the private
incentives of market participants to speculate and front-run government policies.



1     The Model Setup

Consider an economy with three dates t = 0, 1, 2, in which a large, strategic policy
maker and a continuum of identical private firms learn the fundamentals that govern
the economy over time. The economy is subject to two fundamental shocks, θ and
ε. The shock θ, which can be thought of as a technological shock capturing the
strength of the economy, affects payoffs of both the policy maker and firms, while ε
only directly affects firms.
    The policy maker makes two policy choices a1 and a2 on date 1 and 2, respectively,




                                          5
to maximize a quadratic objective function


                          U0 = max E − (θ − a1 )2 − (θ − a2 )2 .
                                                             
                                                                                        (1)
                               a1 ,a2



Mapping this setting to China’s post 2008 economic stimulus program discussed
earlier, one may think of a1 as the initial scale or, alternatively, duration of the
credit stimulus program. At t = 0, the fundamentals θ and ε are unobservable
to the policy maker and the private agents who operate the firms. From their
perspective, θ and ε are independently and normally distributed random variables:
               
θ ∼ N θ̄, 1/τθ and ε ∼ N (0, 1/τε ) . The mean of the prior belief θ̄, with θ̄ > 0,
represents the public information at t = 0 about θ.
    Private agents choose a level of capital k for a continuum of identical firms. Each
firm produces output y (k) according to a linear technology y (k) = eθ k, subject
                                             a
to a quadratic cost c (k) =       1
                                  2
                                      (e−ε ) 1 k 2 , with ε as a shock to the firm’s cost of
capital. Notice that the policy maker’s action a1 , which private firms either observe
or anticipate, also affects firms’ investment cost. Unlike the policy maker, agents
observe both θ and ε at t = 1 before making their investment decisions. Thus, they
choose k to maximize the profit Π = y (k) − c (k):

                                                      1 −ε 2a1 2
                               Π = max eθ k −           e      k .                      (2)
                                         k            2

The first order condition implies that log k = θ + 2a1 ε. Consequently, firm output is


                                        log y = 2 (θ + a1 ε) ,


and profit Π = 21 e2θ+a1 ε .


                                                  6
   After the policy maker observes firm output y at t = 2, he updates his belief
about θ. This inference is imperfect, however, since output is also affected by ε,
which acts as noise in the inference problem.


Defining Gradualism Given the policy maker’s quadratic objective function, one
might expect him to choose in both periods an action that corresponds to his best
prediction of θ. Gradualism, in this context, refers to the decision of the policy maker
to deliberately underreact to his initial information θ̄.


Definition Under the gradualistic policy approach, the policy maker’s action at
      t = 1 is below the best prediction of θ. That is, a1 < θ̄.


The Perfect-Information Benchmark As a benchmark, we first illustrate the
case in which θ and ε are publicly observable to private agents and the government
at t = 0. One may associate this benchmark with developed economies, in which
policy makers face less uncertainty about economic fundamentals than in emerging
economies such as China. In this case, it is straightforward from the government’s
objective that the policy maker chooses a1 = a2 = θ, and private agents choose
log k = θ + 2θε. With the fundamentals directly observable to the policy maker,
there is no need for any policy gradualism.
   Next, we analyze the case in which the policy maker cannot observe the funda-
mentals θ and ε at t = 0, and contrast settings absent and with financial markets.




                                           7
2     Government Gradualism Absent Financial Mar-

      kets

In the absence of fully developed financial markets – our baseline model – we as-
sume that private agents in the economy must receive financing from state-controlled
banks, which wait until the policy maker has chosen his policy a1 at t = 1. This
corresponds to a game between the policy maker and private agents in which the
policy maker moves first. He chooses a1 at t = 1 before private agents make their
investment decision k, which leads to output y (k) at the end of t = 1.
    At the beginning of t = 2, the policy maker observes output y, which serves as
a signal about θ. By Bayes’ rule, given his Gaussian prior distribution about θ and
the normally distributed signal log y = 2 (θ + a1 ε), his posterior is also Gaussian:
                     
θ| log y ∼ N θ̂, 1/τ̂1 , with conditional mean θ̂ and conditional belief precision τ̂1 ,
given by

                                                                           
                                               τε            1
                                 θ̂ = θ̄ + 2                   log y − a1 ε̄ ,
                                          a1 τ θ + τ ε       2
                                           1
                               τ̂1 = τθ + 2 τε .
                                           a1

                   τε
Notice that   a21 τθ +τε
                           is the signal-to-noise ratio of the output signal, which is decreasing
with a1 . That is, a smaller a1 leads to a more precise signal about θ, which helps
the policy maker improve his policy choice a2 in t = 2. Formally, after updating his
belief, the policy maker chooses a2 at t = 2 to maximize the continuation problem:
maxa2 E − (θ − a2 )2 |a1 , log y .
                               

    By backward induction, the policy maker chooses a1 at t = 1 to maximize his
objective function in (1) by internalizing the impact of a1 on the precision of the


                                                    8
output signal. His optimal choice a∗1 trades off the tracking error of choosing a∗1 6=
θ̄ with the increased informativeness of the output signal log y = 2 (θ + a∗1 ε). In
equilibrium, he chooses a∗1 < θ̄ at t = 1, and a∗2 at t = 2 to match the updated
expectation of θ after observing log y: a∗2 = θ̂. We derive the equilibrium in the
following proposition with the proof given in the appendix.

Proposition 1 In the absence of financial markets, the policy maker chooses a grad-
ual policy {a∗1 , a∗2 }, with a∗1 < θ̄ as the unique, positive root of

                                                            2
                                θ̄ − a∗1       a∗2               = a∗1 τε ,
                                           
                                                1 τθ + τε                           (3)


and a∗2 = θ̂∗ , and private agents choose log k = θ + 2a∗1 ε.

    The policy maker does not fully adjust a1 to θ̄, which would be the ex-post
optimal policy, because a lower choice of a1 reduces the noise in the output signal
about θ. This “experimentation benefit of small steps” motivates policy gradualism.
The gradual adjustment toward the ex-post optimum, however, also gives rise to a
time-inconsistency issue when we introduce financial markets in the next section. As
we will see, this can lead to unintended consequences of financial market liberalization
for policy gradualism.



3     Time Inconsistency with Financial Markets

Financial markets give private agents financial flexibility to make investment deci-
sions even before the policy maker chooses the policy a1 . Instead of having to rely on
state-controlled banks for financing, they can obtain financing from financial mar-
kets. Competition among private agents for limited real investment opportunities,

                                                   9
however, forces them to act before the policy maker chooses a1 . As before, the pol-
icy maker only observes the output of firms at the end of t = 1. The presence of
financial markets has a profound impact on the game between the policy maker and
private agents. Agents make investment decisions ahead of the government policy.
Consequently, the policy maker faces the well-known time-inconsistency problem in
setting its optimal policy.
   We will distinguish between a setting in which the policy maker can pre-commit
to a policy rule prior to any information revelation, say at t = 0, which we refer
to as the “principled approach”, and a setting in which the policy maker cannot
pre-commit, which we call the “pragmatic approach”.


3.1    “Principled Approach” with Commitment

Suppose that the government has a commitment technology that allows it to credibly
set policies ex-ante that may not necessarily be optimal ex-post. In this case, the
timing of actions by the policy maker and private agents is irrelevant, and the equi-
librium coincides with that outlined in Proposition 1. The policy maker pre-commits
to choosing a∗1 , despite that private agents now make their investment decisions ear-
lier. Since private agents form rational expectations, they choose their investment
conditional on a∗1 , correctly anticipating that the policy maker will choose a∗1 at
t = 1. With commitment, the Chinese government can implement a stimulus policy
of slowly expanding credit availability, leading to a gradual expansion of leverage
and China’s shadow banking system.
   Notice, however, that the policy maker’s choice of a∗1 is not ex-post efficient.
After private agents make their investment choices, the policy maker would prefer to
choose a1 = θ̄ > a∗1 . This gives rise to a time-inconsistency problem for a government

                                          10
that cannot commit.


3.2    “Pragmatic Approach” without Commitment

A government without a commitment technology cannot credibly announce a policy
rule before the agents choose their investment decisions. Now, private agents must
form rational expectations about what policy a1 the policy maker will choose. In this
case only policies that are optimal ex-post (i.e., a1 = θ̄) can arise in equilibrium. To
see this, we recognize that once the agents make their investment choice based on this
expectation, the informativeness of the output signal is determined. Consequently,
the policy maker finds it best to choose the ex-post efficient a∗∗
                                                                1 = θ̄, which, in

turn, justifies the agents’ expectation. As is well known, the equilibrium without
commitment delivers a lower ex-ante expected utility to the policy maker. The next
proposition summarizes this equilibrium, and we omit the proof.


Proposition 2 When the government cannot commit to policies, no gradualism
emerges. The policy maker chooses a∗∗          ∗∗    ∗∗
                                   1 = θ̄ and a2 = θ̂ , and private agents choose

log k = θ + 2a∗∗
              1 ε. Furthermore, the policy marker has an expected utility (weakly)

lower than that in the case of commitment.


   In the absence of commitment by the government, private agents invest more
aggressively and the signal-to-noise ratio of the output signal log y is lower, relative
to the case with government commitment, which is also equivalent to the case without
financial markets. As such, while the government achieves its ex-post optimal policy
a∗∗
 1 = θ̄, the reduced informativeness of the output signal induces a loss to the policy

maker, lowering the policy maker’s expected utility. In a realistic world where the
Chinese government cannot commit to a gradual credit stimulus policy, leverage rises

                                          11
faster since financial markets anticipate the policy’s subsequent abandonment. As a
result, China’s shadow banking system expands quicker than it would in the absence
of financial markets, and at the expense of the informativeness of real signals useful
for future policy adjustments.
   Proposition 2 shows that, by giving private agents greater flexibility in financing
their investment decisions, financial markets present a challenge to the gradualistic
approach preferred by the policy maker. When the policy maker cannot pre-commit
to a policy rule, he faces a time-inconsistency problem. This renders the gradualis-
tic approach through experimentation, China’s “crossing the river by touching the
stones” approach, ineffective.

   References
 Acharya, Viral, Jun Qian, and Zhishu Yang (2016), In the shadow of banks: Wealth
     management products and issuing banks’ risk in China, Working Paper, NYU.
 Bai, Chongen, Chang-Tai Hsieh, and Zheng Song (2016), The long shadow of a
      fiscal expansion, Brookings Papers in Economic Activity, forthcoming.
 Barro, Robert and David Gordon (1983), Rules, discretion and reputation in a
     model of monetary policy, Journal of Monetary Economics 12: 101-121.
 Brunnermeier, Markus, Michael Sockin, and Wei Xiong (2016), China’s model of
     managing the financial system, Working Paper, Princeton University.
 Chen, Kaiji, Jue Ren, and Tao Zha (2015), What we learn from China’s rising
    shadow banking: Exploring the nexus of monetary tightening and banks’ role
    in entrusted lending, Working Paper, Emory University.
 Chen, Zhuo, Zhiguo He, and Chun Liu (2016), The financing of local government
    in China: Stimulus loan wanes and shadow banking waxes, Working Paper,
    University of Chicago.
 Cong, Will and Jacopo Ponticelli (2016), Credit allocation under economic stimulus:
    Evidence from China, Working Paper, University of Chicago.
 Hachem, Kinda, and Zheng Song (2015), The rise of China’s shadow banking sys-
     tem, Working Paper, University of Chicago.
 Huang, Yi, Marco Pagano, and Ugo Panizza (2016), Public debt and private firm
    funding: Evidence from Chinese cities, CEPR Working Paper.

                                         12
Kydland, Finn and Edward Prescott (1977), Rules rather than discretion: The
    inconsistency of optimal plans. Journal of Political Economy 85: 473-491.
Liang, Yousha, Kang Shi, Lisheng Wang, and Juanyi Xu (2016), Local government
    debt and firm leverage: Evidence from China, Working Paper, CUHK.
Wang, Hao, Honglin Wang, Lisheng Wang, and Hao Zhou (2016), Shadow Bank-
   ing: China’s Dual-Track Interest Rate Liberalization, Working Paper, Tsinghua
   University.




                                      13
