NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MATCHING PENNIES ON THE CAMPAIGN TRAIL:
AN EMPIRICAL STUDY OF SENATE ELECTIONS AND MEDIA COVERAGE
Camilo García-Jimeno
Pinar Yildirim
Working Paper 23198
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23198

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2017

We thank Jeff Groesback, Scott Wang, and Shawn Zamechek for excellent research assistance,
and Noah Veltman for sharing with us the data on NFL fandom. We are also grateful to Daron
Acemoglu, Frank DiTraglia, Gregory Martin, Maria Petrova, Carlo Prato, Noam Yuchtman, and
to seminar participants at Tufts University, CEMFI, Pompeu Fabra, Stockholm University, the
Wharton School, Princeton University, NYU Abu Dhabi, UC Berkeley, the Wallis Political
Economy conference at the University of Rochester, the Southern Economic Association 2015
Conference, and the Stanford University SITE conference for their valuable comments. We
gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the NET Institute, the Dean's Research Fund at
the Wharton School, and the Hal Varian Visiting Assistant Professorship research fund at MIT.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Camilo García-Jimeno and Pinar Yildirim. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Matching Pennies on the Campaign Trail: An Empirical Study of Senate Elections and Media
Coverage
Camilo García-Jimeno and Pinar Yildirim
NBER Working Paper No. 23198
February 2017
JEL No. C50,C7,D72
ABSTRACT
We study the strategic interaction between the media and Senate candidates during elections.
While the media is instrumental for candidates to communicate with voters, candidates and media
outlets have conflicting preferences over the contents of the reporting. In competitive electoral
environments such as most US Senate races, this can lead to a strategic environment resembling a
matching pennies game. Based on this observation, we develop a model of bipartisan races where
media outlets report about candidates, and candidates make decisions on the type of
constituencies to target with their statements along the campaign trail. We develop a
methodology to classify news content as suggestive of the target audience of candidate speech,
and show how data on media reports and poll results, together with the behavioral implications of
the model, can be used to estimate its parameters. We implement this methodology on US
Senatorial races for the period 1980-2012, and find that Democratic candidates have stronger
incentives to target their messages towards turning out their core supporters than Republicans.
We also find that the cost in swing-voter support from targeting core supporters is larger for
Democrats than for Republicans. These effects balance each other, making media outlets willing
to cover candidates from both parties at similar rates.

Camilo García-Jimeno
Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania
3718 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
gcamilo@sas.upenn.edu
Pinar Yildirim
Marketing Department
The Wharton School / Univ. of Penn.
Philadelphia PA 19104
pyild@wharton.upenn.edu

1

Introduction

Scholars agree that free speech, and a free media as its main conduit, are necessary for a
well-functioning liberal democracy. One key role attributed to the media is that of serving
as a watchdog monitoring leaders’ behavior while in office. The media also plays a role in
shaping the behavior of candidates during campaigns. It is especially involved in reporting
about politics during elections, and invests heavily in covering them. Candidates are particularly aware of the way and extent to which the media reports on them. Most modern
campaigns invest heavily in media relations, and hire specialized staff focused on dealing
and communicating with reporters. It is not uncommon for politicians to be escorted into
campaign locations with political consultants who curate speeches by choosing or omitting
words, phrases, and issues.
Electoral campaigns are not just a game between candidates, but a highly strategic one
between candidates and the media. Candidates use the media to communicate with their
constituencies, and the media uses candidates as sources of news (Bartels (1996); Prat and
Strömberg (2013)). However, this relationship is not purely symbiotic. Although candidates
and media outlets both share the objective of generating news, their preferences can be misaligned regarding the contents of such reporting. First, there are political scandals, which
the media is particularly eager to report about (Fonseca et al. (2014)). The breaking of such
events depends on the previous history of the candidates, and on the increased spotlight at
which the campaign itself puts them. Second, and of more relevance for this paper, throughout their campaigns candidates need to target a heterogeneous electorate. Particularly in
competitive and bipartisan races, candidates require support from centrist or non-ideological
voters as much as from more ideological or core supporters. The literature often calls the
former swing voters because they are likely to switch their vote across candidates. Core
supporters, in contrast, are unlikely to switch party allegiances, making turnout the relevant
margin of their decision (Cox and McCubbins (1986), Lindbeck and Weibull (1987)).
As a result, candidates have incentives to differentiate their message, especially if it can
be targeted towards core or swing voters. The media, in turn, produces public information
which constrains the targeting ability of candidates. If messages targeted to core supporters
happen to be widely reported by the media, the cost in electoral support among swing voters
may be larger than any benefits that may be reaped from additional core supporters.1 On
the other hand, following and reporting on candidates is costly for media outlets. When
the media devotes more attention to a candidate it may reduce the candidate’s incentive to
1

A recent example of this was Mitt Romney’s “the other 47%” statement during a private fundraiser in
Boca Raton during the 2012 U.S. presidential election. Although intended for a very narrow audience of
wealthy individuals, its public revelation led to a significant backlash and widespread media coverage.

1

target core supporters, making the gains from such a strategy relatively low. In this paper we
highlight this trade off and explore empirically how it can shape the campaigning behavior
of candidates and the reporting strategies of media outlets, in the context of U.S. Senate
races.
We begin by arguing that these considerations make bipartisan campaigns closely resemble the strategic environment of a classic matching pennies game between each candidate
and the media. Regardless of whether they desire to inform the public or simply earn revenue, as long as there is sufficient heterogeneity in media slant across outlets, the average
media outlet is likely to profit more by reporting or covering statements directed towards
core supporters. These are especially informative for swing voters, and also of interest to core
supporters. In contrast, campaign messages targeted towards swing voters are likely more
‘centrist’ and as such, of little interest to core supporters and of low informational value
to swing voters. Candidates, on the other hand, may benefit electorally from campaign
speech targeted towards core supporters as long as it is not widely reported by the press.
The implication of these conflicting objectives is that candidates’ incentives to target core
constituencies will be determined by how profitable it is for the media to report on them.
Likewise, the media’s incentives to invest in covering campaigns will be determined by the
candidates’ relative profitability from targeting core supporters relative to swing voters with
their campaign speech. In such a strategic environment, both candidates and media outlets
will have strong incentives to behave in a relatively unpredictable way (to the opponent).
In this paper we develop a simple model of bipartisan electoral races with media coverage
and unidimensional policy which we then test empirically. Policy positioning by candidates
happens through their campaign statements, but differences in the core supporter and swingvoter responses to campaign-trail statements put a limit to full policy convergence. Voters
perceive a candidate as more or less centrist as a function of the history of statements they
have had access to, either through the media or through direct contact with the candidate.
Voters express their preferences throughout the campaign by responding to polls, and lastly,
by voting on election day. Media outlets decide on the intensity with which they will cover
each candidate, and candidates decide the type of statements to make at every date during
the campaign. Modeling electoral races in this way suggests a new meaning for the role of
the media in constraining politicians’ behavior, different from the one emphasized in the
standard political agency framework (e.g., Ferraz and Finan (2011); Snyder and Strömberg
(2010)). Moreover, it suggests a novel channel through which politicians can influence the
media’s behavior that is unrelated to the corruption or influence-buying channels emphasized
in the literature.
We implement this methodology on U.S. Senatorial races for the period 1980-2012. U.S.
2

Senate races offer an ideal empirical setting; most Senate races are high profile, and thus,
enjoy ample media and polling coverage. We show how data on media reports, electoral and
poll results, and an exogenous source of variation in the profitability of campaign reporting
by the media, together with the behavioral implications of the model, can be used to estimate
its structural parameters. We estimate a discrete game of complete information (see Bajari
et al. (2010)) with several novelties. First, the nature of the environment allows us to study
a repeated (and subsequently dynamic) game in a very parsimonious way. This is because
matching pennies games have a unique Nash equilibrium in mixed strategies, and naturally,
electoral campaigns are finite in time as they end on election day. Thus, an unraveling
argument implies that the repeated (and dynamic) game will also have a unique sub-game
perfect equilibrium, hugely simplifying estimation. Second, our empirical strategy allows us
to overcome a pervasive problem faced by the literature on identification in discrete games
of this nature, when frequencies for a subset of game outcomes are unobserved.2
In practice, we estimate a linear model (for the technology mapping equilibrium play
to the electoral outcome of the race) where we allow media outlets to exhibit asymmetric
payoffs from covering Republican and Democratic candidates. We call this media bias, and
show that although it is only partially identified, we can nevertheless recover and compute
its identified set, the equilibrium strategies of all players, and all candidate payoff parameters governing the game.3 These directly measure the average impact that different types
of statements and media reports have on the poll standings and electoral performance of
candidates. As will become clear below, we make the linearity assumption only to make our
identification arguments transparent. Our identification strategy closely relies on mapping
conditional probabilities to observed frequencies, and on the availability of an exogenous
shifter of the media’s payoffs. Following ideas in Eisensee and Strömberg (2007) among
others, we collected detailed and high frequency data on sports events from the four most
important sports leagues in the US (the NCAA, NBA, MLB, and NFL). We use these data
as sources of exogenous variation in the media’s willingness to cover and report on politics
during campaigns.
2

For example, in entry games, data on the number of firms which decide not to enter in a given period is
necessarily unobserved. Similarly, in our model the media chooses whether or not to cover a given candidate.
In periods when the media does not report, we do not observe the type of statement made by the candidate.
As a result, we observe the frequencies for different types of statements only conditional on the media
reporting. Nevertheless, we overcome this difficulty tracking changes in candidate support based on poll
data over the campaign, which we argue are responsive to the full distribution of statements made, and thus,
allow us to to recover all relevant payoff parameters.
3
The literature has emphasized how media bias or slant affect the media market (e.g.,Baron (2006);
Mullainathan and Shleifer (2005)). In these papers media bias refers to an outlet’s preference for ‘spinning’
the information they receive when reporting it. Here our definition of media bias refers only to the media’s
relative preference for the extent of reporting about either political party.

3

Our model and estimation require that we measure a signal of the intended target of
each instance of a candidate’s campaign trail speech as reported by the media. As such, our
paper also contributes to the literature by developing and implementing a novel text-analysis
methodology in the spirit of Gentzkow and Shapiro (2010). Our proposed methodology allows
us to assess whether the contents of a given news piece mentions candidate speech suggestive
of swing voter or core supporter targeting. The key idea is to create a self-referential measure.
We first compute the most commonly used phrases related to policy issues found within the
universe of written media coverage of each Senate race (state-x-year). We also compute the
relative counts of candidate name mentions in each article to measure the extent to which
it reports coverage of the Democratic or the Republican candidate. We then assign a score
to each article based on the frequency with which it contains phrases that are relatively
commonly used in articles that mention more heavily one or the other candidate. We can
then use this index to classify each news piece as likely reporting on a core-supporter or a
swing-voter targeted candidate statement. We use different classification criteria to explore
the robustness of our results.
Any attempt to estimate the electoral or poll responsiveness of different types of voters
to candidates’ campaign promises faces a severe identification challenge: unobservables may
drive both the types of statements candidates make and their electoral performance. This
empirical challenge is even more serious when the researcher’s ability to measure candidates’
campaign statements depends on the endogenous decisions of media outlets on whether to report on those statements or not. Our methodology allows us to overcome these identification
challenges.
We use our parameter estimates and empirical findings to assess the impact of partisan
bias in the media, the importance of race characteristics such as the ideological distribution
of voters, and technological innovations altering the cost of media reporting. Our findings
point to a large asymmetry in the strategic environment faced by Democratic and Republican
Senate candidates: on average, the turnout responsiveness of Democratic core supporters is
much larger than that of Republican core supporters, possibly because of the lower turnout
rates of traditionally Democratic demographics.4 This gives strong incentives for the media
to cover Democratic candidates more intensely. Moreover, we also find that swing-voters
punish Democratic candidates more strongly for widely reported core supporter-targeted
campaign speech. As a result, Democratic candidates’ speech is sufficiently disciplined that
in equilibrium Democratic and Republican candidates face similar rates of media coverage
4

This finding is consistent with previous empirical studies showing the effect of the media on voting
behavior takes places especially through increased turnout (see George and Waldfogel (2006); OberholzerGee and Waldfogel (2009); Strömberg (2004a)).

4

and reporting. We also find little evidence of significant media preference for reporting on
candidates of one party over the other.
Although we are unaware of any other study modeling the relationship between politicians
and the media in the way we do here, nor estimating the effect of media campaign coverage
on electoral outcomes within a structural model, our paper relates to several research areas.
Foremost, this paper is related to the literature on media coverage (Gentzkow and Shapiro
(2006); Puglisi and Snyder (2008); Strömberg (2004a)). Most of this literature separately
endogenizes policy choices by politicians or coverage decisions by the media. In contrast,
we directly explore the simultaneous determination candidates’ choices and media coverage
strategies. The theoretical literature on issue selection has emphasized how informational
frictions between voters and candidates may affect equilibrium campaign message choices
(Egorov (2015)). The empirical literature also has measured the impact of media coverage
on policy outcomes (Snyder and Strömberg (2010); Strömberg (2004b)). Instead, we focus
on the impact of media coverage on candidate behavior. Thus, our model is close in spirit
to the ideas in Ansolabehere et al. (1992), according to whom “... some of the most crucial
interactions in campaigns are those between candidates and reporters... campaign organizations seek to spoon-feed the press in order to control the news coverage their candidates
receive. Journalists react by striving to keep candidates off balance through independent
reporting” (pg. 72). Another related paper is Fonseca et al. (2014), who study the partisan
bias in newspaper coverage of political scandals in the late 19th Century U.S. They find
significant bias in reporting depending on newspaper partisanship. While they focus on political scandals only, here we focus on the media’s coverage choices over any candidate-related
content.
Our paper also relates to the literature on transparency, which asks how increased information affects policy outcomes (Maskin and Tirole (2004); Prat (2005)). Most insights
in this literature follow closely those from the contract-theory literature on agency. In our
model, an increase in the amount of information generated in equilibrium comes from more
intense media reporting, which happens when candidates’ payoffs from speech targeted to
core supporters are higher. Thus, more information may be correlated with more extreme
platform choices by politicians. Of course, if there is no relationship between what candidates say during campaigns and what they do while in office, understanding the forces
shaping campaign speech would be uninformative about the media’s role in shaping policy.
Nevertheless, voters appear to care significantly about what candidates say, and the literature does suggest there is a close relationship between campaign speech and policy choices
(Budge and Hofferbert (1990); Kurkones (1984)).
Also within the tradition of political agency, Besley and Prat (2006) develop a model
5

where the media plays the key role of supplying voters information on incumbent behavior
they use when deciding whether to retain or dismiss him. When the incumbent is able to
influence the media’s information supply decision, it can undermine democracy’s ability to
exert agency control. In this literature, competition in the media market limits the extent
of media capture, and thus, of selection of the information supplied to the public (See for
example Chiang and Knight (2011); Corneo (2006)). In contrast, we show that highly selected
media content can arise even in highly competitive media markets. Our paper also directly
fits within the literature studying how the media affects citizens’ opinions and electoral
choices (e.g.,Campante and Hojman (2010); DellaVigna and Kaplan (2007); Enikolopov et al.
(2011)), and is related to the strand of the literature measuring the media’s ideological
positions (Gentzkow and Shapiro (2010); Puglisi (2006)). Instead of attempting to measure
the ideological positions of different media outlets, we measure the extent of reporting on
speech targeted to different voters by the media as a whole. Although our paper does not
directly study voter learning and the extent to which voters react to new information during
campaigns, our ability to establish an empirical link between overall news reports and poll
changes indirectly suggests voter responsiveness to information, similar to the findings in
Hirano et al. (2015) who study voter learning during primaries and find strong effects for
statewide offices.
Here we model the interaction between politicians and the media as a matching pennies
game. Thus, our paper also is related to the literature that has empirically studied this
kind of strategic environment and the mixed-strategy equilibria it is associated with. Walker
and Wooders (2001) were the first to look for empirical evidence of mixed-strategy behavior
by studying serving on Wimbledon tennis matches. In a very different context, Knowles
et al. (2001) developed a test for racial profiling in motor vehicle searches. In their model,
policemen randomize over searching and not searching potential suspects. Palacios-Huerta
(2003) and Chiappori et al. (2002) similarly studied penalty kick data in soccer to look for
evidence of mixing behavior. To the best of our knowledge, our paper is the first to use this
game-theoretic framework for empirical analysis in a political economy context.
Lastly, our paper contributes to the literature estimating discrete games of complete
information. Most of these have been Industrial Organization applications focused on the
problem of entry, and on pure strategy equilibria (see Berry (1992); Bresnahan and Reiss
(1990, 1991)). In contrast, we estimate a model where only mixed strategies are economically
meaningful, and propose a different identification strategy. Moreover, for games where a
subset of outcomes is unobserved (such as the tax auditing game), Bresnahan and Reiss
(1990) pointed out a negative identification result for the game’s payoff parameters. Our
methodology shows how this issue can be overcome empirically.
6

The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides a brief overview of electoral
campaigns in the U.S., focusing on Senate races. Section 3 presents our benchmark model
of the campaign trail, Section 4 describes the data, and Section 5 discusses identification
and our empirical strategy. Section 6 goes on to present our main results, and Section 7
concludes. Appendices A and B contain proofs and a detailed description of data sources.

2

Background

In this section we briefly discuss U.S. Senate races and provide some institutional background
on them. The U.S. Senate has been democratically elected for a century now, after the
17th Amendment to the Constitution was passed in 1913. Before the amendment, State
Legislatures elected U.S. senators. The Senate is composed of 2 senators per state; hence
100 senate seats currently exist. Senate elections are held every two years in November of
even years, and senators are elected by plurality within each state. Under the current system,
a third of the seats are up for election on each 2-year cycle, and each seat has a six-year
term. As a result, there are about 33 elections every electoral cycle5 .
As in most other elections for public office in the U.S., general elections are preceded
by a period of campaigning, which in practice begins well before each party in each state
has chosen its candidate in either a primary election or a convention. Most states hold
primaries, which vary in how close to the general election they happen. Even during the
primaries pollsters track hypothetical electoral outcomes for the general election. This is
facilitated by the large fraction of Senate races including an incumbent senator, who is very
likely to become his party’s candidate in the general election, and often runs unopposed in
the primary.
Technological change in the media industry has transformed in major ways how electoral
politics operates in the U.S. As access to newspapers first, later television, and more recently,
the internet, have arisen and deepened, not only the quantity but also the kind of information
received by voters has changed. Early on, direct contact between candidates and voters
was reduced. Printed news and television made the media an unavoidable middleman in
the transmission of political messages. Direct contact between politicians and voters, for
example through town-hall meetings and campaign-trail speeches, allowed candidates great
control over the exact contents of their messages. Moreover, during the 19th and early
20th Centuries, the extent of direct control of media outlets by politicians’ families also
contributed to their ability to determine which constituencies were reached by different
messages. In contrast, candidates now have little direct control over how the media will
5

After the resignation or death of an incumbent senator, special elections can be held at different times.

7

report on their actions and statements, both because of competition in the media market
and the reduced extent of direct media control by politically involved families. Second,
information has become increasingly public. Before the advent of these new information
technologies, candidates had the ability to target their messages narrowly to specific groups.
This ability has been significantly curtailed by the broad reach of modern media technologies.
According to Ansolabehere et al. (1992, p. 71), “The importance of the mass media and
the growth of television in particular have forced candidates to respond to the routines and
incentives of news organizations. Candidates and their staffs devote a great deal of energy
to influencing the decisions of reporters and editors. Successful candidates and campaigns
also adjust their behavior to exploit the media environment in which they operate.”
These changes manifest themselves in the key role that public and media relations play
within the organizational structure of political campaigns. This is especially so in U.S.
Senate races, which by their nature are quite salient and, as a result, are intensely covered
by both state and national-level media outlets. Interestingly, the very recent emergence of
social media may be allowing candidates to have more direct access to their constituencies
once again. It may also partially allow increased message differentiation and targeting. In
practice, technological change has altered both the costs of campaign coverage by the media,
and the costs and benefits for candidates of producing differentiated messages.
This discussion also motivates our focus on U.S. Senate races. While the number of U.S.
House races is significantly larger, House electoral districts are small relative to most media
markets. This limits the extent to which the media will be directly following individual races.
Furthermore, polling data for House races is scarce. In contrast, U.S. presidential races have
extensive media and poll coverage, but there are too few of them for a satisfactory statistical
analysis. Senate races are, thus, an ideal compromise. Moreover, their state-level nature
implies that the electorate is diverse enough for candidates to have incentives to target
different types of voters.

3

A Simple Model of the Campaign Trail

In this section we describe the simple model of campaign speech and media coverage that we
subsequently estimate. The model captures what we consider are key features of the interaction between two candidates running against each other, p ∈ {D, R}, and the distribution
of media outlets m covering the race. In the model, candidates make statements over time
that can be targeted to core or swing voter constituencies. The media decides on coverage
of the campaigns every period, and obtain different payoffs from reporting on either type
of campaign speech. The key assumption we maintain and implicitly test is that payoffs to
8

the media are higher when reporting news on campaign speech targeted to core supporters.
Candidates benefit electorally (in their poll standing) from media reports on their swing
voter-targeted statements. Moreover, although they may also benefit from unreported core
voter-targeted statements, they suffer from media reports of these kinds of statements as
this leads swing-voters to shift towards their opponent.
Time is discrete, t = 0, ..., T , where t = T is election day and t = 0 is the beginning of
the campaign. Both candidates begin their campaigning on the same date. We also assume
that each candidate makes a campaign statement every period. Each media outlet decides
on whether to follow the Democratic candidate D, the Republican candidate R, or both.
Conditional on following a candidate, the media successfully reports on their statements
with an exogenous probability that may vary across parties. Candidate statements and
media reports then map period by period onto changes in poll standings. Our focus on this
paper is not on voters, so we model their behavior in a simple way; voters poll support
decisions at any point in time respond to the amount of information they receive during the
campaign, either directly from the candidates or through the media.
Players’ Actions
Candidates make a statement every period to increase their electoral support. The underlying environment is such that candidates do not fully converge to the median voter’s
ideological stance. This can be easily micro-founded in a model where the turnout of voters
in the extremes of the ideological distribution (core supporters) is sensitive to their distance
to the candidates’ position, and the density of voters is high in the extremes. Standard incentives to move towards the median would have to be traded-off against the loss in turnout
from the margins of the distribution of voters. To capture the electoral support of core
voters, candidates are tempted to make ideological statements c, directly targeted to this
audience. Nevertheless, core-targeted statements may decrease the electoral support they
receive from swing voters. Candidates may, instead, make relatively centrist, swing votertargeted statements s, which generate little excitement in the extremes, but increases or
maintains the electoral support in the center.
Candidates and the media have partially aligned preferences: candidates benefit from
being reported by the media, and the media profits from reporting news about candidates.
Nevertheless, their preferences are also partly misaligned: candidates benefit from the media
reporting on their relatively centrist statements -those targeted to swing voters-, and are
possibly hurt when the media reports on their ideological statements –those targeted at core
voters. In contrast, the media profits more from reporting on core-targeted statements than
from reporting on swing voter-targeted ones. Candidates also take each others’ strategies
9

as given when deciding their campaign-trail speech. This gives rise to a matching-pennies
strategic environment between each candidate and the media. The reason is simple: the
candidate’s best response is to generate a swing voter-targeted statement when covered
by the media, and to generate core-targeted speech when not covered by it. Similarly, the
media’s best response is to report core-targeted statements and to ignore statements targeted
at swing voters.
Following these ideas, we model the candidates’ action space as follows: each can take
one of two actions every period; either to make a swing voter-targeted statement, or a
riskier core voter-targeted statement: ap ∈ {s, c}. Simultaneously, the media can take one
of three possible actions: to follow both candidates, to follow only D, or to follow only R:
am ∈ {(FD FR ), (FD NR ), (ND FR )}. In either case, after having taken its action, the media
outlet successfully reports (denoted by χ = 1) with probability P(χ = 1|p) = ηp . This
modeling choice allows us to keep the action space of the media three dimensional, while
still allowing for realizations of periods in which no news reports are observed. Moreover, it
allows us to introduce a parameter, (ηD , ηR ), directly capturing the media’s overall propensity
to report differentially about candidates from one or the other party. When ηD 6= ηR , we
refer to this differential treatment as media bias.
Payoffs
The payoff structure is very simple. Every period, the media, m, must pay a cost k per
candidate followed. The per-period gains from reporting on candidate p are:
πp (ap ) =


0

if ap = s

π

if ap = c

p

(1)

where we have chosen to normalize the gain from reporting a swing voter-targeted statement
to zero. Nevertheless, we allow the gain for the media to differ between a report about the
Democrat or the Republican.
To simplify the payoff structure of the game, we make some behavioral assumptions about
potential voters. The arrival of media reports can have two effects on voters’ decisions. First,
it can make them shift support from one candidate to the other. Second, it can alter their
turnout decision. This distinction is important because the first margin leads to a zerosum setting from the point of view of the candidates, while the second margin does not.
The payoff structure we present below implicitly assumes that core voters only react on the
turnout margin, and never switch party allegiances. In contrast, centrist swing voters only
react on the party support margin, and do not react on the turnout margin (their turnout
10

rate is constant). Voters report truthfully to pollsters.
For candidates, instantaneous payoffs depend on whether their statements are reported
or not, and whether these are targeted to swing voters or to core supporters. Candidates
care about their poll standing, and players’ actions directly map into changes in electoral
and poll support. We suppose that unreported swing voter-targeted statements have no
effect on either core or swing voters. When reported, these kinds of statements do have an
effect on swing voters; they shift support from the candidate not reported to the candidate
reported. Because the turnout rate for swing voters is unaffected, the gain for one candidate
is exactly the loss for his opponent. We also suppose core voter-targeted statements increase
the turnout of core constituencies. When they are unreported, these statements do not have
an effect on swing voters. When they are reported, in contrast, they swing centrist voters
away from the candidate making these statements and towards his opponent. For the stage
game to have a matching pennies structure, this loss must be larger than the gain on the
turnout margin. In such a case, the net effect on the polls from a reported core-targeted
statement is negative for the candidate making it.
We denote by ∆Tap the average change in electoral support to candidate p on the turnout
margin when he chooses action ap , and by ∆Sap the average change in electoral support on
the swing voter margin when candidate p chooses action ap . We can express the change in
poll support for each candidate p ∈ {D, R} between periods t and t + 1 as:

Vp (t + 1) − Vp (t) = ∆Tcp 1{ap (t) = c, χ(t) = 0} + ∆Tcp − ∆Scp 1{ap (t) = c, χ(t) = 1}
+∆Sc∼p 1{a∼p (t) = c, χ(t) = 1}+∆Ssp 1{ap (t) = s, χ(t) = 1}−∆Ss∼p 1{a∼p (t) = c, χ(t) = 1}+p
(2)
D R
Above, ( ,  ) are other unobserved shocks to the change in electoral support of Democrats
and Republicans. We impose the following parameter restrictions:
Assumption 1. The following inequalities hold:

∆TcD < ηD ∆ScD + ∆SsD , ∆TcD > 0, ∆ScD > 0, ∆SsD > 0

∆TcR < ηR ∆ScR + ∆SsR , ∆TcR > 0, ∆ScR > 0, ∆SsR > 0
These inequalities are sufficient for the stage game to have a unique Nash equilibrium in
mixed strategies. Equations (1) and (2) and the parameter restrictions in Assumption 1 are
fairly natural. They take into account the zero-sum nature of swing support, and also make
explicit the assumptions that (i) unreported actions by a candidate do not have an effect on
his opponent’s support, and (ii) unreported s statements by a candidate do not have any
effect on his own support. They also imply that candidates gain support from c statements
11

that go unreported, but expect to lose support when these are reported. Finally, they imply
that reported own swing voter-targeted statements increase own support (at the expense
of the opponent), and reported opponent’s swing-targeted statements decrease own support
(and are a gain to the opponent). We further assume that candidates maximize their poll
standing (which, in a bipartisan race, is equivalent to maximizing the winning probability
at every t). In summary, we have a total of eleven structural parameters in this model:
θ = (∆TcD , ∆ScD , ∆SsD , ∆TcR , ∆ScR , ∆SsR , ηD , ηR , πD , πR , k) characterizing the game. Given the
uniqueness of equilibrium we establish below, these also pin down the joint distribution of
players’ actions and poll changes over time.
Indeed, the payoff structure of the game outlined above gives rise to a matching pennies
stage game G. Its normal form representation is presented in Appendix A.
Proposition 1. (Equilibrium Strategies) Suppose ηp πp > k. The normal form game described above does not have a pure-strategy equilibrium. The unique mixed strategy equilibrium is given by:
∆TcD
(3)
γR∗ = 1 −
ηD [∆ScD + ∆SsD ]
∗
γD
=1−

∆TcR
ηR [∆ScR + ∆SsR ]

(4)

∗
qD
=

k
ηD π D

(5)

qR∗ =

k
ηR πR

(6)

where γD denotes the probability that m plays FD NR , γR denotes the probability that m plays
ND FR , qD denotes the probability that D plays c, and qR denotes the probability that R plays
c. Furthermore, because the stage-game has a unique Nash equilibrium, the only sub-game
perfect equilibrium of the finitely repeated game GT is to play the unique stage-game Nash
equilibrium every period.
Proof. See Appendix A.
As is standard in a matching pennies environment, mixing probabilities are pinned down
by indifference. This makes them a function only of the opponents’ payoffs. In our application, this consequence of equilibrium has a subtle testable implication. If we want to study
candidate campaign speech, we must do comparative statics on the media’s payoffs. Candidates’ payoffs are in fact irrelevant to explain their equilibrium behavior. Media payoffs from
reporting on core-targeted statements will be negatively correlated with the equilibrium rate
at which candidates make such statements. This is the sense in which, in our setting, the
12

media can constrain candidates’ behavior. Moreover, the poll gains from a given campaign
statement should have no predictive power for the rate at which the candidate makes such
statements. Conversely, the frequency with which the media reports on the candidates should
be independent of how profitable it is to report. It should depend only on the candidates’
∗
payoffs. Notice also that the ratio qD
/qR∗ = ηR πR /ηD πD does not depend on k.

4

Data

This section describes our data, the construction of our main variables, and the data structure. First, we discuss the information on all Senate races included in our dataset, the poll
and election outcomes data, and how we rely on poll availability to construct the time dimension of our panel. We then introduce our news coverage data and describe the proposed
methodology to compute news article scores measuring the type of content reported. We
conclude by discussing the sports events data we will rely on for our identification strategy.

4.1

Senate Races

For our empirical implementation, we built a dataset of all ordinary competitive races to the
U.S. Senate taking place between 1980 and 2012 for which a Democrat and a Republican
ran.6 Our final sample includes 415 races (out of the 561 = 17 election cycles × 33 races that
could have taken place in this 32 year period). For each Senate race we have data on its
outcome (Democratic share and Republican share) from the Federal Elections Commission,
the date and outcomes of the primaries for each party whenever a primary took place –or
whether the candidate was chosen at a party convention for states electing their candidates
that way–, information on whether the incumbent senator was running, and characteristics
of the political environment such as the party of the President, the party of the incumbent
senators in the state, and the share of Democratic and Republican registered voters in the
state. For states without party registration, we use the vote share for President in the most
recent election. Table 1 presents summary statistics for the variables in our study.

4.2

Polls

Our empirical strategy relies on information on the evolution of partisan support throughout
the campaign. We collected detailed polling data for Senate races from a variety of sources.
6

We excluded races with three prominent candidates, races where a candidate ran unopposed (or in
practice unopposed), non bipartisan races, and races where either candidate died or quit during the campaign.
Appendix B contains a list of dropped races.

13

Descriptive Statistics
Panel A

2-Week Intervals
Dem.

All

Rep.

3-Week Intervals
Dem.

All

Number of poll-to-poll intervals per race

5.63
(4.55)

4.86
(3.62)

Length of poll-to-poll interval (days)

30.51
(34.32)

35.16
(35.47)

Number of polls per interval

1.74
(1.66)

2.01
(2.12)

Electoral support (poll results)

0.44
(0.11)

Number of articles per interval

56.11
(101.7)

Number of core-targeted articles
per interval (0.25 cutoff)

Rep.

0.42
(0.11)

0.44
(0.12)

0.42
(0.11)

90.22
(127.42)

41.50
(62.49)

61.98
(112.53)

98.83
(138.0)

45.43
(67.63)

35.82
(91.09)

58.79
(102.6)

22.97
(45.92)

41.75
(101.52)

68.43
(113.89)

26.67
(52.28)

Number of swing-targeted articles
per interval (0.25 cutoff)

20.29
(30.21)

38.82
(57.67)

18.53
(30.52)

20.23
(30.75)

38.98
(59.30)

18.76
(31.17)

Number of core-targeted articles
per interval (0.5 cutoff)

29.05
(89.46)

45.8
(97.95)

16.75
(43.50)

34.07
(98.21)

54.12
(107.93)

20.05
(50.83)

Number of swing-targeted articles
per interval (0.5 cutoff)

27.07
(40.23)

51.81
(77.23)

24.75
(40.81)

27.12
(42.40)

52.58
(82.64)

25.46
(43.78)

Number of core-targeted articles
per interval (0.75 cutoff)

21.18
(63.21)

33.41
(69.67)

12.23
(31.81)

25.86
(77.21)

40.87
(84.21)

15.02
(38.08)

Number of swing-targeted articles
per interval (0.75 cutoff)

33.92
(49.91)

63.01
(87.93)

29.09
(46.03)

35.33
(51.11)

65.82
(90.85)

30.49
(46.88)

Number of NFL games per interval
(fan weighted)

4.22
(6.34)

4.91
(6.98)

Number of MLB games per interval
(fan weighted)

14.91
(25.43)

17.17
(27.12)

Number of NBA games per interval
(fan weighted)

8.91
(27.65)

10.15
(28.62)

Number of NCAA games per interval
(playoffs)

0.04
(0.29)

0.05
(0.31)

14

Descriptive Statistics (cont.)
Panel B

Dem.

Number of races

All

Rep.

415

Number of races per election cycle

24.41
(7.91)

Number of polls

4076

Number of polls per election cycle

239.76
(208.15)

Number of polls per race

10.01
(11.93)

Number of news articles

131131

210848

96984

Number of news articles per race

315.97
(488.13)

508.07
(687.04)

233.70
(358.47)

-0.52
(0.44)

-0.005
(0.70)

0.52
(0.43)

Article score

Number of media outlets per race
Observations

124.17
(85.40)
2337

2033

Table 1: Descriptive Statistics: The table reports means and standard deviations for our main variables.
Panel a reports summary statistics for the 2-week poll-to-poll interval panel and the 3-week poll-to-poll
interval panel. Panel b reports overall summary statistics. Please see the text and the data description
Appendix B for variable definitions and sources.

To the best of our knowledge, the earliest systematic compilation of polls goes back to
1998. We obtained polls from PollingReport.com for 1998-2004, and from Pollster.com for
2006-2012. For pre-1998 poll data, we did an exhaustive newspaper search using the Dow
Jones/Factiva news database, focusing on all polling reported within a one-year window
before election day.7 We collected a total of 4076 polls. As Table 1 illustrates, we obtain
an average of 240 polls per election cycle, and of 10 polls per Senate race. Naturally, the
frequency of Senate race polls becomes higher in more recent years and in states with larger
populations.
7

For example, for the 1998 election we began our search on November 1, 1997. In a few cases we
encountered discrepancies in the reported polling results across articles from different newspaper sources
referring to the same poll, in which case we averaged the results. The 1998 poll data from PollingReport.com
was sparse, so we also did an online newspaper search for polls for that year. When only the month of the
poll was reported we imputed the date to be the fifteenth of the month except for November polls, in which
case we imputed the date to be the first of the month.

15

k weeks

Actual Polls −→

k-week Poll Averages −→

Poll 1

Poll 2

P̄0

k weeks

k weeks

Poll 3

Poll 4 Poll 5 Poll 6

P̄1

P̄2

k weeks

Poll 7

Poll 8

P̄3

Election Day

P̄4 (T )

Figure 1: Construction of the poll-to-poll intervals.

Our empirical strategy also relies on our ability to compute frequencies of news reporting
over time. To do this, we rely on our dataset of polls to construct what we call “poll-to-poll”
intervals. By using the poll dates to create poll-to-poll time intervals within each race, we
effectively create the time dimension of our panel. Subsequently, we use the dates of the
news articles to assign them to their corresponding poll-to-poll interval, within which we
measure the different news article statistics required by our empirical strategy, and which we
describe in section 4.3. Because the definition of these periods is arbitrary, we explore two
alternative criteria for the construction of the intervals, by grouping nearby polls using twoweek or three-week windows, and averaging –weighting by poll sample size– all polls falling
within the time window. We then assign the median date among the polls in the window as
the period marker. This strategy is convenient because the frequency and spacing of polls is
uneven across states and years, and because aggregating nearby polls helps us average out the
inherent measurement error in poll reports. Figure 1 graphically illustrates the construction
of the poll-to-poll intervals.
The construction of time periods in this way introduces an unavoidable precision/bias
trade-off because the statistics we construct are based on observed news article relative
frequencies. On the one hand, the longer a poll-to-poll interval, the smaller the sampling
error in the measured statistics of news reports falling within it, and the closer these statistics
will be to the probabilities with which they are generated. On the other hand, if the actual
probabilities change significantly over time, –for example because payoff parameters depend
on a time-varying state variable–, the longer a poll-to-poll period, the larger the bias from a
statistic based on frequency counts within the interval. To deal with this issue, we explore the
robustness of our results to alternative definitions of a poll-to-poll interval, and we perform a
robustness exercise where we estimate a version of the model where the game is not repeated
but dynamic. In that case, we allow the payoff parameters to evolve as a function of a state
variable, namely the current relative poll standing of the candidates.

16

4.3

Measuring News Reporting

Estimation of our model requires us to classify different types of observed news article content
related to the political campaigns. This allows us to establish a link between reported
candidate speech and electoral performance. More specifically, we require a classification
criterion of each news piece as suggestive of turnout (core supporter)-targeted or swing
voter-targeted campaign speech. Naturally, such a distinction is empirically meaningful only
in relation to the ideological distribution of the relevant population of potential voters –the
state in our setting. For example, the same statement may be considered moderate and
targeted to centrist voters when expressed by a Democratic candidate in Massachusetts, but
it may only appeal to core Democratic voters when expressed by a Democratic candidate in
Utah. Moreover, the ideological distribution of the population within a state may change
over time, making a statement that could be considered core-targeted in 1980, appealing to
swing voters in 2012. A sensible classification criterion for the reported content of media
reports must be race-specific.
With this in mind, we follow some of the ideas in the seminal work of Gentzkow and
Shapiro (2010) for computing measures of media slant, to develop a novel index of media
content. For each race, we conducted a comprehensive search of news reporting from two
major news databases, Lexis Nexis and Factiva, which cover national and local newspapers.
The search criteria was based on the names of both candidates in each race, during the
year prior to election day.8 We collected all news articles mentioning either candidate in a
given race. Our initial search recovered more than 300,000 articles covering 560 races and
1120 candidates. For the set of articles mentioning either candidate in a given race, we
implemented a text search algorithm to parse the HTML tags and gather information about
the articles (publication date, source, subjects, and persons mentioned in the article). These
tags allowed us to further weed out irrelevant articles and omit repeated articles. As Table
1 illustrates, our estimation sample contains information from 210,848 news articles, with
an average of 508 articles per race. Although articles often mention both candidates, the
average article is usually centered on reporting about one of them. The name of the opponent
is reported as part of the context only. A few articles, of course, discuss the race as a whole
and would be harder to classify as reporting about the Democrat or the Republican. We
rely on the candidate name information in the articles themselves for the construction of our
index of news reporting.
We proceed in the following way. First, to assess the extent to which an article reports
on the Democratic or the Republican candidate, we count the number of times the name of
8

We downloaded these articles in HTML (for Lexis Nexis) and .rtf (for Factiva) formats

17

Figure 2: Distribution of article name assignments τi .

each appears in the article. We then compute the candidate assignment statistic τi :
τi =

D
xR
i − xi
∈ [−1, 1]
D
xR
i + xi

where xpi is the count of party p’s candidate name in article i. Values closer to +1 imply
the article is more heavily reporting on the Republican, and values closer to −1 imply the
article is more heavily reporting on the Democrat. Figure 2 presents the distribution of τi
across all articles and races. The distribution is multi-modal, with most articles referring
heavily to just one candidate. There is also some significant density of articles mentioning
both candidates evenly (with scores close to 0). Table 1 reports the number of articles we
classify as referring to the Democratic (τi < 0) and Republican (τi > 0) candidates. The τi
provides us with a continuous measure that allows us to classify the contents of all articles
in each race.
Within the set of all articles corresponding to a given race, we identify the 500 most
commonly used 2 word phrases (2-grams), and the 500 most commonly used 3-word phrases
(3-grams). We then proceed by giving a score sj ∈ [−1, 1] to each phrase j ∈ {1, 2, ..., 1000},
related to how Republican-specific vs. Democratic-specific the phrase is within the set of
articles covering the race. We do this by computing a weighted average of the τi ’s corresponding to articles containing phrase j, where the weights are the frequencies with which
each phrase appears in each article, relative to all articles covering the race. Formally, for

18

Figure 3: Distribution of articles scores σi .

each j,
P
τi fij
sj = Pi
∈ [−1, 1]
i fij
Here fij represents the frequency with which phrase j appears in article i. For example, if
a given phrase appears only in articles that only mention the Republican candidate, then
that phrase will have a score of sj = 1. sj gives gives us information regarding the extent
to which phrase j is more commonly associated to one candidate or to the other. Endowed
with the score sj for each phrase in the race, we then compute a score for each news article in
the race, building a weighted average of the scores of phrases appearing in the article, where
the weights are the frequencies with which each phrase appears in each article, relative to
all phrases in the article. Formally for each i,
P
j sj fij
∈ [−1, 1]
σi = P
j fij

(7)

Articles with more phrases which, within the race coverage, are more closely associated with
articles more heavily covering the Republican (Democratic) candidate will get higher (lower)
scores. This measure has the advantage of being completely self-referential; we do not use any
information from outside the coverage of the specific race to assess the extent to which a given
news piece is likely to be reporting about core supporter or swing voter-targeted statements
by the candidates. σi is a continuous index which we use together with τi , to classify each
article both as covering either the Democrat or the Republican, and whether the content is

19

Swing-targeted for R

-1

-0.25

Core-targeted for R

0

Core-targeted for D

0.25

1

Swing-targeted for D

Figure 4: Illustration of the Article Type Classification (0.25 score cutoff case).

more swing voter targeted –s– or core supporter targeted –c– (depending on the value of
σi ). Figure 3 presents the distribution of the article scores σi for our sample of news pieces.
Our benchmark specification classifies articles as signaling core supporter-targeted speech
when σi < −0.25 for the Democrat and when σi > 0.25 for the Republican. It classifies the
remaining articles as signaling swing voter-targeted speech (those with scores σi ∈ [−0.25, 1]
for the Democrat and with scores σi ∈ [−1, 0.25] for the Republican). Figure 4 illustrates
graphically the article classification criterion for the ±0.25 cutoff. In our robustness analysis
we present additional results that reclassify all articles using alternative cutoffs σi = ±0.5
and σi = ±0.75.
Our collection of news articles also allowed us to obtain information on the number of
different media outlets covering each race. We obtained this information based on the media
outlet name and date tags in the articles. As a result, we have data on the count of different
outlets reporting on a race within each poll-to-poll interval.9 Finally, to compute overall
reporting frequencies, we defined the total effective number of periods or stage games within
each poll-to-poll interval as the number of days between polls times the total number of
media outlets ever reporting on the particular race. This is equivalent to assuming that the
candidates play a stage game against each media outlet every day during the campaign.
4.3.1

A Cross-validation exercise

Our theoretical model of campaign-trail speech is based on the premise that the media
profits relatively more from reporting on candidate speech targeted to core supporters. To
the extent that this premise is correct, a revealed-preference argument would suggest that
written media outlets should be willing to allocate more space to news pieces covering these
kinds of campaign speech. As a cross-validation exercise of our index of media content σi , in
9

In order to remove misclassifications due to the occasional use of “the” in front of an outlet name (e.g.,
The New York Times could occasionally be classified as New York Times), we processed the text to remove
the word “the” in front of all outlet names.

20

Conditional Correlations of Article Word Counts and Article Scores
Dependent variable:

Absolute value of article score (|σi |)

Race Fixed Effects
2

R
No. of Races
No. of Observations

Number of Words

Log Number of Words

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

36.83
(29.98)

40.10
(17.69)

0.052
(0.031)

0.036
(0.016)

N

Y

N

Y

0.02
417
176034

0.06
417
176034

0.09
417
176034

0.29
417
176034

Table 2: Article Word Counts: The table presents OLS panel regressions of a measure of article word
count on the absolute value of the article’s score σi . The dependent variable in columns (1) and (2) is the
word count of the article. The dependent variable in columns (3) and (4) is the log of the word count of
the article. All models control for the article candidate assignment score τi , the article’s days to election
and its square, and include year fixed effects and a constant. Columns (2) and (4) include race fixed effects.
Standard errors are robust to arbitrary heteroskedasticity and clustered at the Senate-race level.

Table 2 we look at the relationship between the number of words in an article in our sample,
and the absolute value of its score σi . The table presents results from OLS specifications using
either the number of words or its log, with and without race fixed effects. All specifications
control for the article’s candidate assignment score τi , a quadratic in the article’s date, and
year fixed effects. The conditional correlation between article length and σi is always positive,
and is highly significant in the models including race fixed effects which exploit within-race
variation only. The mean word count of articles in our sample is around 800 words. From
column (2) in Table 2, moving from a score of 0 to a score of 1 increases the article’s length
by 40 words, or around 5% of the average article length. This suggests that our proposed
index is a reliable signal of the article content relevant to our model.

4.4

Sports news data as media-payoff shifters

In our empirical strategy we exploit the observed correlations between frequencies of news
reporting and changes in poll support for both candidates. Changes in electoral support
along the campaign may be due to a host of unobservables (to the econometrician) which
may, in turn, be correlated with candidates’ incentives to make different kinds of statements
and the media’s incentives to cover campaigns. To overcome this difficulty we rely on the
occurrence of major sports events as exogenous shifters of the media’s attention, similar
to Eisensee and Strömberg (2007). More specifically, we collected daily information on all
games from the N F L, M LB, and N BA, and all playoffs games from the N CAA between

21

1979 and 2012.10 This constitutes a dataset with more than 600,000 observations. For each
day we have information on whether a team played or not, and won or lost the game. We
then match teams to their respective states, which gives us daily state-level variation in the
media’s payoff from reporting on political campaigns. This source of variation is unlikely to
be related to unobservables driving candidate behavior along the campaign trail. Because
most games for each sports league take place during a specific season of the year (e.g., football
is concentrated in the winter, and baseball in the summer, for example), having information
from the four leagues provides us with year-round variation.
Some states do not have teams in these leagues, or their teams seldom make it to the
playoffs with enough frequency during the 33 year period. To obtain exogenous variation in
media campaign coverage also for these states, we additionally collected information from
Facebook. Facebook collected county-level information on the distribution of “likes” among
its users in 2013, for each N F L, M LB, N BA, and N CAA team. We use this information
as a proxy for the extent to which the media covering a race in a given state may vary
its behavior in response to salient sports events from teams of other states, which have a
significant support in the state where the race is taking place. We computed the matrices
l
, l ∈ {N F L, M LB, N BA} records the total
WN F L , WM LB , and WN BA , where entry wij
population of counties in state i, as a fraction of total state population, where a plurality
of Facebook users supports a team from state j in the sports league l. For states without
teams in our data, these matrices provide us with variation in media payoffs, coming from a
large fan base rooting for out-of-state sports teams that may lead to local media attention.
Figure 5 illustrates the geographic distribution of fans of the teams in these four leagues,
illustrating the straddling of fans across states which we exploit.11

10

N F L is the National Football League, M LB is the Major League Baseball, N BA is the National
Basketball Association, and N CAA is the National Collegiate Athletic Association.
11
The Facebook fan map for the N CAA reveals that fandom for College Football is very highly correlated
with state boundaries, thus giving us no additional variation. For this reason, we do not weight N CAA
sports events by the cross-state fandom weighs.

22

23

	  

Figure 5: Facebook Sport-Team Fans Distribution Maps.

5

Empirical Strategy and Identification

We now discuss our empirical strategy. Our purpose is to recover the payoff parameters
governing the matching pennies game described above. The empirical strategy has several
components. We first discuss the non-parametric identification of the equilibrium mixing
strategies of all players based on the counts of the different types of news articles in our
dataset. We then show how, relying on these mixing strategies, on polling data, and on
the exogenous source of variation in campaign news coverage induced by the sports events,
we can identify the electoral response elasticities that map directly on to the game’s payoff
parameters for the candidates. This is despite our inability to observe a subset of the
equilibrium outcomes of the game, namely realizations in which the media does not report
on the campaign.

5.1

Identification of the mixing strategies

Our first task is to develop a methodology allowing us to identify the model parameters θ
using the equilibrium conditions (3)-(6), and the data on media reports and poll and election
results. The main difficulty in identifying payoff parameters from behavior reflecting mixed
strategies in a setting such as this one is the nature of the game itself; we do not observe
counts of type c or s candidate statements in periods when the media does not report on
the campaign.
We first introduce some notation. Define Xpa (t, t+τ ) as the count of type a ∈ {c, s} media
reports on candidate p ∈ {D, R} appearing between stage games t and t + τ . Also define
Npa (t, t + τ ) as the count of type a campaign-trail statements by candidate p between stage
games t and t + τ that do not get reported by the media. While the Xpa (t, t + τ ) are observed
(with error), the Npa (t, t + τ ) are unobserved. If within a time interval [t, t + τ ) payoff parameters θ are constant, the repeated matching pennies game directly gives us the joint distribuc
s
tion for the four observables and the four unobservables (XD
, XD
, XRc , XRs , NDc , NDs , NRc , NRs ).
In fact, for each candidate, (Xpc (t, t + τ ), Xps (t, t + τ ), Npc (t, t + τ ), Nps (t, t + τ )) is a draw
from a multinomial distribution with success and failure probabilities determined by the
equilibrium mixing strategies of candidates and media outlets.
Correspondingly, each observed count Xpa has a binomial marginal distribution given by
τ
k

P(Xpa (t, t + τ ) = k) =

!
ϕap

k

1 − ϕap

τ −k

(8)

∗
∗
where ϕcp ≡ qp∗ [1 − γ∼p
]ηp and ϕsp ≡ (1 − qp∗ )[1 − γ∼p
]ηp . The expressions in equation (8)

24

result from equilibrium play: qp∗ is the probability that candidate p chooses a core-targeted
∗
statement each period, and [1−γ∼p
]ηp is the unconditional probability that the media reports
12
on candidate p each period. Because the Xpa are observable, equation (8) allows us to nonparametrically identify the conditional probabilities generating the observed media reports,
by noticing that the MLE estimator for a binomial random variable is simply its sample
analogue:
Xpa (t, t + τ )
(9)
ϕ̂ap (t, t + τ ) ≡
τ
∗
∗
The estimator in equation (9) gives us four equations in six unknowns (qD
, qR∗ , γD
, γR∗ , ηD , ηR ).
Nevertheless, by taking the quotients of these conditional probabilities for each p, we can
recover the equilibrium mixing strategies of both candidates:
∗
]ηp
(1 − qp∗ )[1 − γ∼p
ϕ̂sp (t, t + τ )
ϕ̂sp
∗
=
⇒ q̂p (t, t + τ ) = s
∗ ]η
ϕ̂cp
qp∗ [1 − γ∼p
ϕ̂p (t, t + τ ) + ϕ̂cp (t, t + τ )
p

(10)

The efficient estimator of the qp∗ (t, t + τ )’s will be the one taking t = 0, τ = T . Moreover,
from the definition of the ϕap ’s and equation (9) for p ∈ {D, R}, we can also recover the
conditional probabilities of a news report of any type about candidate p:
∗
φ̂p (t, t + τ ) ≡ [1 − γ∼p
]ηp = ϕ̂cp (t, t + τ ) + ϕ̂sp (t, t + τ )

(11)

Equation (11) also illustrates that in this model, and based on the observed article
counts, we cannot separately identify the average media biases (ηD , ηR ) from the equilibrium
∗
mixing strategies (γD
, γR∗ ) of the media. The reason is that in stage games where a news
report is not observed, we cannot distinguish whether this happened because the media did
not invest in following the candidate, or because despite doing so, a news piece was not
generated. We do not observe the realizations of the unobserved speech (NDc , NDs , NRc , NRs ).
However, our ability to recover estimates of equilibrium reporting rates and of the equilibrium
mixing strategies of candidates implies we have estimates of the parameters governing the
12

We can additionally calculate the conditional distribution of the unobserved counts Npa using the information from the observed ones. This distribution is also binomial and takes the form:


τ − Xpc (t, t + τ ) − Xps (t, t + τ )
c
c
s
P(Np (t, t + τ ) = k|Xp (t, t + τ ), Xp (t, t + τ )) =
×
k


∗
qp∗ [1 − (1 − γ∼p
)ηp ]
∗
(1 − γ∼p )ηp

k 
τ −Xpc (t,t+τ )−Xps (t,t+τ )−k
∗
qp∗ [1 − (1 − γ∼p
)ηp ]
1−
∗ )η
(1 − γ∼p
p

∗
This conditional distribution can be derived by noticing that 1 − (1 − γ∼p
)ηp is the total probability that
the media does not report on candidate p each period. There is an analogous expression for the conditional
distribution of Npc (t, t + τ ) which we omit here to save space.

25

conditional distributions they are drawn from. Below we show this will be sufficient to
recover the candidates’ payoff elasticities ∆, arguably the parameters of most economic
interest. Furthermore, as we will show below, exploiting the variation in polls and election
results, we will also be able to provide an identified set for the ηp ’s, the γp ’s, and relative
media payoffs πR /πD .

5.2

Identification of the electoral performance technology

We now discuss our identification strategy for the elasticities mapping equilibrium outcomes
to changes in polls over time. Although a linear model for the changes in candidate shares
of electoral support is necessarily misspecified, it makes our identification arguments transparent. It also illustrates clearly what the sources of variation we exploit are, to identify the
candidates’ payoff parameters. Recall the construction of our poll-to-poll intervals, and consider the realizations of all game outcomes within stage games t and t + τ .13 The proposition
below establishes how the core-supporter turnout elasticities (∆TcD , ∆TcR ) can be recovered.
Proposition 2. (Identification of Turnout Elasticities) Consider the following linear specification:
ϕ̂c (t, t + τ )
ϕ̂c (t, t + τ )
VD (t + τ ) − VD (t) + VR (t + τ ) − VR (t)
+ ∆TcR R
+ ω(t, t + τ )
= ∆TcD D
τ
φ̂D (t, t + τ )
φ̂R (t, t + τ )
(12)
where ϕ̂ap (t, t + τ ) and φ̂p (t, t + τ ) are defined in equations (9) and (11), and ω(t, t + τ ) is an
error term derived in Appendix A. Suppose instrumental variables z(t, t + τ ) are available,
such that, (i) πp (z) vary with z, (ii) Cov(z, ω) = 0, and (iii) the dimension of z is at least 2.
Then a 2SLS regression of equation (12) using z as instruments for ϕ̂cD (t, t + τ )/φ̂D (t, t + τ )
and ϕ̂cR (t, t + τ )/φ̂R (t, t + τ ) identifies the elasticities (∆TcD , ∆TcR ).
Proof. See Appendix A.
The dependent variable in equation (12) is the change between two time periods in the
fraction of polled individuals reporting support for neither the Democratic nor the Republican candidate. In most polls, these are people who have not made up their mind about
whether to turn out or about which candidate they prefer. Proposition 2 shows that the
13
In practice, the length of a panel period, τ , will be determined by the frequency of polls for the race
as we described in section 4.2. As long as pollsters’ poll-timing decisions are not dependent on how the
media is covering the campaigns or how the campaign is developing, choosing the panel periods this way will
introduce no additional sources of bias when estimating equation A.5. In section 6.3.2 we test the plausibility
of this assumption.

26

covariation in these changes with the ratios of news reports indicative of core-targeted statements to all news reports for each candidate can identify the average turnout response of
the polled electorate to core voter-targeted statements. The result hinges on aggregating
the changes in poll standings of both candidates; the zero-sum nature of swing voter-voter
support implies that all swing voter effects cancel out after this aggregation.
The proof of this result proceeds by first writing down the net change in the poll standing
of a given candidate between stage games t and t + τ from equation (2), as a function of
the counts of all realizations of game actions that affect the evolution of electoral support
c
s
(Xpc , X∼p
, Xps , X∼p
Npc ) in that time interval. After adding the net changes for both candidates
and dividing by the number of stage games considered, all terms related to swing voters
cancel and we obtain an expression that depends only on (Npc (t, t + τ ) + Xpc (t, t + τ ))/τ for
p ∈ {D, R} and the average of the shocks in the time interval (see equation (A.6) in Appendix
A). A first empirical challenge is that this equation cannot be estimated directly; the counts
of unreported core-targeted statements (NDc (t, t + τ ), NRc (t, t + τ )) are unobserved. This


difficulty can be overcome by noticing that E (Npc (t, t + τ ) + Xpc (t, t + τ ))/τ = qp∗ is simply
the expected fraction of stage games in which candidate p will target his core supporters.
We can then use our non-parametric estimate for the equilibrium mixed strategy of the
candidate from equation (10), and express (Npc (t, t + τ ) + Xpc (t, t + τ ))/τ as our estimate of
√
qp∗ , namely ϕ̂cp (t, t + τ )/φ̂p (t, t + τ ), plus sampling noise that goes to zero at rate τ as the
poll-to-poll interval size increases.14
The second challenge in estimating equation (12) is the endogeneity of ϕ̂cD (t, t+τ )/φ̂D (t, t+
τ ) and ϕ̂cR (t, t + τ )/φ̂R (t, t + τ ). Each of these is likely correlated with other unobservables
that also determine the evolution of electoral support during a campaign, so we require
at least two instrumental variables. These need to be sources of variation for the relative
frequencies of core-targeted statements made by candidates, which do not, simultaneously,
covary with any other determinants of the evolution of electoral support during the campaign. Our model suggests what the natural instruments for these variables should be. From
the equilibrium mixing probabilities in equations (5) and (6), the mixing probabilities chosen
by the candidates are pinned down by the media’s payoffs from reporting:
qp∗ (z) =

k
ηp πp (z)

(13)

A shifter of the media’s payoffs to reporting on the campaign, which is otherwise unrelated
to other campaign outcome determinants, will generate variation in the candidates’ choices.
14

Expressing the regressors in this way in equation (A.6) amounts in practice to including an explanatory
variable with classical measurement error, which should create no additional issues as long as our instruments
are valid.

27

As long as such an instrument varies across poll-to-poll intervals, it can be used to identify
the parameters of interest from equation (12). Equation (13) also points out that the model
makes an unambiguous prediction about the expected sign of the first stage; if larger values
of the instrument reduce the media’s profitability of reporting on politics, this should increase
the rate at which the candidates target their core constituencies. Thus, we should expect a
positive sign for the first stage. As we described in section 4.4, we rely on salient sports events
which may crowd out the media’s attention (thus, lowering its payoff from reporting on the
campaigns). Eisensee and Strömberg (2007) use time variation generated by the occurrence
of the Olympic Games to study media coverage of natural disasters. In a similar spirit, we
use daily data on the occurrence of games in any of the four major sports leagues in the U.S.
(M BL, N F L, N BA, N CAA). We match the games to the poll-to-poll intervals where they
fall, including games with teams from the race’s state or from other states with a significant
local fan base as proxied by the Facebook fandom data (see section 4.4). The exclusion
restriction is thus that games in any of these sports are uncorrelated to any unobserved
determinants of the evolution of electoral support besides how they alter the media’s relative
payoffs from covering the campaigns. We believe this is a plausible exclusion restriction.15
Moreover, because the model predicts the sign of the first stages, we consider the first stages
as implicit specification tests of our model.
Equipped with estimates of ∆TcD and ∆TcR , we now describe the identification of the
remaining electoral support elasticities.
Proposition 3. (Identification of Swing Elasticities) Consider the following linear specification:
D̂(t, t + τ ) − R̂(t, t + τ )
= ∆SsD φ̂D (t, t + τ )τ − ∆SsR φ̂R (t, t + τ )τ + ζ(t, t + τ )
2
where
ˆT
p̂(t, t + τ ) ≡ [Vp (t + τ ) − Vp (t)] − ∆
c∼p

ϕ̂c∼p (t, t + τ )
φ̂∼p (t, t + τ )

(14)

τ

is the change in electoral support for candidate p net of the turnout effects of the opposing
candidate, and ζ(t, t + τ ) is an error term derived in Appendix A. Suppose instrumental
variables z(t, t + τ ) are available, such that, (i) τ (z) varies with z, (ii) Cov(z, ζ) = 0, and
(iii) the dimension of z is as least 2. Then an IV regression of equation (14) using z as
15

One possible channel through which the exclusion restriction may fail is if the occurrence of these sports
events directly either lowers the turnout or changes the voters’ electoral choices. Healy et al. (2010), for
example, find that college football wins around election day increase the vote share of incumbent Senators.
This effect is restricted to matter only around election day, thus only for the last poll-to-poll interval in each
race. As robustness checks we estimate the model excluding the last period of each race, and using only
variation in games won instead of variation in games taking place.

28

instruments for φ̂D (t, t + τ )τ and φ̂R (t, t + τ )τ identifies the elasticities (∆SsD , ∆SsR ). Finally,
(∆ScD , ∆ScR ) are identified from
ˆT
∆
cp
ˆS
−∆
(15)
∆Scp =
sp
φ̂p
Proof. See Appendix A.
Proposition 3 shows that the covariation between appropriately “corrected” changes in
the competitiveness of the race over time and the rate at which candidates are being reported
about any type of statements can identify the average swing voter response of the polled
c
ˆ T ϕ̂∼p (t,t+τ ) τ captures
electorate to swing voter-targeted statements. The correction term, ∆
c∼p φ̂∼p (t,t+τ )
poll changes induced by core-targeted statements from the opponent. Although these do not
directly affect the poll standing of the candidate (see equation (2)), in equilibrium they do
so indirectly. As equation (15) shows, the poll gains to a candidate from core supportertargeted statements by his opponent, ∆Scp , are fully pinned down by equilibrium play and
the remaining elasticities. The proof of Proposition 3 shows that relying on this equilibrium
relationship we can use the estimates of (∆TcD , ∆TcR ) from Proposition 2 to appropriately
correct for poll changes stemming from core-targeted candidate speech.
Subsequently, by scaling the net poll change in the interval by its size (the corresponding
number of stage games), we obtain an expression where the regressors depend on τ but
the error term does not. This is key to our identification strategy. The reason is that in
equation (14) both φ̂p (t, t + τ )τ ’s will be correlated with other unobservables in ζ(t, t + τ )
driving the evolution of the campaign. We require the use of appropriate instruments once
more, and we again rely on exogenous variation induced by sports events. The variation
in this case is of a different nature, however. In contrast to the identification idea for
the elasticities in Proposition 2, where we leveraged the dependence of qp∗ on the media’s
payoff
from reporting
on politics πp , our model implies that the equilibrium reporting rate
h
i
E φ̂p (t, t + τ ) = ηp (1 − γ∼p ) is independent of πp . As equations (3) and (4) show, in
equilibrium the reporting rate depends only on the candidates’ payoff parameters, which are
unlikely to respond to variation in sports events.
Nevertheless, the right-hand side variables in equation (14) are scaled by the size of the
poll-to-poll interval. If the occurrence of sports events leads to variation across media outlets
in their willingness to report on politics, then sports events can be valid shifters of τ (z), and
thus valid instruments.16 Sports events induce no intensive-margin response by a given media
outlet (whose reporting strategy is pinned down by indifference). They can, nevertheless,
induce an extensive margin response across the distribution of media outlets covering a race.
16

Recall that in equation (14), ζ(t, t + τ ) is independent of τ .

29

πp

Fraction of reporting media outlets at z0

Fraction of reporting media outlets at z1

0

πp (z)

z0

z1

Sports Events

Variation Induced by the Instrument

Figure 6: Instrument variation and media coverage in the extensive margin.

Figure 6 illustrates how variation in sports events can lead to infra-marginal outlets (those
barely not covering the race in a given period) to enter coverage, or to supra-marginal outlets
(those barely covering the race in a given period) to drop out from coverage. In the figure we
plot a hypothetical distribution of media outlets who are heterogeneous in their payoffs from
covering the campaign. Across the board, their payoff from campaign coverage is decreasing
in the occurrence of relevant sports events, and only those outlets with a positive payoff
invest in covering the campaign. When more sports events take place in a given period,
some media outlets stop covering the campaign, effectively lowering the number of stage
games τ being played. We exploit this source of variation to instrument for the endogenous
variables in equation (14). As this discussion points out, our model once again makes an
unambiguous prediction about the expected sign of the first stages for equation (14). In this
case, the model predicts a negative relationship between the intensity of sports events and
the two endogenous variables in the structural equation. The model also predicts a positive
estimate for the IV second-stage coefficient on φ̂D (t, t + τ )τ , and a negative estimate for
the coefficient on φ̂R (t, t + τ )τ . These sign predictions are further specification tests of our
model.
In Table 3 we directly test this mechanism in our data, by looking at the correlation
between sports events and the number of distinct media outlets from which we observe news
pieces over time. We find evidence that the number of media outlets covering a senate

30

Testing Model Assuptions: Media Coverage and Sports Events on the Extensive Margin
No. of reporting media outlets in poll-to-poll interval
Dependent variable:
Total no. of reporting media outlets in the race
2 week poll-to-poll intervals
Regressor
Log NFL games/τ

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

−0.008
(0.029)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

−0.042
(0.021)
−0.035
(0.018)

Log NBA games/τ

−0.041
(0.021)
−2.335
(0.609)

Log NCAA games/τ

−2.046
(0.658)
−0.062
(0.017)

Log all games/τ
0.69
415
2134

(10)

−0.005
(0.036)
−0.021
(0.019)

Log MLB games/τ

R2
No. of Races
No. of Observations

3 week poll-to-poll intervals

0.69
415
2134

0.69
415
2134

0.70
415
2134

0.70
415
2134

−0.085
(0.020)
0.70
415
1865

0.70
415
1865

0.70
415
1865

0.70
415
1865

0.70
415
1865

Table 3: Testing Model Assumptions: Media Coverage and Sports Events on the Extensive Margin.
The table presents OLS panel regressions. The dependent variable in all columns is the number of media
outlets reporting on a race in a poll-to-poll interval as a fraction of all media outlets ever reporting on the
race. All models include a full set of Senate-race fixed effects, month fixed effects, a dummy variable for the
last poll-to-poll interval in the race, and a constant. The first five columns of the table are estimated on the
2 week poll-to-poll interval panel. The last five columns of the table are estimated on the 3-week poll-to-poll
interval panel. Columns (1) and (6) include the log number of N F L games per day, columns (2) and (7)
include the log number of M LB games per day, columns (3) and (8) include the log number of N BA games
per day columns (4) and (9) include the log number of N CAA games per day, and columns (5) and (10)
include the log number of N F L, M LB, N BA, and N CAA games per day. All regressions are weighted by
the square root of the length in days of the poll-to-poll interval (relative to the longest interval). Standard
errors are robust to arbitrary heteroskedasticity.

race does vary systematically with sports events relevant to the race’s state. We test this
assumption relying on our dataset of news articles, which includes the media outlet names
for each news piece. This allows us to compute the number of different outlets producing
news for a given race over time. The table reports OLS results of a regression where the
dependent variable is the number of distinct media outlets reporting on a senate race in
a given poll-to-poll interval as a fraction of all media outlets ever reporting on that race,
on each of our sports events instruments. These models include Senate-race fixed effects,
exploiting only within-race variation. The table presents results both for the 2-week and
3-week poll-to-poll interval datasets we described in section 4. All regressions show evidence
of a significant and negative within-race correlation between game frequencies and media
outlet coverage on the extensive margin.
31

6

Estimation Results

In this section we present our main empirical findings and discuss several robustness exercises.
We first present our point estimates for the poll change elasticities ∆, and conclude with a
partial identification exercise for the media biases (ηD , ηR ). Overall, we find that the turnout
margin response to core-targeted speech is more responsive for Democratic candidates and
that the swing voter response to swing-targeted speech is quantitatively similar for Democrats
and Republicans. We also find that the responsiveness of swing voters to swing-targeted
speech is lower in states with a more uneven partisan distribution of voters. Nevertheless,
we do not find evidence suggesting that voter responsiveness to media coverage significantly
changes as the campaigns develop. Our results also indicate that Democratic candidates
suffer larger swing voter losses when their core-targeted campaign speech is widely reported
by the media compared to those of Republican candidates. Finally, we find that a large bias
of the average media outlet towards either party is unlikely.

6.1

Poll Change Elasticities

Our empirical strategy consists of several steps. On our state-x-race-x-poll-to-poll interval
dataset, we compute the average counts of reported core-targeted statements for each canXc
, and the average counts of total reported
didate within a poll-to-poll interval ϕ̂cp,r,t ≡ τp,r,t
r,t
Xc

Xs

+ τp,r,t
. p ∈ {D, R}
statements for each candidate within a poll-to-poll interval φ̂p,r,t ≡ τp,r,t
r,t
r,t
denotes the candidate’s party, r denotes the race, t ∈ {1, 2, ...Tr } denotes the poll-to-poll
interval, Tr is the last poll-to-poll interval of race r, and τr,t denotes the number of stage
games within poll-to-poll interval t for race r (computed as the days in the poll-to-poll
interval times the number of total media outlets ever reporting on the race).
Following Proposition 2, we estimate the turnout effects of core-targeted statements by
2SLS using the following model:
12
c
c
X
XD,r,t
XR,r,t
4t vrD + 4t vrR
T
T
= ∆cD c
+ ∆cR c
+ δr +
%m
r,t + ωr,t
s
s
τr,t
XD,r,t + XD,r,t
XR,r,t + XR,r,t
m=1

(16)

Here the δr are race fixed effects. These will capture any unobservable systematic differences
that are constant within a state or within an election year, such as the state’s average
ideology, or any specific features of a given electoral year such as the party in power, or
whether it is a midterm election year. As such, we exploit exclusively within-race variation in
media reporting and electoral support changes along the campaign trail. The %m
r,t are monthof-the-year fixed effects. These are important in this setting because the sports events we

32

use as instruments are highly seasonal. As a robustness exercise, we also estimate equation
(16) above with a full set of state, year, and state-x-year fixed effects instead of race fixed
effects.
Estimation of equation (16) requires instruments that vary across poll-to-poll intervals
within a race, for both right-hand side regressors. As mentioned above, we rely on the occurl
rence of major sports events. More specifically, we compute our instruments zr,t
as the fanweighted log number of games per day from sports league l ∈ {N F L, M LB, N BA, N CAA}
relevant to state r falling within the poll-to-poll interval t:
"

l
zr,t

1 X l
= log
w lr,t
τr,t j rj

#

l
where the wrj
are the fraction of state r’s population in counties where a plurality of Facebook
users are fans of a team from state j playing in sports league l. We do not use the Facebook
N CAA
= 0 if
fan weights for N CAA games (see section 4.4). This amounts to making the wrj
N CAA
= 1.17
r 6= j, and wrr
Table 4 presents our main estimates of equation (16) together with the coefficients on
our four instruments in each of the two first stages. Recall that our model predicts that the
occurrence of sports events, by lowering the profitability of campaign reporting, should lead
to an increase in core-targeted reported statements relative to total reported statements.
Reassuringly, there is a systematically positive first-stage relationship between our instruments and each endogenous right-hand side variable in the main equation.18 The first stage
diagnostic statistics reveal that sports events are jointly good predictors of the fraction of
core-targeted to total news articles on a candidate.
Table 4 reports estimates based on the 2-week poll-to-poll interval dataset in the first
four columns, and on the 3-week poll-to-poll interval dataset in the last four columns. In
both cases we report results using the ±0.25 article score cutoff classification described in
section 4.3. We also present estimates from OLS models which illustrate the importance of
appropriately controlling for the endogeneity of equilibrium news coverage. Columns (1), (2),
(5) and (6) present results that include race fixed effects, while columns (3), (4), (7) and (8)
present results that include the state, year, and state-x-year fixed effects instead. In practice,
results are unchanged when using either set of fixed effects. The standard errors we present
throughout allow for heteroskedasticity and serial autocorrelation of up to order two, which
17

As additional robustness exercises available upon request, we estimated our main equations using the
number of winning games per day as instruments instead. Results are very similar.
Xc
18
The partial correlation coefficient for N CAA games on the first stage for X c R,r,t
is negative.
+X s
R,r,t

R,r,t

Nevertheless, the unconditional correlation (without controlling for the remaining sports) is positive.

33

Electoral Share Response Elasticities (0.25 score cutoff)
Panel A: Structural equation

Dependent variable: (∆VD + ∆VR )/τ
2 week poll-to-poll intervals

Explanatory variable

Param.

OLS
(1)

2SLS
(2)

OLS
(3)

2SLS
(4)

3 week poll-to-poll intervals
OLS
(5)

2SLS
(6)

OLS
(7)

2SLS
(8)

0.032
0.15
(0.006) (0.08)

0.032
(0.07)

0.18
(0.089)

c
c
s
RD
/(RD
+ RD
)

∆TcD

0.024
0.16
(0.006) (0.06)

c
c
s
RR
/(RR
+ RR
)

∆TcR

−0.003 0.05
−0.003 0.05
−0.005 0.09
(0.005) (0.058) (0.005) (0.059) (0.005) (0.08)

0.026
0.16
(0.006) (0.06)

−0.004 0.09
(0.005) (0.088)

c
c
s
Dependent variable: RD
/(RD
+ RD
)

Panel B: First Stages
Log NFL games/τ
Log MLB games/τ
Log NBA games/τ
Log NCAA games/τ
R2
F test (p-value)

0.076
(0.034)
0.049
(0.024)
0.060
(0.020)
1.112
(0.588)

0.077
(0.035)
0.048
(0.025)
0.060
(0.020)
1.135
(0.590)

0.104
(0.041)
0.034
(0.026)
0.058
(0.022)
0.695
(0.674)

0.119
(0.041)
0.032
(0.027)
0.058
(0.022)
0.722
(0.685)

0.95
0.001

0.95
0.001

0.96
0.006

0.95
0.003

s
c
c
)
+ RR
/(RR
Dependent variable: RR

Log NFL games/τ
Log MLB games/τ
Log NBA games/τ
Log NCAA games/τ
R2
F test (p-value)
Race fixed effects
Year×State fixed effects
No. of Races
No. of Observations

0.088
(0.034)
0.087
(0.024)
0.023
(0.020)
−1.234
(0.579)

0.089
(0.034)
0.086
(0.024)
0.023
(0.020)
−1.234
(0.579)

0.033
(0.041)
0.048
(0.026)
−0.010
(0.022)
−1.339
(0.673)

0.014
(0.042)
0.050
(0.027)
−0.012
(0.022)
−1.352
(0.688)

0.93
0.000

0.93
0.000

0.94
0.05

0.94
0.042

Y
N

Y
N

N
Y

N
Y

Y
N

Y
N

N
Y

N
Y

415
2134

415
2134

415
2134

415
2134

415
1865

415
1865

415
1865

415
1865

Table 4: Turnout Support Gain Elasticities (0.25 score cutoff). The table presents OLS and 2SLS
estimates of the turnout gain elasticities from equation (16) using a 0.25 article score cutoff. Even-numbered
columns present OLS estimates and odd-number columns present 2SLS estimates. Panel A present estimates
for the structural equation (second stage), and panel B presents estimates of the coefficients for the instruments in both the first stages for the Democratic and the Republican ratios of turnout-targeted to total news
reports. The first four columns in the table are estimated on the 2-week poll-to-poll interval panel. The last
four columns are estimated on the 3-week poll-to-poll interval panel. All regressions are weighted by the
square root of the length in days of the poll-to-poll interval (relative to the longest interval). Columns (1),
(2), (5), and (6) include Senate-race fixed-effects. Columns (3), (4), (7), and (8) include a full set of year,
state, and year-x-state fixed effects. All models include a dummy variable for the last poll-to-poll interval in
a race and month fixed effects. Standard errors are robust to arbitrary heteroskedasticity and to arbitrary
serial correlation of up to order 2 following Newey and West (1987). Coefficients and standard errors in
Panel A are multiplied by 1000.

34

we believe is important given the nature of our data. Because we measure the end-of-period
electoral support for the last poll-to-poll interval of each race using the election outcome
instead of a poll, we additionally include a dummy variable for the last poll-to-poll interval
in each race. All of our estimated regressions are also weighted by the square root of the
length in days of the poll-to-poll interval because longer intervals contain more information
than shorter ones and there is significant variation in poll-to-poll interval sizes in our data.
All of our IV estimates for the Democratic turnout elasticity ∆TcD are positive and significant. Although the IV estimates for the Republican turnout elasticity ∆TcR are systematically
positive across all of our specifications and robustness exercises, they are significantly smaller
than the Democratic turnout elasticity, and their standard errors are large. This is not too
surprising given the large amount of measurement error in our dependent variable, which
relies on arguably quite noisy polls. Our estimates are also very similar when using the
2-week and the 3-week poll-to-poll intervals. We believe this first result is important, as it
points out that Republican core supporters are much less responsive on the turnout margin
to campaigning targeted towards them than Democratic core supporters. This may be because solidly Republican constituencies exhibit high baseline turnout rates. It is well known,
for example, that senior white males in rural areas, who tend to favor the Republican party,
turn out at much higher rates than other demographic groups. As a result, Republican
candidates’ incentives to target those sectors of the electorate may be weaker. Democratic
campaigns, in contrast, often appear focused on mobilizing turnout among younger and minority demographic groups, possibly because these groups have lower average turnout rates,
making the potential gains on this margin large.
Our estimates from Table 4 are informative about the partial equilibrium quantitative
effects of candidate behavior on poll changes. In the bottom panel of Table 6 we report
the average estimates of candidates’ mixing strategies qp , as measured by the ratio of coretargeted news reports to all news reports. Based on the 0.25 article score cutoff criterion,
E[qD ] ≈ 0.56, and E[qR ] ≈ 0.45. A ten percent increase in these probabilities, which is
within the range of variation induced by the sports events, if sustained during a month
would translate, on average, into a 3.3 percentage point gain to the Democratic candidate,
and a 0.8 percentage point gain to the Republican candidate stemming from their core
supporters’ increased turnout.19 Because the margin of victory for most Senate races is
around 5 percentage points, this simple exercise illustrates the importance of media coverage
incentives on election outcomes.
With our estimates for (∆TcD , ∆TcR ) at hand, we then construct D̂r,t and R̂r,t as defined in
19

(0.1 × 0.56) × (0.16/1000) × 124 media outlets on average × 30 days ≈ 0.033 for Democrats, and (0.1 ×
0.45) × (0.05/1000) × 124 media outlets on average × 30 days ≈ 0.008 for Republicans.

35

Proposition 3. We then estimate the swing voter effects of swing voter-targeted candidate
speech by 2SLS using the specification:
12
X
D̂r,t − R̂r,t
S
c
s
S
c
s
τr,t = ∆sD [XD,r,t + XD,r,t ] − ∆sR [XR,r,t + XR,r,t ] + δ̃r +
%̃m
r,t + ζr,t
2
m=1

(17)

Once again, the δ̃r are race fixed effects, and %m
r,t are month-of-the-year fixed effects. Recall
from Proposition 3, that through the lens of our model, the regressors in equation (17) are
the sample analogues of τ ηp (1 − γ∼p ). Total observed news reports on a candidate should not
vary as a function of changes in the media’s payoff –from equations (3)-(4), these conditional
probabilities only depend on candidates’ payoffs–. Our model suggests that a media outlet’s
reporting strategy is pinned down by indifference, and thus, is independent of its own payoff.
Nevertheless, for the distribution of media outlets as a whole, a shift in the profitability of
reporting on political campaigns can lead to an extensive margin response by outlets entering
into or dropping out from coverage (see Figure 6). Following this idea, we use sports events
as exogenous sources of variation for the two endogenous regressors in equation (17). In this
c
s
case, the model predicts sports events should be negatively correlated with [Xp,r,t
+ Xp,r,t
].
This is exactly the pattern we find in the first stage estimates, which we present in Table 5.
Table 5 presents our benchmark estimates of equation (17). The table has the same
structure as that of Table 4. Its first four columns are based on the 2-week poll-to-poll interval
dataset, and the last four are based on the 3-week poll-to-poll interval dataset. All models in
the table are also based on the ±0.25 article score cutoff classification. As discussed above,
the first stage estimates in panel B show that our instruments are systematically negatively
correlated with both the Democratic and the Republican total news reports counts. Panel A
then presents our main estimates of the Democratic and Republican swing-voter elasticities
in response to swing voter-targeted media contents. Quite reassuringly, across all models
c
s
estimated by 2SLS we obtain a positive coefficient on [XD,r,t
+ XD,r,t
] corresponding to ∆SsD ,
c
s
and a negative coefficient on [XR,r,t
+ XR,r,t
] corresponding to −∆SsR , exactly as implied by
equation (17). We consider this pattern of resulting signs to very strongly suggest the validity
of our proposed model. The IV estimates in the table show that the swing voter electoral
support elasticities are remarkably similar in magnitude for Democratic and Republican
candidates. Column (4), for example, shows our estimates for both parameters to be 0.0018,
although the one for the Democratic candidate is more precisely estimated. Both ∆SsD
and ∆SsR are significant at the 5% level. Across specifications both the magnitudes and
significance of the parameter estimates are very similar.
We can undertake a quantitative exercise based on our benchmark estimates of (∆SsD , ∆SsR )

36

Electoral Share Response Elasticities (0.25 score cutoff)
Dependent variable: τ (D̂ − R̂)/2

Panel A: Structural equation

2 week poll-to-poll intervals
Explanatory variable

3 week poll-to-poll intervals

Param.

OLS
(1)

2SLS
(2)

OLS
(3)

2SLS
(4)

OLS
(5)

2SLS
(6)

OLS
(7)

2SLS
(8)

c
s
RD
+ RD

∆SsD

0.15
(0.04)

0.18
(0.09)

0.15
(0.04)

0.18
(0.087)

0.15
(0.3)

0.2
(0.10)

0.15
(0.03)

0.2
(0.10)

c
s
RR
+ RR

−∆SsR

−0.08
(0.02)

−0.18
(0.10)

−0.08
(0.02)

−0.18
(0.11)

−0.10
(0.02)

−0.27 −0.10
(0.136) (0.02)

−0.29
(0.14)

c
c
s
Dependent variable: RD
/(RD
+ RD
)

Panel B: First Stages
Log NFL games/τ
Log MLB games/τ
Log NBA games/τ
Log NCAA games/τ
R2
F test (p-value)

1.73
(24.07)
−34.72
(17.06)
−12.82
(13.93)
−1322.8
(410.13)

1.08
(24.05)
−34.62
(17.06)
−12.82
(13.93)
−1321.3
(410.02)

19.47
(30.50)
−36.12
(19.58)
−17.99
(16.43)
−1348
(503.09)

18.30
(30.48)
−36.00
(19.59)
−19.60
(16.45)
−1347.5
(504.2)

0.70
0.007

0.70
0.007

0.72
0.029

0.72
0.028

c
c
s
Dependent variable: RR
/(RR
+ RR
)

Log NFL games/τ
Log MLB games/τ
Log NBA games/τ
Log NCAA games/τ
R2
F test (p-value)
Race fixed effects
Year×State fixed effects
No. of Races
No. of Observations

−34.52
(12.93)
−6.99
(9.16)
−22.17
(7.49)
−663.0
(220.34)

−34.44
(12.92)
−7.02
(9.17)
−22.13
(7.48)
−663.8
(220.31)

−28.01
(16.24)
−7.35
(10.42)
−31.59
(8.75)
−582.2
(267.91)

−29.04
(16.19)
−6.77
(10.41)
−31.88
(8.74)
−581.7
(267.84)

0.73
0.000

0.73
0.000

0.76
0.000

0.76
0.000

Y
N

Y
N

N
Y

N
Y

Y
N

Y
N

N
Y

N
Y

415
2134

415
2134

415
2134

415
2134

415
1865

415
1865

415
1865

415
1865

Table 5: Swing-Voter Gain Elasticities (0.25 score cutoff). The table presents OLS and 2SLS estimates of the swing-voter gain elasticities from equation (17) using a 0.25 article score cutoff. Even-numbered
columns present OLS estimates and odd-number columns present 2SLS estimates. Panel A presents estimates for the structural equation (second stage), and panel B presents estimates of the coefficients for the
instruments in both the first stages for the Democratic and the Republican total news reports. The first four
columns in the table are estimated on the 2-week poll-to-poll interval panel, and the dependent variable is
constructed using the parameter estimates from the model in Panel A, column (4) of Table 4. The last four
columns are estimated on the 3-week poll-to-poll interval panel, and the dependent variable is constructed
using the parameter estimates from the model in Panel A, column (8), of Table 4. All regressions are
weighted by the square root of the length in days of the poll-to-poll interval (relative to the longest interval).
Columns (1), (2), (5), and (6) include Senate-race fixed-effects. Columns (3), (4), (7), and (8) include a full
set of year, state, and year-x-state fixed effects. All models include a dummy variable for the last poll-to-poll
interval in a race and month fixed effects. Standard errors are robust to arbitrary heteroskedasticity and
to arbitrary serial correlation of up to order 2 following Newey and West (1987). Coefficients and standard
errors in Panel A are multiplied by 100.
37

Electoral Share Response Elasticities and Equilibrium Mixing Strategies
Dependent variable:

2 week poll-to-poll intervals
0.25 article score cutoff
(1)

Panel A

0.5 article score cutoff
(2)

Parameters

∆TcD

0.016

0.011

∆TcR

0.005

0.004

∆SsD

0.18

0.12

∆SsR

0.18

0.15

∆ScD

0.69

0.50

∆ScR

0.18

0.15

Panel B

Average Equilibrium Mixing Strategies

E[qD ]

0.557

0.414

E[qR ]

0.449

0.299

E[ηD (1 − γR )]

0.018

0.018

E[ηR (1 − γD )]

0.014

0.014

Table 6: Identified Parameter Estimates and Equilibrium Mixing Strategies. The table presents all
the identified parameters (Panel A) and average equilibrium mixing probabilities (Panel B) in the model
estimated using the 2-week poll-to-poll interval dataset. Electoral gain elasticities in Panel A are taken from
the estimation of equations (16) and (17). Swing-voter loss elasticity parameters are computed according to
equation (18) in the text. Column (1) is based on the 0.25 article score cutoff and the estimates in column
(4) of Table 4 and column (4) of Table 5. Column (2) is based on analogous models using the 0.5 article
score cutoff. Estimates in Panel B are computed directly from the sample analogues as weighted averages
using relative interval lengths as weights. Parameter estimates reported in Panel A are multiplied by 100.

similar to the one we discussed above for (∆TcD , ∆TcR ). In the bottom panel of Table 6 we
report the average estimates of the unconditional probabilities of observing a news piece,
ηp (1−γ∼p ), as measured by the ratio of observed news pieces relative to the number of relevant
stage games. Based on the 0.25 article score cutoff criterion, E[ηD (1 − γR )] ≈ 0.018, and
E[ηR (1−γD )] ≈ 0.014. A ten percent increase in these probabilities sustained during a month
would translate, on average, into a 1.2 percentage point gain to the Democratic candidate,
and a 1 percentage point gain to the Republican candidate, stemming from increased swing
voter support. These would be losses for the opposing candidate20 .
20

(0.1 × 0.018) × (0.18/100) × 124 media outlets on average × 30 days ≈ 0.012 for Democrats, and (0.1 ×
0.014) × (0.18/100) × 124 media outlets on average × 30 days ≈ 0.010 for Republicans.

38

The next step in our empirical strategy is to back out estimates of the swing voter
responses to core-targeted campaign speech using the equilibrium mixing strategies of the
media in equations (3)-(4), together with our estimates φ̂p of the conditional reporting probabilities ηp (1−γ∼p ) as described in Proposition 3. We obtain average elasticities by integrating
over our sample as follows:
ˆS =
∆
cp

1
N

ˆT
∆
cp
P PTr
r

t=1

φ̂p,r,t

ˆS
−∆
sp

(18)

Panel A in Table 6 presents the estimates of all six poll-change elasticities in our model.
The table presents estimates using the 2-week poll-to-poll interval dataset, both using the
±0.25 article cutoff classification in column (1), and the ±0.5 cutoff in column (2). The
magnitude of the estimates is very similar for both cutoffs, showing that the specific criterion
chosen to classify articles as c or s is not critical for our results. The full set of parameters is
also similar when using the 3-week poll-to-poll intervals. These results are omitted to save
space. As the table illustrates, the swing voter responsiveness to core-targeted statements is
significantly larger for the Democratic candidate than for the Republican candidate. Using
the ±0.25 cutoff estimates, ∆ScD = 0.69, ∆ScR = 0.18. Our estimates suggest that swing
voters are on average very sensitive to media content that signals relatively core-mobilizing
campaign speech by Democrats. This difference in poll response elasticities across parties has
substantial implications for the dynamics of the Senate races; although the turnout gains of
core-targeted statements are larger for Democrats than for Republicans, the cost on the swing
voter margin is even larger. If both centrist voters and the media play a role in moderating
candidates’ campaign trail speech, these results suggest that swing voters are especially
important in fulfilling this role for Democratic candidates, while the media is relatively more
important to constrain the behavior of Republican candidates. The equilibrium implication
of this pattern of parameters is that candidates from both parties are covered by the media
at similar rates. As we pointed out above, our average estimates for these probabilities,
reported in Panel B of Table 6, are 0.018 for Democrats and 0.014 for Republicans. These
should be understood as the average unconditional probabilities that a given media outlet
generates a news piece on a candidate in a given day during the campaign.

6.2

Payoff Heterogeneity

The 2SLS estimates of the payoff parameters (∆TcD , ∆TcR , ∆SsD , ∆SsR , ∆ScD , ∆ScR ) described above
are average effects across states and three decades, identified off the variation in media
coverage and poll changes within races over time. In this section we explore the extent
39

of heterogeneity in these payoff parameters across races. We do so in a straightforward
parametric way by allowing the payoff parameters we recover from equations (16) and (17)
to depend on race characteristics which may be important sources of heterogeneity. Here
we discuss four sources of heterogeneity: the partisan distribution of voters across states
and time, the time to election day, the competitiveness of the election at a given point
in time, and the presence of an incumbent senator in the race. Specifically, we allow the
payoff elasticities to be linear functions of one of these four characteristics Kr,t : ∆Tcp =
S
S
T
T
Kr,t for p ∈ {D, R}.21 We estimate equations (16) and
+ βsp
Kr,t and ∆Ssp = αsp
+ βcp
αcp
(17) by 2SLS including the relevant interaction terms, instrumenting the interaction terms
with the respective interactions between our sports events instruments and the source of
heterogeneity in each case.22
6.2.1

The partisan distribution of voters

We first explore heterogeneity in electoral responses as a function of the partisan distribution
of the electorate, which varies considerably across states. We proxy this distribution using the
average of the Democratic registration share of the electorate and the most recent presidential
election results. For states without partisan registration, we use only the presidential election
returns. The results for this exercise are presented in column (1) of Table 7. These and all
other estimates in the table use our benchmark 2-week poll-to-poll interval dataset based
on the ±0.25 article score cutoff and are estimated by 2SLS using all sports events and
interactions of sports events and voter registration as instruments. Panel A presents the
estimates for the turnout elasticities from equation (16), while panel B presents the estimates
for the swing voter elasticities from equation (17). Although the pattern of signs implies
that ∆TcD decreases while ∆TcR increases with Democratic registration, we cannot estimate
these effects precisely. In contrast, we find a significant decreasing relationship between
Democratic registration and ∆SsD . In states with relatively few Democratic voters, these
21

An additional reason to explore heterogeneity in this context is the potential bias of our estimates
if parameters vary substantially over time because we base our empirical strategy on the computation of
probabilities based on relative frequencies. On the one hand, if the underlying probabilities vary substantially
over time, the sample analogue estimators of the mixing probabilities will be biased. This would make shorter
poll-to-poll intervals preferable. On the other hand, longer poll-to-poll intervals reduce sampling error, as
long as the ∆’s are constant within a time interval. This is an unavoidable bias-precision trade-off.
22
To recover the remaining elasticities ∆Scp (K) when allowing for heterogeneity, we construct decile bins
for Kp,r and compute the integration in equation (18) restricted to the set ΓK = {(r, t) : Kr,t ∈ K} of
observations falling in each decile:
ˆ Scp (K) =
∆

ˆ Tcp (Kp,r )
∆
ˆ Ssp (Kp,r ),
−∆
P
PTr
1
φ̂
t=1 p,r,t
r
|ΓK |

40

(r, t) ∈ ΓK .

41

E[K]

c
s
(RR
+ RR
)×K

S
βsR

S
αsR

c
s
RR
+ RR

S
αsD

S
βsD

+

s
RD

T
βcR

c
s
(RD
+ RD
)×K

c
RD

c
c
s
RR
/(RR
+ RR
)×K

T
αcR

c
c
s
RR
/(RR
+ RR
)

T
αcD

T
βcD

+

s
RD
)

Coefficient

c
c
s
RD
/(RD
+ RD
)×K

c
c
RD
/(RD

Regressor

Race tightness
(3)

0.008
(0.032)

0.004
(0.009)

−0.031
(0.039)

0.019
(0.010)

0.003
(0.003)
4.56

0.47

−0.0163
(0.014)

−0.0001
(0.001)

0.0028
(0.008)

0.17

−0.014
(0.005)

0.0009
(0.002)

−0.002
(0.002)

0.0014
(0.001)

Dependent variable: τ (D̂ − R̂)/2

−0.011
(0.009)

0.047
(0.041)

0.001
(0.005)

0.001
(0.025)

Dependent variable: (∆VD + ∆VR )/τ

Log days to election
(2)

−0.007
(0.028)

0.0020
(0.014)

−0.078
(0.018)

0.037
(0.009)

0.14
(0.10)

−0.060
(0.048)

−0.13
(0.074)

0.075
(0.037)

Dem. registration
(1)

0.76

−0.0015
(0.002)

0.000
(0.002)

0.0008
(0.001)

0.0007
(0.001)

0.00
(0.014)

0.005
(0.011)

−0.003
(0.011)

0.018
(0.009)

Incumbent running
(4)

between a race characteristics and the endogenous explanatory variables. All models are estimated on the 2-week poll-to-poll interval panel using
2134 observations from 415 Senate races. Models in column (1) allow for an interaction with the Democratic registration in the state as defined in
the text. Models in column (2) allow for an interaction with the log of days to the general election. Because this variable varies across poll-to-poll
intervals and races, log days to the general election is also included as a covariate. Models in column (3) allow for an interaction with a proxy for
the competitiveness of the race measured as the absolute value of the difference between the Democratic and Republican poll results in the beginning
on the poll-to-poll interval. Because this variable varies across poll-to-poll intervals and races, race competitiveness is also included as a covariate.
Models in column (4) allow for an interaction with a dummy variable for races where an incumbent senator is running. The dependent variable for
the equation in Panel B uses the parameter estimates from the corresponding column of Panel A. All models include Senate-race fixed effects, month
fixed effects, and a dummy variable for the last poll-to-poll interval in a race. The set of instruments includes the log of N F L games per day, the
log of M LB games per day, the log of N BA games per day, the log of N CAA games per day, and interactions of each of these variables with the
corresponding interaction variable. All regressions are weighted by the square root of the length in days of the poll-to-poll interval (relative to the
longest interval). Standard errors are robust to arbitrary heteroskedasticity and to arbitrary serial correlation of up to order 2 following Newey and
West (1987). Coefficients and standard errors in Panel A are multiplied by 100.

Table 7: Heterogeneity in Electoral Response Elasticities. The table presents parameter estimates from 2SLS models that include an interaction

−∆SsR

∆SsD

Panel B

∆TcR

∆TcD

Panel A
Parameter

Interaction term (K):

Testing for Heterogeneity in Electoral Response Elasticities (2 week poll-to-poll intervals, 0.25 article score cutoff)

voters appear to be more responsive to swing-voter targeted media coverage favoring the
Democratic candidates. Except for this result, the partisan distribution of the electorate
does not appear to be a major source of heterogeneity in electoral response elasticities across
states or over time.
6.2.2

Days to Election

In a second exercise we explore the possibility that the electoral responsiveness of voters
varies during the campaign. For example, if voters pay more attention to media coverage as
November approaches, they may become more responsive to the news over time. We explore
this possibility by allowing the payoff parameters in equations (16) and (17) to depend on
the time between the initial date of the poll-to-poll interval and the general election date.
Because the time to election day varies across poll-to-poll intervals within race, we also
include the time to election as a covariate. Our main results for this exercise are presented
in column (2) of Table 7. They show no statistically significant evidence of heterogeneity on
time to election day. Overall, the ∆’s appear to be stable along the campaign trail.
6.2.3

State of the Race: A Dynamic Game

We also explore whether poll response elasticities vary as a function of an endogenous state
variable, making the game in practice a dynamic one rather than a repeated one. It is
possible that both candidates’ and the media’s incentives change along the campaign trail
as a function of the political environment and the previous evolution of the race itself. On
the one hand, we may expect a candidate to become more willing to take risks when he
is behind in the polls. On the other hand, the electoral cost of bad press may grow as
election day approaches, making politicians more cautions late in the race. Similarly, the
media’s campaign coverage profitability may grow as election day approaches. To explore
these possibilities and their implications for the robustness of our results, we allow payoff
parameters to depend on the current state of the race as measured by the poll margin between
candidates at the beginning of the corresponding poll-to-poll interval.23
We now have a dynamic game where payoffs depend on a state variable, and where the
state variable itself evolves over time as a function of the players’ previous choices. Even
in this case, the finite horizon of the game and the uniqueness of Nash equilibrium in its
stage game imply that the dynamic game only has one sub-game perfect equilibrium. It
prescribes playing the mixed-strategy Nash equilibrium of the stage game given the value
23

In principle, the relevant state variable may be a high-dimensional vector of time-varying characteristics.
In practice, our sample size requires us to limit the dimensionality of the state variable we consider.

42

of the state variable at every period. As a result, equilibrium play is independent across
periods conditional on the state variable, and we can replicate our estimation strategy from
above. Similar to the time-to-election exercise, the poll margin varies over time within a
race, so we also include it separately as a covariate.
Results for this exercise are presented in column (3) of Table 7. Overall, we do not find
a strong relationship between the state of the race and the electoral support elasticities.
The only exception arises for the swing-voter response elasticity to swing-targeted speech for
Republicans, ∆SsR . This parameter is higher in more competitive periods of a race. Taken at
face value, it suggests that incentives to target swing voters become stronger for Republican
candidates as races become closer. The results from this exercise should be taken with
caution because the poll margin is an endogenous outcome which we are including as a
covariate.
6.2.4

Incumbent Running

Our final exercise looking at payoff heterogeneity explores whether poll responsiveness differs
in races where incumbents are running. We allow the ∆’s to depend on a dummy variable
for elections with a running incumbent. Results for this exercise are presented in column
(4) of Table 7. We find no evidence of differences in candidate payoff parameters in races
with or without incumbents. We should notice, however, that this test may not have much
power: 75% of all Senate races in our sample have an incumbent running.

6.3
6.3.1

Robustness Exercises and Specification Tests
Robustness Exercises

In Tables 8 and 9 we present a subset of additional econometric exercises exploring the
robustness of our main findings. Table 8 reports 2SLS results for alternative specifications
based on the 2-week poll-to-poll interval dataset. First, we estimate equations (16)-(17)
excluding the last poll-to-poll interval for each race. We do this for two reasons. First,
our last poll-to-poll interval for each race is constructed using the general election result
as the end-of period value. This is in contrast to all other periods in which beginning and
end-of-period electoral support are measured using averages of polls. Second, the validity
of our instruments relies on the assumption that sports events are shifters of the media’s
reporting payoffs, but do not otherwise affect the evolution of the polls. If sports events that
happen very near election day –thus falling on the last poll-to-poll interval– directly lead to
lower turnout in elections, the exclusion restriction would not be satisfied.24 Excluding these
24

We believe this is unlikely given that poll-to-poll intervals cover an average of 30 days.

43

Robustness exercises (2 week poll-to-poll intervals)
Robustness exercise:
Panel A

Parameter

Regressor

Excluding last
poll-to-poll
interval
(1)

Controlling for
post-primary
dummy
(2)

0.5 article score
cutoff

0.75 article
score cutoff

(3)

(4)

Dependent variable: (∆VD + ∆VR )/τ
∆TcD

c
c
RD
/(RD

s
RD
)

0.015
(0.005)

0.014
(0.005)

0.011
(0.005)

0.015
(0.006)

∆TcR

s
c
c
)
+ RR
/(RR
RR

0.003
(0.005)

0.008
(0.006)

0.004
(0.005)

0.005
(0.006)

+

Dependent variable: τ (D̂ − R̂)/2

Panel B
∆SsD

c
s
RD
+ RD

0.21
(0.08)

0.13
(0.056)

0.12
(0.056)

0.12
(0.06)

−∆SsR

s
c
+ RR
RR

−0.24
(0.12)

−0.16
(0.082)

−0.15
(0.076)

−0.14
(0.078)

415
1871

415
2134

415
2134

415
2134

No. of races
No. of observations

Table 8: Robustness Exercises. The table presents 2SLS estimates of the electoral support elasticities
from equations (22) and (23). All models are estimated on the 2 week poll-to-poll interval panel, and
include a full set of Senate-race fixed effects, and month fixed effects. The dependent variable in Panel B
is constructed using the parameter estimates from Panel A. All regressions are weighted by the square root
of the length in days of the poll-to-poll interval (relative to the longest interval). Column (1) excludes all
observations consisting of the last poll-to-poll interval in a race. Columns (2), (3), and (4) include a dummy
variable for the last poll-to-poll interval in a race. All models use log of N F L games per day, log of M LB
games per day, log of N BA games per day, and log of N CAA games per day as instruments. Standard
errors are robust to arbitrary heteroskedasticity and to arbitrary serial correlation of up to order 2 following
Newey and West (1987). Coefficients and standard errors in Panels A and B are multiplied by 100.

44

observations reduces the sample size from 2134 to 1871. As column (1) in Table 8 shows,
the magnitude and significance of the estimated parameters is almost unchanged relative to
our baseline estimates.
In column (2) we then include a dummy variable for poll-to-poll intervals after the primary
election for the race. If the strategic environment is significantly different before and after the
primaries have taken place, it may be important to distinguish between both regimes. For
most races, even during primary campaign days, pollsters are already collecting polls asking
for the candidates who eventually become the Democratic and Republican nominees. This
suggests that in most cases, the bipartisan race is already implicitly taking place before the
primary outcome is known. As column (2) in Table 8 shows, controlling for a post-primary
dummy variable does not alter any of our benchmark estimates either.
Finally, in columns (3) and (4) of Table 8 we estimate our main specification using two
alternative article score cutoffs. Column (3) presents estimates using a ±0.5 cutoff, and
column (4) presents estimates using a quite extreme ±.75 cutoff. Because our classification
cutoff for core-targeted versus swing-targeted news content is arbitrary, it is reassuring that
our main results are unaltered.
In Table 9 we turn to a sensitivity analysis of our estimates to the inclusion of alternative
subsets of our sports events instruments. These, in practice, amount to over-identification
exercises. We report the results from models using the 2-week (columns (1)-(5)) and the
3-week (columns (6)-(10)) poll-to-poll interval datasets, using the ±0.25 article score cutoff
classification. Panel AI presents the parameter estimates for equation (16). Panel BI presents
the parameter estimates for equation (17). Panels AII and BII present diagnostic statistics
for the respective first stages that include different subsets of instruments. We present results
that omit one by one each of the four sports events from the instrument set in columns (1)(4) and (6)-(9). In columns (5) and (10) we also include a more demanding specification
where we omit both M LB and N BA games simultaneously, making these models exactly
identified. The F-tests for the excluded instruments across the table do suggest that we
lose some of the joint predictive power of our instruments when excluding some of them.
However, we fail to reject the null of no joint significance in only 4 out of the 40 first stages
reported in the Table. Standard errors for the parameter estimates are also somewhat larger,
but in most cases the parameter estimates that are significant in our benchmark specification
using all instruments remain significant at the 5% level when using only a subset of them.
More importantly, the table shows that the magnitude and pattern of signs for the estimated
parameters remain unchanged relative to our baseline model estimates.

45

46

0.014
(0.006)
0.003
(0.006)

∆TcD
∆TcR

s
c
c
)
+ RR
/(RR
RR

+

s
RD

−∆SsR

∆SsD

0.60
0.009
415
2134

R2
F test (p-value)

No. of races
No. of observations

415
2134

0.60
0.001

0.60
0.095

−0.21
(0.11)

0.24
(0.10)

0.80
0.076

0.78
0.011

0.013
(0.010)

0.019
(0.008)

(2)

MLB

415
2134

0.60
0.003

0.60
0.046

−0.20
(0.12)

0.18
(0.08)

0.80
0.000

0.78
0.058

0.004
(0.004)

0.011
(0.006)

(3)

NBA

MLB,
NBA
(5)
(6)

NFL
(7)

MLB

0.013
(0.009)

0.015
(0.009)
0.005
(0.007)

0.009
(0.007)
0.0013
(0.012)

0.018
(0.010)

0.78
0.037

0.80
0.071

0.80
0.015

0.80
0.032

0.82
0.021

0.82
0.067

−0.33
(0.17)

0.30
(0.14)
−0.15
(0.013)

0.12
(0.07)
−0.30
(0.14)

0.27
(0.11)

0.60
0.047

0.63
0.090

0.63
0.134

415
2134

0.60
0.013

415
2134

0.60
0.001

415
1865

0.64
0.016

415
1865

0.64
0.006

c
s
+ RR
Dependent variable: RR

0.60
0.495

c
s
Dependent variable: RD
+ RD

−0.19
(0.11)

0.10
(0.11)

Dependent variable: τ (D̂ − R̂)/2

0.80
0.001

c
c
s
/(RR
+ RR
)
Dependent variable: RR

0.78
0.011

c
c
s
Dependent variable: RD
/(RD
+ RD
)

0.00
(0.01)

0. 024
(0.010)

Dependent variable: (∆VD + ∆VR )/τ

(4)

NCAA

415
1865

0.64
0.048

0.63
0.088

−0.29
(0.17)

0.19
(0.09)

0.82
0.019

0.80
0.082

0.009
(0.008)

0.020
(0.010)

(8)

NBA

415
1865

0.64
0.037

0.63
0.672

−0.27
(0.12)

0.15
(0.12)

0.82
0.166

0.80
0.014

0.01
(0.01)

0.02
(0.007)

(9)

NCAA

3 week poll-to-poll intervals

415
1865

0.64
0.023

0.63
0.062

−0.46
(0.28)

0.32
(0.17)

0.82
0.053

0.80
0.042

0.012
(0.012)

0.021
(0.012)

MLB,
NBA
(10)

(17) in Panel B. All models are estimated using the 0.25 article score cutoff, and include a full set of Senate-race fixed effects, month fixed effects, and
a dummy variable for the last poll-to-poll interval in a race. The dependent variable for the structural equation in Panel BI is constructed using the
benchmark parameter estimates from the structural equation (16). Columns (1)-(5) are based on the estimate from column (4) of Table 4. Columns
(6)-(10) are based on the estimate from column (8) in Table 4. Panels AI and BI present estimates for the structural equations (second stages), and
Panels AII and BII report the corresponding R-squared and p-value for the F-tests on the excluded instruments for each first stage. The dependent
variables in the first stages of Panel AII are the Democratic and Republican ratios of turnout-targeted to total news reports. The dependent variables
in the first stages of Panel BII are the Democratic and Republican total news reports. The first five columns in the table are estimated on the 2 week
poll-to-poll interval panel. The last five columns are estimated on the 3 week poll-to-poll interval panel. All regressions are weighted by the square
root of the length in days of the poll-to-poll interval (relative to the longest interval). Columns (1) and (6) exclude the log number of N F L games
per day from the instrument set. Columns (2) and (7) exclude the log number of M LB games per day from the instrument set. Columns(3) and (8)
exclude the log number of N BA games per day from the instrument set. Columns (4) and (9) exclude the log number of N CAA games per day from
the instrument set. Columns (5) and (10) present a just-identified model excluding the log number of M LB games per day and the log number of
N BA games per day from the instrument set. Standard errors are robust to arbitrary heteroskedasticity and to arbitrary serial correlation of up to
order 2 following Newey and West (1987). Coefficients and standard errors in Panels AI and BI are multiplied by 100.

Table 9: Overidentification Exercises. The table presents 2SLS estimates of the electoral support elasticities from equations (16) in Panel A, and

0.60
0.062

−0.02
(0.16)

R2
F test (p-value)

Panel BII: First Stages

c
s
RR
+ RR

c
RD

0.10
(0.07)

0.80
0.002

R2
F test (p-value)

Panel BI: Structural Equation
Regressor
Param.

0.78
0.014

R2
F test (p-value)

Panel AII: First Stages

+

Param.

s
RD
)

c
c
RD
/(RD

(1)

Panel AI: Structural Equation

Regressor

NFL

Excluded Instruments:

2 week poll-to-poll intervals

Overidentification Exercises

Testing Model Assuptions: Poll Timing and Race Tightness
Polls in poll-to-poll interval
Dependent variable:
Polls in poll-to-poll interval
Length of poll-to-poll interval
Poll-to-poll interval size:

2 week
(1)

3 week
(2)

2 week
(3)

3 week
(4)

Race tightness (|VD − VR |)

0.041
(0.506)

0.100
(0.697)

0.001
(0.066)

0.025
(0.077)

0.39
415
2134

0.48
415
1865

0.42
415
2134

0.47
415
1865

R2
No. of Races
No. of Observations

Table 10: Testing Model Assumptions: Poll Coverage Intensity and Race Competitiveness: The
table presents OLS panel regressions of a measure of poll coverage intensity on the tightness of the Senate race
as measured by the absolute value of the difference between the Democratic candidate’s electoral support
and the Republican candidate’s electoral support. The dependent variable in columns (1) and (2) is the
number of polls in the poll-to-poll interval. The dependent variable in columns (3) and (4) is the number
of polls per day in the poll-to-poll interval. All models include a full set of Senate-race fixed effects, month
fixed effects, a dummy variable for the last poll-to-poll interval in a race, and a constant. All regressions are
weighted by the square root of the length in days of the poll-to-poll interval (relative to the longest interval).
Standard errors are robust to arbitrary heteroskedasticity.

6.3.2

A Test for Poll Timing Independence

Finally, we are also able to indirectly test whether the timing of polls appears to be uncorrelated with the evolution of the Senate races. Recall from our discussion in section 4.2 that
this underlies the validity of our method for building the poll-to-poll intervals which determine the panel structure of our dataset. We do this by exploring the correlation between
the frequency of actual polls in our dataset and the competitiveness of the race at any given
point in time. In Table 10 we report results from OLS regressions of the number of actual
polls used to construct the average end-poll of each poll-to-poll interval, on the measure
of race competitiveness we introduced in section 6.2. We present results with or without
normalizing by the length of the interval in days, and for both the 2-week and the 3-week
poll-to-poll interval datasets. As the table illustrates, we find no correlation between poll
frequencies and the state of the race. Pollsters do not appear to be releasing polls as a function of how the race is evolving. We see these results, together with those using alternative
poll-to-poll windows, as reassuring.

6.4

Partial Identification of the Media Reporting Biases

We conclude the discussion of our empirical findings showing that the media’s partisan
reporting biases are only partially identified in our model. We then compute their identified
set.
47

ΗR
0.20

0.15

0.10

0.05

0.00
0.00

0.05

0.10

0.15

ΗD
0.20 	  

Figure 7: Identified set for media biases (ηD , ηR ).

Although our identification strategy allows us to recover all of the payoff parameters
governing the poll change technology (∆TcD , ∆TcR , ∆ScD , ∆ScR , ∆SsD , ∆SsR ) and the conditional
probabilities of a media report (ηp (1 − γ∼p )), we cannot separately identify the ηp ’s from
the γp ’s. The reason is that observed counts of reports are the outcome of both media
coverage and successful reporting, and these events are indistinguishable based on observed
news reports alone. In equilibrium, observed media reporting on a given candidate results
from the interaction between the reporting bias and the media’s mixed strategy. Our model
does provide, however, additional structure to partially identify the ηp ’s (and thus the γp ’s
through equations (3)-(4)). Equation (11) directly allows us to solve for γp as a function
of the media bias for the opposing candidate η∼p , and the reduced form parameter φ̂∼p :
1
γp = 1 − η∼p
φ̂∼p . Because γp ∈ (0, 1), it follows that ηD > φ̂D and ηR > φ̂R . Furthermore,
γD + γR < 1 implies that
φ̂R
ηR <
(19)
1 − η1D φ̂D
These three inequalities determine the identified set for (ηD , ηR ), which we illustrate in Figure 7 at our benchmark estimates for (φ̂D , φ̂R ). The hyperbola represents the constraint
in the right-hand side of equation 19.25 As Figure 7 illustrates, our estimates restrict con25

Notice that we can exploit the candidates’ equilibrium mixing probabilities from equations (5)-(6) together with our identified set for the ηp ’s to obtain an identified set for the relative payoff to the media from
reporting about R and D:
∗
πR
ηD q̂D
=
∗
πD
ηR q̂R

48

siderably the range of values that the ηp ’s can take. In particular, the region over which
very asymmetric values for ηD and ηR are feasible is very small. For example, if we were to
consider a uniform prior over this identified set, most of the density would fall over a region
where ηD is close in magnitude to ηR . This is the basis of our assertion that a large media
bias as measured by a large difference in the ηp ’s across parties is very unlikely.

7

Concluding Remarks

In this paper we develop a framework to study how the interaction between the media’s
incentives to cover and report on electoral campaigns, and candidates’ incentives to target
different groups of voters, shape both campaign trail speech, and the evolution of the races
themselves. We do this by proposing a simple game-theoretic model of the interaction
between the media and candidates, where the media gains from reporting on core-supporter
targeted campaign speech from candidates, while candidates benefit from reports about
swing voter-targeted messages. Because candidates have incentives to target both types of
constituencies, this strategic environment is similar to a standard matching pennies game.
The simple structure of the game allows us to propose an empirical strategy to estimate
this discrete game of complete information, and to test for its empirical relevance. We do so
using information on U.S. Senate races from the last 30 years, which are politically salient
and thus, systematically covered by the media and by pollsters. We show how polling data
measuring the evolution of the campaigns, together with media coverage information based
on a text analysis methodology, can be used to estimate the key parameters of the game. Our
results suggest the mechanism we propose here is important for understanding the nature of
bipartisan electoral competition in settings with ample media presence. Moreover, our model
and results provide a novel way of thinking about how and why the media matters in politics,
by highlighting not only that the media shapes candidate behavior, but also that candidates
shape the way the media reports about politics. Our empirical findings suggest a large
asymmetry across Democratic and Republican candidates in their incentives to target core
supporters. While turnout appears more responsive to core-targeted speech by Democrats,
swing-voters also appear more willing to change allegiances towards Republicans when the
media reports widely on core-targeted messaging by Democrats. Exploring the nature of the
differential responses of the electorate to targeted campaign messages may be a fruitful area
for future research.
which we can trace on the identified set for (ηD , ηR ) at the estimated qp ’s. These can be interpreted as
bounds on the relative media payoffs from Democratic versus Republican coverage.

49

References
Ansolabehere, S., R. Behr, and S. Iyengar (1992): The Media Game: American Politics in the
Television Age, Longman.
Bajari, P., H. Hong, and S. Ryan (2010): “Identification and Estimation of a Discrete Game of Complete
Information,” Econometrica, 78, 1529–1568.
Baron, D. (2006): “Persistent Media Bias,” Journal of Public Economics, 90, 1–36.
Bartels, L. (1996): “Politicians and the Press: Who Leads, Who Follows,” Princeton.
Berry, S. (1992): “Estimation of a Model of Entry in the Airline Industry,” Econometrica, 60, 889–917.
Besley, T. and A. Prat (2006): “Handcuffs for the Grabbing Hand? Media Capture and Government
Accountability,” American Economic Review, 96, 720–736.
Bresnahan, T. and P. Reiss (1990): “Entry in Monopoly Markets,” Review of Economic Studies, 57,
531–553.
——— (1991): “Empirical Models of Discrete Games,” Journal of Econometrics, 48, 57–81.
Budge, I. and R. Hofferbert (1990): “Mandates and Policy Outputs: U.S. Party Platforms and Federal
Expenditures,” The American Political Science Review, 84, 111–131.
Campante, F. and D. Hojman (2010): “Media and Polarization,” Harvard.
Chiang, C.-F. and B. Knight (2011): “Media Bias and Influence: Evidence from Newspaper Endorsements,” The Review of Economic Studies, 78, 795–820.
Chiappori, P., S. Levitt, and T. Groseclose (2002): “Testing Mixed-Strategy Equilibria When Players
are Heterogeneous: The Case of Penalty Kicks in Soccer,” American Economic Review, 92, 1138–1151.
Corneo, G. (2006): “Media Capture in a Democracy: The Role of Wealth Concentration,” Journal of
Public Economics, 90, 37–58.
Cox, G. and M. McCubbins (1986): “Electoral Politics as a Redistributive Game,” Journal of Politics,
48, 370–389.
DellaVigna, S. and E. Kaplan (2007): “The Fox News Effect: Media Bias and Voting,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 122, 1187–1234.
Egorov, G. (2015): “Single-Issue Campaigns and Multidimensional Politics,” Northwestern.
Eisensee, T. and D. Strömberg (2007): “News Droughts, News Floods, and U.S. Disaster Relief,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122, 693–728.
Enikolopov, R., M. Petrova, and E. Zhuravskaya (2011): “Media and Political Persuasion: Evidence
from Russia,” American Economic Review, 111, 3253–3285.
Ferraz, C. and F. Finan (2011): “Electoral Accountability and Corruption: Evidence from the Audits
of Local Governments,” The American Economic Review, 101, 1274–1311.
Fonseca, A., J. M. S. Jr., and B. K. Song (2014): “Newspaper Market Structure and Behavior: Partisan
Coverage of Political Scandals in the U.S. from 1870 to 1910,” .
Gentzkow, M. and J. Shapiro (2006): “Media Bias and Reputation,” Journal of Political Economy, 114,
280–316.

50

——— (2010): “What Drives Media Slant? Evidence from U.S. Daily Newspapers,” Econometrica, 78,
35–71.
George, L. and J. Waldfogel (2006): “The New York Times and the Market for Local Newspapers,”
The American Economic Review, 96, 435–447.
Healy, A., N. Malhotra, and C. H. Mo (2010): “Irrelevant Effects Affect Voter’s Evaluations of
Government Performance,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 107, 12804–12809.
Hirano, S., G. Lenz, M. Pinkovskiy, and J. Snyder (2015): “Voter Learning in State Primary Elections,” American Journal of Political Science, 59, 91–108.
Knowles, J., N. Persico, and P. Todd (2001): “Racial Bias in Motor Vehicle Searches: Theory and
Evidence,” Journal of Political Economy, 109, 203–229.
Kurkones, M. (1984): Promises and Performance: Presidential Campaigns as Policy Predictors, University
Press of America.
Lindbeck, A. and J. Weibull (1987): “Balanced Budget Redistribution as the Outcome of Political
Competition,” Public Choice, 52, 273–297.
Maskin, E. and J. Tirole (2004): “The Politician and the Judge: Accountability in Government,”
American Economic Review, 94, 1034–1054.
Mullainathan, S. and A. Shleifer (2005): “The Market for News,” American Economic Review, 95,
1031–1053.
Newey, W. and K. West (1987): “A Simple, Positive Semi-Definite, Heteroskedasticity and Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix,” Econometrica, 55, 703–708.
Oberholzer-Gee, F. and J. Waldfogel (2009): “Media Markets and Localism: Does Local News en
Espanol Boost Hispanic Voter Turnout?” The American Economic Review, 99, 2120–2128.
Palacios-Huerta, I. (2003): “Professionals Play Minimax,” Review of Economic Studies, 70, 395–415.
Prat, A. (2005): “The Wrong Kind of Transparency,” American Economic Review, 95, 862–877.
Prat, A. and D. Strömberg (2013): “The Political Economy of Mass Media,” .
Puglisi, R. (2006): “Being the New York Times: The Political Behavior of a Newspaper,” LSE.
Puglisi, R. and J. Snyder (2008): “Media Coverage of Political Scandals,” Mimeo.
Snyder, J. and D. Strömberg (2010): “Press Coverage and Political Accountability,” Journal of Political
Economy, 118.
Strömberg, D. (2004a): “Mass Media Competition, Political Competition, and Public Policy,” Review of
Economic Studies, 71, 265–284.
——— (2004b): “Radio’s Impact on Public Spending,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119, 189–221.
Walker, M. and J. Wooders (2001): “Minimax Play at Wimbledon,” American Economic Review, 91,
1521–1538.

51

A
A.1

Appendix A
Proof of Proposition 1

The normal form game G is presented in table 11 below. In each cell, the payoffs are written in the order
(D, R, M ).

Existence and Uniqueness:
Define the following parameters:
41 ≡ ∆TcD − ηD ∆ScD + ηR ∆ScR

413 ≡ ∆TcD − ηD ∆ScD − ηR ∆SsR

42 ≡ ∆TcR − ηR ∆ScR + ηD ∆ScD

414 ≡ ηR ∆SsR + ηD ∆ScD

43 ≡ ∆TcD − ηD ∆ScD

415 ≡ ∆TcD − ηD ∆ScD

44 ≡ ∆TcR + ηD ∆ScD

416 ≡ ηD ∆ScD

45 ≡ ∆TcD + ηR ∆ScR

417 ≡ ∆TcD − ηR ∆SsR

46 ≡ ∆TcR − ηR ∆ScR

418 ≡ ηR ∆SsR

47 ≡ ηD ∆SsD + ηR ∆ScR

419 ≡ ηD ∆SsD − ηR ∆SsR

48 ≡ ∆TcR − ηR ∆ScR − ηD ∆SsD

420 ≡ ηR ∆SsR − ηD ∆SsD

49 ≡ ηD ∆SsD

421 ≡ ηD ∆SsD

410 ≡ ∆TcR − ηD ∆SsD

422 ≡ −ηD ∆SsD

411 ≡ ηR ∆ScR

423 ≡ −ηR ∆SsR

412 ≡ ∆TcR − ηR ∆ScR

424 ≡ ηR ∆SsR

G is a game with finite action space, which is sufficient for existence of a Nash equilibrium. Checking
the non-existence of a Nash equilibrium in pure strategies is straightforward. Thus, any equilibria must be
in mixed strategies. Conditions for such an equilibrium are:
1. M must be indifferent between playing aM = FD FR and aM = FD NR :
E[UM |FD FR ] = qD qR (ηD πD +ηR πR −2k)+(1−qD )qR (ηR πR −2k)+qD (1−qR )(ηD πD −2k)+(1−qD )(1−qR )(−2k)

aM = F D F R
D

a =c
aD = s

(∆1 , ∆2 , ηD πD + ηR πR − 2k)
(∆7 , ∆8 , nR πR − 2k)

Media’s action
a M = F D NR
(∆3 , ∆4 , nD πD − k)
(∆9 , ∆10 , −k)

aM = ND FR
(∆5 , ∆6 , nR πR − k)
(∆11 , ∆12 , nR πR − k)

aR = c

Democrat’s
Action

Republican’s
Action
aD = c
aD = s

(∆13 , ∆14 , ηD πD − 2k)
(∆19 , ∆20 , −2k)

(∆15 , ∆16 , nD πD − k)
(∆21 , ∆22 , −k)

(∆17 , ∆18 , −k)
(∆23 , ∆24 , −k)

Table 11: Normal Form of the Stage Game.

52

aR = s

= qD qR (ηD πD − k) + (1 − qD )qR (−k) + qD (1 − qR )(ηD πD − k) + (1 − qD )(1 − qR )(−k) = E[UM |FD NR ]
∗
⇔ qR
=

k
η R πR

(A.1)

2. M must be indifferent between aM = FD FR and aR = ND FR :
E[UM |FD FR ] = qD qR (ηD πD +ηR πR −2k)+(1−qD )qR (ηR πR −2k)+qD (1−qR )(ηD πD −2k)+(1−qD )(1−qR )(−2k)
= qD qR (ηR πR − k) + (1 − qD )qR (ηR πR − k) + qD (1 − qR )(−k) + (1 − qD )(1 − qR )(−k) = E[UM |ND FR ]
∗
⇔ qD
=

k
η D πD

(A.2)

3. D must be indifferent between aD = c and aD = s:
E[UD |c] = (1 − γD − γR )qR 41 + γD qR 43 + γR qR 45
+(1 − γD − γR )(1 − qR )413 + γD (1 − qR )415 + γR (1 − qR )417
= (1 − γD − γR )qR 47 + γD qR 49 + γR qR 411
+(1 − γD − γR )(1 − qR )419 + γD (1 − qR )421 + γR (1 − qR )423 = E[UD |s]
∗
⇔ γR
=1−

∆TcD
S
ηD ∆cD +


∆SsD



(A.3)

4. R must be indifferent between aD = c and aD = s:
E[UR |c] = (1 − γD − γR )qD 42 + γD qD 44 + γR qD 46
+(1 − γD − γR )(1 − qD )48 + γD (1 − qD )410 + γR (1 − qD )412
= (1 − γD − γR )qD 414 + γD qD 416 + γR qD 418
+(1 − γD − γR )(1 − qD )420 + γD (1 − qD )422 + γR (1 − qD )424 = E[UR |s]
∗
⇔ γD
=1−

ηR



∆TcR

∆ScR + ∆SsR

(A.4)

Thus, the mixed-strategy Nash equilibrium is unique.

A.2

Proof of Proposition 2

Consider taking the difference between the poll outcomes for a candidate between stage games t + τ and t.
From equation (2) across τ stage games, the change in electoral support to candidate p ∈ {D, R} is given by

v p (t + τ ) − v p (t) = ∆Tcp Npc (t, t + τ ) + ∆Tcp − ∆Scp Xpc (t, t + τ )
c
s
+ ∆Sc∼p X∼p
(t, t + τ ) + ∆Ssp Xps (t, t + τ ) − ∆Ss∼p X∼p
(t, t + τ ) + p (t, t + τ )
(A.5)
P
t+τ
where p (t, t + τ ) = ι=t+1 p (ι). Now add together the equations for each candidate, and divide by the
number of stage games in the interval. The zero-sum nature of swing-voter support implies all swing voter
effects cancel out, and we are left with an expression that only depends on the counts of events that generate
electoral responses on the turnout margin:

v D (t + τ ) − v D (t) + v R (t + τ ) − v R (t)
=
τ
∆TcD

c
c
c
ND
(t, t + τ ) + XD
(t, t + τ )
N c (t, t + τ ) + XR
(t, t + τ )
+ ∆TcR R
+ ω̃(t, t + τ )
τ
τ

53

(A.6)

R

D

)
)
c
+  (t,t+τ
. This specification cannot be estimated because the (ND
, NRc ) are
where ω̃(t, t + τ ) ≡  (t,t+τ
τ
τ
unobserved. Even if an instrument z that satisfies the exclusion restriction of being uncorrelated with other
determinants of the evolution of electoral support ω̃ is available, it will necessarily be correlated with Npc as
c
long as it is correlated with Xpc . This implies that it is not possible to leave ND
and NRc in the error term of
equation (A.6) if we hwant to implement ian instrumental variables strategy. Instead, notice that equilibrium
Npc (t,t+τ )+Xpc (t,t+τ )
play implies qp∗ = Eτ
, and thus, we can express each of the (endogenous and unobserved)
τ
regressors in equation (A.6) as the equilibrium√mixing strategy of the candidate plus sampling noise ξp (t, t+τ )
that converges in probability to zero at rate τ and is uncorrelated with z:

Npc (t, t + τ ) + Xpc (t, t + τ )
1
= qp∗ (t, t + τ ) + ξp (t, t + τ )
τ
τ
Now use our non-parametric estimator for qp∗ (t, t + τ ) from equations (10) and (11), and define ω(t, t + τ ) ≡
ω̃(t, t + τ ) + ∆TcD τ1 ξD (t, t + τ ) + ∆TcR τ1 ξR (t, t + τ ) as a composite error term that includes all the shocks in
the interval and the sampling error to obtain equation (12).

A.3

Proof of Proposition 3

We first use our non-parametric estimator for the unconditional probability of a media report from equation
(11), together with the equilibrium mixing strategies for the media in equations (3) and (4) to express the
swing voter elasticities to core-targeted statements for each candidate ∆Scp as functions only of observables
ˆ Tcp ’s from the estimation of equation (12):
and the estimated ∆
∆Scp =

ˆ Tcp
∆
φ̂p

− ∆Ssp

(A.7)

Using equation (A.7) we can now eliminate the ∆Scp from equation (A.5) to obtain:
ˆ Tcp [Xpc (t, t + τ ) + Npc (t, t + τ )] =
v p (t + τ ) − v p (t) − ∆
∆Ssp

−

ˆ Tcp
∆

!

φ̂p

Xpc (t, t

+ τ) +

ˆ Tc∼p
∆
φ̂∼p

!
−

∆Ss∼p

c
X∼p
+ ∆Ssp Xps (t, t + τ ) − ∆Ss∼p Xps (t, t + τ ) + p (t, t + τ )

Grouping terms,
ˆ Tcp [Xpc (t, t + τ ) + Npc (t, t + τ )] + ∆
ˆ Tcp
[v p (t + τ ) − v p (t)] − ∆

Xpc (t, t + τ )
φ̂p

ˆ Tc∼p
−∆

c
(t, t + τ )
X∼p

φ̂∼p

=

c
∆Ssp [Xpc (t, t + τ ) + Xps (t, t + τ )] − ∆Ss∼p [Xps (t, t + τ ) + X∼p
(t, t + τ )] + p (t, t + τ )

Multiplying and dividing by τ the second and third terms in the left-hand side of this expression, we have
that
Xpc (t, t + τ ) + Npc (t, t + τ )
ϕ̂cp (t, t + τ )
τ=
τ + ξp (t, t + τ )
τ
φ̂p (t, t + τ )
and

Xpc (t, t + τ ) τ
ϕ̂cp (t, t + τ )
=
τ
τ
φ̂p
φ̂p (t, t + τ )

so that these terms in the left-hand side cancel. Similarly, multiplying and dividing by τ the fourth term in
the left-had side can be re-expressed as
c
X∼p
(t, t + τ ) τ
ϕ̂c∼p (t, t + τ )
=
τ
τ
φ̂∼p
φ̂∼p (t, t + τ )

54

Now multiply and divide by τ the first and second terms of the right-hand side, to obtain:
ˆ Tc∼p
[v p (t + τ ) − v p (t)] − ∆

ϕ̂c∼p (t, t + τ )
φ̂∼p (t, t + τ )

τ=

∆Ssp φ̂p (t, t + τ )τ − ∆Ss∼p φ̂∼p (t, t + τ )τ + ω p (t, t + τ )

(A.8)

ˆ T ξp (t, t + τ ). Crucially, notice that the error term in this equation does
where ω p (t, t + τ ) ≡ p (t, t + τ ) + ∆
cp
not depend on τ . The left-hand side term in equation (A.8) is defined in Proposition 3 as p̂(t, t + τ ). Because
equation (A.8) depends on the same slope parameters and observables for both parties, it is convenient to
subtract the equation for candidate D from the
 equation for candidate R,which directly gives the result of
the proposition by defining ζ(t, t + τ ) ≡ (1/2) $D (t, t + τ ) − $R (t, t + τ ) .
With estimates of (∆TcD , ∆TcR , ∆SsD , ∆SsR ) at hand, equation (A.7) uniquely pins down the remaining two
elasticities (∆ScD , ∆ScR ).

B

Appendix B

News Processing
We followed several steps to process the news article texts. The data collection was conducted in Lexis Nexis
and Factiva.26 Our search terms included the name of the candidate (e.g., “Alan Kenneth Smith”) as well
as common abbreviations of the names (examples include “Senator Smith”, “Al Smith”, “Al K. Smith”).
We downloaded all articles which with a succesfull hit for either search criterion.27 We followed a clean-up
procedure before computing our classification scores as follows: first we removed all common English words
from the article (before the words are stemmed). Then using the Porter Stemming algorithm, we stemmed
the words to their linguistic roots. The benefit of the stemming algorithm is that it allows us to reduce the
words to workable roots which eliminate differentiations due to tense or subject.
To reduce the Type-I and Type-II error in the algorithm, we then eliminated articles irrelevant to our
setting. In the first pass, after stemming the articles, we searched for candidate names (Here we looked for
complete names, excluding any middle names or abbreviations) If the name of the candidate was mentioned
in the article, we considered the article to be relevant to our data analysis. If there was no mention of the
name in the article, we removed it into a secondary group over which we undertook a secondary search to
prevent the unintentional removal of relevant articles.28 We found our first pass categorizes about 25% of
the articles as irrelevant. To reduce the potential for Type-II errors, we conducted a second manual search
on the articles that failed the first pass. A research assistant investigated the common reasons for error on
articles where a mistake arose, by looking at 10% of all removed articles. We then updated our algorithm
to account for these common errors. This second pass reduced the percent of articles removed to 20%.
We carried out our search algorithm for the common words on the set of articles that passed our second
test. For each set of candidate articles, after removal of common English words, punctuation, and stemming,
we sought for the most commonly used two-word and three-word phrases. Single words may result in a high
number of uninformative words and therefore they were not preferred for analysis here (see Gentzkow and
Shapiro (2010) for another example of a similar choice).
26

Due to the limits of search and downloads imposed on us by Factiva, we could not rely exclusively on
this database.
27
The article texts themselves are proprietary of these two companies.
28
For example, a common failure reason in the first pass is a mis-typed character or string (e.g., instead
of “Senator Elizabeth”, the article would be stored in the newspaper database as “SenatorElizabeth”. The
missing character can prevent our algorithm from picking up the name of the candidate.

55

Dropped Senate Races
Candidate Died

Non-bipartisan
Races

3-way Races

Unopposed
Races

Unopposed
Race (in
practice)

Other Reason

MN 2002

LA 1990
VT 2006
VT 2012

AK 2010
LA 1992
LA 2002
CT 2006
FL 2010
ME 2012

ID 2004
SD 2010
AR 1990
GA 1990
MS 1990
KS 2002

VA 1990
AZ 2000
MA 2002
MS 2002
VA 2002
IN 2006
AR 2008

NE 1988
IN 1990
ND 1992
TN 1994
KS 1996
GA 2000
MO 2002
WY 2008
CO 2010
DE 2010
LA 2010
WV 2010

Table 12: Dropped Senate Races.

Dropped Senate Races
We drop from our analysis some senate races either because they were 3-way races, unopposed races, in
practice unopposed races (more than one candidate ran but other candidates were from third parties), not
bipartisan races (not a Democrat and a Republican running against each other), or because a candidate died
during the race. Table 12 presents a list of races for which data was available, but which we excluded from
the analysis for the aforementioned reasons.

56

