                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     KEEPING IT IN THE FAMILY:
 LINEAGE ORGANIZATION AND THE SCOPE OF TRUST IN SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA

                                         Jacob Moscona
                                          Nathan Nunn
                                       James A. Robinson

                                      Working Paper 23196
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23196


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2017




This paper was prepared for the American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Jacob Moscona, Nathan Nunn, and James A. Robinson. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Keeping It in the Family: Lineage Organization and the Scope of Trust in Sub-Saharan Africa
Jacob Moscona, Nathan Nunn, and James A. Robinson
NBER Working Paper No. 23196
February 2017
JEL No. N00,O10,Z1,Z13

                                            ABSTRACT

We present evidence that the traditional structure of society is an important determinant of the
scope of trust today. Within Africa, individuals belonging to ethnic groups that organized society
using segmentary lineages exhibit a more limited scope of trust, measured by the gap between
trust in relatives and trust in non-relatives. This trust gap arises because of lower levels of trust in
non-relatives and not higher levels of trust in relatives. A causal interpretation of these
correlations is supported by the fact that the effects are primarily found in rural areas where these
forms of organization are still prevalent.

Jacob Moscona                                      James A. Robinson
Department of Economics                            University of Chicago
M.I.T.                                             Harris School of Public Policy
E52-380, 50 Memorial Drive                         1155 East 60th Street
Cambridge MA 02142                                 Chicago, Illinois 60637
moscona@mit.edu                                    and NBER
                                                   jamesrobinson@uchicago.edu
Nathan Nunn
Department of Economics
Harvard University
1805 Cambridge St
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
nnunn@fas.harvard.edu
In the last two decades economists have increasingly come to recognize that economies are

embedded in societies. For an economic system to work, a large number of complementary

social norms need to exist and these cannot be taken for granted. While such ideas are latent in

the debate between substantivists and formalists about how to understand historical economic

systems (e.g. Polanyi, 1944) and in research by sociologists (Granovetter, 1985), their modern

articulation is in the guise of ‘social capital.’ In his seminal book Making Democracy Work,

Robert Putnam (1993) argues that the better governance and prosperity of Northern Italy

compared to Southern Italy was caused by the North having greater ‘social capital,’ which he

defines as the “connections among individuals - social networks and the norms of reciprocity

and trustworthiness that arise from them” (Putnam, 2000, p. 19).

      There is now significant evidence that social capital is associated with many important eco-

nomic outcomes, such as economic development (Tabellini, 2010; Algan and Cahuc, 2013) and

trade (Guiso, Sapienza and Zingales, 2009). Yet why does social capital vary across societies?

Following Putnam, most scholars have thus far emphasized historical political institutions as a

source of variation. Tabellini (2010), for example, uses historical constraints on the executive

as a source of variation in social capital today, while Guiso, Sapienza and Zingales (2015)

instead use whether or not an Italian city was a commune in the Middle Ages.1

      This study examines the relationship between traditional social structures and one aspect

of social capital, trust. Within Africa, which is the context of this study, studies of the long

run importance of traditional institutional structures have emphasized the role of political

centralization (e.g., Gennaioli and Rainer, 2007; Michalopoulos and Papaioannou, 2013, 2014).

However, pre-colonial African societies differed in many ways apart from their level of polit-

ical centralization, particularly in their social institutions which sometimes took on political

roles. Examples of these social structures include the nature and strength of kin relations; the

presence of age-based solidarities and societies; rules of marriage and residence; and settlement

patterns.

      In this article, we investigate the relationship between a canonical form of social structure

in Africa – segmentary lineage organization – and trust. Early anthropological work recognized

that many African societies, both centralized and not, were systematically organized on the
  1
    An exception to this approach is Nunn and Wantchekon (2011) who show that social capital in Africa is
systematically lower in places that were more impacted by the slave trade.



                                                   1
basis of kinship. Evans-Pritchard (1940), in his study of the Nuer of the South Sudan, classified

these groups as a “segmentary lineage society.” Such a society is characterized by unilineal

descent, which means that people trace their ancestry back, usually to some mythical founder,

either through the male (patrilineal), or female line (matrilineal). When such a descent group

takes on a corporate form, meaning that it is used to organize economic and political life, it is

said to form a lineage. Sub-sets (segments) of lineages function as coherent corporate groups

and are assigned political, administrative, and judicial functions, usually under the guidance

of elders. Fortes (1953, p. 26) describes the system as follows: “the individual has no legal

or political status except as a member of a lineage;. . . all legal and political relations in the

society take place in the context of the lineage system.”

    In segmentary lineage societies, family is central. All forms of interaction – social, economic,

and political – are structured around family ties and lineages. While this has the benefit

of strengthening associations (and most likely trust) among blood relatives, it also reduces

associations with those with whom one is not related. Thus, it is likely that this shrinking of,

what Putnam (2000) calls ‘associational life’ (i.e. interactions outside of one’s kin) would tend

to reduce the extent of trust of non-relatives in society. Putnam (2000) argues that greater

social capital is facilitated by more associational life, and the more people are members of and

involved with different forms of groups and societies outside of the family.2 Thus, we expect

segmentary lineage organization to limit the extent of generalized trust in a society due to the

greater reliance on family which limits associational life.3

    We test this hypothesis by examining the relationship between an ethnic group’s traditional

reliance on segmentary lineage organization and the levels of trust today. Our analysis distin-

guishes between trust of family members and more generalized trust of non-family members.

We find that segmentary lineage organization is associated with a larger gap between the trust

of one’s relatives compared to non-relatives. Disaggregating the difference, we find that this

is primarily due to segmentary lineage societies having lower trust of non-relatives, and not
   2
     Interestingly, Banfield’s (1958) book, which has been the foundation research in the area of social capital,
attributes the low levels of social capital in the south of Italy to its social structure. Specifically, it is argued
that it can be partially explained by the dominance of the nuclear family in the south.
   3
     There are other well-established hypotheses about the social consequences of such social structures. Sahlins
(1961), for example, hypothesized that segmentary lineage societies would be ‘expansionary’ territorially and
would tend to be associated with conflict. In Moscona, Nunn, and Robinson (2016) we develop the first
systematic database of the presence of segmentary lineage societies in Africa and show that the presence of such
societies is associated with greater levels of conflict today.



                                                         2
higher trust of relatives. Thus, to use the terminology of Putnam (2000), segmentary lineage

organization appears to decrease the level of bridging social capital while having no effect on

bonding social capital.

      We now turn to a description of the data and our empirical results.



Data

Our analysis uses information on the historical presence of segmentary lineage organization

as coded by Moscona, Nunn, and Robinson (2016). Commonly used ethnographic sources,

including the Ethnographic Atlas, do not include information about segmentary lineage orga-

nization. Therefore, to identify the presence or absence of segmentary lineage organization,

Moscona, Nunn, and Robinson (2016) extract information from the Ethnographic Survey of

Africa, a multi-volume work compiled during the mid-20th century that contains ethnographic

information about a large sample of ethnic groups in Africa. In total, 145 ethnic groups were

determined to definitively either have (74 in total) or not have (71 in total) a segmentary

lineage organization. Ethnic groups in the sample reside across sub-Saharan Africa, including

several in Uganda, Tanzania, Kenya, Ethiopia, Mozambique, the Democratic Republic of the

Congo, Zambia, Nigeria, Ghana, Liberia, Sudan, and Sierra Leone (see Moscona, Nunn, and

Robinson, 2016).

      Segmentary lineage organization can be found among groups with both centralized and less

centralized political administrations. Examples of segmentary lineage societies that are less

centralized (i.e., “stateless”) include the Nuer, Tiv and Rega, while examples of segmentary

lineage societies that have more centralized authority include the Somali, and some like the

Duala and Ndembu even had state like structures (Moscona, Nunn, and Robinson, 2016).

However, there is a correlation between the two characteristics. On average, ethnic groups that

are less politically centralized are slightly more likely to have a segmentary lineage organization.

Among the 145 ethnic groups in our sample, there is a negative relationship between the

presence of segmentary lineage organization and the levels of political hierarchy beyond the

local community from the Ethnographic Atlas (corr = −0.21; p = 0.01). Thus, in our analysis,

we are sure to control for this historical characteristic of ethnic groups.4
  4
      We find no relationship between segmentary lineage and historical economic development as measured by


                                                     3
    To measure the nature of social capital, we focus on responses about trust in others from

the 2005 (round 3), 2008 (round 4), and 2015 (round 5) Afrobarometer. The database compiles

nationally representative surveys conducted in local languages from 18, 20, and 34 countries,

respectively. In all surveys, respondents are asked how much they trust their “relatives.”

Respondents’ answers were coded on a scale of 1-4, where 1 means “not at all” and 4 means

“I trust them a lot.” Unfortunately, the surveys do not ask individuals how much they trust

those that are not their relatives. However, the surveys do have questions that come very

close to this. In round 3, respondents were asked how much they trust people from the same

country who are members of other ethnic groups (phrased as “trust [Ghanaian/Kenyan/etc.]

from other ethnic groups”). In round 4, respondents were also asked how much they trust other

people from the same country (phrased as “trust other [Ghanians/Kenyans/etc.]”). In rounds

4 and 5, respondents were asked how much they trust “other people [they] know.” These trust

questions have the same answers and are coded on the same 1-4 scale.

    Our primary outcome variable is the difference between trust in relatives and trust in non-

relatives. Because there is no measure of trust in non-relatives that is common in all three

survey waves, we estimate our regressions separately for the different waves using the different

measures.

    We linked individuals in the Afrobarometer survey to ethnic groups in the segmentary

lineage database using the self-reported ethnicity of survey respondents. For rounds 3 and 4,

we rely on pre-existing concordances that have been developed, linking the ethnic groups from

the Afrobarometer to the ethnic groups from Murdock’s Map of Africa. These are from Nunn

and Wantchekon (2011) for round 3 and Deconinck and Verpoorten (2013) for round 4. For

round 5, we manually matched ethnic groups that were not in the round 3 or 4 surveys. In

total, there are 68 ethnic groups (according to Murdock’s classification) in our round 3 sample,

73 ethnic groups in our round 4 sample, and 92 ethnic groups in our round 5 sample.5
the complexity of settlements from the Ethnographic Atlas (corr = 0.01; p = 0.90).
   5
     In some regressions, we are able to combine rounds 4 and 5. In this sample there are 96 ethnic groups. In
the results below, we report controlled regressions and as a result are forced to drop observations where data on
other covariates are missing. As a result, the reported regressions each use a slightly smaller sample of ethnic
groups – the number of ethnic groups in each regression is listed in column 6 of each table.




                                                       4
Results

To investigate our questions of interest, we use the same basic specification as from Nunn

and Wantchekon (2011), but with two important changes. First, our outcome of interest is

the difference in trust levels between relatives and others. Second, our independent variable

of interest is an indicator variable that equals one if an ethnic group e traditionally has a

segmentary lineage structure. We denote this IeSL . Our estimating equation is as follows:


            T rustRelatives
                  i,e,d,c   − T rustN  onRelatives
                                    i,e,d,c        = αc + β IeSL + X0i,e,d,c Γ + X0e Φ + εi,e,d,c               (1)


where i indexes individuals, e ethnic groups, d districts, and c countries. T rustRelatives
                                                                                  i,e,d,c   −

T rustN  on−Relatives
      i,e,d,c         denotes the self-reported difference in trust between relatives and non-

relatives for individual i. IeSL is our independent variable of interest, an indicator variable

that equals one if ethnic group e traditionally structured society using a segmentary lineage

organization. αc denotes country fixed effects. X0i,e,d,c denotes a vector of individual-level

covariates: age, age squared, a gender indicator variable, an indicator variable that equals

one if the respondent lives in an urban location, five fixed effects for the respondent’s living

conditions, ten fixed effects for the educational attainment of the respondent, eighteen religion

fixed effects, and 25 occupation fixed effects.6 We also include a vector of measures of the

historical characteristics of ethnic groups, denoted X0e . These include: jurisdictional hierarchy,

historical settlement patterns, log slave exports normalized by land area, missions normalized

by land area, indicator variables for explorer and railway contact, an indicator variable for the

presence of a city in 1400, and a malaria ecology index (all taken from Nunn and Wantchekon

(2011)), as well as an agricultural suitability index, absolute latitude, and longitude (from

Moscona, Nunn and Robinson (2016)), and a tse tse fly suitability index (from Alsan (2014)).7

       OLS estimates of equation (1) are reported in panel A of table 1. We report estimates

using each of the three different non-relatives trust measures available (non-coethnic, others

you know, and fellow countrymen). As reported in column 4, the means of the dependent
   6
      In round 4 of the survey, respondents were not asked to list their occupation. As a result, in all regressions
that use trust measures from Round 4, we replace occupation fixed effects with four employment status fixed
effects (individuals are characterized as either (i) jobless and not looking for a job, (ii) jobless and looking for
a job (iii) employed part time, or (iv) employed full time).
    7
      In regressions that combine survey rounds 4 and 5, we also include an indicator variable that equals one if
a respondent was interviewed in round 5 of the survey.


                                                         5
variables are always positive, indicating that on average individuals have greater trust in

relatives than non-relatives. Our estimated effects of segmentary lineage on this trust gap are

reported in column 2 with the associated standard errors in column 3. In each case, we find a

significant positive relationship between segmentary lineage organization and the difference in

trust of relatives and non-relatives. Ethnic groups that traditionally had a segmentary lineage

organization have higher trust of relatives compared to non-relatives today.

       The natural question is why the trust gap emerges. Is it because segmentary lineage

organization decreases one’s trust in others, or because it increases one’s trust in relatives, or

both? To answer this question, we estimate equation (1) with the trust measures themselves

as the outcome variables rather than the differences in the trust measures. These estimates are

reported in panel B of table 1. The estimates show that there is no robust relationship between

segmentary lineage organization and trust in relatives.8 All three coefficients are small and

insignificant. By contrast, we do find a negative and sizeable relationship between segmentary

organization and trust in non-relatives. All three coefficients are sizeable and negative, and

two of the three are statistically significant. Thus, segmentary lineage systems are associated

with lower levels of trust in non-relatives.

       The estimates speak to the effect that social structures can have on social capital, and

particularly on bridging and bonding social capital. Segmentary lineage organization, which

relies on lineage and family structure to organize political and economic life, appears to not

affect an individual’s trust in their relatives (bonding social capital), but it does appear to erode

trust with non-relatives (bridging social capital). This is likely due to the reduced interaction

(i.e., shrinking of ‘associational life’) that occurs between non-related individuals in a society

that is organized by lineage.

       As a robustness check, we estimate the regressions of table 1 separately for urban and rural

populations. This heterogeneity provides a test of the causal interpretation of our results.

Within urban areas, traditional social structures have been replaced, or weakened, by formal

national political institutions. By contrast, in rural areas, the influence of national political
   8
     It is possible that this masks an increase in trust that is offset by the different definition of relatives in
segmentary lineage and non-segmentary lineage groups. In segmentary lineage groups, the set of one’s relatives
is typically larger and tends to include more distant relatives than in non-segmentary lineage societies. A larger
set of more distant relatives would tend to reduce the reported level of trust in one’s relatives. Thus, it is
possible that segmentary lineage societies have more trust in relatives, holding constant the set of relatives in
question.



                                                        6
Table 1: OLS estimates of the relationship between segmentary lineage systems and the rela-
tives trust gap.
                   (1)                             (2)              (3)             (4)             (5)              (6)             (7)
                                                  Segmentary Lineage           Mean of dep
Dependent variable:                               Coeff         S.E.              var               Obs.          Clusters            R2


                                                                 Panel A. The relatives and non-relatives trust gap
Difference (Trust Relatives - Trust X):
  Non-Coethnic (round 3)                         0.1330*         (0.0781)          0.797           10,105            66             0.047

  Others you know (rounds 4 & 5)                 0.0873**        (0.0410)          0.940           25,499            94             0.088

  Fellow Countrymen (round 4)                    0.1850***       (0.0656)          1.043           9,538             72             0.057

                                                                                  Panel B. Trust levels
Trust Measure:
  Relatives (round 3)                            0.0289          (0.0592)          3.104           10,246            66             0.152

  Relatives (round 4)                            -0.0488         (0.0507)          3.338           9,624             72             0.161

  Relatives (rounds 4 & 5)                       -0.0102         (0.0352)          3.346           25,588            94             0.126

  Non-coethnic (round 3)                         -0.1100         (0.0857)          2.299           10,113            66             0.148

  Fellow countryment (round 4)                   -0.2390***      (0.0673)          2.293           9,547             72             0.175

  Others you know (rounds 4 & 5)                 -0.0971**       (0.0473)          2.405           25,534            94             0.170

Notes: Each row of the table summarizes estimates from one regression. The first column of the row reports the dependent variable of
the regression. The second and third columns report the coefficient and standard error (clustered at the ethnicity level) for the
segmentary lineage indicator variable. The other columns report the number of observations (individuals), the number of clusters
(ethnic groups), and the R-squared of the regression. All regressions include country fixed effects, a set of individual-level covariates
(age, age squared, a gender indicator variable, an indicator variable that equals one if the respondent lives in an urban location, five
fixed effects for the respondent's living conditions, ten fixed effects for the educational attainment of the respondent, eighteen religion
fixed effects, and 25 occupation fixed effects), and a set of ethnicity-level covariates (the number of jurisdictional political hierarchies
beyond the local community, historical settlement pattern complexity, log slave exports normalized by land area, missions normalized
by land area, indicator variables for European explorer and railway contact, an indicator variable for the presence of a city in 1400, a
malaria ecology index, a tse tse fly suitability index, an agricultural suitability index, absolute latitude, and longitude). In regressions
that include data from the round 4 survey, occupation fixed effects are replaced with four employment status fixed effects.




institutions is much weaker, and traditional social structures tend to have more influence (see

Michalopoulos and Papaioannou, 2014). Thus, to the extent that the estimates reported in

table 1 are causal and not spurious, we expect the estimated effects to be weaker in cities than

in rural areas. For example, our findings could arise because certain ethnic groups initially

had higher trust in relatives compared to non-relatives, and this caused these ethnic groups

to adopt lineage-based social organization. If initial trust levels persist until today, then we

would observe that segmentary lineage ethnic groups have higher trust in relatives compared

to non-relatives, even if segmentary lineage has no causal effect on trust. However, in this

case, we would expect the relationship between segmentary lineage and trust to be similar

in urban and rural settings. Since in this hypothetical the relationship between segmentary


                                                                      7
Table 2: OLS estimates of the relationship between segmentary lineage systems and the rela-
tives trust gap separately for urban and rural populations.
                   (1)                           (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)             (6)             (7)
                                                Segmentary Lineage          Mean of dep
Dependent variable:                              Coeff           S.E.          var              Obs.          Clusters            R2

                                                                               Panel A. Rural Sample
Difference (Trust Relatives - Trust X):
  Non-Coethnic (round 3)                         0.188*        (0.099)          0.821           6,040             60            0.061

  Others you know (rounds 4 & 5)                 0.114**       (0.045)           0.89           16,164            92            0.080

  Fellow Countrymen (round 4)                    0.241***      (0.074)          1.044           6,162             70            0.067

                                                                              Panel B. Urban Sample
Difference (Trust Relatives - Trust X):
  Non-Coethnic (round 3)                         0.029         (0.062)          0.762           4,065             62            0.054

  Others you know (rounds 4 & 5)                 0.012         (0.046)          1.027           9,335             93            0.111

  Fellow Countrymen (round 4)                    0.065         (0.073)          1.042           3,376             71            0.068

Notes: Each row of the table summarizes estimates from one regression. The first column of the row reports the dependent variable
of the regression. The second and third columns report the coefficient and standard error (clustered at the ethnicity level) for the
segmentary lineage indicator variable. The other columns report the number of observations (individuals), the number of clusters
(ethnic groups), and the R-squared of the regression. All regressions include country fixed effects, a set of individual-level covariates
(age, age squared, a gender indicator variable, an indicator variable that equals one if the respondent lives in an urban location, five
fixed effects for the respondent's living conditions, ten fixed effects for the educational attainment of the respondent, eighteen
religion fixed effects, and 25 occupation fixed effects), and a set of ethnicity-level covariates (the number of jurisdictional political
hierarchies beyond the local community, historical settlement pattern complexity, log slave exports normalized by land area,
missions normalized by land area, indicator variables for European explorer and railway contact, an indicator variable for the
presence of a city in 1400, a malaria ecology index, a tse tse fly suitability index, an agricultural suitability index, absolute latitude,
and longitude). In regressions that include data from the round 4 survey, occupation fixed effects are replaced with four
employment status fixed effects.




lineage and relative trust levels is not causal, it does not matter whether or not segmentary

lineage organization is present today.

    Estimates of equation (1), for urban and rural populations, are reported in table 2. We find

that the estimated effect of segmentary lineage structure on the trust gap is greater among the

rural population than among the urban population. The magnitude of the point estimates for

the rural population are 4–10 times greater than for the urban population. In addition, the

estimates for the urban population are not statistically different from zero (this is due to small

point estimates and not large standard errors). The estimates are consistent with segmentary

lineage systems having a causal effect on the difference betweens individuals’ trust of their

relatives and others.




                                                                    8
  Conclusions

  We have presented preliminary evidence showing that, within sub-Saharan Africa, the structure

  of traditional society plays an important role in determining the scope of trust. Individuals

  belonging to ethnic groups that organized society using segmentary lineages exhibit a more

  limited scope of trust today, as measured by the gap between their trust in relatives and their

  trust in non-relatives. We find that this gap arises because segmentary lineage societies have

  lower levels of trust in non-relatives and not because they have higher levels of trust in relatives.

  A causal interpretation of these correlations is supported by the fact that the effects are only

  found in rural areas where these forms of organization are still prevalent.



 References

Algan, Yann and Pierre Cahuc, (2013) “Trust and Growth,” Annual Review of Economics,

  100(5): 521–549.

Alsan, Marcella, (2014) “The effect of the tsetse fly on African development,” American Eco-

  nomic Review 105(1): 382–410.

Banfield, Edward, (1958) The Moral Basis of a Backward Society, New York: The Free Press.

Deconinck, Koen, and Marijke Verpoorten, (2013) “Narrow and Scientific Replication of

  ‘The Slave Trade and the Origins of Mistrust in Africa.’ ” Journal of Applied Econometrics,

  28(1): 166–169.

Evans-Pritchard, Edward E. (1940) The Nuer, Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Fortes, Meyer, (1953) “The Structure of Unilineal Descent Groups,” American Anthropologist,

  55(1): 17–41.

Gennaioli, Nicola and Ilia Rainer, (2007) “The Modern Impact of Precolonial Centralization

  in Africa,” Journal of Economic Growth, 12(3): 185–234.

Granovetter, Mark, (1985) “Economic Action and Social Structure: The Problem of Embed-

  edness,” American Journal of Sociology, 91(3): 481–510.

Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza and Luigi Zingales, (2015) “Long-Term Persistence,” Journal

  of the European Economic Association, forthcoming.

Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza and Luigi Zingales, (2009) “Cultural Biases in Economic



                                                   9
  Exchange?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(3): 1095–1131.

Michalopoulos, Stelios and Elias Papaioannou, (2013) “Precolonial Ethnic Institutions and

  Contemporary African Development,” Econometrica, 81(1): 113–152.

     Michalopoulos, Stelios and Elias Papaioannou, (2014) “National Institutions and

  Subnational Development in Africa,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(1): 151–213.

Moscona, Jacob, Nathan Nunn, and James A. Robinson, (2016) “Social Structure and

  Conflict in Africa,” Unpublished.

Nunn, Nathan and Leonard Wantchekon, (2011) “The Slave Trade and the Origins of

  Mistrust in Africa,” American Economic Review, 101(7): 3221–3252.

Polanyi, Karl, (1944). The Great Transformation, New York: Farrar & Rinehart.

Putnam, Robert H. (with Robert Leonardi and Raffaella Y. Nanetti), (1993) Making Democracy Work,

  Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Putnam, Robert H. (2000) Bowling Alone, New York: Simon & Schuster.

Sahlins, Marshall D. (1961) “The Segmentary Lineage: An Organization of Predatory Expan-

  sion,” American Anthropologist, 63, 2(1), 322-345.

Tabellini, Guido, (2010) “Culture and institutions: economic development in the regions of

  Europe,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 8(4): 677–716.




                                               10
