NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE HISTORICAL STATE, LOCAL COLLECTIVE ACTION, AND ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT IN VIETNAM
Melissa Dell
Nathaniel Lane
Pablo Querubin
Working Paper 23208
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23208

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2017

We thank Minh Trinh, Nhung Le, Minh Tuan Nguyen, Thao Ngo, and Huyen Cao for providing
excellent research assistance. We are also grateful to seminar participants at Berkeley, the
Canadian Institute for Advanced Research, Central European University, Columbia University,
CUNY, Duke Economics, Duke Political Science, Harvard, IIES, LACEA, LSE, MIT, Munich,
NYU, Oxford, Queen Mary, UC-Santa Barbara, Universidad de Piura, University of Illinois
Urbana-Champaign, Warwick, World Bank and Yale for their helpful comments and suggestions.
Support used to fund this project was received from the Weatherhead Center for International
Affairs (Harvard), the Milton Fund (Harvard), and the Canadian Institute for Advanced Research.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Melissa Dell, Nathaniel Lane, and Pablo Querubin. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Historical State, Local Collective Action, and Economic Development in Vietnam
Melissa Dell, Nathaniel Lane, and Pablo Querubin
NBER Working Paper No. 23208
March 2017
JEL No. N15,O43
ABSTRACT
This study examines how the historical state conditions long-run development, using Vietnam as
a laboratory. Northern Vietnam (Dai Viet) was ruled by a strong centralized state in which the
village was the fundamental administrative unit. Southern Vietnam was a peripheral tributary of
the Khmer (Cambodian) Empire, which followed a patron-client model with weaker, more
personalized power relations and no village intermediation. Using a regression discontinuity
design across the Dai Viet-Khmer boundary, the study shows that areas historically under a
strong state have higher living standards today and better economic outcomes over the past 150
years. Rich historical data document that in villages with a strong historical state, citizens have
been better able to organize for public goods and redistribution through civil society and local
government. This suggests that the strong historical state crowded in village-level collective
action and that these norms persisted long after the original state disappeared.

Melissa Dell
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer M-24
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
melissadell@fas.harvard.edu

Pablo Querubin
New York University
Department of Politics
19 W 4th Street, Room 208
New York, NY 10012
pablo.querubin@nyu.edu

Nathaniel Lane
Institute for International Economic Studies
Stockholm University
Attn: Nathaniel Lane
SE-106 91 Stockholm
Sweden
nathaniel.lane@iies.su.se

A Online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w23208

1

Introduction

The past century has witnessed a large-scale divergence in economic prosperity within the
developing world. In particular, initially poor economies in Northeast Asia - such as Japan,
Taiwan, and South Korea - have developed much more rapidly on average than economies
in Southeast Asia - such as the Philippines and Cambodia. One central di↵erence between
these regions is the nature of the historical state, but it is challenging to deduce what role
this played in the divergence since many factors di↵er. Progress can be made by focusing on
a single country - Vietnam - that lies at the intersection of Northeast and Southeast Asia.
This study uses a regression discontinuity design to compare nearby Vietnamese villages that
belonged to di↵erent historical states, employing rich historical data to elucidate channels
of persistence. We hypothesize that the historical state crowded in local collective action,
and that these norms persisted, influencing civic engagement, public goods provision, and
economic development long after the historical state had disappeared.
Northeast Asia historically had central states with well-developed tax systems, bureaucracies, and legal codes. Importantly, the village was the fundamental administrative unit.
The central state set quotas for tax and military conscript contributions at the village level
and often designed legal codes with an eye towards preventing local strongmen from becoming sufficiently powerful to challenge the national government. These pre-modern states
did not, however, have the capability to micro-manage local administration, and villages
had considerable autonomy in how to implement policies. Villagers had to work together to
provide local public goods and meet the village-level tax and military quotas. In contrast,
Southeast Asian states followed a more decentralized patron-client model. Power relations
were personalized, with peasants paying tribute and receiving protection from landowning
patrons, who in turn had their own network of relations with higher level patrons. The
village was not a central unit of administrative organization.
The northern Vietnamese state of Dai Viet was governed by China during the first millennium CE, and it maintained many features of the Chinese state following independence.
During the 14th through 19th centuries, Dai Viet gradually expanded southward, establishing village governance norms in what is now central Vietnam (see Figure 1). Most of this
expansion came via conquering the territory of Champa, a relatively weak state that historically occupied central Vietnam. Local a↵airs in Dai Viet villages were coordinated by village
councils elected by popular male su↵rage.1 In contrast, the southernmost part of modern
Vietnam was historically a peripheral tributary of the Cambodian state of Khmer. Khmer
had a weak control of its periphery, and patron-client relationships, not villages, were the
1

Evidence on the impacts of elections in pre-modern states is limited, but Martinez-Bravo et al. (2012)
show that in recent years the introduction of local elections in China significantly increased public goods
provision.

1

central feature of local administration. While some Vietnamese settlers had entered the region earlier, the Khmer areas of modern Vietnam were not administratively organized along
Vietnamese lines until 1833, leaving little time for Vietnamese institutions to take root before French colonial occupation in 1859. Colonial rule reinforced the pre-existing di↵erences,
with the French exploiting village structures where they were well-established and relying
on more direct means of control where they were not.
Table 1 summarizes key characteristics of the Khmer and Vietnamese states. Section
2 discusses the many similarities between Dai Viet and other Northeast Asian states, and
between Khmer and other Southeast Asian states. While care must be taken with external
validity, these similarities suggest that the Vietnamese context is informative about di↵erences between Northeast and Southeast Asia more generally.
This study examines the boundary between Khmer and Dai Viet, which was established
in 1698 and is denoted by a thick line in Figure 1. Villages on one side belonged to Dai Viet
for over 150 years prior to French colonization, whereas villages on the other were organized
along Vietnamese administrative lines only a few decades prior to the arrival of the French.
Section 2 documents that this boundary was meaningful and was the result of idiosyncratic
circumstances that prevented Dai Viet from conquering further Khmer territory until they
resolved an internal civil war. Geographic characteristics are similar on either side, suggesting
that villages just to the Khmer side are a reasonable counterfactual for those just to the Dai
Viet side. We also examine the other boundaries of Dai Viet’s expansion but do not expect
major long-run e↵ects, since villages along them were all governed by Dai Viet for centuries
prior to French colonization.
Using a regression discontinuity design to compare nearby villages on either side of the Dai
Viet-Khmer boundary, we find that household consumption in Dai Viet villages is around
one third higher today. Results are highly robust to the selection of bandwidth and RD
functional form. Ho Chi Minh City, the administrative center of Dai Viet’s 1698 expansion,
is in our study area, and the estimates change little when it - and the entire surrounding
region - is dropped. They also change little when all provincial capitals are dropped, or when
we limit to villages along segments of the boundary not formed or only formed by rivers.
Moreover, the estimates are similar when we extend the sample to all of South Vietnam,
rather than focusing on the boundary. We document that economic impacts also obtain
historically, using data from the French colonial period collected between 1878 and 1926,
household income data from the 1970s, and a variety of other historical economic indicators.
After considering contemporary living standards, we examine channels of persistence.
While as always a number of mechanisms could be relevant, the historical and empirical
evidence suggests that local collective action - through civil society and local government
- is an important channel, and one that is interesting in its own right. This would often
2

be unobserved, particularly historically, but Vietnam o↵ers unusually rich historical data
that allow us to examine it. Detailed information on civil society and local government are
available for nearly all 18,000 South Vietnamese hamlets for the period between 1969 and
1973, and public opinion surveys were also collected for a random sample of hamlets.
Citizens in Dai Viet villages historically had to work together to meet their village’s
obligations to the central state, provide public goods, and elect their leaders, and these patterns persisted long after the dissolution of the Dai Viet central state. Citizens in villages
with a historically strong state were nearly twice as likely between 1969 and 1973 to participate in local civic organizations. They were also more likely to organize and participate in
self-development projects and local self-defense forces, to attend local government meetings,
and to have civic organizations that redistributed to needy households. Today, though data
on civil society are quite limited, available information shows that households in Dai Viet
villages are more likely to donate to charitable organizations. These results - and the other
results on mechanisms - survive using latent class analysis to address multiple hypothesis
testing and are robust to the specification tests outlined above, including dropping Ho Chi
Minh City. They are also robust to controlling for village size. Barriers to migration between
villages in Vietnam are high, which may help explain why local social capital has been so
persistent, as argued in Besley (1995).
A 1967 constitutional reform granted villages expansive budgetary powers and public
goods provision responsibilities, with citizens electing village heads and councils. This makes
1969 to 1973 a particularly illuminating time to examine the historical state’s long-run
impacts on local governance. Dai Viet villages were more likely to collect taxes and the village
head was more likely to actually reside in the village. They were also more likely to have all
the positions filled on the village committee, which provides public goods. Importantly, Dai
Viet villages provided better access to basic health care, education, and law enforcement.
Citizens in Dai Viet villages reported that the local government was more responsive to their
needs and that local officials were more successful, and they had better knowledge of the
village administrative structure. These results suggest that participatory governance reforms
work best in places with a history of participatory village governance.
There are no e↵ects on public goods provided by the provincial government and Dai
Viet citizens had more negative views of the national government, indicating that e↵ects
are unlikely to be driven by higher levels of government or more positive attitudes towards
government in general. More recently, we continue to observe e↵ects on access to secondary
schooling, and in Dai Viet areas, individuals have almost a year of additional schooling.
The literature finds that ethnic heterogeneity is an important determinant of collective
action, but it does not appear to be a direct cause of the e↵ects we find.2 While ethnic
2

See Bazzi and Gudgeon (2016); Montalvo and Reynal-Querol (2005b,a); Alesina and La Ferrara (2005);

3

composition may have di↵ered historically, today there is almost no ethnic heterogeneity
within villages. Nearly everyone identifies as Vietnamese, which was also true 50 years ago.
The study also examines plausible alternative mechanisms. Extensive evidence indicates
that the e↵ects are unlikely to be driven by di↵erential impacts of the Vietnam War, with a
variety of measures suggesting that conflict was similar across the boundary. E↵ects likewise
do not appear to be driven by recent land inequality. Dai Viet households are less likely to
be agricultural today, but within agriculture there is not a di↵erence in average farm size.
Moreover, while 97% of French-owned land was located in Khmer areas at the close of the
colonial period, there were almost no French estates near the Dai Viet boundary.
However, a lower share of land is formally titled in Dai Viet villages today. This contrasts
with conventional wisdom - based mostly on evidence from the West - which associates
capable states with the protection of formal property rights and promotion of impersonal
markets. Historically Dai Viet implemented certain formal institutions - a legal code, an
impersonal tax system, a census registry, local elections, etc - whereas in Khmer areas
personalistic ties dominated. However, Dai Viet also emphasized redistribution of property
within the village, in order to prevent the emergence of local strongmen who could challenge
the state. Accepted traditional norms of de facto property management by civil society
networks and local governments plausibly play a more central role in ensuring property
rights in Dai Viet villages than formal titles introduced relatively recently by the central
government in Hanoi. This suggests a crowding out of formal institutions that is similar to
the processes documented in Greif (1994) and Greif and Tabellini (2010).
The study contributes to our understanding of the relationship between civil society and
the state. It is unclear from the existing literature whether we would expect the state and
civil society to be complements or substitutes. On the one hand, scholars such as Gouldner
(1980) and Fukuyama (1995) argue that in the presence of a weak state, civil society emerges
to substitute the state by providing protection and social insurance, whereas a powerful
state can repress or co-opt any organizations that threaten it. Acemoglu et al. (2014) show
that powerful ruling families in Sierra Leone are able to co-opt civil society organizations.
In contrast, Skocpol (1995) argues that strong states can directly promote civil initiatives
through legal protection and public services, and the state’s legitimacy also relies on citizen’s
active participation and trust in institutions.3 Padro i Miquel et al. (2015) document that
Chinese villages with temples - a measure of social capital - experienced larger increases in
public goods following the introduction of local elections.4 Sociologist Peter Evans (1995)
hypothesizes that in Japan and South Korea, a capable state and an active civil society are
Alesina et al. (1999); Easterly and Levine (1997)
3
See Lehning (1998), Hoover (2000) and Woolcock and Narayan (2000) for a review of the theory on the
relationship between states and social capital.
4
For more information on challenges for village governance in China see Qian (2012).

4

complements that provided the engine for rapid economic growth. Our results suggest that
when the state and civil society do compliment each other, long-run growth is more likely.
Moreover, complementarities between the state and civil society are consistent with the
broader hypothesis that complementarities between culture and institutions play a central
role in generating persistence (see Alesina and Giuliano (2015) for a review).
The study also speaks to an important social science debate about the nature of village
development. In his classic The Moral Economy of the Peasant, James Scott (1977) argues
that the village is the key institution of pre-capitalist society, characterized by an adherence
to social arrangements that insure villagers against subsistence crises. Similarly, Hayami
(1980, p. 27) argues that the East Asian village acts as “a community which mobilizes
collective actions to supply essential public goods.” In contrast, other scholars view prisoners
dilemmas, free rider problems, and other barriers to collective action - such as zero sum
mentalities - as prohibitive, and hence argue that when development happens in rural areas,
it is in spite of village social arrangements.5 Notably Samuel Popkin (1976) argues that
organizing to supply public goods is precisely what villagers find very difficult, due to the
limited abilities of peasants to generate village-wide insurance or welfare arrangements.
Interestingly, Scott conducted his fieldwork in central Vietnam, an area where villages had
been ruled by Dai Viet for many centuries, whereas Popkin focused his work on Cochinchina,
the French province in southern Vietnam where the former Khmer areas are located. Given
our results, it is not surprising that they reached di↵erent conclusions. Some social scientists have examined qualitatively why village collective action di↵ers, focusing largely on
environmental determinism (Wade, 1994). This is essentially an efficient institutions view
(Demsetz, 1967) - collective action will emerge where environmental factors lead the benefits to outweigh the costs. Our results provide quantitative evidence for another important
explanation, the village’s historical relationship with the central state.
Finally, the study contributes more broadly to the literatures on the persistence of social
norms and institutions. The persistent impacts of the historical state, despite the upheavals
that came with colonialism, the Vietnam War, and communism, are consistent with Roland
(2012), who argues that culture in transition countries is more influenced by participation in
historical empires for over 100 years than by the communist experience.6 Our results are also
consistent with work by Michalopoulos and Papaioannou (2013) and Gennaioli and Rainer
(2007) documenting that the organization of pre-colonial states a↵ects long-run prosperity
in Africa. By focusing on a single country with rich historical data, we are able to delve
into mechanisms. More generally, this study relates to a large literature that highlights
5

See for example Foster (1965).
Our results are also plausibly consistent with Alesina and Fuchs-Schündeln (2007), who do find that
communism a↵ected social values but argue that these e↵ects will be short lived.
6

5

the relevance of historical states and historical institutions for long-run development and
emphasizes the importance of persistent cultural traits.7 In particular, the results support
the strand of the cultural economics literature that highlights social capital as a highly
persistent determinant of economic divergence (Guiso et al., 2016; Putnam et al., 1994).
This literature has focused extensively on Italy, whereas our results suggest that a social
capital mechanism is also plausibly at play in explaining the relative prosperity of Northeast
versus Southeast Asia, another central puzzle of modern economic growth.8
In the next section, we provide an overview of the historical context. Section 3 discusses
identification and section 4 tests whether the historical state impacts contemporary living
standards. Section 5 examines the mechanisms through which the impacts of the historical
state persist. Finally, Section 6 o↵ers concluding remarks.

2

Historical Background

2.1

Historical Overview

For most of the first millennium, the northern part of modern Vietnam was subject to Chinese
overlordship. After gaining independence, the Vietnamese state of Dai Viet - whose original
borders are shown by the northernmost polygon in Figure 1 - adopted the general political
form of the Chinese state, over time modifying it to Vietnamese needs. The Vietnamese
state maintained a competitive bureaucratic tradition, with an exam system used to select
village bureaucrats.9 In 1461 the system was reformed so that village councils were elected by
villagers through popular male su↵rage, with national bureaucrats still selected through an
exam system.10 These policies made Vietnamese local governance unusually participatory,
by global standards and relative to the original Chinese model.11
Detailed legal codes institutionalized the relationship between the central state, which
served as the impetus and enforcer for most policies, and local functionaries, who were responsible for implementation.12 The central state imposed tax and military recruitment
quotas on the village, leaving the village authority to allocate tax burdens within their ju7

See Becker et al. (2016); Lowes et al. (2015); Acemoglu et al. (2015); Bukowski (2016); Oto-Peralı́as and
Romero-Ávila (2014); Grosjean (2014); Spolaore and Wacziarg (2013); Alesina et al. (2013); Voigtländer and
Voth (2012); Acemoglu et al. (2011); Nunn and Wantchekon (2011); Luttmer and Singhal (2011); Grosjean
(2011); Tabellini (2010); Dell (2010); Fernández and Fogli (2009); Nunn (2008); Tabellini (2008); Guiso et al.
(2008); Giuliano (2007); Acemoglu et al. (2002, 2001).
8
Of course, depending on what sorts of activities civil society engages in, it could also have led to very
negative experiences, as in Satyanath et al. (2013).
9
Porter, 1993, p. 4-5; Lieberman, 2003, p. 381-384; Woodside, 1971, p. 156-157; Thien, 2003, p. 53
10
Meyer and Nguyen, 2005, p. 103
11
Cotter, 1968, p. 16
12
Haines, 1984, p. 309; Yu, 2001, p. 165; Lieberman, 2003, p. 382; Porter, 1993, p. 4-5

6

risdiction.13 The village maintained multiple population and property lists for the central
state, and cadastral records allowed for periodic land redistribution, as well as the collection
of property taxes beginning in the 1690s.14 The state also entrusted the village with the
supervision of public works.15 Historical consensus holds that Dai Viet state capacity was
“exceptionally penetrating by Southeast Asian standards.”16 Comparing Vietnam to Cambodia, Laos, and Thailand, Victor Lieberman (1993, p. 484) argues: “Chinese bureaucratic
norms...tended to encourage in that country [Vietnam] a more impersonal, territorially uniform, and locally interventionist system than was found in Indianized polities to the west.”
Over hundreds of years, Dai Viet expanded southward (Figure 1). Through its conquests
it sought to make conquered territories integral to the Vietnamese state. While conquered
areas were initially settled as military colonies, they were ultimately converted into Vietnamese administrative villages, whose citizens had the same rights and obligations as areas
that had been part of Dai Viet for much longer.17 The Vietnamese first conquered the fragmented, patron-client state Champa, which ruled central Vietnam through a system of loose
personalistic alliances.18 The Cham had been fully absorbed by the late 17th century (Figure
1), bringing the Vietnamese into conflict with the larger and more militarily powerful Khmer
(Cambodian) empire to the south.
Dai Viet left behind a rich paper trail that historians have used to develop a nuanced
understanding of local and national political economy. In contrast, the absence of a recordkeeping state in the Khmer periphery has resulted in very little quantifiable knowledge about
life on the Khmer frontier prior to Vietnamese invasion.19 Nevertheless the general features of
Khmer society are reasonably well-understood. The Khmer lacked a centralized bureaucracy,
and the state’s control over the periphery was weak.20 Southeast Asian historian Shawn
McHale (2013) argues that the Khmer periphery in Vietnam was the lowland equivalent of
highland Zomia in James Scott’s The Art of Not Being Governed : an area with limited state
capacity where peasants could escape the exactitudes of the state.
In Khmer, political appointments and land distribution were personalistic, and taxation
was controlled by a temple-based system.21 Land-owning elites solidified their claims to
land by building a temple. They used the temple to collect tribute from peasants and in
turn passed a share up to higher level elites, who legitimized their claims to land.22 Royal
13

Lieberman, 2003, p. 393; Zottoli, 2011, p. 10; Woodside, 1971; Porter, 1993, p. 5-6
Yu, 2001, p. 165; Li, 1998, p. 49-56; Pastor, 1997
15
Mus, 1949, p. 266
16
Lieberman, 2003, p. 382
17
Nguyen, 1985, p. 8-9
18
Lieberman, 2003, p. 393
19
Hall, 1968, p. 121-123,126
20
Tarling, 1999, p. 231-234; Ebihara, 1984, p. 282; Osborne, 1966, p. 4
21
Osborne, 1969; Sahai, 1970, p. 139-148; Chandler, 1983
22
Lieberman, 1993, p. 227; Hall, 2011, p. 162; Tarling, 1999
14

7

patronage, not administrative specialization, were driving features of government service.23
Moreover, while Dai Viet had a law code with nearly 1000 articles - 15 percent of them aimed
at protecting the existence of independent farmers - the Khmer legal code focused instead
on the preservation of patron-client relations.24 Table 1 summarizes key di↵erences between
the Khmer and Vietnamese states.
Dai Viet and Khmer are representative more generally of Northeast and Southeast Asian
civilizations.25 The literature commonly divides Asian societies into two groups - the Indic
states of Southeast Asia and the Sinic states of Northeast Asia. Dai Viet, Korea (Choson),
and Japan adopted a Chinese-style administrative bureaucracy, including the exam system.26
They had Chinese-style legal norms, a high degree of centralization, and the village was a
fundamental administrative unit.27 All three had a tributary relationship with China at
some point, with political ties precipitating the adoption of Chinese statecraft.28
In contrast, a large literature on state formation in Southeast Asia classifies Laos, Siam
(Thailand), Bagan (Myanmar), and Khmer, as well as states such as Srivijaya and Majapahit
in island Southeast Asia, as Indianized “mandala” states.29 Since at least the second century,
most states across mainland and island Southeast Asia were impacted by Hindu-Buddhist
statecraft and elite culture imported from India. Bureaucracies, to the extent that they
did exist, were never professionalized, even in the more centralized of the Indic polities and
periods; central states had weak control over the periphery; and the village was not typically a
fundamental administrative unit.30 The lines between private and state a↵airs were blurred,
and regime stability depended largely on monarchical personality politics, as opposed to the
codified rules of succession seen in China.31 Southeast Asian states also shared common
Buddhist-Hindu legal origins, though Islamic tradition eventually influenced Indonesia and
Malaysia.32 Legal codes tended to emphasize the preservation of patron client relations,
which some scholars have argued is due to the influence of the Indian caste system.33
Mere decades after the organization of the Khmer areas as Vietnamese provinces in 1833,
the French began colonizing Vietnam. Our study region belonged entirely to the directly
administered province of Cochinchina, established in 1862. The French method of extracting
23

Mabbett and Chandler, 1995, p. 166-167; Ebihara, 1984, p. 285; Mabbett, 1978, p. 10
Ebihara, 1984, p. 285-286; Woodside, 1984, p. 318-319; Haines, 1984, p. 310
25
Hall, 1973; Cotterell, 2014
26
Woodside, 1971; Woodside, 2006; Liu, 2007
27
Jansen, 2000; Barnes, 2007; Liu, 2007; Lewis, 2009; Lewis, 2011; Kang and Cha, 2010; Whitmore, 1979;
Palais, 1996
28
Kang and Cha, 2010; Kang, 2010
29
Cœ dès, 1966; Mabbett, 1977a; Kulke, 1986; Tambiah, 1977; Wolters, 1999; Tambiah, 2013
30
Lieberman, 1993; Lieberman, 2003
31
Lieberman, 1987; Chutintaranond, 1990
32
Hooker, 1978b; Hooker, 1978a; Harding, 2001; Acharya, 2013
33
Mabbett, 1977b
24

8

surplus varied with the pre-existing institutions.34 Where existing village structures were
strong and deeply rooted, they could be leveraged to meet extractive aims.35 In contrast,
where the village was weak and already lacked legitimacy, village leaders lost further legitimacy in attempting to collect taxes for the French. The French relied on externally appointed
officials to facilitate tax collection, and French landowners took control of many estates that
had previously been held by the Khmer landed gentry.36 We digitized data on all French
landownership in Vietnam at the close of the colonial period, and 97.5% of French lands in
Vietnam were on the Khmer side of the boundary.37 Nearly all of these lands are further
south than our study region, and thus are unlikely to explain our results, but the overall
patterns support the assertion that the French worked through existing societal structures.
French colonial strategy halted the Vietnamization of former Khmer territories that would
have otherwise plausibly taken place. If the historical state had di↵ered, colonial policy would
have as well, as it exploited and preserved pre-existing norms. Colonial policy is hence an
outcome that is important for understanding persistence, not just in Vietnam but in a variety
of Asian countries that also experienced foreign interference.
Following World War II, the Vietnamese engaged in a successful anti-colonial struggle
against the French. The Geneva Accords of 1954 demarcated Vietnam at the 17th parallel
into two zones - communist North Vietnam and pro-western South Vietnam - until elections
to be held in 1956 would select a unified Vietnamese government. These elections never occurred, and ongoing conflict gradually escalated into the Vietnam War. Our study region is
well within South Vietnam, with the 17th parallel falling near the boundary of the northernmost region in Figure 1. Importantly for our study, in 1967 there was a major constitutional
reform in South Vietnam that decentralized political power, granting villages new budgetary
powers, control over local councils, and the ability to elect village councils and shape local
development projects. Our results from the South Vietnamese era thus shed light on the
impacts of the historical state in a context with a high degree of decentralization.
In 1975, Vietnam was reunited under a communist government, which attempted unsuccessfully to collectivize land in the south and implement a command economy. Liberalization began in the 1990s, and presently Vietnam is one of the more decentralized countries
in Southeast Asia. An administrative hierarchy defines a fiscal relationship between the
village and the central government, with provincial and district bodies in between. Fiscal
administration is conducted at the provincial level, whereas village governments continue
to play a role in administering a variety of services.38 Officials are selected by communist
34

Nguyen, 2003, p. 117; Booth, 2007
Nguyen, 1985, p. 160
36
Nguyen, 2003, p. 119; Osborne, 1969, p. 151; Popkin, 1979, p. 432; Wolf, 1969, p. 177
37
These data were compiled from French records by the Stanford Research Institute (Bredo, 1968).
38
See Kerkvliet and Marr (2004).
35

9

party bodies.39 However, locally selected village heads continue to exist in a more informal
capacity, carrying out important de facto functions in local politics along with village-level
party officials, although the central government does not formally recognize them.40

2.2

The Dai Viet - Khmer Boundary

The 1698 boundary between Dai Viet and Khmer is the southernmost one in Figure 1, shown
with a thick black line. Areas just to the east of this boundary were part of Dai Viet for
around 150 years prior to French colonization, whereas areas just to the west were organized under Vietnamese administrative lines in 1833, just decades prior to the commencement of French colonization. Dai Viet exercised a strong control over its periphery, and
the Vietnamese state believed “firmly in well-defined borders as an alternative of wayward
conquering.”41 Systematic data do not exist for this region prior to Vietnamese conquest.
Nevertheless, the historical evidence suggests that the location of the boundary is the result
of a highly contingent set of historical circumstances that with small perturbations would
have produced di↵erent boundaries, as opposed to reflecting underlying economic potential.
Upon completion of the conquest of Champa, southern expansion brought Dai Viet into
conflict with the Khmer kingdom. In 1623, the Vietnamese procured the rights from Khmer
to establish a customs house at Prey Nokor (today Ho Chi Minh Port), which was at the time
a small Khmer fishing village. Prey Nokor historically played a marginal role in Southeast
Asian trade and “would only become important much later when it had been developed as an
administrative center [of Dai Viet].”42 Other natural ports such as Ha Tien, Ninh Kieu, and
Binh Long were located on the Khmer side of the boundary and initially played a larger role
in trade. Throughout the 17th century, Vietnamese settlers fleeing civil conflict in Vietnam
moved into the surrounding region.43 The Vietnamese annexed much of the eastern Mekong
as Gia Dinh Province in 1698, in part using rivers to demarcate the territory, and the Khmer
crown was unable to stop this since they were engulfed in a war with Thailand. Dai Viet
then set about consolidating the area into administrative districts.44
Dai Viet would have likely annexed further Khmer territory in the immediate aftermath
of 1698, but this process was halted due to a contingent set of circumstances at home.45
Vietnam had witnessed a series of bloody civil wars between the Nguyen family in the south
and the Trinh family in the north. In 1672, a truce was declared, and the country was split
39

Marr, 2004, p. 48
Kerkvliet and Marr, 2004, p. 4-7
41
Osborne, 1969, p. 13
42
Vickery, 1996, p. 415; Parthesius, 2010
43
Cœ dès, 1966; Taylor, 2013, p. 303-310
44
Briggs, 1947, p. 358
45
Nguyen, 1999, p. 17
40

10

in two. Conquering a more substantial chunk of Khmer territory further south would have
required a full-scale o↵ensive by the Nguyen army against Khmer and Thailand, which also
aspired to conquer Cambodia.46 This would have left the Nguyen vulnerable to an attack
in the north from the Trinh. Civil conflict likewise constrained the Khmer state, which had
been in decline since the 15th century. The Khmer crown oscillated between pro-Siamese
and pro-Vietnamese royal factions in a series of bloody conflicts.47 Vietnamese had settled
in the Khmer areas during the 18th century, albeit with a risk of ethnic cleansing, but they
did not have the political rights and obligations of those residing in Dai Viet.48 This political
equilibrium persisted until the latter quarter of the 18th century, when large-scale conflict
in Vietnam broke out. The Nguyen, who governed the south, united all of Vietnam under
their rule in 1802, allowing the annexation of the remainder of modern Vietnam to proceed.

3

Estimation Framework

This study’s research design exploits the discontinuous change in exposure to the historical
state across the Khmer-Dai Viet boundary, comparing households in areas incorporated into
Dai Viet in 1698 to households in areas that remained under Khmer. The boundary forms a
multi-dimensional discontinuity in longitude-latitude space, and regressions take the form:

outv = ↵ + Dai V ietv + f (geographic locationv ) +

n
X

segvi + dist hcmv + ✏v

(1)

i=1

where outv is the outcome variable of interest in village v, and Dai V ietv is an indicator
equal to 1 if village v was on the Dai Viet side of the 1698 boundary and equal to zero otherwise. f (geographic locationv ) is the RD polynomial, which controls for smooth functions of
geographic location. The segvi split the boundary into 25 km segments and equal 1 if village
v is closest to segment i and zero otherwise. The boundary segment fixed e↵ects ensure
that the specification is comparing villages across the same segment of the boundary, and
the appendix shows that results are highly robust to the choice of segment length. Finally,
dist hcmv is the distance of village v from Ho Chi Minh City and is included in all regressions to explicitly control for proximity to the region’s largest urban area. For regressions
with equivalent household consumption on the left-hand side, we also include a vector of
demographic variables giving the number of infants, children, and adults in the household.
The baseline specification limits the sample to villages within 25 kilometers of the thresh46

Nguyen, 1999, p. 17
Wook, 2004, p. 293
48
Taylor, 2013, p. 325-336; Engelbert, 1994, p. 170-175
47

11

old. Following Gelman and Imbens (2014), we use a local linear RD polynomial for the baseline and document robustness to a wide variety of di↵erent bandwidths and RD polynomials.
The key identifying assumption is that all relevant factors besides treatment vary
smoothly at the Dai Viet-Khmer boundary. That is, letting c1 and c0 denote potential
outcomes under treatment and control, x denote longitude, and y denote latitude, identification requires that E[c1 |x, y] and E[c0 |x, y] are continuous at the discontinuity threshold. This
assumption is needed for observations located just across the Khmer side of the boundary
to be an appropriate counterfactual for observations located just across the Dai Viet side.
To assess the plausibility of this assumption, Table 2 examines a variety of geographic
characteristics, using gridded geographic data and regressions of the form described in equation (1). The unit of analysis is a 10 km x 10 km grid cell.49 To be conservative, we treat grid
cells as independent observations, as the use of spatially correlated standard errors tends to
slightly increase their magnitude. Ideally we would be able to look at social and economic
characteristics before Dai Viet settled our study region, during the period when the entire
area was loosely controlled by Khmer. However, because the state was weak, no systematic
data were collected. Suitability for rice - the dominant crop - was plausibly the most relevant
characteristic given the agrarian nature of the society at that time.
Columns (1) and (2) of Table 2 examine elevation and slope, respectively. The point
estimates on Dai V iet are small relative to the mean and statistically insignificant. Column
(3) shows that temperature is likewise balanced. Column (4) does find a modest di↵erence in
precipitation that is marginally significant at the 10% level, but the coefficient is quite small
relative to the mean. Column (5) documents that suitability for rice - the region’s principal
crop - is similar on either side of the boundary. Column (6) examines flow accumulation, a
measure constructed by the USGS Hydrosheds project that calculates how many cells are
uphill from the cell under question. The higher the number, the more water we would expect
to flow through the cell. There is not a statistically significant di↵erence. Finally, column
(7) examines the kilometers of river flowing through each cell, which is also balanced.
An additional assumption is no selective sorting across the treatment threshold. This
would be violated if the historical state provoked substantial out-migration of relatively
productive individuals from Khmer to Dai Viet, leading to a larger indirect e↵ect. The
historical state would still exert long-run impacts, but the interpretation would be di↵erent.
As Dai Viet expanded southward, it initially set up military colonies in newly acquired areas
with settlers from the north. This process happened throughout southern Vietnam prior to
the arrival of the French. However, there is little evidence of selective migration from Khmer
to established Dai Viet villages. The historical literature argues that negative attitudes
towards outsiders created substantial barriers to moving into established villages:
49

Results are similar when other sized cells or villages are used as the unit of analysis.

12

“An outsider who was allowed to live in a village had fewer rights to village
possessions than did insiders. His descendants, furthermore, might not receive
full citizenship–and with it, the right to own property and be notables–for several
generations. Such marked distinctions made it exceedingly difficult, if not impossible, for a man to move into a village and take over another man’s land. Even
well into the period of French rule, a person from another village who tried to
farm was likely to have his crops destroyed...The emphasis on village citizenship,
therefore, encouraged local ownership” (Popkin, 1979, p. 89).
Moreover, the Pacification Attitudes and Analysis Survey, conducted in the early 1970s,
asked individuals if they would hypothetically be willing to move to a di↵erent village or
province if they received an o↵er for a higher paying job. Only 21% and 12% of respondents
answered yes, respectively.
Finally, we use the 2009 census to compare current place of residence to place of residence
in 2004 and find low levels of migration between historically Khmer and Dai Viet areas.
2.5% of households in areas historically under Dai Viet reported having lived in historically
Khmer areas in 2004. 1% of households in historically Khmer areas reported having lived
in historically Dai Viet areas in 2004. While migration is unlikely to be a primary driver of
results, we will examine its potential e↵ect on the estimates in Section 4.

4

Long Run E↵ects on Economic Prosperity

This section examines the impacts of the historical state on economic prosperity across
the past century and a half. It begins by considering e↵ects on contemporary household
consumption and then explores a variety of historical measures of economic activity.
The biennial Vietnam Household Living Standards Surveys (VHLSS) were collected between 2002 and 2012 by the General Statistics Office of Vietnam with technical assistance
from the World Bank.50 The set of sampled villages remains mostly constant across 20022008, and then changes substantially in 2010. In each year, a core survey is administered to
a large number of households, and an additional module on expenditures is administered to
a subsample of households. In order to create a panel, there is a 50% rotation of households
from one survey round to the next. To avoid repeated observations for the same household,
we drop all households in 2004 that were also surveyed in 2002, all households in 2006 that
were also surveyed in 2004 and so forth. Results are quantitatively similar if all observations
are retained (Appendix Table A-1). To construct a measure of consumption that reflects
50

The survey was collected during the 1990s but only for a very small sample of villages.

13

productive capacity, we subtract transfers received from total consumption, though estimates
are similar when transfers are included (Table A-2).51
Table 3 reports estimates from equation (1), using the log of equivalent household consumption as the dependent variable. Following Deaton (1997), we assume that children aged
0 to 4 are equal to 0.4 adults and children aged 5 to 14 are equal to 0.5 adults. All regressions control for survey year fixed e↵ects and the number of household members aged 0-4,
5-14, and 15 and older.52 Standard errors are clustered at the village level, and none of the
significance levels in Table 3 change if errors are clustered at a higher administrative level
or adjusted for spatial dependence.
Overall, the point estimates suggest that household consumption is around a third higher
in Dai Viet villages. Column (1) uses a local linear polynomial in latitude and longitude,
whereas column (2) uses instead a local linear polynomial in distance to the boundary, and
column (3) includes both. Results are similar across these specifications. In a regression
discontinuity there are many options for how to specify the RD polynomial and bandwidth.
We follow Gelman and Imbens (2014) in specifying the baseline as a local linear polynomial
but are not aware of a widely accepted optimal bandwidth for a multi-dimensional RD,
employing a variety of outcomes. Fortunately the choice of bandwidth and RD polynomial
makes little di↵erence. Each panel in Figure 2 plots point estimates of using equation
(1) and di↵erent bandwidth values between 10-100 kilometers, with the bandwidth under
consideration denoted on the x-axis. Thin lines show 95% confidence intervals while the
slightly thicker lines show 90% confidence intervals. The panels in di↵erent rows employ
di↵erent functional forms for the RD polynomial: linear latitude-longitude polynomial (row
1), linear distance to the boundary polynomial (row 2), both linear latitude-longitude and
linear distance to the boundary polynomials (row 3), and analogous specifications using
quadratic functional forms (rows 4 through 6). The estimates in the first column include
the full border and show that impacts are remarkably robust to alternative bandwidth and
RD polynomial choices, though by construction estimates for smaller bandwidths tend to
be noisier, particularly for quadratic polynomials. The second column shows that estimates
change little when limiting the sample to portions of the boundary not formed by rivers.
The results can be seen graphically in Figure 3. Each sub-figure shows a scatter plot
for one of the paper’s main outcomes. These plots are the three-dimensional analogues to
standard two-dimensional RD plots, with each village’s longitude on the x-axis, its latitude on
the y-axis, and the outcome shown using an evenly-spaced monochromatic color scale. The
background shows predicted values, for a finely spaced grid of longitude-latitude coordinates,
51

We classify transfers as remittances and gifts received by the household as well as all income from social
welfare and charity organizations.
52
Household demographics are balanced.

14

from a regression for the outcome under consideration using equation (1). In the typical RD,
the predicted value plot is a two-dimensional curve, whereas here it is a three-dimensional
surface, with the third dimension indicated by the color gradient. Lighter shades indicate
higher values. The data are not binned, the way they often are in a two-dimensional RD,
so will tend to show greater variation. Panel (a) for household consumption illustrates the
predicted jump across the boundary and darker dots tend to overlay darker-shaded areas,
indicating a good fit.
The cluster of points on the Dai Viet side of the boundary is Ho Chi Minh City, and one
concern is that it drives the e↵ects. Its placement is not by chance - it was the administrative
center of Dai Viet’s 1698 expansion - but if it drove the results the interpretation would be
di↵erent. While Ho Chi Minh City is near the boundary, it does not directly border the
boundary, and hence its influence on the RD estimates is limited. Column (4) shows that
results barely change upon dropping all urban districts comprising Ho Chi Minh City, and
column (5) documents that results are also unchanged when all of Ho Chi Minh Province which includes urban and rural areas - is excluded. Column (6) shows that results are also
robust to dropping all provincial capitals, which largely removes urban areas.
Villages in Dai Viet do tend to be slightly closer to Ho Chi Minh City, but this does
not change discontinuously at the boundary. Hence, the RD controls for it. One additional
concern, though, is that travel costs could be discontinuous along boundary segments formed
by rivers - today bridges are widespread but this may not have always been true. On the
other hand, river segments might be preferred to the extent that they constitute exogenous
barriers that were used to separate di↵erent historical polities. Column (7) limits the sample
to villages closest to boundary segments that do not coincide with rivers, and column (8)
does the same for segments that are formed by rivers. The point estimates are of similar
magnitude, suggesting that e↵ects are unlikely to be driven by discontinuous travel costs or
by unobservables that change discontinuously only along non-river segments. This robustness
extends across bandwidths and RD polynomials (Figure 2). Another alternative hypothesis
is that results could be driven by higher levels of government. Provinces change across the
study period, so we aggregate these changes to create provinces with consistent boundaries
across time. Comparing villages within these if anything makes the estimates larger (column
9).
An additional question to consider is whether di↵erential rates of migration today may
be responsible for living standards di↵erences across the boundary. Given that in-migration
to provinces historically under Dai Viet is about 2.5%, we omit the 2.5% of the Dai Viet
sample with the highest consumption. To be conservative we similarly omit the 1% of the
Khmer sample with the lowest consumption, as in-migration to Khmer areas is 1%. The
estimate in Column (10) based on the trimmed sample remains similar, indicating migration
15

today is not large enough to drive the di↵erences. We have no way to measure migration - or
how selective it was - historically. However, as discussed in Section 3, the fact that migrants
and their descendants faced substantial barriers in gaining full village citizenship suggests
that selective migration is unlikely to fully drive our results.
A final concern is that the boundary may be an unusual place. We address this by
examining two alternative samples. The first considers only places 25-100 km from the
boundary, omitting the boundary region itself. The second compares all of South Vietnam
that belonged to Dai Viet historically to all of South Vietnam that belonged to Khmer.53
While these estimates are no longer causally identified, they remain very similar to the
baseline estimates, demonstrating that the e↵ects near the boundary are not a fluke. Results
(available upon request) are also robust to dropping other places that may be unusual, such
as coastal villages.
The appendix documents additional robustness. The baseline specification uses 25 km
boundary segment fixed e↵ects. Appendix Tables A-3 through A-6 show robustness to
instead including 100, 75, 50, or 10 km segment fixed e↵ects, respectively. Tables A-7 and
A-8 document that results are broadly similar before and after the redefinition of the VHLSS
sample in 2010.
Finally, Appendix Table A-9 reports several placebo tests. First, the rivers coinciding with the Dai Viet boundary also flow through areas that are not along the boundary
(Appendix Figure A-1), providing an additional opportunity to examine whether estimates
simply capture the e↵ect of being on di↵erent sides of a river. Column (1) estimates the
baseline regression on the sample of districts bordering other portions of the rivers that partially form the boundary, assigning as treated whichever side of the river segment is richer.
The di↵erence across the rivers is statistically insignificant. Column (2) performs a placebo
comparing across the provincial boundaries in the study area, in order to see whether income
di↵erentials of the magnitude found along the Dai Viet boundary are typical. This requires
assigning some places as treated and others as untreated, and in order to stack the test in
favor of finding a di↵erence we assign the richer side of each provincial boundary segment
as treated. The specification does not reveal a statistically significant discontinuity. Finally,
Column (3) considers a placebo test using other historical boundaries of Dai Viet’s southward expansion. To increase power, we pool all observations in proximity to the 1306, 1407,
1471, 1611, 1651 and 1693 boundaries, and the treatment indicator equals 1 if the district
is located on the side of the boundary conquered earlier. Since all of these places were organized under the village government system for hundreds of years, we would expect there
53

We focus on South Vietnam to increase comparability, since the North had a very di↵erent history under
Communist North Vietnam between independence and reunification. We do not include an RD polynomial
since the sample contains places very far from the boundary, but estimates are larger when it is included.

16

to be little or no long run e↵ect of being brought into this system modestly earlier. This
contrasts to the Khmer-Dai Viet boundary, where villages on the Khmer side were organized
along Dai Viet administrative lines for only a short time before French colonization. The
estimate is indeed small and statistically insignificant.
The historical state has a robust impact on current living standards. We turn next
to an examination of economic variables across the past century and a half, in order to
examine whether similar e↵ects obtain historically. Data from the pre-colonial period are
not systematically available, in particular for the Khmer side of the boundary. When the
French arrived, they did collect some systematic data, but disaggregated data are rare. The
only source of extant village level information is maps held by the Bibliotheque Nationale
de France, for 1878, 1901, 1910, and 1926. Each map shows di↵erent types of infrastructure
- specifically roads, railroads, telegraph lines, and military posts - though not all types of
infrastructure are shown in all maps. Since our entire study region is within the same colonial
administrative unit, Cochinchina, we would not expect these outcomes to di↵er if pre-existing
conditions were not di↵erent. The colonial state and private companies plausibly invested
in transport and communications infrastructure in areas with the greatest economic surplus.
We georeferenced these maps and intersected them with village boundaries.
Table 4, columns (1) and (2) consider density (in km per village area) of telegraph lines
in 1878 and 1901, respectively. Telegraph lines were more prominent on the Dai Viet side of
the boundary, and the coefficients are large relative to the sample means. In contrast, while
only 3% of villages in the sample contain a military post, these were less prominent in 1878
in Dai Viet areas, plausibly because these villages could be more easily governed through
the pre-existing village structure (column 3). The 1878 map also shows lines denoting a
rail or road (of any type), and there is not a statistically significant di↵erence across the
boundary (column 4). However, by 1910, the maps reveal that railroad density was higher
in Dai Viet villages (column 6), and the coefficient on motor roads (which may be paved or
unpaved) is positive but noisy (column 5). Finally, the 1926 map shows a strong positive
e↵ect on paved roads (column 7). The railroad e↵ect, in contrast, is no longer statistically
significant, and the density of railroads by this time had fallen nearly in half relative to
1910 (column 8). Appendix Figure A-2 shows that these estimates are broadly robust to the
choice of bandwidth. We plot coefficients only for the linear RD baseline specification, to
avoid reporting tens of thousands of coefficients over the course of the study, but estimates
are also similar when other RD polynomials are used.
Next, we turn to data from the South Vietnamese period. Income data are available
for a sample of hamlets through the Pacification Attitudes and Analysis Survey (PAAS,
U.S. National Archives RG 330 and 472). PAAS was a joint U.S.-South Vietnamese e↵ort,
in which responses were compiled by Vietnamese enumerators. It was launched in March
17

of 1970 and was conducted monthly until December of 1972, though unfortunately not all
months have been preserved.54 Each month, surveys were conducted in 6 randomly selected
hamlets per province. 15 respondents were randomly selected per hamlet, with stratification
on demographic characteristics. The survey focused on citizens’ attitudes and opinions, but
also asked about household income in the past year. Households identify which income bin
describes their situation, and we assign their income as the midpoint of the bin. The data are
not of the same quality as modern expenditure surveys but are nevertheless a rare example of
income measurement in a developing country before the advent of living standards surveys.
We also obtain a variety of economic indicators from the Hamlet Evaluation System
(HES, RG 472), collected jointly by the United States and South Vietnam between 1969 and
1973. HES contains information on economic, social, political, and security conditions in
all South Vietnamese hamlets, with data collected on a quarterly basis.55 The information
was compiled by US and Vietnamese advisers, in conjunction with local officials, and the
questions are at the hamlet or village level. The data provide unusually rich local level
information covering a broad set of variables.
The HES questions have categorical responses. We code questions with multiple responses
into binary indicators that preserve variation (see the data appendix for more details). For
example, a coding of a question about non-rice food availability into no or limited availability
versus ample availability preserves significantly more variation than alternative codings, since
few hamlets completely lack non-rice staples.56 These indicators are then averaged across
the full period of data availability. We also report estimates from a Bayesian latent class
analysis, to address potential concerns about the coding of categorical responses and multiple
hypothesis testing. Based on the observed categorical responses to all economic questions,
latent class analysis estimates the posterior probability that each hamlet belongs to one of
two latent groups associated with “high” and “low” economic prosperity.57
Estimates for economic outcomes during the South Vietnamese period are reported in
Table 5. Column (1) examines log household income between 1970 and 1972. Income on
the Dai Viet side of the boundary is around 16 percentage points higher, and the estimate
is statistically significant at the 1% level. Column (2) documents that hamlets historically
under Dai Viet are 16 percentage points more likely to be in the high prosperity latent
54

Tapes containing information for May, 1970 through February, 1971 and for August and September of
1971 were not preserved.
55
Most questions are quarterly, but a few of the security questions were collected monthly.
56
An alternative would be to estimate a multinomial logit, but this does not converge well since there is
often little variation in some of the categories.
57
We include questions that are available for the full sample period. Results are similar if we include
questions that were only asked during part of the sample period. When we compute the LCA, we include
all observations, to avoid needing to recompute the LCA when changing the bandwidth. However, if we just
include hamlets within 25 kilometers of the boundary in the LCA computations, results are very similar.

18

class (s.e.= 0.055), and the e↵ect is significant at the 1% level. See also Figure 3, panel
b). The results for the individual outcomes that contribute to the LCA show a similar
pattern. In places with a strong state historically, non-rice foodstu↵s are 28 percentage
points more likely to be amply available (column 3, s.e.= 0.06), and manufactured goods are
20 percentage points more likely to be available (column 4, s.e.= 0.07). Surplus goods are
also more likely to be produced, households are less likely to require assistance to subsist, and
households are more likely to have access to a vehicle (columns 5-7). However, there is no
di↵erence in whether land is left fallow due to poor security (column 8). The next section will
show that security did not di↵er substantially across the Dai Viet boundary, alleviating the
concern that these e↵ects could be largely driven by the war. Finally, column (9) shows that
there is no di↵erence in quarterly population growth, suggesting that di↵erential migration
during this period is unlikely to contribute substantially to the e↵ects. Appendix Figure A-3
documents that results are broadly robust to the choice of bandwidth.
One concern is that the results could be partially driven by hamlet size. While we do not
control for this in the baseline, since it is endogenous, Table A-10 documents that results are
similar when this control is included. Results are also similar when we drop Ho Chi Minh
City, which at the time was its own province, or when we drop all provincial capitals (Tables
A-11 and A-12).
Finally, we digitized district level data on land ownership and rice cultivation during 19751985, the period after Vietnamese reunification, from provincial yearbooks and declassified
Vietnamese Communist Party documents. The main drawback of these data is that there
are relatively few districts, and thus we lack statistical power. In order to have enough
observations for regression analysis, we extend the bandwidth to 100 kilometers. Estimates
in Table A-13 suggest that districts in historically Dai Viet areas had a higher share of
state-owned land, a lower share of private land, and may have had less land cultivated with
paddy rice.58 Conditional on land being in paddy, it was more likely to be irrigated and
mechanized. Most e↵ects are marginally significant at the 10% level, except the e↵ect on
land in paddy, which falls short of statistical significance but is large in magnitude. While
these e↵ects are noisy, they are highly consistent with the persistent impacts of the historical
state on economic conditions, documented from the mid-19th century through the present.

5

Mechanisms

This section explores mechanisms through which the historical state has influenced longrun development. Our hypothesis is that Dai Viet’s long history of village government
58

In addition to state and private land, the third category of land is collectively farmed land. In 1979,
when these data were compiled, there was no collectively farmed land in our study region.

19

translated into greater local collective action that has persisted through a series of upheavals
following the dissolution of Dai Viet, including colonial conquest, the Vietnam War, and
an e↵ort to implement a communist command economy. Long after the Dai Viet central
state ceased to exist - and even in the face of subsequent state policies that have at times
aimed to discourage local collective action - these norms have persisted and have plausibly
had important impacts on local public goods provision and economic development. We do
not claim that local collective action is the only mechanism linking the historical state to
long-run development, but the historical and empirical evidence make it difficult to tell a
story where it does not play an important role.
Before examining the data in detail, it is useful to consider one important reason local
collective action may vary across the boundary - ethnic heterogeneity.59 In the past ethnicity
may well have di↵ered, but more recently the vast majority of people throughout the region
self-identify as Vietnamese. In VHLSS, 97% of respondents are Vietnamese and almost none
identify as Khmer or Cham. The only minority group of any quantitative significance is the
Chinese, who are concentrated in large urban areas. Results change little when these areas
are dropped. Within villages, there is almost no ethnic diversity. Moreover, during the 1960s
and 1970s, Vietnamese is identified as the primary ethnicity in over 98% of hamlets. While
it is possible that individuals could self-identify as Vietnamese but still practice the customs
of other ethnic groups, we do not find di↵erences across the boundary in patrilocal marriage
patterns, an important di↵erence between Northeast and Southeast Asian ethnicities.
Engagement with civil society and local government - two important components of local
collective action - is often unobserved, particularly historically, but between 1969 and 1973
the U.S. and South Vietnamese governments compiled unique local level data on civil society,
village government, and public opinion. The Hamlet Evaluation System (1969-1973) contains
monthly and quarterly data on economics, civil society, local government, and security for
nearly all of South Vietnam’s 18,000 hamlets, and the PAAS Public Opinion Survey (19701972) provides public opinion data for a random sample of hamlets. These data are described
in more detail in the previous section.
Table 6 uses the HES data to examine non-communist civil society (the Viet Cong insurgency will be considered subsequently). To address potential concerns about multiple
hypothesis testing, we start by constructing a summary measure using Bayesian latent class
analysis and the individual civil society questions, as described in the previous section. The
dependent variable in column (1) is the posterior probability that the hamlet is in the high
civil society group. Hamlets historically under a strong state are 18 percentage points more
likely to be classified in the high group (s.e.= 0.035), relative to a sample mean posterior
59

See Bazzi and Gudgeon (2016); Montalvo and Reynal-Querol (2005b,a); Alesina and La Ferrara (2005);
Alesina et al. (1999); Easterly and Levine (1997).

20

probability of 0.76. This e↵ect is shown in Figure 3, panel c).
Columns (2) through (12) consider individual outcomes. In hamlets historically under
Dai Viet, households are 26 percentage points more likely to participate in civil organizations,
relative to a sample mean of 0.37 and are 21 percentage points more likely to participate in
local economic trainings (columns 2-3). Both e↵ects are significant at the one percent level.
Households in Dai Viet villages are 8 percentage points more likely to participate in the
People’s Self Defense Forces - a local self defense organization - and the e↵ect is statistically
significant at the one percent level (column 4). Dai Viet villages are also substantially
more likely to have self-development projects underway (column 5). We do not find that
the village council is more likely to discuss citizens’ grievances with them - the mean of
this variable is over 90% - nor are Dai Viet villages more likely to have organized youth
activities (columns 6-7). Dai Viet households are 10 percentage points more likely to attend
meetings held by the village government, relative to a mean of 0.37 (column 8). In the final
columns, we consider outcomes that may be selected - participation in Rural Development
(RD) Cadre activities and civil organization assistance to needy households. Not all villages
have RD Cadre - South Vietnamese development aid workers - or households that require
assistance to subsist, but only villages that have RD cadre can participate in their activities
and only villages that answer that they have households requiring assistance to subsist can
then specify that they have civic organizations to provide this assistance. Otherwise, the
response to these is coded as zero.60 We do not find a di↵erence in whether the RD cadre are
present in the hamlet, and in Dai Viet villages, households are more likely to participate in
RD cadre-initiated development activities (columns 9-10). In contrast, Dai Viet villages are
substantially less likely to have households that require assistance to subsist (column 11).
Nevertheless, they are 17 percentage points more likely to have organizations that provide
assistance to such households, relative to a sample mean of 0.24 (column 12).61 These results
are broadly robust to the selection of bandwidth (Appendix Figure A-4), to controlling for
population, to dropping Ho Chi Minh City, and to dropping all provincial capitals (Tables
A-14 to A-16).
Next, we turn to local governance and public goods provision, with outcomes drawn
from HES (1969-1973). During this period, a constitutional reform had decentralized many
governance and public goods provision roles to the local level, making it a time when local
government was particularly relevant. As discussed in the introduction, it is not clear from
the existing literature whether we would expect impacts on local governance to go in the
same direction as those on civil society.
60

These outcomes are not included in the LCA since they may be selected, but LCA impacts would be
even stronger if they were included.
61
The response to this question is 0 by construction if villages don’t have such households.

21

The results indicate that local governance and civil society in Vietnam are complements.
They also suggest that participatory decentralization reforms work best in areas with a
history of participatory governance. Table 7, Column (1) considers the posterior probability
that the hamlet belongs to the class associated with good local government administration.
Dai Viet areas are more likely to be classified in the high local governance class, and the
e↵ect is statistically significant at the 5% level.
A classic measure of state capacity is tax collection, and column (2) shows that local
governments in Dai Viet villages are six percentage points more likely to systematically
collect taxes, relative to a sample mean of 0.84. Column (3) documents that Dai Viet villages
are also more likely to have all the positions on their village committee - which organizes
public goods provision - filled. The village chief is more likely to be regularly present in
Dai Viet villages, though there is not a statistically significant e↵ect on the presence of the
hamlet chief (columns 4 and 5). Moreover, police are 17 percentage points more likely to be
regularly present, relative to a sample mean of 0.56 (column 6). Next we consider outcomes
that might be selected - the village head’s control over the RD cadre and the provision of
government assistance. There is not a di↵erence in the presence of RD cadre (Table 6, column
9), but village heads in Dai Viet villages are more likely to e↵ectively control the RD teams
(column 7). Households in Dai Viet villages are less likely to require assistance to subsist
(Table 6, column 11), but despite this governments in Dai Viet villages are 14 percentage
points more likely to provide assistance, relative to a sample mean of 0.3 (column 8).
Examining policies under the control of the provincial government can serve as a useful
placebo. In principal, the historical state could a↵ect provincial governments or the distribution of provincial resources, but if the mechanism is about organizing within the village we
would expect these e↵ects to be less pronounced. HES asked three questions about provincial government: whether projects have failed due to a lack of provincial technical assistance
(column 9), whether provincial technical personnel - such as agricultural extension workers regularly visit the village (column 10), and whether provincial land a↵airs officials visit the
village to assist with land reform (column 11). All coefficients are small relative to the mean
and statistically insignificant.
Local public goods provision also shows a discontinuity at the Dai Viet boundary. Data
are available for health care, education, and law enforcement, the principal public goods in
this context. Table 8, Column (1) reports the LCA for health care provision, documenting
that Dai Viet villages are substantially more likely to be in the high health care provision
latent class (see also Figure 3, panel d)). Government-provided medical services are 20
percentage points more likely to be available, relative to a sample mean of 0.39 and mobile
health workers are more likely to regularly visit all hamlets in the village (columns 2-3).
There is more likely to be a health clinic in the village, but we do not find an impact on the
22

presence of a maternity clinic (columns 4-5).
We also consider education. The LCA is not statistically significant, though it is positive
(column 6). This is partially driven by the fact that there is not a di↵erence in whether school
attendance is restricted by poor security (column 11). Dai Viet villages are 6 percentage
points more likely to have access to a primary school, and the primary school completion
rate is 9 percentage points higher, relative to a sample mean of 0.61 (columns 7 and 8).
There is not a statistically significant impact on whether there is a secondary school in the
village - though the coefficient is large and positive - but the secondary school attendance
rate is 3 percentage points higher, relative to a sample mean of 0.18 (columns 9 and 10).
Finally, in Dai Viet villages, authorities are 22 percentage points more likely to enforce the
law day and night (column 12). The local administration and public goods results are robust
to alternative bandwidths, to controlling for population, to dropping Ho Chi Minh City, and
to dropping provincial capitals (Figures A-5 to A-6 and Tables A-17 to A-22).
Public opinion data, examined in Table 9, can corroborate the above results with an
independent data source and also provide additional nuance. Since di↵erent questions are
asked in di↵erent months, the number of observations can vary substantially. Column (1)
documents that respondents in Dai Viet villages are 9.8 percentage points more likely to
report that their local government is responsive to the needs of its citizens, relative to a
sample mean of 0.37. They are also 20 percentage points more likely to report that their local
government is successful, relative to a sample mean of 0.52, and they have more knowledge
of their village administrative structure (columns 2-3). This is consistent with the previous
result that they are more likely to attend government meetings. Respondents in Dai Viet
areas are also 35 percentage points more likely to feel that the Land to Tiller (LTT) program
- South Vietnam’s land reform - was administered fairly in their village (column 4).
These views do not extend to the national government (columns 5-6). Respondents in Dai
Viet villages are 11 percentage points more likely to respond that the national government
performs poorly, an e↵ect that is significant at the one percent level. They are also more
likely to feel that the national government has done a poor job of managing the economy.
These results suggest that e↵ects cannot be explained by Dai Viet areas having more positive
attitudes towards government in general.
A final set of questions considers civic engagement. These have a smaller sample size and
should be interpreted cautiously. Respondents are asked who has the primary responsibility
to make community life better, the people or the government, and respondents in Dai Viet
villages are 27 percentage points more likely to feel that this is the responsibility of the people
(column 7). This may indicate a less severe free-rider problem, in which citizens recognize
their own responsibility to improve village life. Dai Viet respondents are also more likely to
be active in an interest group and are more likely to report that the people of the village
23

decide which self-development projects will be implemented, rather than government heads
(columns 8-9). The public opinion results are broadly robust to alternative bandwidths
(Figure A-7) and to controlling for population, dropping Ho Chi Minh City, and dropping
all provincial capitals (Tables A-23 through A-25).
Current data about civil society, local government, and public opinion are sparsely available for Vietnam, a communist country where officially civic engagement occurs through the
Party and local government is managed by communist officials. As discussed in Section 2,
informal institutions reflecting village structures remain active, but the state has been hesitant to acknowledge or collect information on these arrangements. Unlike many household
surveys, VHLSS does not have a social capital module. Nevertheless, in the available data,
we continue to see legacies of the historical state. The closest question to civic engagement
systematically available in VHLSS asks about household expenditures on donations to charitable organizations, and we code an indicator for whether the household has donated to a
charitable group. Table 10, column 1 documents that households in Dai Viet villages are 12
percentage points more likely to make charitable contributions (see also Figure 3, panel e).
Columns (2) through (6) consider human capital. Column (2) uses district-level information from provincial yearbooks (1999-2004) on the share of communes in each district
with a secondary school, showing a greater prevalence in Dai Viet areas. In order to have
enough districts for regression analysis, we need to extend the bandwidth to 100 km, so this
estimate should be interpreted with caution. We do not examine primary schools or health
posts because access today is nearly universal. Columns (3) through (6) use individuallevel data from VHLSS on years of schooling. Column (3) reports the average e↵ect for all
individuals over 25, whereas columns (4) through (6) consider di↵erent cohorts separately.
We focus on adult cohorts as they are likely to have completed schooling. The estimates
are positive and statistically significant, documenting that individuals in areas historically
under a strong state have an additional 0.9 years of schooling. This is shown graphically in
Figure 3, panel f). While the absolute e↵ect is roughly similar across cohorts, the e↵ect is
proportionally larger for older individuals, since the older cohort has only half the schooling
of the younger cohort. The estimates are consistent with the historical results on access to
schooling and suggest some convergence over time. The direct impacts of education today
are large enough to explain about a third of the economic di↵erences, using typical returns
to education. Figure A-8 documents that the estimates are broadly robust to the choice of
bandwidth. Tables A-26 through A-28 show that results remain similar when Ho Chi Minh
City and Province are dropped and when provincial capitals are dropped.62
This study documents that the historical state exerts long-run impacts on collective
62

The impact on the share of households that contribute to charity is no longer statistically significant
when all of Ho Chi Minh Province is excluded, but the coefficient remains large and positive.

24

action. There could be many mechanisms linking the historical state to economic outcomes,
but we argue that it is difficult to tell a compelling story where this does not play a role.
Figure A-11 shows that there is a strong relationship in the raw data between the civil society
LCA and the economic LCA, as well as between the civil society LCA and the health care
and education LCAs. Providing local public goods that promote development inherently
requires working together. Villages that are richer might be able to a↵ord to invest more in
local collective action, creating a virtuous feedback loop that is sustained in the long-run.
We next consider some other potential mechanisms, starting with the Vietnam War. The
war is unlikely to be an omitted variable. Our study region is in the same military corps
region, with no reason to expect military strategy to change discontinuously at the boundary,
and we find economic impacts of the historical state prior to the war. Moreover, Dell and
Querubin (2016) do not find long-run e↵ects of bombing - one of the most destructive features
of the war - using the same data sources as this study, and Miguel and Roland (2011) likewise
find no long-run impacts of bombing.
If the historical state impacted insurgency, the war could be a contributing mechanism,
but Table 11 finds little evidence for major di↵erences in conflict across the Dai Viet boundary, using a variety of detailed data drawn from the U.S. National Archives. Column (1)
considers the security LCA, which combines the security questions available in HES. The
coefficient is small in magnitude and statistically insignificant. Columns (2) through (7)
examine representative individual outcomes that enter the LCA. Columns (2) and (3) do
not find impacts on whether there are Viet Cong (VC) forces or a VC base nearby. Dai Viet
villages are 6.5 percentage points more likely to have a VC village guerrilla squad, which
consists entirely of locals who are part-time fighters (column 4). At the same time, they
are less likely to have a VC main squad, which consists of regular forces from elsewhere
(columns 5). VC supporters in Dai Viet villages appear better able to organize into a guerrilla squad, but the VC compensated this by sending more regular forces to former Khmer
areas. Columns 6 and 7 do not find impacts on presence of the VC Infrastructure, which
organized VC political activities, or on VC taxation.
HES likewise contains information on whether friendly (U.S. and South Vietnamese)
forces operated nearby in the past month and whether friendly air or artillery strikes hit
near populated areas (columns 8 and 9). While the coefficients are negative, neither is close
to being statistically significant. We can likewise examine security using administrative
data from the U.S. and South Vietnamese armed forces that track ground troop activity
(“Situation Report Army”, RG 218). There is not an impact on U.S. initiated attacks near
the hamlet (column 10), but South Vietnamese initiated attacks are lower in Dai Viet villages
(column 11). This is likely because South Vietnamese ground troops pursued VC main force
squads. Finally, we consider data on South Vietnamese regional defense forces from the
25

the “Territorial Forces Evaluation System” (RG 472) and the “Territorial Forces Activity
Reporting System” (RG 330) and again do not find a discontinuity (column 12).
These results are broadly robust to widening the bandwidth, with security on the Dai Viet
side tending to be better relative to the Khmer side as the bandwidth is extended towards
100 kilometers (Appendix Figure A-9). Results are robust to controlling for population,
dropping Ho Chi Minh City, and dropping all provincial capitals (Tables A-29 to A-31).
E↵ects likewise do not appear to be driven by recent land inequality. Recall from Section
2 that there were almost no French estates near the 1698 boundary - nearly every village is
a zero in these data - but we also examine agricultural and land outcomes more recently.
The dependent variable in column (1) of Table 12 is an indicator equal to 1 if the household is engaged in agricultural production, taken from VHLSS. The estimates show that Dai
Viet households are less likely to work in agriculture, consistent with the economic e↵ects
discussed earlier. Column (2) examines agricultural land size, in hectares, for agricultural
households. Though some caution is warranted since this outcome is selected, the coefficient
is small relative to the mean and statistically insignificant. This indicates that di↵erences
in average farm size are unlikely to drive the observed economic di↵erences. In Column (3),
the dependent variable is an indicator equal to 1 if the individual works in a manufacturing
industry, again from VHLSS. We restrict analysis to prime-age men, in order to avoid conflating e↵ects with selection into the labor force. The point estimate is small and statistically
insignificant, suggesting that households in Dai Viet areas are more likely to move out of
agriculture into owner-operated businesses and services. We also examined manufacturing in
detail using the 2012 Enterprise Census and did not find major di↵erences in the distribution
of employment across manufacturing sectors (results available upon request).
However, the VHLSS commune questionnaire does reveal that a lower share of land is
formally titled in Dai Viet villages. Columns (4) through (6) estimate equation (1) using
the fraction of area of di↵erent types of land in each commune with a land use certificate
as the dependent variable. The estimates show a lower prevalence of land-use certificates
in areas historically under a strong state, for annual, perennial, and residential land. If
property rights are de facto secure for villagers due to strong communal enforcement, they
may demand fewer formal titles, or there may be social pressure to participate in community
norms rather than formal titling.
On a related note, column (7) examines whether the use of formal financial services is
more or less widespread in historically Dai Viet areas. Results are again consistent with less
active impersonal markets. Households in Dai Viet villages are 10 percentage points less
likely to make interest expenses on formal financial instruments, despite being wealthier.
This contrasts to Italy, where Guiso et al. (2004) find that in high-social-capital areas,
households are more likely to use checks, invest less in cash and more in stock, have higher
26

access to institutional credit, and make less use of informal credit. Market institutions
arrived in Vietnam recently, and may still be less e↵ective than non-market institutions in
places where social capital is high, and hence non-market arrangements work relatively well.
Finally column (8) considers informal sector employment, limiting to prime age males. In
contrast to the land titling and financial sector results, informal sector employment is lower
in Dai Viet villages. This is largely driven by the fact that there is less agriculture, which
makes up the bulk of the informal sector. These results are broadly robust to the choice of
bandwidth (Figure A-10), with the impact on land size becoming negative and significant
when wider bandwidths are used. The results are also robust to excluding Ho Chi Minh City
and Province and provincial capitals (Tables A-32 to A-34).
Vietnam has become increasingly globalized in recent years, and an additional hypothesis
is that Dai Viet villages are richer in part because they have been better at attracting foreign
investment. For example, a review by Nielsen et al. (2017) suggests that places with higher
human capital are often better able to attract FDI. However, using data from the 2011
Enterprise Census, Table A-35 shows that foreign sector employment is actually lower in
Dai Viet villages.63 This is consistent with historically tight-knit villages being more closed
towards outsiders, although other explanations could also be at play. In any case, a greater
prevalence of FDI in Dai Viet villages is unlikely to drive the results.

6

Conclusion

Using a regression discontinuity design across the Dai Viet-Khmer boundary, this study
documents that areas historically under a strong state have higher living standards today
and better economic outcomes over the past 150 years. Rich historical data reveal that in
villages with a strong historical state, citizens have been better able to organize for public
goods and redistribution through civil society and local government.
The strong historical state plausibly crowded in village-level collective action, and these
norms persisted long after the original state disappeared. While care must be taken with
external validity, this study provides support for the theory that the existence of a strong
historical state in East Asia - which encouraged local collective action - played a central role
in the 20th century divergence between this region and much of the developing world.

63

The Enterprise Census includes formal firms and identifies the location of the headquarters.

27

References
Acemoglu, D., D. Cantoni, S. Johnson, and J. A. Robinson (2011): “The Consequences of Radical
Reform: The French Revolution,” American Economic Review, 101, 3286–3307.
Acemoglu, D., C. Garcia-Jimeno, and J. A. Robinson (2015): “State Capacity and Economic Development: A Network Approach,” The American Economic Review, 105, 2364–2409.
Acemoglu, D., S. Johnson, and J. A. Robinson (2001): “The Colonial Origins of Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation,” The American Economic Review, 91, 1369–1401.
——— (2002): “Reversal of Fortune: Geography and Institutions in the Making of the Modern World Income
Distribution,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117, 1231–1294.
Acemoglu, D., T. Reed, and J. A. Robinson (2014): “Chiefs: Economic Development and Elite Control
of Civil Society in Sierra Leone,” Journal of Political Economy, 122, 319–368.
Acharya, A. (2013): Civilizations in Embrace: The Spread of Ideas and the Transformation of Power: India
and Southeast Asia in the Classical Age, vol. 2, Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies.
Alesina, A., R. Baqir, and W. Easterly (1999): “Public Goods and Ethnic Divisions,” The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 114, 1243–1284.
Alesina, A. and N. Fuchs-Schündeln (2007): “Goodbye Lenin (Or Not?): The E↵ect of Communism on
People,” American Economic Review, 97, 1507–1528.
Alesina, A. and P. Giuliano (2015): “Culture and Institutions,” Journal of Economic Literature, 53, 898–
944.
Alesina, A., P. Giuliano, and N. Nunn (2013): “On the Origins of Gender Roles: Women and the Plough,”
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128, 469–530.
Alesina, A. and E. La Ferrara (2005): “Ethnic Diversity and Economic Performance,” Journal of Economic
Literature, 43, 762–800.
Barnes, G. L. (2007): State Formation in Japan: Emergence of a 4th-century Ruling Elite, London, England
and New York, New York: Routledge, Taylor & Francis.
Bazzi, S. and M. Gudgeon (2016): “Local Government Proliferation, Diversity, and Conflict,” Working
paper, Boston University, https://www.bu.edu/econ/files/2016/04/BazziGudgeon_Manuscript.pdf.
Becker, S. O., K. Boeckh, C. Hainz, and L. Woessmann (2016): “The Empire Is Dead, Long Live the
Empire! Long-Run Persistence of Trust and Corruption in the Bureaucracy,” The Economic Journal, 126,
40–74.
Besley, T. (1995): “Nonmarket Institutions for Credit and Risk Sharing in Low-Income Countries,” The
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 9, 115–127.
Booth, A. (2007): “Night Watchman, Extractive, or Developmental States? Some Evidence from Late Colonial
South-East Asia,” The Economic History Review, 60, 241–266.
Bredo, W. (1968): Land Reform in Vietnam, Stanford Research Institute.
Briggs, L. P. (1947): “A Sketch of Cambodian History,” The Far Eastern Quarterly, 6, 345.
Bukowski, P. (2016): “How History Matters for Student Performance. Lessons from the Partitions of Poland,”
Working paper, Central European University, http://www.personal.ceu.hu/staff/repec/pdf/2015_3.
pdf.
Chandler, D. P. (1983): A History of Cambodia, Westview Press.

28

Chutintaranond, S. (1990): “”Mandala”, ”Segmentary State” and Politics of Centralisation in Medieval
Ayudhya,” Journal of the Siam Society, 78, 89–100.
Cœ dès, G. (1966): The Making of South East Asia, University of California Press.
Cotter, M. G. (1968): “Towards a Social History of the Vietnamese Southward Movement,” Journal of
Southeast Asian History, 9, 12–24.
Cotterell, A. (2014): A History of Southeast Asia, West Sussex, U.K.: Wiley Blackwell.
Deaton, A. (1997): The Analysis of Household Surveys: A Microeconometric Approach to Development Policy,
World Bank.
Dell, M. (2010): “The Persistent E↵ects of Peru’s Mining Mita,” Econometrica, 78, 1863–1903.
Dell, M. and P. Querubin (2016): “Nation Building Through Foreign Intervention: Evidence From Discontinuities in Military Strategies,” Working Paper 22395, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Demsetz, H. (1967): “Toward a Theory of Property Rights,” American Economic Review, 57, 347–359.
Dùc, T. H. and N. Tao (1972): Gia D̀inh Thành Thông Chı́, Nha Ván hóa, Phù Quóc-vu-khanh D̀ac-trách
Văn-hóa.
Easterly, W. and R. Levine (1997): “Africa’s Growth Tragedy: Policies and Ethnic Divisions,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112, 1203–1250.
Ebihara, M. (1984): “Social Organization in Sixteenth and Seventeenth Century Cambodia,” Journal of
Southeast Asian Studies, 15, 280–295.
Engelbert, T. (1994): “The Khmer in Southern Vietnam-Cambodians or Vietnamese?” Nationalism and
Ethnicity in Southeast Asia, 1, 155–196.
Evans, P. B. (1995): Embedded Autonomy: States and Industrial Transformation, Princeton University Press.
Fernández, R. and A. Fogli (2009): “Culture: An Empirical Investigation of Beliefs, Work, and Fertility,”
American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 1, 146–177.
Foster, G. M. (1965): “Peasant Society and the Image of Limited Good,” American Anthropologist, 67,
293–315.
Fukuyama, F. (1995): Trust: The Social Virtues and the Creation of Prosperity, Free Press.
Gelman, A. and G. Imbens (2014): “Why High-order Polynomials Should not be Used in Regression Discontinuity Designs,” Working Paper 20405, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Gennaioli, N. and I. Rainer (2007): “The Modern Impact of Precolonial Centralization in Africa,” Journal
of Economic Growth, 12, 185–234.
Giuliano, P. (2007): “Living Arrangements in Western Europe: Does Cultural Origin Matter?” Journal of
the European Economic Association, 5, 927–952.
Gouldner, A. W. (1980): The Two Marxisms: Contradictions and Anomalies in the Development of Theory,
Critical Social Studies, Macmillan.
Greif, A. (1994): “Cultural Beliefs and the Organization of Society: A Historical and Theoretical Reflection
on Collectivist and Individualist Societies,” Journal of Political Economy, 102, 912–950.
Greif, A. and G. Tabellini (2010): “Cultural and Institutional Bifurcation: China and Europe Compared,”
American Economic Review, 100, 135–140.

29

Grosjean, P. (2011): “The Weight of History on European Cultural Integration: A Gravity Approach,”
American Economic Review, 101, 504–508.
——— (2014): “A History of Violence: The Culture of Honor and Homicide in the US South,” Journal of the
European Economic Association, 12, 1285–1316.
Guiso, L., P. Sapienza, and L. Zingales (2004): “The Role of Social Capital in Financial Development,”
American Economic Review, 94, 526–556.
——— (2008): “Alfred Marshall Lecture: Social Capital as Good Culture,” Journal of the European Economic
Association, 6, 295–320.
——— (2016): “Long-Term Persistence,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 14, 1401–1436.
Haines, D. (1984): “Reflections of Kinship and Society Under Vietnam’s Le Dynasty,” Journal of Southeast
Asian Studies, 15, 307–314.
Hall, D. (1968): A History of South-East Asia, Macmillan and Company, Limited and St. Martin’s Press.
——— (1973): “The Integrity of Southeast Asian History,” Journal of Southeast Asian Studies, 4, 159–168.
Hall, K. R. (2011): A History of Early Southeast Asia: Maritime Trade and Social Development, 100-500,
Rowman & Littlefield Publishers.
Harding, A. (2001): “Comparative Law and Legal Transplantation in South East Asia: Making Sense of the
‘Nomic Din’,” in Adapting legal cultures, ed. by D. Nelken and J. Feest, Hart Publishing.
Hayami, Y. (1980): “Economic Approach to Village Community and Institutions,” Journal of Rural Development, 3, 27–49.
Hooker, M. B. (1978a): A Concise Legal History of South-East Asia, Clarendon Press and Oxford University
Press.
——— (1978b): “The Indian-Derived Law Texts of Southeast Asia,” The Journal of Asian Studies, 37, 201–219.
Hoover, D. R. (2000): “The Sources of Social Capital Reconsidered: Voluntary Associations, Advocacy and
the State,” in Social Structures, Social Capital, and Personal Freedom, ed. by D. McConkey and P. Lawler,
Praeger.
Jansen, M. B. (2000): China in the Tokugawa World, Harvard University Press.
Kang, D. C. (2010): “Hierarchy and Legitimacy in International Systems: The Tribute System in Early
Modern East Asia,” Security Studies, 19, 591–622.
Kang, D. C. and V. D. Cha (2010): East Asia Before the West. Five Centuries of Trade and Tribute,
Columbia University Press.
Kerkvliet, B. J. and D. G. Marr (2004): Beyond Hanoi: Local Government in Vietnam, Institute of
Southeast Asian Studies / Nordic Institute of Asian Studies.
Kulke, H. (1986): “Early and the Imperial Kingdoms in Southeast Asian History,” in Southeast Asia in the
9th to 14th Century, ed. by D. G. Marr and A. C. Milner, Institute of Southeast Asian Studies and Australian
National University, Research School of Pacific Studies.
Lehning, P. B. (1998): “Towards a Multicultural Civil Society: The Role of Social Capital and Democratic
Citizenship,” Government and Opposition, 33, 221–242.
Lewis, M. E. (2009): China’s Cosmopolitan Empire, Belknap Press and Harvard University Press.
——— (2011): China Between Empires: The Northern and Southern Dynasties, Harvard University Press.

30

Li, T. (1998): Nguyen Cochinchina: Southern Vietnam in the Seventeenth and Eighteenth Centuries, SEAP
Publications.
Lieberman, V. (1987): “Reinterpreting Burmese History,” Comparative Studies in Society and History, 29,
162.
——— (1993): “Local Integration and Eurasian Analogies: Structuring Southeast Asian History, c. 1350-c.
1830,” Modern Asian Studies, 27, 475–572.
——— (2003): Strange Parallels: Volume 1, Integration on the Mainland: Southeast Asia in Global Context,
c.800-1830, Cambridge University Press.
Liu, H. (2007): “Influence of China’s Imperial Examinations on Japan, Korea and Vietnam,” Frontiers of
History in China, 2, 493–512.
Lowes, S., N. Nunn, J. A. Robinson, and J. Weigel (2015): “The Evolution of Culture and Institutions:
Evidence from the Kuba Kingdom,” Working Paper 21798, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Luttmer, E. F. P. and M. Singhal (2011): “Culture, Context, and the Taste for Redistribution,” American
Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 3, 157–79.
Mabbett, I. W. (1977a): “The ‘Indianization’ of Southeast Asia : Reflections on the Historical Sources,”
Journal of Southeast Asian Studies, 8, 143–161.
——— (1977b): “Varas in Angkor and the Indian Caste System,” The Journal of Asian Studies, 36, 429–442.
——— (1978): “Kingship in Angkor,” Journal of the Siam Society, 66, 1–58.
Mabbett, I. W. and D. P. Chandler (1995): The Khmers, Oxford, U.K. and Cambridge, Massachusetts:
Blackwell Publishers.
Marr, D. G. (2004): “A Brief History of Local Government in Vietnam,” in Beyond Hanoi: Local Government
in Vietnam, ed. by B. J. T. Kerkvliet and D. G. Marr, Institute of Southeast Asian Studies / Nordic Institute
of Asian Studies.
Martinez-Bravo, M., G. Padró i Miquel, N. Qian, and Y. Yao (2012): “Elections in China,” Working
Paper 18101, National Bureau of Economic Research.
McHale, S. (2013): “Ethnicity, Violence, and Khmer-Vietnamese Relations: The Significance of the Lower
Mekong Delta, 1757-1954,” The Journal of Asian Studies, 72, 367–390.
Meyer, K. E. and H. V. Nguyen (2005): “Foreign Investment Strategies and Sub-National Institutions in
Emerging Markets: Evidence from Vietnam,” Journal of Management Studies, 42, 63–93.
Michalopoulos, S. and E. Papaioannou (2013): “Pre-Colonial Ethnic Institutions and Contemporary
African Development,” Econometrica, 81, 113–152.
Miguel, E. and G. Roland (2011): “The Long-Run Impact of Bombing Vietnam,” Journal of Development
Economics, 96, 1–15.
Montalvo, J. and M. Reynal-Querol (2005a): “Ethnic Diversity and Economic Development,” Journal
of Development Economics, 76, 293–323.
——— (2005b): “Ethnic Polarization, Potential Conflict, and Civil Wars,” American Economic Review, 95,
796–816.
Mus, P. (1949): “The Role of the Village in Vietnamese Politics,” Pacific A↵airs, 22, 265–272.
Nguyen, A. T. (1985): “The Vietnamese Monarchy under French Colonial Rule 1884-1945,” Modern Asian
Studies, 19, 147–162.

31

——— (2003): “Village Versus State: The Evolution of State-Local Relations in Vietnam Until 1945,” South
East Asian Studies, 41, 101–123.
Nguyen, T. D. (1999): The Mekong River and the Struggle for Indochina: Water, War, and Peace, Praeger.
Nielsen, B. B., C. G. Asmussen, and C. D. Weatherall (2017): “The Location Choice of Foreign Direct
Investments: Empirical Evidence and Methodological Challenges,” Journal of World Business, 52, 62 – 82.
Nunn, N. (2008): “The Long-Term E↵ects of Africa’s Slave Trades,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
123, 139–176.
Nunn, N. and L. Wantchekon (2011): “The Slave Trade and the Origins of Mistrust in Africa,” American
Economic Review, 101, 3221–3252.
Osborne, M. (1966): “History and Kingship in Contemporary Cambodia,” Journal of Southeast Asian History,
7, 1–14.
Osborne, M. E. (1969): The French presence in Cochinchina and Cambodia: Rule and Response (1859-1905),
Cornell University Press.
Oto-Peralı́as, D. and D. Romero-Ávila (2014): “The Distribution of Legal Traditions Around the World:
A Contribution to the Legal-Origins Theory,” Journal of Law and Economics, 57, 561–628.
Padro i Miquel, G., N. Qian, Y. Xu, and Y. Yao (2015): “Making Democracy Work: Culture, Social
Capital and Elections in China,” Working Paper 21058, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Palais, J. B. (1996): Confucian Statecraft and Korean Institutions: Yu Hyongwon and the Late Choson
Dynasty, Seattle, Washington: University of Washington Press.
Parthesius, R. (2010): Dutch Ships in Tropical Waters: The Development of the Dutch East India Company (VOC) Shipping Network in Asia 1595-1660, Amsterdam studies in the Dutch golden age, Amsterdam
University Press.
Pastor, J. (1997): “Land and Economy in Ancient Palestine,” Journal of Southeast Asian Studies, 1, 306.
Popkin, S. L. (1976): “Corporatism and Colonialism: The Political Economy of Rural Change in Vietnam,”
Comparative Politics, 431–464.
——— (1979): The Rational Peasant: The Political Economy of Rural Society in Vietnam.
Porter, G. (1993): Vietnam: The Politics of Bureaucratic Socialism, Cornell University Press.
Putnam, R. D., R. Leonardi, and R. Y. Nanetti (1994): Making democracy work: Civic traditions in
modern Italy, Princeton University Press.
Qian, N. (2012): “Village Governance in China,” in The Oxford Companion to the Economics of China, Oxford
University Press, USA.
Roland, G. (2012): “The Long-Run Weight of Communism or the Weight of Long-Run History?” in Economies
in Transition, Springer, 153–171.
Sahai, S. (1970): Les Institutions Politiques et l’Organisation Administrative du Cambodge Ancien (VIe-XIIIe
siècles), 75, Paris: École française d’Extréme-Orient Publications.
Satyanath, S., N. Voigtlaender, and H.-J. Voth (2013): “Bowling for Fascism: Social Capital and the
Rise of the Nazi Party,” Working Paper 19201, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Scott, J. C. (1977): The Moral Economy of the Peasant: Rebellion and Subsistence in Southeast Asia, Yale
University Press.
Skocpol, T. (1995): Protecting Soldiers and Mothers, Harvard University Press.

32

Spolaore, E. and R. Wacziarg (2013): “How Deep Are the Roots of Economic Development?” Journal of
Economic Literature, 51, 325–369.
Su Quan Trieu Nguyen, Q. and T. D. Pham (1992): Dai Nam Nhat Thong Chi, Nha Xuat Ban Thuan
Hoa.
Tabellini, G. (2008): “Presidential Address: Institutions and Culture,” Journal of the European Economic
Association, 6, 255–294.
——— (2010): “Culture and Institutions: Economic Development in the Regions of Europe,” Journal of the
European Economic Association, 8, 677–716.
Tambiah, S. J. (1977): “The Galactic Polity: The Structure of Traditional Kingdoms in Southeast Asia,”
Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 293, 69–97.
——— (2013): “The Galactic Polity in Southeast Asia,” HAU: Journal of Ethnographic Theory, 3, 503–534.
Tarling, N. (1999): The Cambridge History of Southeast Asia, Cambridge University Press.
Taylor, K. W. (2013): A History of the Vietnamese, Cambridge Concise Histories, Cambridge University
Press.
Thien, D. (2003): Vietnamese Supernaturalism: Views from the Southern Region, Taylor & Francis.
Vickery, M. (1996): “Mak Phœun : Histoire du Cambodge de la fin du XVIe au début du XVIIIe siècle,”
Bulletin de l’Ecole française d’Extrême-Orient, 83, 405–415.
Voigtländer, N. and H.-J. Voth (2012): “Persecution Perpetuated: The Medieval Origins of Anti-Semitic
Violence in Nazi Germany,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127, 1339–1392.
Wade, R. H. (1994): Village Republics: Economic Conditions for Collective Action in South India, International Center for Self-Governance, San Francisco: Institute for Contemporary Studies.
Whitmore, J. K. (1979): “Merit Subjects: China, Korea, Vietnam,” Ming Studies, 1979, 42–51.
Wolf, E. R. (1969): Peasant Wars of the Twentieth Century, University of Oklahoma Press.
Wolters, O. (1999): History, Culture and Region in Southeast Asian Perspectives, Southeast Asia Program
Publications, Cornell University.
Woodside, A. B. (1971): Vietnam and the Chinese Model: A Comparative Study of Vietnamese and Chinese
Government in the First Half of the Nineteenth Century, Harvard University Asia Center.
——— (1984): “Medieval Vietnam and Cambodia: A Comparative Comment,” Journal of Southeast Asian
Studies, 15, 315–319.
——— (2006): Lost Modernities : China , Vietnam , Korea and the Hazards of World, Harvard University
Press.
Wook, C. B. (2004): Southern Vietnam Under the Reign of Minh Mang (1820-1841): Central Policies and
Local Response, SEAP Publications.
Woolcock, M. and D. Narayan (2000): “Social Capital: Implications for Development Theory, Research,
and Policy,” World Bank Research Observer, 15, 225–49.
Yu, I. (2001): “The Changing Nature of the Red River Delta Villages During the Lê Period (1428-1788),”
Journal of Southeast Asian Studies, 32, 151–172.
Zottoli, B. A. (2011): “Reconceptualizing Southern Vietnamese History Form the 15th to 18th Centuries:
Competition Along the Coasts Form Guangdong to Cambodia,” Ph.D Dissertation, The University of Michigan, https://deepblue.lib.umich.edu/handle/2027.42/89821.

33

Figure 1: Dai Viet Historical Boundaries

Historical Boundaries
Conquest Date
Capture of Bo
1069 Chinh, Dia Ly,
Ma Linh
1306

Huyen Tran
marriage

1407 Ming boundary
1471

Annexation of
Quang Nam

1611

Conquest of
Phu Yen

1651

Defeat of Po
Nraup

U

1693 Fall of Champa
1698

Establishment
of Gia Dinh

1833

1:7,000,000

Org. under
Minh-Mang

0

100

200

400 Kilometers

Sources: Dùc and Tao (1972); Su Quan Trieu Nguyen and Pham (1992).

34

Figure 2: Robustness of Household Consumption Estimates
Full Border

No Rivers

●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●
●●●●●●●
●●●●●
●●●●
●●●
●●●●
●●●●●
●●●
●●●
●●●
●●
●
●
●●●

●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●
●●●●●
●●●●
●●●
●●●
●●
●●
●●●●
●●●●
●
●
●
●●●●
●●
●●
●●●●●

0.6

0.2

Lin. Lat−Lon

0.4

0.0

0.6

Lin. Dist. to Bnd.

●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●
●●●●●●●●●●●
●●●●●●
●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●
●●●●
●●●●●●●●●●●●
●●●●
●●●●●●●
●●●
●●●●●
●●●
●●●●
●●●
●●●●
●●●
●●●●
●●●●●●●●●●●●●
●●●●●●●●●●
●●●
●●●●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●●●●●●●●
●●●●●●●●●●●
●●●●●●●
0.2
0.4

0.0

0.6

Equivalent Consumption

0.2

●●●●●●●●●●●
●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●
●●●●●●●●●
●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●
●●●●●
●●●●●●●●●●●●●●
●●●●
●●●●●●●
●●●
●●●●●
●●●
●●●●
●●●
●●●●
●●●
●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●
●●●●●●●●●●●●●
●●●
●●●
●●●●●●
●●●●●●
●
●
●●●●●●●●●
●●●●●●●

0.0

Lin. Dist. to Bnd., Lat−Lon

0.4

0.6

●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●
●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●
●●●●●●●●
●●●●●●
●●●●●●●●●
●●●●●●●●●●●●
●●●●
●●●●●●
●●●●●

●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●
●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●
●●●●●●●●
●●●●●●
●●●●
●●●●
●●●●●
●●●●●
●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●
●●●●●●
●●●●●

0.2

Quad. Lat−Lon

0.4

0.0

0.6

●●●●
●

●●
●●●●●●●●●●●●
●●●●●●●●●●●●
●●●●●●●
●●●●●●●●●●●
●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●
●●
●
●

0.2

●

●●
●●●●●●●●●●●●●●

●

●●●
●

●

●●●●●●
●●●●●●●●●
●●●●●●●
●●●●●●
●●●●●
●●●●●●
●●●●●●●●
●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●
●●●

●

●
●
●

●
●●●●●●●
●●●●●●●●

●

Quad. Dist. to Bnd.

0.4

0.0

0.4

●●●●●
0.2

●

●
●●●●●
●●●●●
●●●●●●

●

●

●●●●●●
●●●●●
●●●
●●
●●●●●●●
●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●
●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●
●●●●
●

●

●
●●●●●●
●●●●
●●
●●●●

●

●

●●●●
●●●●●●●●●●●●●●
●●●●●●●●●●●
●●●●●
●●
●●●●●●●
●●●●●●●●
●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●

0.0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100 10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

bw

Notes: Each sub-figure plots the point estimates of (vertical axis) from equation (1) for di↵erent
bandwidth values between 10-100 kilometers in 1 km increments (horizontal axis). Thin lines stemming
from the point estimates show 95% confidence intervals while the slightly thicker lines show 90%
confidence intervals. The panels in di↵erent rows correspond to di↵erent polynomial functions for
geographic location. The estimates in the first column are based on the full border while those in the
second column exclude households closest to boundary segments that coincide with a river.

35

90

Quad. Dist. to Bnd., Lat−Lon

0.6

100

Figure 3: RD graphs
(a) Household Consumption

(b) Economic LCA Index
econ_p1

●
●
●

●

●

●
●

●

●

11.5

●
●
●●●

●

●

11.5

●

●

●
●

●

●

●
●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●●

●
●
● ●
●

10.5

●

●

●

●

●

●

10.5

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●
●

●

11.0

●

●

●

●

● ●
●
●
●●

●

●
●

●

●

●
●
●
●●

●●

● ●

●

●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●

●

●
●
●

●

●

●

●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
● ●
●
● ●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●● ●● ●
●
●
● ●
●●● ●●
●●
●
● ● ●●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
● ● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ● ● ●●
●
●
● ●
●● ●
●●
●
●
●
● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●●
●
● ● ● ●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●● ●
●●
● ● ● ●●●●●●
●●
●
●
●
●●
● ●●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●● ●
●
● ●
● ●
●●●●
●
●
●●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●●●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●●
●
●
●●●
● ● ●●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
● ● ●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●●

●

●
●

●
●

−0.4

●

●

−0.2

●

0.0

●

0.2

●

●●

●
●

●

●

●
●

11.0

●
●

●
●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
● ●

●
● ●●
●●
●
●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●
●

●
●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●●
●
●●
● ●
●

●

●
●

●

●

●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
● ●●
● ● ●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
● ● ●●●●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
● ●●●●●
●●
●● ●
●
● ●
●●
●●
●
●
●
● ●
●●
●
●
● ● ● ● ●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●●●
●
●● ●
● ● ●
●
●● ●●● ● ●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●● ●
●
●●
● ● ●●●●●
●
● ●● ●
●
●●●●● ●
●
●
●
●● ●
●●
●
●●●●
●
●●
●
●
● ●●
●●
●
●● ●●
●
● ● ● ●●
● ● ●●
●
●● ●
●●
●●
●
● ●
●●
●
● ●●● ●●
●●
●
●
●●●●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
● ●● ● ●
●●
●●●
●
●●
●●
●● ●
● ●●
●
●●
● ● ● ●
●● ●● ●
●● ●
●
●●●
●
● ● ● ● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●● ● ●
●
●
● ●
● ● ● ●
●●
●
●
●●
● ● ● ●●●
●
●●
●
●●
● ●● ● ●
●●●●
● ●●●
●●●●●
● ●
●● ●●●●● ●
●●
●
●●
● ●
●●
●
● ●● ●
●
●●
●
●
●● ●
●
●●
●●●●
●●
● ●
● ●●
● ● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●●● ●●
●
●
●●●● ● ● ● ●●●● ●●
●●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
● ●
●●
●
●
● ●
●
● ● ● ● ● ●●
●
●
●
● ●●●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●●
●
●
●● ●
●
●● ●
● ● ● ●● ● ●●● ● ●●
●●
●●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●●
● ● ● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●● ● ●
●
●
●● ● ●
● ●
●●●●
●●
●
●●
●●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●●
●●●
●
●●
●● ●
●●
●
●
●●
●
● ●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●●
● ●● ●●●●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●●
●●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●●●●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●● ● ● ●
● ●
●
●● ●
●●● ●●●
●
●
●●●
●
● ●●
●● ● ●
●●●●●●●
●
●
●
● ● ●● ●
●
●●●
●●
●●
●●● ● ●
● ●●
●
●●
●
●●
●●●●●
● ●● ● ● ●● ●
●● ●● ● ● ● ●
●●
●
●
●●
● ●
●● ●
● ●●
●
●●
● ●● ● ● ●
● ● ●● ●
●
●
● ● ●● ● ●
●
● ● ●● ● ●
●● ●●●●● ●● ●●
●
● ● ● ● ●● ● ●
●
● ●●●● ● ●
●●●● ● ●
●●●●● ● ● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●● ●
●
● ●
● ● ●●
●●● ● ●●
● ● ●●
●●
● ●●●
●
●
●●●
● ●●● ● ● ● ●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●●
●●
● ● ●●●●●
●● ●
●
●●
●
●
● ●
●
● ●●
●
● ●● ● ●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●● ●● ●●
●
●
● ●● ● ● ●
● ●
●● ● ●
●
●●
●
●
● ● ● ● ● ●●
●
●●● ● ●
●
●
●
● ●●●●● ●
● ● ●● ●
● ● ● ● ●●
●
●● ● ●●●●
●
● ● ● ●● ● ● ● ●● ● ● ● ●
●
●●●
● ● ●●
● ●●●
●
●
●
● ●● ●●●
● ●●● ●●
●
●
● ● ●●●●
● ● ●●
●
● ● ● ● ● ● ●● ● ●●● ● ●●● ●●
●
● ●
● ●
● ●● ● ●●●
●● ●●
● ●
●
● ●● ●●●●● ●
● ●●●
●
● ●●
●
● ●●
●
● ●●
●
● ●● ●●● ● ● ●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
● ●● ●
●
●● ● ● ●
●
●
●●
●●
●● ●● ●● ●●● ● ●
●●
●
●
● ●● ●●
●
●
●
●● ● ●
●
● ● ●●●
●
● ●●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
● ● ●
● ●●●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ● ● ●
●
● ● ●●
● ● ●
●
● ●●
●
●
● ●
● ●●
●
●●
● ●
● ●●
● ●●
● ● ● ● ●● ●●●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
● ● ●●● ● ● ●● ● ●●●●●
●●
●●
● ●
●●
●●●
●●
●●●
●● ●● ● ● ●
●
● ●●
●●●● ● ●●●
● ●
●●
● ● ●●●● ●●● ●●●●
● ●
●●●
●● ●● ● ●●● ● ● ● ● ●
● ● ●●
●
●● ●●
● ●● ●
●●●●●●
● ●
●
● ● ●● ●●
●
●
●●
● ●●●●● ●
●● ● ● ●●
●
●
●
●●
● ●●
●●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●

●● ●

●
●

●
●● ●
● ●

●

0.4
0.6
0.8

0.4
0.6
106.5

107.0

106.5

(c) Civil Society LCA Index

107.0

(d) Public Health Care Provision LCA Index

soccap_p1

health_p1

●
●

●
●

●

●

●
●
●●●

●
●
●●●

11.5

11.5

●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
● ●

●
● ●●
●●
●
●

●

●

●
●
●
●
●

● ●
●
●
●●

●
●
●●

●

●●

11.0

10.5

●
●

●
●
●

●

●●

●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●

●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
● ●

●
● ●●
●●
●
●

●

●
●

●
●
●
●

●●
●
●●
● ●
●

●

●

●
●

●

●
●
●

●

●

●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
● ●●
● ● ●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
● ● ●●●●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
● ●●●●●
●●
●● ●
●
● ●
●●
●●
●
●
●
● ●
●●
●
●
● ● ● ● ●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●●●
●
●● ●
● ● ●
●
●● ●●● ● ●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●● ●
●
●●
● ● ●●●●●
●
● ●● ●
●
●●●●● ●
●
● ●
●
●● ●
●●
●
●●●●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●● ●●
● ●● ●
● ● ● ●●
● ● ●●
●
●● ●
●●
●●
●
●●
●
●
● ●●● ●●
●●
●
●
●●●●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
● ●● ● ●
●●
●●●
●
●●
●●
●● ●
● ●●
●
●●
● ● ● ●
●● ●● ●
●● ●
●
●●●
●
● ● ● ● ● ●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
● ●
●
●
●
●●
● ● ● ●●●
●
●●
●
●●
● ●● ● ●
●●●●
● ●●●
●●●●●
● ●
●● ●●●●● ●
●●
●
●●
● ●
●●
●
● ●● ●
●
●●
●
●
●● ●
●
●●
●●●●
●●
● ●
● ●●
● ● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●●● ●●
●
●
●●●● ● ● ● ●●●● ●●
●●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
● ●
●●
●
●
● ●
●
● ● ● ● ● ●●
●
●
●
● ●●●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●●
●
●
●● ●
●
●● ●
● ● ● ●● ● ●●● ● ●●
●●
●●
● ●
●
● ●
●●
● ●●●
●
● ● ●●●●●●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●● ● ●
●
●
●● ● ●
● ●
●●●●
●●
●
●●
●●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●●
●●●
●
●●
●● ●
●●
●
●
●●
●
● ●
●●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●● ●●●●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
● ● ● ●●●
● ●●●
●●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●●
●●
●
●
●●● ●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●●●●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●● ● ● ●
● ●
●
●● ●
●●● ●●●
●
●
●●●
●
● ●●
●● ● ●
●●●●●●●
●
●
●
● ● ●● ●
●
●●●
●●
●●
●●● ● ●
● ●●
●
●●
●
●●
●●●●●
● ●● ● ● ●● ●
●● ●● ● ● ● ●
●●
●
●
●●
● ●
●● ●
● ●●
●
●●
● ●● ● ● ●
● ● ●● ●
●
●
● ● ●● ● ●
●
● ● ●● ● ●
●● ●●●●● ●● ●●
●
● ● ● ● ●● ● ●
●
● ●●●● ● ●
●●●● ● ●
●●●●● ● ● ●●
●
●
●●●●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●● ●
●●●
● ●● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●
●●●
●
●
●●●
● ●● ● ● ● ● ●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●●
●●
● ● ●●●●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
● ●
● ●●
●
●● ●
●
● ●
●
●
● ● ●● ● ● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●● ● ● ●
● ●
● ●
●● ● ●
●
●●
●
●
● ● ● ● ● ●●
●
●●● ● ●
●
●
●
● ●●●●● ●
● ● ●● ●
● ● ● ● ●●
●
●● ● ●●●●
●
● ● ● ●● ● ● ● ●● ● ● ● ●
●
●●●
● ● ●●
● ●●●
●
●
●
● ●● ●●●
● ●●● ●●
●
●
● ● ●●●●
● ● ●●
●
● ● ● ● ● ● ●● ● ●●● ● ●●● ●●
●
● ●
● ●
● ●● ● ●●●
●● ●●
● ●
●
● ●● ●●●●● ●
●
● ●●●
● ●●
●
● ●●
●
● ●●
●
● ●● ●●● ● ● ●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
● ●● ●
●
●● ● ● ●
●
●
●●
●●
●● ●● ●● ●●● ● ●
●●
●
●
● ●● ●●
●
●
●
●● ● ●
●
● ● ●●●
●
● ●●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
● ● ●
● ●●●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
● ● ●●
●● ● ● ● ● ●
●
● ●●
●
● ●
● ●●
●
●●
● ●
● ●●
● ●●
● ● ● ● ●● ●●●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
● ● ●●● ● ● ●● ● ●●●●●
●●
●●
● ●
●●
●●●
●●
●●●
●● ●● ● ● ●
●
● ●●
●●●● ● ●●●
● ●
●●
● ● ●●●● ●●● ●●●●
● ●
●●●
●● ●● ● ●●● ● ● ● ● ●
● ● ●●
●
●● ●●
● ●● ●
●●●●●●
● ●
●
● ● ●● ●●
●
●
●●
● ●●●●● ●
●● ● ● ●●
●
●
●
●●
● ●●
●●
●
●
●

●
●

●
●

●● ●

● ●
●
●
●●
●

11.0

●
●
●

●
●
●
●●

●●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●

●
●● ●
● ●

●

10.5

0.5
0.6
0.7

●

●●

●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●

●●
●
●●
● ●
●

●

●
●

●

●

●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
● ●●
● ● ●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
● ● ●●●●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
● ●●●●●
●●
●● ●
●
● ●
●●
●●
●
●
●
● ●
●●
●
●
● ● ● ● ●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●●●
●
●● ●
● ● ●
●
●● ●●● ● ●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●● ●
●
●●
● ● ●●●●●
●
● ●● ●
●
●●●●● ●
●
● ●
●
●● ●
●●
●
●●●●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●● ●●
● ●● ●
● ● ● ●●
● ● ●●
●
●● ●
●●
●●
●
●●
●
●
● ●●● ●●
●●
●
●
●●●●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
● ●● ● ●
●●
●●●
●
●●
●●
●● ●
● ●●
●
●●
● ● ● ●
●● ●● ●
●● ●
●
●●●
●
● ● ● ● ● ●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
● ●
●
●
●
●●
● ● ● ●●●
●
●●
●
●●
● ●● ● ●
●●●●
● ●●●
●●●●●
● ●
●● ●●●●● ●
●●
●
●●
● ●
●●
●
● ●● ●
●
●●
●
●
●● ●
●
●●
●●●●
●●
● ●
● ●●
● ● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●●● ●●
●
●
●●●● ● ● ● ●●●● ●●
●●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
● ●
●●
●
●
● ●
●
● ● ● ● ● ●●
●
●
●
● ●●●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●●
●
●
●● ●
●
●● ●
● ● ● ●● ● ●●● ● ●●
●●
●●
● ●
●
● ●
●●
● ●●●
●
● ● ●●●●●●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●● ● ●
●
●
●● ● ●
● ●
●●●●
●●
●
●●
●●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●●
●●●
●
●●
●● ●
●●
●
●
●●
●
● ●
●●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●● ●●●●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
● ● ● ●●●
● ●●●
●●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●●
●●
●
●
●●● ●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●●●●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●● ● ● ●
● ●
●
●● ●
●●● ●●●
●
●
●●●
●
● ●●
●● ● ●
●●●●●●●
●
●
●
● ● ●● ●
●
●●●
●●
●●
●●● ● ●
● ●●
●
●●
●
●●
●●●●●
● ●● ● ● ●● ●
●● ●● ● ● ● ●
●●
●
●
●●
● ●
●● ●
● ●●
●
●●
● ●● ● ● ●
● ● ●● ●
●
●
● ● ●● ● ●
●
● ● ●● ● ●
●● ●●●●● ●● ●●
●
● ● ● ● ●● ● ●
●
● ●●●● ● ●
●●●● ● ●
●●●●● ● ● ●●
●
●
●●●●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●● ●
●●●
● ●● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●
●●●
●
●
●●●
● ●● ● ● ● ● ●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●●
●●
● ● ●●●●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
● ●
● ●●
●
●● ●
●
● ●
●
●
● ● ●● ● ● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●● ● ● ●
● ●
● ●
●● ● ●
●
●●
●
●
● ● ● ● ● ●●
●
●●● ● ●
●
●
●
● ●●●●● ●
● ● ●● ●
● ● ● ● ●●
●
●● ● ●●●●
●
● ● ● ●● ● ● ● ●● ● ● ● ●
●
●●●
● ● ●●
● ●●●
●
●
●
● ●● ●●●
● ●●● ●●
●
●
● ● ●●●●
● ● ●●
●
● ● ● ● ● ● ●● ● ●●● ● ●●● ●●
●
● ●
● ●
● ●● ● ●●●
●● ●●
● ●
●
● ●● ●●●●● ●
●
● ●●●
● ●●
●
● ●●
●
● ●●
●
● ●● ●●● ● ● ●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
● ●● ●
●
●● ● ● ●
●
●
●●
●●
●● ●● ●● ●●● ● ●
●●
●
●
● ●● ●●
●
●
●
●● ● ●
●
● ● ●●●
●
● ●●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
● ● ●
● ●●●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
● ● ●●
●● ● ● ● ● ●
●
● ●●
●
● ●
● ●●
●
●●
● ●
● ●●
● ●●
● ● ● ● ●● ●●●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
● ● ●●● ● ● ●● ● ●●●●●
●●
●●
● ●
●●
●●●
●●
●●●
●● ●● ● ● ●
●
● ●●
●●●● ● ●●●
● ●
●●
● ● ●●●● ●●● ●●●●
● ●
●●●
●● ●● ● ●●● ● ● ● ● ●
● ● ●●
●
●● ●●
● ●● ●
●●●●●●
● ●
●
● ● ●● ●●
●
●
●●
● ●●●●● ●
●● ● ● ●●
●
●
●
●●
● ●●
●●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●

●● ●

●
●

●
●● ●
● ●

●

0.4
0.6

0.8

0.8

0.9

106.5

107.0

106.5

(e) Household Donates to Charity

107.0

(f) Years of Schooling

cont_fund

years_schooling

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

11.5

●
●

●

11.5

●

●

●

●

●

●
●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●
●●

●
●
● ●

●
●
●

●
●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●
●

●

●
●

●

●
●●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

107.0

●

●

●

−0.3
−0.2
−0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2

●

●

●

●

●
●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●
●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●
●

●

●

●

●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
● ●● ●● ●
● ● ●● ● ● ●
●● ● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ● ● ●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●●
● ●
●
● ●
● ●● ●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●●
●●
●
● ● ● ●●●●●● ●●●● ●
● ●
●
● ●●
● ●●●●●●
●
● ●
● ● ●●● ●
●
● ●
●
●●
● ● ●
●
●●● ●
● ●
●
●
●
●●
●●●
●●●
● ●●
●●●●
●●
●
●●
●●●
● ●
●●●●●
●●●●●●●
● ● ●●●●
●●
●● ● ●● ●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●
● ●

●

106.5

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

10.5

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

11.0

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
● ●● ●● ●
● ● ●● ● ● ●
●● ● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ● ● ●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●●
● ●
●
● ●
● ●● ●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●●
●●
●
● ● ● ●●●●●● ●●●● ●
● ●
●
● ●●
● ●●●●●●
●
● ●
● ● ●●● ●
●
● ●
●
●●
● ● ●
●
●●● ●
● ●
●
●
●
●●
●●●
●●●
● ●●
●●●●
●●
●
●●
●●●
● ●
●●●●●
●●●●●●●
● ● ●●●●
●●
●● ● ●● ●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

10.5

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●
●

11.0

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●
●

●

−2

●

−1

●
●

0
1

106.5

107.0

Notes: Longitude is on the x-axis, latitude is on the y-axis, and the data value is shown using an
evenly-spaced monochromatic color scale. The background shows predicted values, for a finely spaced
grid of longitude-latitude coordinates, from a regression of the outcome variable under consideration
using equation (1).

Table 1: Comparing Dai Viet and Khmer Kingdoms in Precolonial Vietnam
Dai Viet

Khmer

Colonial outpost of China (111
BCE-939 CE)

Indic patron-client statea

Maintained bureaucratic Chinese
government system since independenceb

Accelerated decline after invasion
by Siam (1430); weak control of
peripheryc

Centralized state; impersonal
centralized bureaucracy under
dynastic court; uniform territorial administrationd

Decentralized state; personalistic rule through court; semiindependent provincial rulee

Institutionalized role of village
chiefs & village councils (elected
since 1461)f

Personalistic political appointments & land distributiong

Bureaucratic control of local taxation, military recruitmenth

Temple-based public finance systemi

a

Lieberman, 2003
Woodside, 1971
c
Coedes, 1966; Tarling, 1999
d
Lieberman, 2003
e
Woodside, 1971; Tarling, 1999
f
Yu, 2001
g
Osborne, 1969; Chandler, 1983
h
Woodside, 1971; Yu, 2001
i
Tarling, 1999; Hall, 2010
b

37

Table 2: Balance Checks

Dai Viet
Obs
Clusters
Mean

Elev.
(1)
-1.562
(10.027)
120
120
51.39

Slope
(2)
0.356
(0.596)
120
120
2.59

Temp.
(3)
0.052
(0.053)
120
120
26.65

Dependent variable is:
Precip. Rice Suit. Flow Accum.
(4)
(5)
(6)
2.084
0.371
-1.758
(1.206)
(0.611)
(1.483)
120
119
120
120
119
120
168.34
27.28
0.66

Km Rivers
(7)
-1.195
(2.666)
120
120
17.01

The unit of analysis is the grid cell. All regressions include a linear RD polynomial in latitude
and longitude, a control for distance to Ho Chi Minh City, and boundary segment FE. Robust
standard errors are reported in parentheses.

Table 3: Contemporary Household Consumption

Dai Viet
Obs
Clusters

Dependent variable is log household expenditure. Specification is:
Dist.
Lat-Lon
No
No
No
Consist.
Trim
Lat-Lon
Bnd.
& Dist.
Urban
HCM
Prov.
No
Only
Prov.
For
Polynomial
HCMC
Prov.
Cap.
River Bnd.
FE
Migr.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
0.331
0.259
0.280
0.344
0.322
0.329
0.311
0.340
0.405
0.281
(0.054) (0.059) (0.059) (0.055) (0.076) (0.059) (0.065) (0.084) (0.063) (0.050)
4,319
4,319
4,319
3,483
2,565
2,866
3,597
722
4,319
4,240
450
450
450
362
258
312
374
76
450
450

25 to
100
Km
(11)
0.329
(0.085)
6,789
670

All
SVN
(12)
0.351
(0.026)
25,617
2581

The unit of analysis is the household. Columns (1) and (3) through (11) include a linear polynomial in latitude and longitude, and
columns (2) and (3) include a linear polynomial in distance to the boundary. All columns include a control for distance to Ho Chi
Minh City, demographic controls for the number of infants, children, and adults in the household, and year fixed e↵ects. Columns
(1) through (11) include boundary segment fixed e↵ects, and column (9) includes consistent province fixed e↵ects. Robust standard
errors, clustered at the village level, are reported in parentheses.

Table 4: Economic Outcomes: Colonial Period

Dai Viet
Obs
Clusters
Mean

Telegraph
Density
1878
1901
(1)
(2)
0.013
0.061
(0.006) (0.032)
691
691
691
691
0.01
0.17

Military
Post
1878
(3)
-0.055
(0.025)
691
691
0.03

Dependent variable is:
Rail/Road Motor Road
Rail
Density
Density
Density
1878
1910
1910
(4)
(5)
(6)
-0.011
0.058
0.036
(0.031)
(0.037)
(0.021)
691
691
691
691
691
691
0.19
0.42
0.09

Paved
Road Dens.
1926
(7)
0.121
(0.043)
691
691
0.43

Rail
Density
1926
(8)
0.007
(0.016)
691
691
0.06

The unit of analysis is the village. All regressions include a linear RD polynomial in latitude and longitude, a control for distance to Ho Chi Minh City, and boundary segment fixed e↵ects. Robust standard
errors are reported in parentheses.

Table 5: Economic Outcomes: South Vietnamese Period

Dai Viet
Obs
Clusters
Mean

Log
Family
Income
(1)
0.156
(0.041)
5,926
172
9.72

Econ
LCA
(2)
0.163
(0.055)
2,285
392
0.82

Non-rice
Food
Avail.
(3)
0.279
(0.060)
388
388
0.71

Dependent variable is:
Manuf.
Surplus
Households
Goods
Goods
Require
Avail. Produced
Assist.
(4)
(5)
(6)
0.196
0.184
-0.075
(0.065)
(0.052)
(0.038)
388
388
2,330
388
388
397
0.63
0.44
0.61

% HH
Access
Vehic.
(7)
0.143
(0.020)
2,332
396
0.34

Land
Unfarmed
Bad Sec.
(8)
0.009
(0.047)
330
330
0.26

Pop
Growth
(9)
-0.004
(0.006)
2,276
396
0.01

The unit of analysis is the household, hamlet, or village. All regressions include a linear RD polynomial in
latitude and longitude, a control for distance to Ho Chi Minh City, and boundary segment fixed e↵ects. Robust standard errors, clustered at the village level, are reported in parentheses.

Table 6: Civil Society

Dai Viet
Obs
Clusters
Mean

Civil
Society
LCA
(1)
0.175
(0.035)
2,285
392
0.76

% Households
Particpate in
Civic Org Econ. Train.
(2)
(3)
0.262
0.211
(0.027)
(0.027)
2,325
2,348
397
399
0.37
0.22

% HH
Active
in PSDF
(4)
0.077
(0.028)
2,330
397
0.62

Self-Dev.
Project
Underway
(5)
0.099
(0.024)
388
388
0.83

Dependent
Council
Discusses
Griev.
(6)
-0.011
(0.020)
384
384
0.93

variable is:
Org.
% HH
Youth
Attend
Activ. Govt. Mtgs.
(7)
(8)
-0.036
0.104
(0.033)
(0.028)
388
2,331
388
397
0.78
0.37

RD
Cadre in
Hamlet
(9)
0.009
(0.030)
2,337
397
0.76

% HH
Part.
RD Cadre
(10)
0.174
(0.035)
2,314
396
0.52

Households Civ. Soc.
Require
Provides
Assistance
(11)
(12)
-0.075
0.165
(0.038)
(0.042)
2,330
2,206
397
388
0.61
0.24

The unit of analysis is the hamlet or village. All regressions include a linear RD polynomial in latitude and longitude, a control for distance to Ho Chi Minh City,
and boundary segment fixed e↵ects. Robust standard errors, clustered at the village level, are reported in parentheses.

Table 7: Local Administration

Dai Viet
Obs
Clusters
Mean

Local
Admin.
LCA
(1)
0.039
(0.017)
2,285
392
0.98

Govt.
Syst.
Taxes
(2)
0.060
(0.035)
388
388
0.84

Vilg.
Comm.
Filled
(3)
0.062
(0.028)
388
388
0.87

Vilg.
Chief
(4)
0.057
(0.033)
388
388
0.93

Dependent variable is:
Hamlet
Police
Chief
Chief
Regularly
Controls
Present
RD Cadre
(5)
(6)
(7)
0.036
0.166
0.081
(0.024)
(0.048)
(0.020)
2,317
2,339
382
396
397
382
0.92
0.56
0.88

Govt.
Provides
Assist.
(8)
0.141
(0.048)
2,221
390
0.30

Lack
Prov. Tech.
Assist.
(9)
0.012
(0.030)
387
387
0.18

Tech.
Pers.
Visit
(10)
0.003
(0.048)
386
386
0.53

Prov. Land
A↵airs
Visit
(11)
0.001
(0.055)
308
308
0.72

The unit of analysis is the hamlet or village. All regressions include a linear RD polynomial in latitude and longitude, a control for distance to Ho Chi Minh City, and boundary segment fixed e↵ects. Robust standard errors, clustered at the village level, are reported in
parentheses.

Table 8: Public Goods

Dai Viet
Obs
Clusters
Mean

Health
Care
LCA
(1)
0.140
(0.043)
2,285
392
0.86

Govt.
Med. Serv.
Avail.
(2)
0.204
(0.037)
2,339
397
0.39

Health
Wkrs. Visit
Reg.
(3)
0.339
(0.042)
2,336
397
0.47

Health
Mat.
Clinic
in Village
(4)
(5)
0.140
0.022
(0.050) (0.067)
388
388
388
388
0.79
0.61

Dependent variable is:
Primary
Educ.
School
LCA
Access. Completion
(6)
(7)
(8)
0.052
0.057
0.089
(0.044) (0.022)
(0.031)
2,285
2,336
388
392
396
388
0.82
0.90
0.61

Secondary
School
In Vilg. Attend.
(9)
(10)
0.085
0.030
(0.059) (0.013)
388
388
388
388
0.35
0.18

Attend.
Restr.
by Sec.
(11)
-0.018
(0.013)
2,333
396
0.02

Law
Enforced
Day/Night
(12)
0.215
(0.046)
2,333
397
0.79

The unit of analysis is the hamlet or village. All regressions include a linear RD polynomial in latitude and longitude, a control for distance to Ho
Chi Minh City, and boundary segment fixed e↵ects. Robust standard errors, clustered at the village level, are reported in parentheses.

Table 9: Public Opinion

Dai Viet
Obs
Clusters
Mean

Gvt.
Responsive
Citizens
(1)
0.098
(0.044)
2,779
190
0.37

Local
Officials
Successful
(2)
0.202
(0.075)
3,487
183
0.52

Knows Vilg
Admin.
Struct. Well
(3)
0.119
(0.044)
1,457
89
0.22

Dependent variable is:
LTT
Natl. Gvt.
Fairly
Performs Man. Econ.
Administ.
Poorly
Poorly
(4)
(5)
(6)
0.350
0.110
0.087
(0.075)
(0.040)
(0.040)
999
2,811
5,778
101
182
215
0.57
0.19
0.31

People
Respons.
Comm. Life
(7)
0.271
(0.075)
879
106
0.18

Active in
Interest
Group
(8)
0.395
(0.146)
243
35
0.18

People
Decide
SDP
(9)
0.222
(0.052)
353
53
0.23

The unit of analysis is the individual. All regressions include a linear RD polynomial in latitude and longitude, a control for
distance to Ho Chi Minh City, and boundary segment fixed e↵ects. Robust standard errors, clustered at the village level, are
reported in parentheses.

Table 10: Current Outcomes

Dai Viet
Obs
Clusters
Mean

Contributed
to Charity
Fund
(1)
0.122
(0.035)
5,889
450
0.70

Dependent variable is:
Share
Years Schooling
Communes
Cohort
Lower Sec.
> 25
25-40
40-60
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
0.292
0.950
0.899
0.989
(0.069)
(0.195) (0.192) (0.237)
124
42,189 17,985 17,273
124
453
452
453
0.78
7.45
8.41
7.67

>60
(6)
0.982
(0.232)
6,931
442
4.38

The unit of analysis is the household, district, or individual. All columns include a linear RD polynomial in latitude and longitude, a control for distance
to Ho Chi Minh City, and boundary segment fixed e↵ects. Columns (1) and
(3) through (6) include year fixed e↵ects. Robust standard errors, clustered
at the village level, are reported in parentheses.

Table 11: Additional Mechanisms - The Vietnam War

Dai Viet
Obs
Clusters
Mean

Security
LCA
(1)
0.003
(0.043)
2,285
392
0.80

VC
Forces
Present
(2)
-0.049
(0.035)
2,335
398
0.15

VC
Base
Nearby
(3)
-0.035
(0.052)
390
390
0.49

Vilg.
Guerr.
Squad
(4)
0.065
(0.038)
390
390
0.20

Dependent variable is:
VC
VC
Friendly
Main
Infra
VC
Forces
Squad Activity Taxation Nearby
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
-0.102
0.023
-0.014
-0.024
(0.039) (0.032)
(0.016)
(0.037)
390
2,339
389
389
390
398
389
389
0.23
0.09
0.07
0.49

Air/Art.
Strke
Nearby
(9)
-0.040
(0.031)
388
388
0.13

U..S.
SVN
Initiated
Attack
(10)
(11)
-0.000
-0.109
(0.001) (0.024)
2,358
2,358
400
400
0.00
0.71

Territ.
Forces
Present
(12)
-0.015
(0.026)
2,348
399
0.24

The unit of analysis is the hamlet or village. All regressions include a linear RD polynomial in latitude and longitude, a control for
distance to Ho Chi Minh City, and boundary segment fixed e↵ects. Robust standard errors, clustered at the village level, are reported
in parentheses.

Table 12: Additional Mechanisms - Land and Markets

Dai Viet
Obs
Clusters
Mean

Agric.
H.H.
(1)
-0.190
(0.034)
16,419
453
0.24

Agric.
Land
Size
(2)
-0.020
(0.103)
4,518
285
0.87

Main
Job in
Industry
(3)
-0.013
(0.022)
20,357
453
0.25

Dependent variable is:
Share
Annual Perennial Residential
Land Certified
(4)
(5)
(6)
-0.118
-0.125
-0.218
(0.041)
(0.049)
(0.064)
176
173
170
131
129
128
0.93
0.92
0.94

H.H.
Interest
Expenses
(7)
-0.090
(0.032)
4,553
251
0.25

Employed
Informal
Sector
(8)
-0.069
(0.021)
20,343
453
0.62

The unit of analysis is the household, individual, or commune. All columns include a linear RD polynomial in latitude and longitude, a control for distance to Ho Chi Minh City, year fixed e↵ects, and
boundary segment fixed e↵ects. Robust standard errors, clustered at the village level, are reported in
parentheses.

43

