                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            INSTRUMENTAL VARIABLES AND CAUSAL MECHANISMS:
          UNPACKING THE EFFECT OF TRADE ON WORKERS AND VOTERS

                                        Christian Dippel
                                          Robert Gold
                                        Stephan Heblich
                                         Rodrigo Pinto

                                      Working Paper 23209
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23209


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                            March 2017, Revised June 2018


We thank Alberto Alesina, David Autor, Sascha Becker, Sonia Bhalotra, Gilles Duranton, Jon
Eguia, Johanna Fajardo, Andreas Ferrara, Markus Frölich, Paola Giuliano, James Heckman,
Martin Huber, Kosuke Imai, Ed Leamer, Yi Lu, Craig McIntosh, Ralph Ossa, Sebastian Ottinger,
Anne Otto, David Pacini, Bruno Pellegrino, Maria Petrova, Justin Pierce, David Slichter, Daniel
Sturm, Peter Schott, Zhigang Tao, Dustin Tingley, Dan Trefler, Nico Voigtländer, Wouter
Vermeulen, Till von Wachter, Romain Wacziarg, Frank Windmeijer, Yanos Zylberberg, and
seminar participants at Bristol, Kiel, the LMU, the LSE, Toronto, UCLA, UCSD, U HK,
Warwick, the 2015 Quebec Political Economy conference, the 2016 EEA conference, the 2017
VfS conference, and the 2017 INET conference for valuable comments and discussions. We also
thank David Slichter for thoughtful comments and Wolfgang Dauth for sharing the crosswalk
from product classifications to industry classifications in the German IAB data. Dippel
acknowledges financial support from UCLA’s Center for Global Management. This paper builds
on an earlier working paper titled “Globalization and its (Dis-)Content.” The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Christian Dippel, Robert Gold, Stephan Heblich, and Rodrigo Pinto. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Instrumental Variables and Causal Mechanisms: Unpacking The Effect of Trade on Workers
and Voters
Christian Dippel, Robert Gold, Stephan Heblich, and Rodrigo Pinto
NBER Working Paper No. 23209
March 2017, Revised June 2018
JEL No. F1,F6,J2

                                         ABSTRACT

Instrumental variables (IV) are a common means to identify treatment effects. But standard IV
methods do not allow us to unpack the complex treatment effects that arise when a treatment and
its outcome together cause a second outcome of interest. For example, IV methods have been
used to show that import exposure to low-wage countries has adversely affected Western labor
markets. Similarly, they have been used to show that import exposure has increased voter
polarization. However, standard IV cannot estimate to what extent the latter is a consequence of
the former. This paper proposes a new identification framework that allows us to do so, appealing
to one additional identifying assumption without requiring additional instruments. The added
identifying assumption can be relaxed, and bounds instead of point estimates can be derived.
Applying this framework, we estimate that labor market adjustments explain most to all of the
effect of import exposure on voting, thereby providing rigorous evidence that the correct policy
response to voter polarization has to be focused on labor markets.

Christian Dippel                                Stephan Heblich
UCLA Anderson School of Management              Department of Economics
110 Westwood Plaza, C-521                       University of Bristol
Los Angeles, CA 90095                           8 Woodland Road
and NBER                                        Bristol BS8 1TN
christian.dippel@anderson.ucla.edu              UK
                                                stephan.heblich@bristol.ac.uk
Robert Gold
Kiel Institute for the World Economy            Rodrigo Pinto
Kiellinie 66                                    Department of Economics
24105 Kiel                                      8283 Bunche Hall
Germany                                         Los Angeles, CA 90095
robert.gold@ifw-kiel.de                         rodrig@econ.ucla.edu
1       Introduction

Instrumental variables (IV) are broadly used to identify the causal effect of a treatment variable

on an outcome in observational data. Standard IV methods, however, are unable to unpack the

causal chain that arises when the treatment and its outcome jointly cause a second outcome of

interest. Our empirical application at the nexus of import competition, labor markets and voting

is a case in point: International trade between high and low-wage countries has risen dramatically

in the last thirty years (Krugman, 2008). Consumers in high-wage countries have benefited from

such import exposure through cheaper manufactured goods. However, IV methods have been

used to show that import exposure has also caused real wage stagnation and substantial job losses

in Western manufacturing (Autor, Dorn, and Hanson, 2013; Dauth, Findeisen, and Suedekum,

2014; Malgouyres, 2017).1 The same IV methods have been used to show that import exposure

has increased the support for parties and politicians with protectionist, populist, and nationalist

agendas (Malgouyres, 2014; Dippel, Gold, and Heblich, 2015; Feigenbaum and Hall, 2015; Autor,

Dorn, Hanson, and Majlesi, 2016). While these two findings seem to be related, standard IV meth-

ods cannot quantify to what extent import exposure has turned voters towards political populism

because it adversely affected labor markets. Unpacking this causal mechanism is important to

guide policy makers in designing effective responses to political populism.

        From an econometric perspective, we investigate the problem of identifying causal relations

when an endogenous treatment and its outcome together cause a second outcome of interest. We

propose a solution to the problem that does not require additional instrumental variables and

can be easily implemented using the well-known Two-Stage Least Square (2SLS) estimator. We

begin by clarifying the identification challenge. The starting point is to estimate the effect of a

non-random treatment T (e.g. import exposure) on an outcome M (e.g. regional labor market

adjustments). The Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) estimate of said treatment effect may be biased

by omitted variables that affect both T and M (e.g. regional demand shocks may reduce regional

imports as well as employment). The solution involves using an instrumental variable Z that

affects T (i.e. there is a first stage relation) but is uncorrelated with the omitted variables (i.e. the
    1
    Not every paper that addresses this question uses IV. See for example Dix-Carneiro 2014 and Pierce and Schott
2016, who instead focus on exogenous variation in tariff reductions.




                                                       1
                    Table 1: The Identification Problem of Mediation Analysis with IV

               A. Graphical Representation
                        Model I:                 Model II:                        Model III:
                    IV for Labor M            IV for Voting Y            IV for the Mediation Model


                         T      M                T       ηY                   T       M       Y


                Z        T       M        Z         T       Y           Z        T        M        Y

               B. Model Equations
               T = fT (Z, T )           T = fT (Z, T )            T = fT (Z, T ), M = fM (T, M )
               M = fM (T, M )           Y = gY (T, ηY )            Y = fY (T, M, Y )
               Z ⊥⊥ (T , M )           Z ⊥⊥ (T , ηY )            Z ⊥⊥ (T , M , Y )

Notes: (a) Model I is the standard IV model, which enables the identification of the causal effect of T on M . Model II
is the standard IV model that enables the identification of the causal effects of T on Y . Model III is the IV Mediation
Model with an instrumental variable Z. (b) Panel A gives the graphical representation of the models. Panel B presents
the nonparametric structural equations of each model. Conditioning variables are suppressed for sake of notational
simplicity. We use ⊥⊥ to denote statistical independence.


exclusion restriction holds).2 This is the standard IV solution and is depicted in Model I in Table 1.

T is endogenous in a regression of M on T (i.e. T ⊥
                                                   ⊥ M ), but Z is exogenous (i.e. Z ⊥⊥ T , M ).
                                                   

       We are interested in the identification challenge that arises when there is a second outcome

of interest Y (e.g. voting) that is likely to be caused by T both through M as well as ‘directly’.

The most straightforward approach to this is to simply estimate the ‘total effect’ of T on Y using

the same IV approach, as depicted in Model II in Table 1: T ⊥
                                                             ⊥ ηY , but Z is exogenous (i.e.
                                                             

Z ⊥⊥ T , ηY ).3 In combination, Model I and Model II estimate the causal effect of T on M and the

causal effect of T on Y . However, this leaves unidentified whether and to what extent the former

causes the latter. In our empirical setting, there clearly could be other channels that directly link T

to Y : On the one hand, if import exposure creates anxiety about the future this may by itself turn

voters towards populism (Mughan and Lacy, 2002; Mughan, Bean, and McAllister, 2003).4 On the
   2
     We base our analysis on the well-known instrument proposed by Autor et al. (2013).
   3
     It is common to use the same instrument to identify the causal effect of a treatment on several outcomes, and the
application studied here is no different. For example, three pairs of papers in the related literature each use the same
identification strategy to separately investigate the effect of import exposure on labor markets and on some form of
political outcomes; e.g. Autor et al. (2013) and Autor et al. (2016), Malgouyres (2017) and Malgouyres (2014), as well as
Pierce and Schott (2016) and Che, Lu, Pierce, Schott, and Tao (2016).
   4
      In our empirical specification, import exposure refers to the net import exposure, i.e. the exposure to imports after
accounting for export exposure.



                                                            2
other hand, import exposure may be politically moderating if it lowers consumer prices, if targeted

government transfers like Trade Adjustment Assistance increase, if manufacturers shift production

towards more differentiated higher mark-up output varieties (as in Holmes and Stevens, 2014), or

if it leads to task-upgrading within industries and occupations (as in Becker and Muendler, 2015).

Depending on these factors’ relative importance, their aggregate effect on support for populists

may be positive or negative. If these direct effects as a whole are negative, the effect of import

exposure on voting that is mediated by labor market adjustments could actually be larger than the

total effect estimated by Model II. We find evidence that this is indeed the case.

    The identification challenges that arise from this discussion are depicted in Model III in Table 1.

T causes Y indirectly through M as well as directly, i.e. through a number of other channels. In a

regression of Y on both T and M there are two endogenous regressors (i.e. T ⊥
                                                                             ⊥ Y , M ⊥
                                                                                      ⊥ Y ),
                                                                                       

but there is only one instrument Z to address this endogeneity. Model III is a mediation model, i.e.

one where T (import exposure) causes an intermediate outcome M (labor market adjustments)

that is also a ‘mediator’ in T ’s effect on a final outcome Y (voting).5 Most of the approaches to

identification in mediation analysis assume that T is as good as randomly assigned (i.e. T ⊥⊥ M ),

making them not applicable to the IV settings we are interested in. See, e.g., Imai, Keele, Tingley,

and Yamamoto 2011a. The only existing approaches to achieving identification in the IV setting

of Model III require separate dedicated instruments for M , which require additional exogeneity

assumptions that are considerably more restrictive than the standard ones (e.g. Jun, Pinkse, Xu,

and Yildiz 2016; Frolich and Huber 2017).

    Our proposed solution does not assume away endogeneity in any of the key relationships

in Model III and does not require additional instruments. Instead, we rely on the insight that in

many research settings the omitted variable concerns themselves suggest a natural solution. This

is the case when T is endogenous in a regression of Y on T primarily because of omitted variables

that affect M . For example, in the literature above the main endogeneity concern in a regression

of regional manufacturing employment (M ) on import exposure (T ) is that unobserved adverse

regional demand shocks reduce regional imports as well as employment, and it seems likely that

such shocks affect voting (Y ) primarily to the extent that they affect labor markets. We show
   5
     Mediation analysis decomposes the total effect of T on Y into the indirect effect of T on Y that operates through M
and the direct effect that does not. The indirect effect may alternatively be labeled as the ‘mediated effect’. For recent
works on this literature, see Heckman and Pinto (2015b); Pearl (2014); Imai, Keele, and Tingley (2010).



                                                            3
that this assumption alone is sufficient to unpack the causal channels in Model III, allowing us

to identify the extent to which T causes Y through M . We further show that under linearity,

the resulting identification framework is straightforwardly estimated using three separate 2SLS

estimations of the effect of T on M , the effect of T on Y , and and the effect of M on Y conditional

on T .6

       While the identifying assumption of our framework is plausible in our setting, it may be less

so in other mediation-type IV settings; and even when it is plausible, it is desirable to know how

robust the results are to relaxing it. When we allow unobserved confounders that directly affect

T and Y , covariance relations in the data still allow us to provide bounds on the possible range of

estimates of the direct and the indirect effects linking T and Y .7

       We apply our method to data on regional import exposure, labor market adjustments and vot-

ing patterns in Germany from 1987–2009. The data is organized as a stacked panel of two first

differences for the periods 1987–1998 and 1998–2009, with specific start- and end-points dictated

by national election dates. The analysis precedes the European debt crisis and each period in-

cludes a large international trade shock: In 1989, the fall of the Iron Curtain opened up the Eastern

European markets, and in 2001 China’s accession to the WTO led to another large increase in

import exposure. We use German data in part because it offers several advantages, especially

relative to the U.S., for the question at hand: (i) Germany’s multi-party system straddles the en-

tire political spectrum from the far-left to the extreme right so that we can consistently measure

changes in political preferences over time. (ii) Germans cast their main vote for a party at large so

that local voting patterns are un-confounded by local variation in political messaging. (iii) We are

able to measure vote shares, regional import exposure and labor market conditions all at the same

statistical unit of 408 Landkreise.8 (iv) Unique amongst attitudinal socio-economic surveys, the
   6
     Our main focus is to estimate the product of the effect T on M and the effect M on Y , i.e. the indirect effect, and
to compare it to the estimated total effect of T on Y . This objective is naturally similar to traditional approaches to
mediation analysis, which assume that both T and M are exogenous, and apply OLS to estimate three equations
                                                                             Y |T         Y |T      Y |T
                  Yit = βTY Tit + Yit ,   Mit = βTM Tit + M
                                                            it ,     Yit = βT       Tit + βM Mit + it ,
                                                                      Y |T
and then compare the total effect βTY to the indirect effect βTM × βM . See Baron and Kenny (1986) and MacKinnon
(2008) for an overview.
    7
       In spirit, this relates to the method developed in Conley, Hansen, and Rossi (2012) for calculating plausible bounds
on IV estimates, when the IV’s exclusion restriction may not be fully satisfied.
    8
      In U.S. data, one observes vote-shares in 3,007 counties, politicians in 435 congressional districts, and trade shocks
in 741 commuting zones.




                                                             4
German Socio-Economic Panel’s (SOEP) long-running panel structure allows us to cross-validate

the aggregate results with an individual-level panel-analysis, relating decadal changes in individ-

ual workers’ stated party preferences to changes in their local labor markets’ import exposure over

the same time.

    We combine changes in national sector-specific trade flows with regional labor markets’ initial

industry mix to determine regional import exposure (T ). We then instrument T with a measure

based on other high-wage countries’ sector-specific trade flows (Z).9 Estimating Model I in Table 1,

we corroborate existing results that import exposure significantly reduces total employment (M ),

particularly in manufacturing, raises unemployment and negatively affects manufacturing wages.

With a view towards the mediation analysis that follows, we aggregate these into one index using

principal component (PC) analysis.10 This approach is appealing for mediation settings if the

treatment effects are concentrated in one PC, and this PC also has a clear interpretation. This turns

out to be the case in the German labor market data, where one PC summarizes the effect of import

competition on labor markets.

    Estimating Model II in Table 1, we find that import exposure (T ) increased voter polarization

(Y ). There is a significant positive effect on the vote share of the nationalist and highly protec-

tionist extreme right.11 There is no significant effects on turnout, or any of the mainstream parties,

small parties, or the far left.12 These findings are corroborated by the SOEP’s individual-level data,

where we can show that the effects are entirely driven by low-skill workers employed in manu-

facturing, i.e. those most affected by the labor market adjustments to increasing import exposure.

Using gravity residuals instead of our IV strategy yields similar results.13

    Next, we estimate the causal links in Model III. A single PC, associated with total employment
    9
      In this, we follow the work of Autor et al. (2013) who suggest the import exposure of high-wage countries other
than Germany as an IV for Germany’s import exposure T . The resulting identifying variation is driven by supply
changes (productivity or market access increases) in low-wage countries instead of fluctuations in German domestic
conditions. We refer the reader to the literature above and to section 3.4 for more details.
   10
       Our framework estimates the mediating effect of a single variable M , but in many research settings there will
be several observed variables that potentially link a treatment T to an outcome Y . principal component analysis is
attractive in this case because it generates orthogonal indices that are purely statistical.
   11
       Election outcomes are divided into changes in the vote-share of (i) four mainstream parties: the CDU, the SPD,
the FDP and the Green party, (ii) extreme-right parties, (iii) far-left parties, (iv) other small parties, and (v) turnout, see
Falck, Gold, and Heblich (2014).
   12
       Of course, all other parties combined must have a vote share loss of equal magnitude and significance to the extreme
right’s gain.
   13
       We report these for completeness as this is standard in the literature on import exposure and labor markets (Autor
et al., 2013; Dauth et al., 2014). However, our focus is naturally on the IV setting to which our identification framework
applies.


                                                              5
and manufacturing, drives the effect of import competition on extreme-right voting. The effect

of import-exposure-driven adjustments in this PC on voting is larger than the total effect of im-

port exposure on voting, implying that other channels that connect import exposure to voting

are moderating in the aggregate. When we relax the identifying assumptions within the possi-

ble range implied by the covariance relations in the data, we derive bounds on the indirect effect

which suggests it explains between 70 and 128 percent of the total effect. Even at the lower bound,

labor market adjustments are thus the primary reason for the populist backlash against import

exposure.

    Our paper’s contribution is two-fold: It answers a relevant substantive question at the nexus of

the literatures on trade, local labor markets and politics; in order to do so it makes a methodolog-

ical contribution to the literature on causal mechanisms and on IV. On the substantive side, our

analysis confirms that labor market adjustments, concentrated in manufacturing, are the main rea-

son for the political backlash against free trade in the data we study.14 On the methodological side,

we offer a mediation model which relies on a single instrumental variable Z that directly causes

T to identify three causal effects, while allowing for endogenous variables caused by confounders

and for unobserved mediators. This parsimonious feature is useful for the typical observational

data setting where good instrumental variables are scarce. Our model can be estimated by well-

known 2SLS methods, its identifying assumption can be relaxed to derive bounds instead of point

estimates, and it can be applied to a potentially broad range of empirical research questions in

which an endogenous treatment and its primary outcome together cause a second outcome of

interest.

    Section 2 explains our identification approach.Section 3 describes the data. Section 4 presents

the IV results for Model I and Model II, establishing the causal effects of import exposure on labor

markets and voting. Section 5 applies Model III. Section 6 concludes.
  14
     Our findings relate more broadly to a literature on the effects of economic shocks on voters (Scheve and Slaughter,
2001; Bagues and Esteve-Volart, 2014; Jensen, Quinn, and Weymouth, 2016; Charles and Stephens, 2013; Brunner, Ross,
and Washington, 2011; Giuliano and Spilimbergo, 2014) and political cleavages (Rogowski, 1987; Hiscox, 2002).




                                                           6
2    Examining the Mediation Model with an Instrumental Variable

Our goal is to evaluate a sequence of causal relations where import exposure T causes labor market

adjustments M , and both T and M cause changes in voting behavior Y . Such a sequence of causal

relations is called a mediation model (Pearl, 2011). We modify the standard mediation model by

adding an instrument Z that causes T . A general nonparametric model that portrays these causal

relations is given by:


                                                      T = fT (Z, T )                                                (1)
                                                   M = fM (T, M )                                                   (2)
                                                 Y = fY (T, M, Y )                                                  (3)



    We use T , M , Y for the unobserved error terms associated with variables T, M, Y respec-

tively. We use supp(Z), supp(T ), supp(M ), supp(Y ) for the support of variables Z, T, M, Y respec-

tively. We are interested in estimating causal effects among variables T , M , and Y . The seminal

work of Robins and Greenland (1992) examines the mediation model in which a binary treatment

T causes Y via M. They decompose the causal effect of T on Y into the total, the direct and the

indirect effects. The total effect T E stands for the average causal effect of T on Y. The direct effect

DE stands for the causal effect of T on Y that is not generated by changes in M. The indirect effect

IE is the causal effect of T on Y induced by the change in the distribution of the mediator M.

    A causal effect is defined by the difference between potential (counterfactual) variables. For

instance, let M (t) be the counterfactual variable M when T takes the value t ∈ supp(T ). The

average causal effect of T on M when T takes values t, t0 ∈ supp(T ) is given by the expected value

of the difference E(M (t) − M (t0 )).15 Model (1)–(3) yields four counterfactual variables defined by

the following equations:
   15
      Formally, a causal model is defined by a set of structural equations that define the causal direction among the
model. Counterfactual variables are defined by fixing an argument of a structural equation to a value. For instance let
the structural equation that governs the data generating process of variable M be M = fM (T, M ) where M denotes
an error term. The the counterfactual variable M (t) is defined by fixing the T -input of this structural equation to the
value t ∈ supp(T ), namely, M (t) = fM (t, M ). See Heckman and Pinto (2015a) for a discussion on causality and the
fixing operator.




                                                           7
                             M (t) = fM (t, M ); t ∈ supp(T )                                                     (4)
                              Y (t) = fY (t, M (t), Y ); t ∈ supp(T )                                             (5)
                             Y (m) = fY (T, m, Y ); m ∈ supp(M )                                                  (6)
                          Y (m, t) = fY (t, m, Y ); t ∈ supp(T ) and m ∈ supp(M )                                 (7)



    It is useful to examine a simple Randomized Control Trial (RCT) to show how the total, direct

and indirect effect can be written using counterfactual variables. Counterfactual variable Y (t) in

(5) denotes the potential outcome Y when T takes the value t ∈ supp(T ), Y (m) is the counter-

factual outcome when M is fixed to the value m ∈ supp(M ), and Y (m, t) is the counterfactual

outcome that arises when both T, M are fixed to t, m respectively. Consider an RCT whose treat-

ment assignment takes the values in supp(T ) = {t0 , t1 }, where t0 indicates the control group and

t1 indicates the treatment group. Let FM (t) (m) denote the Cumulative Density Function (CDF) of

the counterfactual mediator M (t) conditional on the assignment t ∈ {t0 , t1 }. The total effect T E is

the expected difference between counterfactual outcome Y when T is fixed at t1 and t0 . The direct

effect DE(t) evaluates the expected difference of counterfactual outcomes between treated (t1 )

and control (t0 ) group holding the distribution of the mediator fixed at M (t). The indirect effect

IE(t) evaluates the expected value of the the difference between counterfactual outcomes Y (t, m)

when the distribution of the mediator m varies between treated M (t1 ) and control M (t0 ) while

holding the t-input fixed. Notationally, these effects are defined as:

     TE        =           E(Y (t1 ) − Y (t0 ))          ≡           E(Y (t1 , M (t1 )) − Y (t0 , M (t0 )))
                                                                   R                          
     DE(t)     =    E(Y (t1 , M (t)) − Y (t0 , M (t)))   ≡          E Y (t1 , m) − Y (t0 , m) dFM (t) (m)
                                                                 R          h                             i
     IE(t)     =    E(Y (t, M (t1 )) − Y (t, M (t0 )))   ≡        E Y (t, m) dFM (t1 ) (m) − dFM (t0 ) (m)

    Robins and Greenland’s (1992) main contribution is to show that the total effect of T on Y can

be decomposed as the sum of the effect of T on Y that is mediated by M (the indirect effect) and

the causal effect of T on Y that is not mediated by M (the direct effect).16 Equations (8)–(9) express

the total effect as the sum of direct and indirect effects:17
  16
     Pearl (2011) makes a distinction between natural (or “descriptive”) direct and indirect effects and controlled (or
“prescriptive”) direct effects.
  17
     A large literature on mediation analysis relies on the Sequential Ignorability Assumption A-3 of Imai, Keele, and
Yamamoto (2010) to identify mediation effects. This assumption is discussed in Online Appendix A. See Frolich and
Huber (2017) for a recent review of the mediation literature.


                                                             8
 T E = E(Y (t1 , M (t1 )) − Yi (t0 , M (t0 )))
                                                                                       
     = E(Y (t1 , M (t1 ))) − E(Y (t0 , M (t1 ))) + E(Y (t0 , M (t1 )) − Yi (t0 , M (t0 ))) = DE(t1 ) + IE(t0 ) (8)
                                                                                       
     = E(Y (t1 , M (t1 ))) − E(Y (t1 , M (t0 ))) + E(Y (t1 , M (t0 )) − Yi (t0 , M (t0 ))) = IE(t1 ) + DE(t0 ). (9)




   Robins and Greenland’s (1992) decomposition can be extended to the problem we examine by

allowing T to be a continuous variable, in which case the decomposition is obtained by the total

differentiation of the counterfactual outcome:



                         dE(Y (t))   ∂E(Y (t, m)) ∂E(Y (t, m)) dE(M (t))
                                   =             +            ·          .                                    (10)
                            dt } |
                         | {z            ∂t
                                         {z     } |  ∂m {z        dt }
                           Total Effect    Direct Effect            Indirect Effect



   Identification of the total, direct and indirect effects hinges on the dependence relation among

the error terms T , M , Y in (1)–(3). Suppose that the error terms T , M are statistically indepen-

dent, i.e. T ⊥⊥ M . This means that there are no unobserved variables that jointly cause T and M .

In this case, T is a exogenous with respect to M , as in an RCT. It is easy to show that the indepen-

dence conditions M (t) ⊥⊥ T holds and the expected value of counterfactual variable M (t) is iden-

tified by the conditional expectation E(M (t)) = E(M |T = t). In addition, if error terms (T , M )
                                                                                       
and Y were statistically independent, then independence conditions Y (t), Y (t, m) ⊥⊥ T and

Y (t, m) ⊥⊥ M would also hold. This means that variables T, M are exogenous with respect to Y

and the expected value of counterfactual variables E(Y (t)) and E(Y (t, m)) would be identified by

conditional expectations of observed variables E(Y (t)) = E(Y |T = t) and E(Y (t, m)) = E(Y |T =

t, M = m) respectively.

   These assumption of the mutual independence among error terms (T ⊥⊥ M , T ⊥⊥ Y ,

M ⊥⊥ Y ) are very strong; in fact they are stronger than the random treatment assumption made in

an RCT, which does not include M ⊥⊥ Y . They are therefore unlikely to hold in any observational

data, and since our starting point is to derive a mediation model for IV settings, we naturally want

to relax them. We now investigate the pairwise dependence relations between the error terms in



                                                           9
turn:

(i) Our interest is in settings where IV is needed to identify the causal effect of a treatment T on an

outcome M . Inherently, we therefore allow T ⊥
                                              ⊥ M . In our empirical application the literature’s
                                              

main endogeneity concern is that unobserved adverse regional demand shocks reduce regional

imports (T ) as well as employment (M ).

(ii) Our interest is in settings where T and M jointly cause a second outcome of interest Y . We

therefore want to allow M ⊥
                           ⊥ Y . At the same time, it is usually unappealing to assume M ⊥⊥ Y .
                           

In our empirical application unobserved industry or worker characteristics that affect labor mar-

ket outcomes may also affect political preferences. This induces a correlation between error term

M , associated with labor market outcomes M, and error term Y , associated with voting behavior.

(iii) When it comes to the relation between T and Y , we observe that in many research settings

the specific omitted variable concerns themselves suggest a natural solution, as follows. In our

empirical application for example, the main endogeneity concern in a regression of regional man-

ufacturing employment (M ) on import exposure (T ) is that unobserved adverse regional demand

shocks reduce regional imports as well as employment, and it is plausible that such shocks affect

voting (Y ) primarily to the extent that they affect labor markets. This implies that T ⊥
                                                                                         ⊥ Y only
                                                                                         

because of confounders that affect T and M .

   The identification framework we propose uses this intuition. It allows for unobserved shocks

T to affect voter preferences through the labor markets M , but not through other channels. No-

tationally, T ⊥⊥ Y , but T ⊥
                              ⊥ Y |M . This can be stated alternatively as T ⊥
                                                                               ⊥ Y |M , namely, the
                                                                                

unobserved variables T , Y that affect regional import exposure and voting are not statistically in-

dependent conditional on labor market adjustments M . This assumption does not assume away

endogeneity in any of the key relations, but, as we show, suffices to yield point-identification of

the total, direct and indirect effects.

   It is important to be clear that we are not claiming that the assumption that T is endogenous in

Y only because of unobserved confounders that impact T and M is appropriate in all mediation-

type settings. There will be settings where this assumption is clearly not plausible and there will

be settings where the plausibility of the assumption is debatable. It is therefore important that we

can relax T ⊥⊥ Y , which we do in Section 2.3.

   Relaxing T ⊥⊥ Y still allows us to bound the decomposition of the total into direct and in-


                                                   10
direct effect. In addition, it allows us to estimate bounds for the correlation between error terms.

In our empirical application, the estimates of the correlation between error terms (in Section 5)

will corroborate our reasoning: While the bounds for the correlation between error terms T , Y

contain the zero correlation, the estimated bounds for T , M and M , Y are strictly positive.18

   The statistical dependence between error terms T and M precludes the independence be-
                                                              
tween T and counterfactuals M (t), Y (t) i.e. T ⊥
                                                ⊥ Y (t), M (t) . Hence T is endogenous and
                                                

the observed correlation between treatment T and the outcomes M, Y does not identify causal

effects. As well, the correlation between error terms M and Y turns M endogenous because
                                                                                       
it invalidates the independence condition between M and counterfactuals Y (m, t), Y (m) , i.e.
                       
M ⊥  ⊥ Y (m), Y (m, t) . Hence the causal effect of M on Y cannot be identified on the basis
     

of their observed distributions. In particular, the conditional expectation of observed variables

E(M |T = t), E(Y |T = t), E(Y |T = t, M = m) do not identify the expected value of the coun-

terfactual outcomes E(M (t)), E(Y (t)), E(Y (t, m)). We utilize the properties of an instrumental

variable Z to solve this identification problem.

       The standard IV exclusion restriction is that instrument Z affects M and Y only through its

impact on T . Otherwise stated, for Z to be an instrument, it must be the case that Z is statistically

independent of unobserved error terms T , M , Y which jointly cause T, M, Y . In the interest of

clarity, we state this property as Assumption A-1.19

                                                          
Assumption A-1 The independence relation Z ⊥⊥ T , M , Y holds in the mediation model (1)–(3).


       A-1 merely states the independence condition that characterizes Z as an instrumental variable

for T . Lemma L-1 explains that this independence condition generates the two exclusion restric-

tions.
Lemma L-1 Under Assumption A-1, the following statistical relations hold:
                    Targeted Causal Relation        IV Relevance             Exclusion Restrictions
                             T →Y                      Z⊥
                                                        ⊥T
                                                                     and           Z ⊥⊥ Y (t)
                             T →M                      Z⊥
                                                        ⊥T
                                                                     and           Z ⊥⊥ M (t)

Proof P-1 See P-1 in Appendix A.
  18
    While this does not amount to a statistical test of the identifying assumption, it is nonetheless reassuring.
  19
    As mentioned, Autor et al. (2013) fostered a large literature that uses import exposure of other countries (say O’s)
as an instrument Z for one specific country’s (say G’s) import exposure to low-wage manufacturing countries. See
expressions (46) and (47) for the precise definitions of T and Z in our empirical application.


                                                          11
   The exclusion restrictions in L-1 imply that the counterfactual outcomes M (t) and Y (t) can

be evaluated using standard IV techniques. This is not surprising. L-1 simply means that an

instrument for T enables the identification of the causal effect of T on M as well as T on Y. L-1 is

most relevant due to its symmetry. The exclusion restriction that applies to the mediator M also

applies to outcome Y . The fact that M causes Y (and not the opposite) plays no role in generating

exclusion restrictions. Indeed, the lemma would remain the same if the causal relation M → Y

were reversed to M ← Y. The irrelevance of the causal direction between M and Y exposes a

limitation of the instrumental variable: although instrument Z for T identifies the causal effect of

T on M, Y, it is not suitable to identify the causal effect of M on Y. This problem is addressed by

evoking the following dependence structure among error terms:

Assumption A-2 The following independence relations hold in the mediation model (1)–(3):


                            T ⊥
                               ⊥ M , M ⊥
                                        ⊥ Y , T ⊥
                                                  ⊥ Y |M and T ⊥⊥ Y .
                                                                                                (11)


   Assumption A-2 allows for the correlation between error terms T , M , thus T is endogenous.

A-2 also allows for error terms M , Y , to correlate, thus M is endogenous. A-2 states that error

terms T , Y are unconditionally independent, but correlate conditional on M .

   Assumption A-2 yields a new exclusion restriction stated in Lemma L-2. We show that this

additional restriction renders our model just identified with one instrumental variable Z. Specif-

ically, this restriction is used to identify the causal effect of M on Y and thereby decompose the

total effect of T on Y into its direct and indirect counterparts.
Lemma L-2 Under A-1–A-2, the following statistical relation hold:

                 Targeted Causal Relation    IV Relevance           Exclusion Restrictions
                        for M → Y             Z⊥
                                               ⊥ M |T
                                                           and        Z ⊥⊥ Y (m)|T

Proof P-2 See P-2 in Appendix A.

   The exclusion restriction of L-2, i.e. Z ⊥⊥ Y (m)|T , implies that the instrumental variable Z can

be used to evaluate the causal relation of M on Y if (and only if) conditioned on T. Indeed, while

Z ⊥⊥ Y (m)|T holds, Z ⊥⊥ Y (m) does not. Corollary C-1 states that the counterfactual outcome

Y (m) conditioned on T = t, i.e. (Y (m)|T = t), is equal in distribution to the counterfactual

outcome Y (m, t). Therefore Z can be used to identify Y (m, t) using standard IV methods.

                                                  12
Corollary C-1 Under A-1–A-2, the counterfactual outcome Y (m) conditioned on T = t is equal in dis-
                                                                    d
tribution to the counterfactual outcome Y (m, t), i.e., (Y (m)|T = t)=Y (m, t).


Proof P-3 See P-3 in Appendix A.


   As discussed, we relax Assumption A-2 in Section 2.3 to derive bounds instead of point esti-

mates.

   Panel A of Table 2 represents the causal relations of the mediation model (1)–(3) as a Directed

Acyclic Graph (DAG). Squares represent observed variables while circles denote unobserved vari-

ables. Causal relations are denoted by solid lines while the dependence structure among error

variables is depicted by dashed lines. Table 2 is a version of Model III in Table 1, with the specific

assumptions on the error terms that we just discussed.


                                Table 2: The Mediation Model with IV

                      A. DAG Representation


                                               T        M    Y


                                        Z       T        M     Y

                      B. Model Equations
                        Treatment variable: T = fT (Z, T )
                      Observed Mediator: M = fM (T, M )
                                  Outcome: Y = fY (T, M, Y )
                                     where:    T ⊥
                                                  ⊥ M , M ⊥
                                                              ⊥ Y , T ⊥
                                                                        ⊥ Y |M
                                                                
                                       and:    Z ⊥⊥ T , M , Y , T ⊥⊥ Y




Remark 2.1 The exclusion restrictions in L-1–L-2 also hold for a more general model that al-
lows for an unobserved mediator U that is caused by T and causes both M and Y. Notation-
ally, this model is characterized by the following equations: T = fT (Z, T ), U = fU (T, U ),
M = fM (T, U, M ), Y = fY (T, M, U, Y ). We investigate this model in Online Appendix B.


Remark 2.2 The independence condition in A-2 enables the use of the IV to identify the counter-
factual outcome Y (m). The identification is possible by conditioning on the treatment T. Another
identification approach could be formulated if additional instrumental variables were available.


                                                    13
Consider an additional variable Z̃ that plays the role of an instrumental variable that is exclu-
sively dedicated to M. This means that variable Z̃ is characterized by two properties: (1) Z̃ does
not cause T ; and (2) Z̃ has no impact on Y other than through M. This instrument could be used
to evaluate the causal effect of M on Y, however the availability of such instrument is unlikely
in most empirical settings. See Online Appendix C for a discussion on this topic, where we dis-
cuss the potential applicability as well as pitfalls of using ‘automation’ as a candidate for Z̃ in our
empirical application.


Remark 2.3 Exclusion restrictions, such as L-1–L-2, are necessary but not sufficient to identify
causal effects. An extensive IV literature exists on the additional assumptions that grant the iden-
tification of causal effects.20 Examples of these additional assumptions are monotonicity (Imbens
and Angrist, 1994; Heckman and Pinto, 2017), separability of the choice equation Heckman and
Vytlacil (2005) or control functions (Blundell and Powell, 2003, 2004), or revealed preference anal-
ysis (Pinto, 2015).


2.1    The IV Mediate Model under Linearity

We adopt the assumption of linearity, which is prevalent in many literatures, including the local

labor markets literature, which our empirical application belongs to. Our model is thus character-

ized by the following equations:



                                            Z = Z ,                                                                  (12)
                                             T = βTZ · Z + T ,                                                       (13)
                                                    T
                                            M=    βM   · T + M ,                                                     (14)
                                            Y =   βYT · T + βYM ·   M + Y ,                                          (15)




where Z , T , M , Y , are error terms whose variances are denoted by σ2Z , σ2T , σ2M , σ2Y respec-

tively. Let ρT M stands for the correlation between T , M . Likewise, let ρT Y , ρM Y stand for the

correlations between T , Y and M , Y respectively. For sake of notational simplicity, we assume

that each variable has mean zero. This assumption does not incur a loss of generality. The direct

effect is given by the coefficient DE = βYT , the indirect effect is given by the coefficient multiplica-
           T · β M , an the total effect is the sum of these two terms T E = β T + β T · β M .21
tion IE = βM    Y                                                             Y     M     Y
  20
     See Dahl, Huber, and Mellace (2017) for a recent review.
  21
      The linear model lacks treatment-mediator interactions and therefore has homogeneous effects (natural and con-
trolled effects coincide). This is called the no-interaction assumption that the mediation and direct effects do not depend
on the values of the Treatment T.




                                                            14
   We are interested in evaluating the linear coefficients βTZ , βM
                                                                  T , β T , β M . The identification of
                                                                       Y     Y

these coefficients depends on the covariance matrix of observed data. Therefore it is useful to

represent model (12)–(15) in matrix form. Let X = [Z, T, M, Y ]0 be the vector of observed random

variables and  = [Z , T , M , Y ]0 be the vector of unobserved error terms. Matrix Ψ in (16) stands

for the arrangement of linear coefficients. Model (12)–(15) is then written as X = Ψ · X +  in (17):


                                                                                   
                             Z         0       0       0     0     Z                 Z
                             T      βZ       0       0     0 
                                                               · T                 T
                                                                                      
                                 = T        T
                                                                          +                      (16)
                            M      0       βM       0     0   M               M   
                             Y         0      βYT     βYM    0     Y                 Y
                         |   {z   } |            {z            } | {z       }    |   {z   }
                              X                  Ψ                    X              
                              ∴X=Ψ·X+                                                              (17)

   Equation (18) presents the covariance matrix ΣX of observed variables X :


                                                                                   
                                      Z     σZZ               σZT    σZM         σZY
                                     T   ·                 σT T   σT M        σT Y 
                         ΣX   ≡ Var 
                                     M = ·
                                                                                    .            (18)
                                                               ·     σM M        σM Y 
                                      Y      ·                 ·       ·         σY Y


   Assumption A-1 states that Z is an instrumental variable. It implies that error term Z is

statistically independent of T , M , Y . Thus the covariance matrix Σ of unobserved error terms 

is given by:


                                  2                                                       
                              Z      σZ              0           0                  0
                             T   ·                σ2T   ρT M σT σM       ρT Y σT σY 
                   Σ ≡ Var 
                             M  =  ·
                                                                                           .     (19)
                                                        ·        σ2M           ρM Y σM σY 
                              Y       ·                ·          ·                σ2Y


   The identification of linear coefficients βTZ , βM
                                                    T , β T , β M and the unobserved parameters in Σ
                                                         Y     Y                                    

as defined by (19) is based on the equality between the covariance matrices of the observed and

unobserved random variables, namely:


               X=Ψ·X+            ⇒       (I − Ψ) X =        ⇒      (I − Ψ) ΣX (I − Ψ)0 = Σ .    (20)


Assumption A-2 states that T ⊥⊥ Y . In the linear model (12)–(15), this is equivalent to assuming



                                                       15
that the correlation of error terms T , Y is zero, i.e. ρT Y = 0. Let Σ
                                                                        e  be the covariance matrix (19)

under the assumption that ρT Y = 0. This covariance matrix is displayed in (22).



                                                                                   1 −βTZ
                                                                                                            
           1        0    0          0     σZZ        σZT      σZM       σZY                           0      0
         −β Z      1    0          0   ·          σT T     σT M      σT Y   0
                                                                                    1             −βM T
                                                                                                            −βYT 
  Σ
  eX   ≡    T                        ·                                      ·                                 =    (21)
                      T
         0        −βM   1          0   ·           ·      σM M       σM Y   0    0               1     −βYM 
           0       −βYT −βYM        1      ·          ·         ·       σY Y       0  0               0      1
        |             {z              } |                   {z               } |                    {z           }
                      I−Ψ                                   ΣX                                     (I−Ψ)0

                                                                σ2Z
                                                                                                             
                                                                        0           0                  0
                                                                ·     σ2T   ρT M σT σM             0      
                                                                                                              ≡Σ
                                                      =                                                        e .   (22)
                                                                ·       ·        σ2M           ρM Y σM σY 
                                                                 ·       ·          ·                σ2Y
                                                            |                         {z                      }
                                                                              Σ under ρT Y =0




    The equality (21)–(22) compares two covariance matrices of dimension four. Each matrix has

4 · 4 = 16 elements. We use Σ
                            e  [i, j] to denote the element in the i-th row and j-th column of matrix

Σ                                                  e X ≡ (I − Ψ) ΣX (I − Ψ)0 where Σ
e  . For sake of notational simplicity, we define Σ                               e X [i, j] denotes

the the element in the i-th row and j-th column of the matrix (I − Ψ) ΣX (I − Ψ)0 . The matrix is

symmetric, thus the equality generates ten equations: four diagonal equations and six off-diagonal

ones. Notationally, these ten equalities are defined by Σ            e  [i, j] for i ≤ j; i, j ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4}.
                                                        e X [i, j] = Σ

                                                                     e X [1, j] = 0 for j ∈ {2, 3, 4}
Four out of the six off-diagonal equation are equal to zero, namely, Σ

and Σ
    e X [2, 4] = 0. What follows are the equations associated with the four zero elements in the

covariance matrix (22):


       e X [1, 2] = 0 ⇒ σ − β Z σ = 0                                         ⇒              σZT
       Σ                 ZT  T ZZ                                                  βTZ =     σZZ
                                                                                                                       (23)

       e X [1, 3] = 0 ⇒ σ
       Σ                        T                                             ⇒     T =      σZM                       (24)
                          ZM − βM σZT = 0                                          βM        σZT



                                                                                
                                                                                                 σZT σT Y −σT T σZY
   Σ
   e X [1, 4] = 0          σZY −   βYM σZM   −   βYT σZT   =0                    βM =
                                                                                
                                                                                     Y           σZT σT M −σT T σZM
                      ⇒                                                       ⇒                                        (25)
   Σ
   e X [2, 4] = 0 
                           σT Y − βYM σT M − βYT σT T = 0 
                                                                                  β T = − σZM σT Y −σT M σZY
                                                                                  
                                                                                     Y      σZT σT M −σT T σZM



    The four equalities in (23)–(25) suffice to identify all linear coefficients βTZ , βM
                                                                                        T , β M , β T of model (12)–
                                                                                             Y     Y

(15). There are six remaining equalities in (21)–(22). The four diagonal equations generated upon

(21)–(22) identify the variances of the error terms. Those equations are listed in (26).The left-hand



                                                            16
side of each equation consists of observed covariances or identified parameters. The right-hand

side of each equation consist of the error variances.



      Σ            e e [1, 1] ⇒
      e X [1, 1] = Σ                                                             σZZ    = σ2Z

                                              σT T − βTZ σZT − βTZ σZT − βTZ σZZ = σ2T
                                                                               
      Σ            e e [2, 2] ⇒
      e X [2, 2] = Σ

                                                  T σ        T         T        = σ2M
                                                                             
      Σ            e e [3, 3] ⇒
      e X [3, 3] = Σ                      σM M − βM   T M − βM σT M − βM σT T                             (26)
                                    0                                     
                                 1        σY Y           σM Y    σT Y      1
      ΣX [4, 4] = Σe [4, 4] ⇒
      e           e            −βYM    σM Y           σM M    σT M   −βYM  = σ2Y
                                −βYT      σT Y           σT M    σT T     −βYT


   The last two equalities can be extracted from (21)–(22) to identify the correlations ρT M , ρM Y .

Those are described in (27).

      Σ            e e [2, 3] ⇒
      e X [2, 3] = Σ                  σT M − βTZ σZM − βM
                                                        T (σ        Z
                                                             T T − βT σZT ) = ρT M σT σM

                                       0 
                                                                                                          (27)
                                                             
                                   1        σM Y         σT Y         
                   e e [3, 4] ⇒  −β M   σM M                    1
      Σ
      e X [3, 4] = Σ
                                    Y                    σT M       T   = ρM Y σM σY
                                                                  −βM
                                  −βYT      σT M         σT T


   With βTZ , βM
               T , β M , β T identified by the four equalities in (23)–(25), and σ , σ , σ
                    Y     Y                                                       Z  T  M , σY iden-

tified by the four equalities in (26), the model in (27) is therefore just-identified for ρT M , ρM Y .

   The identification formulas to identify all linear coefficients βTZ , βM
                                                                          T , β M , β T are described in
                                                                               Y     Y

the right-hand side of the expressions (23)–(25). Each identifying formula is associated with a

well-known econometric estimator:

   1. Parameter βTZ is identified by (23) as the covariance between Z, T divided by the variance

      of Z. This formula implies that βTZ can be estimated by the Ordinary Least Square (OLS)

      regression of T on Z.


                                            OLS: T = βTZ · Z + T .                                       (28)


                 T is identified by (24) as the ratio of the covariance between Z, M divided by
   2. Parameter βM
                                                         T can be estimated by a Two-stage Least
      the covariance of Z, T. This formula implies that βM


                                                    17
     Squares (2SLS) where Z is the instrumental variable, T is the endogenous explanatory vari-
                                                  T can be estimated by evaluating the stan-
     able and M is the outcome variable. Namely, βM

     dard 2SLS model:


                                         First Stage: T = βTZ · Z + T ,                          (29)
                                                       T
                                    Second Stage: M = βM · T + M .                               (30)



  3. Parameters βYM , βYT are jointly identified by the two remaining equations in (25). In Online

     Appendix D we show that βYM and βYT are the expected values of the estimators of a 2SLS

     regression where T plays the role of a conditioning variable, Z is the instrument, M is the

     endogenous variable and Y is the dependent variable. Namely, βYM and βYT can be estimated

     by evaluating the following two-stage model:


                                                     Z        T
                                   First Stage: M = γM · Z + γM · T + T ,                        (31)

                                Second Stage: Y = βYM · M + βYT · T + Y .                        (32)



   The estimation procedure associated with identification formulas (31) and (32) is not as com-

mon as those in (29) and (30). In fact, it is a novel property of the framework laid out here that

Z is a valid instrument to identify the causal effect of M on Y when conditioned on T, that is,

Z ⊥⊥ Y (m)|T. To clarify the intuition of this result, we illustrate it with our empirical application

to the context of import exposure, labor markets and voting behavior: As previously noted, the

main endogeneity concern in a regression of regional manufacturing employment (M ) on import

exposure (T ) is that unobserved adverse regional demand shocks reduce regional imports as well

as employment. We therefore instrument for regional import exposure. For instance, an industry-

j-specific domestic demand shock will reduce both local import exposure (T ) and local employ-

ment (M ) in regions that are specialized in industry j. The solution advanced in Autor et al. (2013)

is to use other (high-wage) countries’ imports as the basis of an instrument (Z) that is orthogonal

to Germany-specific demand conditions. For illustration, consider industry-specific imports from

China to a specific country, say Australia. The identifying assumption in Autor et al. (2013) is that

Australian industry-specific imports are independent of German domestic demand conditions (at


                                                 18
least conditional on controls). The key piece of intuition is that high Australian industry-specific

imports from China conditional on (i.e. relative to) German industry-specific imports from China

(T ) will partly reflect or proxy for German industry-specific demand conditions, i.e. the source of

the bias. Conditional on German imports (T ), higher Australian imports from China (Z) in a given

sector therefore ‘causes’ additional reductions in German employment, by virtue of proxying for

negative German demand conditions.22

       It is worth making the link to Table 1 in the Introduction explicit. Model I stands for the stan-

dard IV model that evaluates the effect of T on M using Z as the instrument. This model is

estimated by the 2SLS regression defined by equations (29) and (30). Model III is the mediation

model with instrumental variables. This model is estimated by Model I plus the 2SLS regression

represented by the linear equations (31)–(32). Model II stands for the IV model that evaluates the

total effect (T E) of T on Y . In Table 1, we have T = fT (Z, T ) on Y = gY (T, ηY ). The indepen-

dence relation Z ⊥⊥ (T , ηY ) induces the exclusion restriction Y (t) ⊥⊥ Z and T is endogenous due

to the statistical dependence between error terms T and ηY . Model II is obtained from Model III by

substitution of the mediation variable M in (30) into the outcome equation in (32):


                             Y = βYM · M + βYT · T + Y and M = βM T
                                                                     · T + M                                         (33)

                           ⇒ Y = βYM · βMT
                                           · T + M + βYT · T + Y
                                                    
                                                                                                                      (34)

                               = βYM · βMT
                                           + βYT ·T + βYM M + Y ≡ gY (T, ηY ).
                                                 
                                                                                                                      (35)
                                 |      {z       }     |   {z    }
                                             TE                       ηY


Error term ηY of Model II is mapped into βYM M + Y in (35). Thus the correlation between ηY and

T results from the correlation between M and T and the independence Z ⊥⊥ (T , ηY ) is due to

Z ⊥⊥ (T , M , Y ) in A-1.23


2.2      Controlling for Additional Covariates

These methods can be easily extended to enable conditioning on additional covariates. Let K

denote a set of variables that we wish to control for. By this we mean that variables K cause
  22
     Whether they indeed do so is a question of explanatory power, not econometric identification.
  23
     In Online Appendix E, we investigate the particular case in which the instrument Z consists of a single variable.
We show that the estimate of the total effect T E = βYM ·βM T
                                                              +βYT evaluated by the 2SLS regressions in (29)–(30) and (31)–
(32) is numerically the same as the standard 2SLS estimate of the causal effect of T on Y in Model II, namely, the 2SLS
estimate of θYT that uses T = βTZ · Z + T for the first stage and Y = θYT · T + Y for the second stage.


                                                            19
observed variables X = [Z, T, M, Y ]0 . In other words, part of the covariation in X is not due to the

causal relations of model (12)–(15), but due to the correlation induced by covariates K. Thus, our

task is to isolate the portion of covariance ΣX that is caused by variables K.

       It is standard to use orthogonal projections to decompose a covariance matrix ΣX into the part

due to variables K and its complement. Let K be the linear space spanned by variables K and K⊥

be the orthogonal complement to K. Thus the covariance ΣX can be decomposed as:


                                                 ΣX = ΣX|K + ΣX|K⊥                                                 (36)

                                    where ΣX|K⊥ = ΣX − ΣX,K Σ−1 0
                                                             K ΣX,K .                                              (37)


Controlling for covariates K is achieved by simply replacing the covariance matrix ΣX in (19) by

ΣX|K⊥ in (37). All previous identification results follow. In practice, replacing ΣX by ΣX|K⊥ is

equivalent to adding covariates K as conditioning variables in the linear regressions (28)–(32) that

estimate the model coefficients. For instance, instead of (28), parameter βTZ can now be estimated

by the following OLS regression:


                                New OLS for βTZ : T = βTZ · Z + βTK · K + T ,                                     (38)


and equivalently for regressions (29)–(32).24


2.3      Allowing for General Error Dependency

Assumption A-2 allows for statistical dependence between error terms T ⊥
                                                                        ⊥ M and M ⊥
                                                                                   ⊥ Y . A-
                                                                                    

2 also allows for the conditional dependence of error terms T ⊥
                                                               ⊥ Y |M , and assumes these error
                                                               

terms T , Y are unconditionally independent T ⊥⊥ Y . This error structure has appeal: it renders

T, M and Y endogenous, but still enables the identification of all causal effects in a just-identified

model. As previously noted, it is equivalent to assuming that T is endogenous in a regression

of Y on T only because of confounders that affect T and M . We view this assumption as quite

plausible in our setting, but there is clearly a concern that our framework may also be applied to

settings where the identifying assumption is harder to defend. It is therefore important to extend
  24
    Equations (48) and (49) in section 4 are the empirical equivalent of equations (29) and (30), with controls K added.
Equations (50) and (51) in section 5 are the empirical equivalent of equations (31) and (32).


                                                          20
the framework to relax Assumption A-2, in order to gauge the importance of the independence

T ⊥⊥ Y for the results.

    Allowing ρT Y 6= 0 is equivalent to stating that the statistical dependence among error terms

is unrestricted. This generates a model with eleven parameters: four coefficients βTZ , βM
                                                                                         T , βT , βM ,
                                                                                              Y    Y

four error variances σ2Z , σ2T , σ2M , σ2Y , and three correlations ρT M , ρT Y , ρM Y . The identification of

these coefficients relies on the matrix equality in (20). An identification problem arises because

(20) yields only ten identifying equalities. We show that these equalities render six of the eleven

model parameters point-identified. Those are the coefficients βTZ , βM
                                                                     T , the correlation ρ
                                                                                           T M and the

variances σ2Z , σ2T , σ2M .

    The remaining five parameters are not point-identified. Those are the coefficients βYM , βYT , the

correlations ρT Y , ρM Y and the variance σ2Y . As a consequence, neither the direct effect DE = βYT
                              T · β M is point-identified. We can still evaluate bounds for these
nor the indirect effect IE = βM    Y

effects. We estimate the range of possible values that these treatment effects can take when error

terms are allowed to have any dependence relation. The subsequent identification follows the

same steps as in the previous section.

    Model identification relies on matrix equation Σ                e X ≡ (I − Ψ) ΣX (I − Ψ)0 as
                                                   e X = Σ , where Σ

                                                    e X [i, j] = Σ [i, j] for i ≤ j; i, j ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4}. The
in (20). This yields ten linear equalities given by Σ

independence relation Z ⊥⊥ (T , M ) implies that Σ [1, 2] = Σ [1, 3] = 0. Thereby the equalities
                   e X [1, 3] = 0 as in (23)–(24) still hold. As a consequence, the coefficients β Z , β T
e X [1, 2] = 0 and Σ
Σ                                                                                                 T     M
                                                            σZT              σZM
remain unchanged and are still identified by βTZ =          σZZ
                                                                       T =
                                                                  and βM     σZT .
                                                                                                          T can
                                                                                     Coefficient βTZ and βM

still be evaluated by the OLS regression in (28) and the 2SLS in (29)–(30) respectively. Coefficients

βTZ , βM
       T refer to Model I in Table 1. The model is not altered by the causal relation between T and


Y and thereby βTZ , βM
                     T are not affected by relaxing ρ
                                                      T Y 6= 0.

    Error variances are identified by the diagonal of the matrix equality Σ
                                                                          e X = Σ . The equality

e X [1, 1] = Σe [1, 1] implies that σZZ = σ2 . Furthermore, the identification of β Z and the observed
Σ                                            Z                                      T

covariances enable the identification of error variance σ2T by the following equation:


                                             σT T − βTZ σZT − βTZ σZT − βTZ σZZ = σ2T                       (39)
                                                                              
                 e X [2, 2] = Σe [2, 2] ⇒
                 Σ




                                                       21
                                    T enables the identification of σ 2 by the following equation:
In addition, the identification of βM                                M



                                                 T σ        T         T        = σ2M                                (40)
                                                                            
            e X [3, 3] = Σe [3, 3] ⇒
            Σ                            σM M − βM   T M − βM σT M − βM σT T



Parameters βTZ , βM
                  T and variances σ 2 , σ 2 enable the identification of correlation ρ
                                   T    M                                            T M via the fol-

lowing equation:


          e X [2, 3] = Σe [2, 3] ⇒ σT M − β Z σZM − β T (σT T − β Z σZT ) = ρT M σ σ
          Σ                                                                                                          (41)
                                           T         M           T                 T  M




                                    e X [i, j] = Σe [i, j] such that (i, j) ∈ {(2, 3), (1, 4), (2, 4), (3, 4)},
   We are left with four equalities Σ

and five parameters βYM , βYT , ρT Y , ρM Y , σ2Y that are not point-identified. If any of these five param-

eters were known, the remaining four parameters would be just identified. It is useful to define

an auxiliary variable κ ≡ ρM Y · σY to examine the identification of the model. Suppose κ was

known, then the model parameters could be identified by the following procedure:

   1. The equalities Σ                       e X [2, 4] = Σe [2, 4] generate the following equations:
                     e X [1, 4] = Σe [1, 4], Σ
                                   σZY − βYM σZM − βYT σZT = 0                                                       (42)

                                   σT Y − βYM σT M − βYT σT T = ρT Y σY σT .                                       (43)
                                                                | {z }
                                                                             κ


      If κ was known, the coefficients βYM , βYT could be obtained by the following formula:

                 βYM
                           −1           
                    = B0 A−1 B     · B0 A−1 C ,                                                                      (44)
                 βYT
                                                                                                        
                        σZZ σZT              σZM              σZT                                σZY
            where A =    0          , B=                                 ,       C=                              .   (45)
                        σZT  σT T            σT0 M            σT T                        σT Y   + κ · σT

   2. Coefficients βYM , βYT enable the evaluation of error variance σ2Y via equality Σ
                                                                                       e X [4, 4] = Σe [4, 4]

      in (26).

   3. The evaluation of σY in addition to βYT , βYM , βM
                                                        T ,σ
                                                            M enables the identification of the corre-

      lation ρM Y via the equality Σ
                                   e X [2, 3] = Σe [2, 3] in (27).

   4. Finally, the correlation ρT Y can be identified through the ratio ρT Y = κ/σY .

   The identification of model parameters is anchored on value of the parameter κ. Under no

model constrains, the parameter κ could take any value in the real line, which would render un-

                                                     22
informative bounds for parameters βYM , βYT , ρT Y , ρM Y , σ2Y . Fortunately, we can rely on additional

model restrictions that delimit the range of values that κ can take. For instance, κ is defined by

κ ≡ ρM Y · σY , where the outcome error variance σ2Y is smaller or equal than the variance of

the outcome σY Y itself, i.e. σY Y ≥ σ2Y . This model property limits the range of possible values
             √
of κ to |κ| ≤ σY Y . Another restriction arises from the fact that the covariance Σe must be a

positive-definite matrix. That is to say that its eigenvalues25 are strictly positive. We also benefit

from the restrictions on the model correlations 0 ≤ |ρT Y | ≤ 1 and 0 ≤ ρT Y ≤ 1. We evaluate the

κ-interval that complies with all these model restrictions. We then use this interval to generate the

bounds for: (1) the direct effect DE = βYT ; (2) the indirect effect IE = βM
                                                                           T · β M ; (3) the total effect
                                                                                Y

T E = βYT + βM
             T · β M ; (4) the share of the total effect that is mediated by the indirect effect, namely,
                  Y

S = IE/T E = βM · βYM · βYT + βM
                  T                   T · β M −1 .
                                             
                                           Y




3        Data

Our data is organized as a stacked panel of first differences between election dates, 1987 to 1998

(period 1) and 1998 to 2009 (period 2), staying as close as possible to the decadal changes usually

studied in the literature. We study regional exposure to German trade with Eastern Europe and

China, that was exogenously affected by the fall of Communism and China’s WTO accession. In

Germany, imports from and exports to China and Eastern Europe roughly tripled over the period

1987 to 1998 (from about 20 billion to about 60 billion Euros each),26 and again tripled between

1998 and 2009.

         Our data is observed at the county (Landkreis) level.27 We drop all city states from the sample,

and follow Dauth et al. (2014) in excluding East-German counties from the first period of analysis,

but including them in the second period. We observe 408 counties in our data, 86 of which are

in East Germany. Over two periods, we have 730 (= (408 − 86) + 408) observations in total. For

reference, we represent the data as two separate Landkreise-maps for periods 1 and 2 in Appendix
    25
      A a square matrix A of dimension N has N eigenvalues λn ; n = 1, ..., N that are defined as the root-solutions of
polynomial generated by det (A − λI) = 0, where det(·) is the matrix determinant and I stands for the identity matrix
of dimension N.
   26
      Throughout the paper, we report values in thousands of constant-2005 Euros using exchange rates from the German
Bundesbank.
   27
       We follow Dauth et al. (2014) in using counties as a representation of German local labor markets. Dauth et al.
(2014) show that results are qualitatively identical when using broader ‘functional labor markets’ but at the cost of
econometric precision.


                                                          23
B. We include period-specific fixed effects for four broad regions in all estimations (North, West,

South, and East Germany). These imply that the imbalanced nature of the panel has no bearing on

any coefficient estimates. Indeed, none of our results are affected at all by dropping East Germany

altogether, and we include it primarily to stay close to the existing literature.

       With a view towards the mediation framework we develop in section 2, we need the following

variables: Treatment Tit is our measure of local labor market i’s import exposure in period t. Medi-

ators Mit are labor market variables, and Final Outcome Yit refers to voting outcomes. Finally, we

construct Zit as an Instrument for Tit . We now explain how these variables are measured.28


3.1      Import Exposure (Treatment T )

We follow Autor et al. (2013) and Dauth et al. (2014) and calculate T as net import exposure:29

                                                X Lijt ∆IMGjt − ∆EXGjt
                                        Tit =                                   .                                   (46)
                                                       Ljt        Lit
                                                 j


∆IMGjt denotes changes in Germany’s imports in industry j in period t. Local labor market i’s

composition of employment at the beginning of period t determines its exposure to changes in

industry-specific trade flows ∆IMGjt over the ensuing decade.30 Sector j receives more weight if
                                                Lijt
region i’s national share of that sector        Ljt    is high, but a lower weight if i’s overall workforce Lit

is larger. Autor et al. (2013) focus on imports (∆IMGjt ) and consider the net of imports (∆IMGjt )

minus exports (∆EXGjt ) only in their appendix. Dauth et al. (2014) show that in Germany imports

from and exports to low-wage manufacturers are not only more balanced in the aggregate than

in the U.S. but also correlate positively at the industry level. As a result, we rely on a local labor

market’s net import exposure throughout the paper.

       One concern with the measure of import exposure in equation (46) is that it is a composite effect

of the relative importance of trade-intensive industries and the relative importance of manufactur-

ing employment in a region (i.e. L1it relative to j Lijt ). The share of manufacturing employment
                                                 P

might independently shape subsequent labor-market and voting changes. This problem is well
  28
      Conditioning variables Kit are discussed with the results in section 4.1.
  29
      Throughout the paper, we will refer to net import exposure as import exposure for short.
   30
      The Institut für Arbeitsmarkt- und Berufsforschung (IAB) reports industries of employment Lij in standard interna-
tional trade classification (SITC), and we link these to the UN Comtrade trade data using the crosswalk described in
Dauth et al. (2014), which covers 157 manufacturing industries.



                                                             24
known, and is solved by always conditioning on region i’s initial share of manufacturing employ-

ment in all our regressions (Autor et al., 2013).


3.2    Labor Market Variables (Mediator M )

We use the Institut für Arbeitsmarkt- und Berufsforschung (IAB)’s Historic Employment and Es-

tablishment Statistics (HES) database to glean information on workers’ industry of employment,

occupation, and place of work for all German workers subject to social insurance.31 Individual-

level data are aggregated up to the Landkreis level to match our voting data. We consider decadal

changes in (i) total employment, (ii) manufacturing’s employment share, (iii) manufacturing wages,

(iv) non-manufacturing wages, and (v) unemployment, with data for the last one coming from the

German Statistical Office. Online Appendix F provides additional information on data sources and

variable construction.


3.3    Voting (Final Outcome Y )

To measure how import exposure affects voting behavior, we focus on party-votes in federal elec-

tions in Germany (Bundestagswahlen).32 Due to its at-large voting system Germany, like most conti-

nental European countries, has consistently had a multi-party system that spans the full spectrum

from far-left to extreme-right parties. This allows us to contrast the effect of import exposure on

populists parties’ vote share with that for moderate parties. There are four parties that we label

‘established’ in that they were persistently represented in parliament over the 25 years we study.

There is also a large number of small parties. The average vote share of these small parties is far

below the 5% threshold of party votes needed to enter the federal parliament.33 We collected these

data to create a novel dataset of party vote shares at the county level. We group the small parties

into three categories: far-left parties, extreme-right parties, and a residual category of other small
  31
      see Bender, Haas, and Klose 2000 for a detailed description. Civil servants and self-employed individuals are not
included in the data. Furthermore, we exclude workers younger than 18 or older than 65 and we exclude all individuals
in training and in part-time jobs because their hourly wages cannot be assessed.
   32
      The party vote, called (Zweitstimme), mainly determines a party’s share of parliamentary seats. German voters also
cast a second vote for individual candidates, called (Erststimme). This vote for individuals affects the very composition
of party factions in the parliament, but has no significant influence on their overall parliamentary share. Moreover, the
decision on individual candidates might be strategic. We thus follow Falck et al. (2014) and focus on the party vote.
   33
      This threshold is not binding if a party wins at least three seats through the vote for individual candidates (Erst-
stimme). During our period of analysis, this occurred once in 1994. The individual candidates of the party PDS won
4 seats by Erststimme. As a result, the party received 30 seats in total, according its 4.4% of party votes (Zweitstimme)
received.


                                                           25
parties. Altogether, Landkreis-level voting outcomes are divided into changes in the vote-share of

(i) four mainstream parties: the CDU, the SPD, the FDP and the Green party, (ii) extreme-right

parties, (iii) far-left parties, (iv) other small parties, and (v) turnout, see Falck et al. (2014).34


3.4        Others’ Import Exposure (Instrument Z)

Endogeneity concerns in estimating the effect of import exposure on labor markets and voting

come from the fact that domestic demand and supply shocks may simultaneously affect Tit , local

labor market outcomes, and local voting behavior.

         To overcome this problem, we follow the approach in Autor et al. (2013) and instrument Ger-

many’s imports from (exports to) China and Eastern Europe, ∆IMGjt (∆EXGjt ), with the average

imports from (exports to) a set of similar high-wage economies ∆IMOjt (∆EXOjt ):35

                                   X Lijt−1 ∆IMOjt                        X Lijt−1 ∆EXOjt
                         ZitIM =                       ,        ZitEX =                      .                  (47)
                                        Ljt−1 Lit−1                            Ljt−1 Lit−1
                                    j                                      j


Finally, following Autor et al. (2013) we lag the initial employment shares by one decade to address

reverse causality concerns, denoting the lag by the subscript t − 1.



4        Baseline Results

In this section, we estimate Model I (trade effect on labor markets) and Model II (trade effect on

voting) using the standard IV approach.


4.1        Model I

Under linearity, Model I can be estimated by evaluating the following two-stage model:


                                          Tit = βTZ · Zit + βTK Kit + ηit ,                                     (48)
                                                 T          K
                                          Mit = βM · Tit + βM Kit + it .                                       (49)
    34
     Online Appendix G provides additional background on the German political system and party landscape, and in
Online Appendix H we present descriptive patterns on the vote share variables by period.
  35
     We choose the same countries as Dauth et al. (2014) to instrument German imports and exports: Australia, Canada,
Japan, Norway, New Zealand, Sweden, Singapore, and the United Kingdom. This set of countries excludes Eurozone
countries because their demand conditions are likely correlated with Germany’s.



                                                           26
Equations (48) and (49) are equations (29) and (30) with control variables Kit included and sub-

scripts added to reflect the panel nature of the data. Model II will be estimated by the same model,

with Yit replacing Mit in the second stage (49).

    Kit includes i’s start-of-period manufacturing employment share; the employment share in

the largest sector;36 along with separate controls for the employment share in car manufacturing

and the chemical industry;37 the start-of-period employment share that is foreign born, and the

start-of-period unemployment rate; finally, the start-of-period vote-shares for all parties (with the

SPD as the ommitted party share. Further included is a set of period-specific region fixed effects

(North, West, South, and East Germany) with the regions being comparable to U.S. Census di-

visions (Dauth et al., 2014).38 The regional fixed effects are period-specific to allow for different

trends by period. Standard errors it are clustered at the level of 96 larger economic zones defined

by the Federal Office for Building and Regional Planning (BBR).

    We use the exact same set of controls variables in Model I and Model II. The core economic

controls are well-motivated and routinely included in the related literature. Adding social and

baseline voting controls is motivated by Model II and turns out to have more bearing on the es-

timates of interest in Model II than in Model I, as one would expect. We emphasize that Model I

has been examined in detail in other papers including Autor et al. (2013), whose results have al-

ready been replicated for Germany by Dauth et al. (2014). We therefore keep the results for Model

I brief. There is, however, one aspect that we need to explore for the purposes of our analysis.

There is naturally more than one observed labor market outcome that is likely to be impacted

by import competition. In addition to (i) total employment, we additionally observe (ii) manu-

facturing’s employment share, (iii) manufacturing wages, (iv) non-manufacturing wages, and (v)

unemployment. total employment (i) is probably the most direct measure of the potential conse-

quences of import exposure, but we find that (ii) and (iii) are also significantly impacted by import

competition, with weak effects also for (iv) and (v).39

    Without additional separate dedicated sets of instruments for each potential mediator, our
  36
     It is a feature of the German economy that some regions are dominated by one specific industry. In such regions,
individual firms (e.g. Daimler-Benz, Volkswagen, or Bayer) are likely to have political bargaining power, and as a result
politicians may help buffer trade shocks to limit adverse employment effects.
  37
     The latter account for those industries’ outstanding importance for the German economy.
  38
     Each of Germany’s 16 states (Bundesländer) is fully contained inside one of these four regions.
  39
      This is consistent with prior research that clearly shows that the labor market effects of import exposure are con-
centrated in manufacturing employment (Autor et al., 2013; Dauth et al., 2014).


                                                           27
method can only identify the effect of as many mechanisms as there are treatments. Indeed, it

is likely to be a common problem for researchers interested in applying the method developed

here that there will often be a number of observed variables that potentially link a treatment T to

an outcome Y . We therefore need to aggregate the multiple mechanisms into a single index. A

principal component analysis is attractive in this regard because it generates indices that are purely

statistical measurements based on the total variation in labor market outcomes and are orthogonal

to one another by construction.40 This approach is appealing as long as the mediating effects are

sharply concentrated in a single principal component, and this principal component has a clear

interpretation. We label the principal components as our ‘labor market components’ (LMC).


                Table 3: German Labor Markets’ Principal Components’ Factor-Loadings

                      (1)                (2)                 (3)                   (4)                    (5)
                    ∆ log              ∆ Share              ∆ log                 ∆ log                 ∆ Share
                  employment         Manuf. Empl.        Manuf. Wage         Non-Manuf. Wage            Unempl.

        LM C1         0.1711             -0.3632              0.5108                 0.5486               0.5261
        LM C2         0.7625             0.6004               0.2104                 0.0607              -0.1012
        LM C3        -0.5389              0.397               0.5311                 0.3251              -0.4053
Notes: The table reports on the factor loadings of the five labor market variables on LMC1 and LMC2 . See discussion in
text. LMC1 ’s eigenvalue is 2.707, explaining 54.1 percent of the total variation. LMC2 ’s eigenvalue is 1.281, explaining
25.6 percent of the total variation. LMC3 ’s eigenvalue is 0.509, explaining 10.2 percent of the total variation.




       One can best interpret the LMCs through their relation to the labor market outcomes we ob-

serve, specifically through their factor loadings. Table 3 reports on the LMCs’ factor loadings. By

construction, there are always as many LMCs as variables but to keep this section brief, we report

only the first three. The convention is to report these only for the LMCs with an eigenvalue larger

than 1, i.e. only the first two. In our data, LMC1 and LMC2 together explain about 80 percent of

the variation in the labor market data (0.541 + 0.256). The third LMC only explains about 10.2

percent, the fourth and fifth together explain the remaining 10.1 percent.

       LMC1 is somewhat ambiguous: it loads positively on changes in wages, but negatively on
  40
    By contrast, methods that take weighted averages (Christensen and Miguel, 2016; Kling, Liebman, and Katz, 2007)
are usually applied to creating an outcome-index, but are unattractive for creating a mediating variable index precisely
because they pre-impose weights. Similarly, factor analysis is more suitable when there are strong priors on how to
group variables (Heckman, Pinto, and Savelyev, 2013).




                                                           28
manufacturing employment and also positively on unemployment.41 By contrast, LMC2 ’s inter-

pretation is unambiguous: Its factor loadings are strongly positive for changes in manufacturing

employment and total employment, and negative for changes in unemployment. LMC2 is clearly

associated with the labor market aspects that we know to be most affected by import exposure.

       The estimation results of Model I are displayed in table 4, each cell reporting on a different

regression specification. In column 1, our least conservative specification considers only the start-

of-period manufacturing employment share as a control.42 In column 2, we account for the dispro-

portionate regional employment share of some firms by including a control for the employment

share in the largest sector, along with separate controls for the employment share in car manufac-

turing and the chemical industry. In column 3, we add controls for the start-of-period employ-

ment share that is foreign born and the start-of-period unemployment rate. In column 4, we add

start-of-period vote-shares for all parties, with the SPD being the omitted baseline. The addition

of controls in columns 3 and 4 is motivated by Model II but we will need to maintain the same

control variables for labor market outcomes in our mediation framework and therefore apply the

same here.

       In the upper part of Panel A, we investigate the five individual labor market outcomes, where

we view total employment as the primary one. Import exposure has a significant negative effect

on total employment, and on manufacturing employment and wages, as well as a weak effect

on the unemployment rate. In our preferred specification in column 4, a one-standard-deviation

increase in Tit (e1,350 per worker) decreases total employment by about 3 percent (e−0.024·1.35 −

1 = −0.032).43 In the lower part of Panel A, we investigate the effect of Tit on the five principal

components LMC1 –LMC5 . We argued that PCA is appealing if the mediating effects turn out

to be sharply concentrated in one PC, and this PC has a clear interpretation. Indeed, this turns

out to be the case here: Comparing the results for LMC2 to those of the other four, it is the only

one significantly impacted by import competition in all specifications, and the p-value is below
  41
     Our interpretation of LMC1 is that it reflects the polarization of high-wage countries’ labor markets (Goos, Man-
ning, and Salomons, 2009, 2014), associated with both higher wages and higher unemployment. A related view on
LMC1 is provided by the urban agglomeration literature, where Duranton and Puga (2005) point out that regional
specialization has become “functional” as opposed to “sectoral” over the last decades, implying a tendency for head-
quarters and business services to cluster in large cities, a trend that appears to be clearly borne out in Germany (Bade,
Laaser, and Soltwedel, 2003).
  42
     As is common in this literature, we always control for a region’s start-of-period manufacturing share in employ-
ment because it inherently drives part of the variation in Tit ; see the discussion in 3.4.
  43
     We report corresponding OLS results in Online Appendix I (table 3).


                                                           29
                       Table 4: Effect of Import Exposure Tit on Labor Markets Mit

                                                           (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)
                   Panel A: Second Stage (49), for Individual Labor Market Outcomes
            M: ∆ log employment                        -0.023***       -0.021**      -0.023***     -0.023***
                                                         [0.004]        [0.012]        [0.005]       [0.004]

            M: ∆ Share Manuf. Empl.                    -0.440**        -0.515**      -0.719***     -0.757***
                                                         [0.048]        [0.022]        [0.001]       [0.000]

            M: ∆ log Manuf. Wage                       -0.006**       -0.007***      -0.006***     -0.006***
                                                         [0.013]        [0.004]        [0.006]       [0.008]

            M: ∆ log Non-Manuf. Wage                   -0.005***      -0.005***        -0.003        -0.002
                                                         [0.004]        [0.008]        [0.112]       [0.265]

            M: ∆ Share Unempl.                           0.076          0.049           0.107        0.099
                                                         [0.271]        [0.575]        [0.140]       [0.134]

            M: LM C1                                     -0.033         -0.036          0.019        0.030
                                                         [0.489]        [0.441]        [0.624]       [0.410]

            M: LM C2                                   -0.264***      -0.266***      -0.317***     -0.324***
                                                         [0.003]        [0.004]        [0.001]       [0.000]

            M: LM C3                                     -0.028         -0.051        -0.072*       -0.066*
                                                         [0.517]        [0.277]        [0.052]       [0.062]

            M: LM C4                                     0.024          -0.002         -0.015        -0.027
                                                         [0.409]        [0.957]        [0.621]       [0.366]

            M: LM C5                                     -0.016         0.002           0.006        0.008
                                                         [0.433]        [0.912]        [0.773]       [0.718]

                                        Panel B: First Stage Equation (48)
             IM
            βM                                           0.225         0.212***       0.214***      0.217***
                                                         [0.000]        [0.000]        [0.000]       [0.000]
             EX
            βM                                           -0.211       -0.206***      -0.206***     -0.202***
                                                         [0.000]        [0.000]        [0.000]       [0.000]

            Controls                                   Baseline      + Industry        +Socio      + Voting
            R-Squared                                   0.524           0.551           0.555        0.566
            F-Stat. of excluded Instruments             43.81           43.64           40.15        38.77
            Period-by-region FE                          Yes             Yes             Yes          Yes
            Observations                                 730             730             730          730
Notes: (a) Each cell reports results from a separate IV regression. The data is a stacked panel of first-differences at
the Landkreis level. Each regression has 730 observations, i.e. 322 Landkreise in West Germany, observed in 1987–
1998 and 1998–2009, and 86 Landkreise in East Germany, observed only in 1998–2009. (b) All specifications include
region-by-period fixed effects. Columns incrementally add controls. (1) controls only for start-of-period manufacturing
and period-specific region fixed effects. (2) adds controls for dominant industries (employment share of the largest
industry, in automobiles, and chemicals). (3) adds controls for the structure of the workforce (share foreign workers,
and population share unemployed). (4) adds beginning-of-period voting controls. (c) Across rows, we investigate
different outcomes. For example, the top-row reports a semi-elasticity where a one-standard-deviation increase in Tit
(e1,350 per worker) decreased total employment by about 3 percent, (e−0.024·1.35 − 1 = −0.032). (d) The bottom panel
reports the first stage results. p-values are reported in square brackets, standard errors are clustered at the level of 96
commuting zones. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
                                                            30
0.001 in all specifications. By contrast, the other four LMCs are largely unaffected by import

competition, with only the third one showing a weak response.44

       For the estimation of Model III we will later focus on LMC2 because it appears to summarize

the effects of import exposure on labor markets very well in this data.

       Panel B reports on the first-stage results of estimating equation (48). These results are highly

significant, have the expected sign and are in line with estimates in the existing literature.45 We do

not study any individual-level labor market results, but refer the interested reader to Dauth et al.

(2014) who present such evidence for Germany.


4.2      Model II

We now turn to estimating Model II, which shares the first stage equation (48) with Model I, but

replaces Mit with Yit in the second stage equation (49). We devote more attention to Model II

because our empirical application is an investigation of the causes of political populism and the

subsequent results are original to this study. In Table 1 in the Introduction Model II represents

causal equations T = fT (Z, T ) and Y = gY (T, ηY ). The endogeneity implied by T ⊥
                                                                                    ⊥ ηY can be
                                                                                    

solved with the same instrument as in Model I because Z ⊥⊥ T , ηY .

       Table 5 presents our baseline results of this 2SLS estimation. Each cell reports results from

a different regression. While we are primarily interested in political support for populists, our

voting data allow us to study effects on the entire political spectrum, i.e. changes in the vote-

shares of moderate, small, extreme-right, and far-left parties, as well as turnout. Each row in

table 5 pertains to one of these different outcome variables. Columns refer to different regression

specifications, which are introduced in exactly the same manner as in table 4. In addition, column

5 reports the results from our preferred specification in column 4 as standardized coefficients to

facilitate a comparison of the magnitudes of the effect on different election outcomes.

       The effects are broadly consistent across all specifications, though we see that the stepwise

inclusion of controls reduces the estimated magnitude. Table 5 suggests no effect on turnout;
  44
       Given our interpretation of the LMCs, these results resonate closely with Autor, Dorn, and Hanson (2015) who
show that import exposure has had large effects on (overall and manufacturing) employment whilst the polarization
of work and the rise of service jobs (i.e. our LMC1 ) were explained by other factors, primarily automation.
   45
      For added clarity, we break the instrument βTZ · Zit in the first stage equation (48) into a separate import and export
                     IM            EX
instrument βTIM · Zit    + βTEX · Zit . Whether we have one instrument or a vector of instruments has no bearing on our
argument that we develop a method that requires instruments dedicated to only one endogenous variable T .



                                                             31
                            Table 5: Effect of Import Exposure (Tit ) on Voting (Yit )

                                                    (1)              (2)           (3)           (4)          (5)
          ∆ Turnout                                0.002            0.003        0.003         0.002         0.030
                                                  [0.348]           [0.244]      [0.219]       [0.289]      [0.289]

          Established Parties:
          ∆ voteshare CDU,CSU                     -0.128           -0.206        -0.211        -0.066       -0.016
                                                  [0.457]           [0.271]      [0.246]       [0.630]      [0.630]

          ∆ voteshare SPD                         -0.020            0.015        0.023         -0.010       -0.001
                                                  [0.897]           [0.928]      [0.881]       [0.941]      [0.941]

          ∆ voteshare FDP                        0.215***       0.232***        0.222***       0.122         0.022
                                                  [0.005]           [0.004]      [0.004]       [0.109]      [0.109]

          ∆ voteshare Greens                     -0.132**          -0.131**      -0.073        -0.042       -0.015
                                                  [0.022]           [0.029]      [0.188]       [0.374]      [0.374]

          Non-Established Parties:
          ∆ voteshare Extreme-Right              0.118***       0.140***        0.131***      0.102**      0.051**
                                                  [0.001]           [0.001]      [0.002]       [0.032]      [0.032]

          ∆ voteshare Far-Left                    -0.037           -0.064        -0.095        -0.079       -0.020
                                                  [0.773]           [0.650]      [0.417]       [0.501]      [0.501]

          ∆ voteshare Other Small                 -0.015            0.013        0.002         -0.028       -0.021
                                                  [0.696]           [0.739]      [0.957]       [0.528]      [0.528]

          Controls                              Baseline       + Industry       +Socio       + Voting        ∼(4)
          Period-by-region F.E.                   Yes              Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
          Observations                            730              730           730           730           730
Notes: (a) Each cell reports results from a separate instrumental variable regression. The data is a stacked panel of first-
differences at the Landkreis level. Each regression has 730 observations, i.e. 322 Landkreise in West Germany, observed
in 1987–1998 and 1998–2009, and 86 Landkreise in East Germany, observed only in 1998–2009. We drop three city-states
(Hamburg, Bremen, and Berlin in the East). (b) All specifications include region-by-period fixed effects. Columns
incrementally include added controls in identical fashion as table 4. Column 4 is our preferred specification, which
includes socioeconomic controls. Column 5 reports on the same specification with standardized outcome variables to
facilitate comparison of magnitudes across rows. (c) Across rows, we report on different voting outcomes. Our focus
will be on the most significant, and in column 5 also most sizeable, voting response, which occurs on the extreme right.
(d) The first stage is identical to that in table 4. p-values are reported in square brackets, standard errors are clustered at
the level of 96 commuting zones. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                              32
and looking at reactions across the political spectrum, we see no significant effects on established,

small, or far-left parties in our preferred specification in column 4. The only segment of the party

spectrum that responds consistently to trade shocks across all specifications is the vote-share of

extreme-right parties.46 In our preferred specification in column 4, a one-standard-deviation in-

crease in Tit (e1,350 per worker) increases the extreme-right vote share by 0.14 (0.102 · 1.35) per-

centage points, roughly 35 percent of the average per-decade increase of 0.43 percentage points

during the 22 years we study. Column 5 reports the results from our preferred specification as

beta coefficients, which shows that the estimated effects for all parties except the extreme right are

not only insignificant but also small compared to the effect on extreme-right parties.47

       Interpreting the Effects:        Whether far-left or extreme-right populists capture protectionist

sentiments is ultimately country-specific. To argue with a recent headline in the The Economist

(2016) “Farewell, left versus right. The contest that matters now is open against closed.” Nonethe-

less, political scientists argue that the political left in Europe has found it difficult to take a coher-

ent position against globalization in the last two decades, often hampered by internal intellectual

conflicts (Arzheimer, 2009). Sommer (2008, p. 312) argues that “in opposing globalization, the

left-wing usually criticizes an unjust and profit-oriented economic world order. [It] does not reject

globalization per se but rather espouses a different sort of globalization. In contrast, the solutions

proposed by the extreme right keep strictly to a national framework. The extreme right’s claim,

therefore, that it is the only political force that opposes globalization fundamentally [...] rings

true.”48 In Appendix B we provide anecdotal evidence linking local import exposure to increasing

support for the extreme right in two regions of Germany. While it is clear that import exposure

has increased the extreme right’s vote share in our data, the overall effect is small. This is partly

mechanical because in our setup the fixed effects absorb bigger shifts in voting behavior. More im-
  46
       There is also some evidence of polarization in the response of the vote share of the market-liberal FDP is only
marginally insignificant. One possible explanation for the positive though marginally insignificant effect on votes for
the pro-market FDP is that regions hit by a trade shock may face increasing demand for redistribution or government
intervention in markets (Rodrik, 1995). As a result, those who do not approve such policies may choose to vote for the
FDP. Based on our reading of German politics, we take this as a hint for possible polarization, if the economically liberal
FDP became an attractive choice for voters who position themselves against growing protectionist sentiments in their
region. Our focus is on the extreme-right’s vote share.
   47
      We present corresponding OLS estimates in table 4 of Online Appendix I.
   48
      For illustration, we provide an excerpt from the extreme-right NPD’s ‘candidate manual’: “Globalization is a plan-
etary spread of the capitalist economic system under the leadership of the Great Money. Despite by its very nature
being Jewish-nomadic and homeless, it has its politically and militarily protected locus mainly on the East Coast of the
United States” (Grumke, 2012, p. 328).




                                                            33
portantly, however, Germany did not have a populist party with broad appeal during our study

period. All anti-globalization parties at the right fringe were extremist parties with neo-Nazi ties

and associations to the Third Reich, which made them anathema to most Germans. Where pop-

ulist leaders have broad appeal, the political backlash to import exposure may be more strongly

reflected in changing vote shares. The coefficient size is thus specific to the political context. Our

focus is not on the magnitude of the effect of import exposure on voting behavior but on the causal

mechanisms underlying it.49

       Gravity:     We also estimate results based on gravity residuals. This approach does not use

IV but instead estimates the exogenous evolution of industry-specific Chinese and Eastern Eu-

ropean comparative advantage over Germany based on a comparison of bilateral trade flows of

Germany and ‘China plus Eastern Europe’ vis-a-vis the same set of destination markets.50 The

gravity results are reported in Appendix C and are in line with those in table 5.

       Individual-Level Analysis:           One benefit of using German data is that the Socio-Economic

Panel (SOEP) has a long-run panel structure that is unique amongst attitudinal socio-economic

surveys, starting in 1984 (GSOEP, 2007).51 Importantly, we can locate individuals inside their

local labor markets. As a result, we can associate individual workers w with their local labor

market i’s import exposure (T ), instrument T with Z as before, and add the same set of regional

controls. This allows us to track decadal changes in individuals’ party preferences in a way that

mirrors our main local labor market analysis.52 For our purpose, the relevant GSOEP question

asks: “If there was an election today, who would you vote for?” We translate this question into a series

of dummies that reflect the full party spectrum also observed in table 5, e.g. one dummy if the

individual would you vote for the CDU, one if the individual would vote for the SPD, etc. The

results, reported in Appendix D, mimic closely our main table 5. A county’s import exposure shifts

individuals’ preferences to the extreme right. Splitting the sample by worker types, we find the

results to be entirely driven by low-skill workers, and more specifically those in manufacturing
  49
     Aside from the size of estimated coefficients we also note that Germany had relatively balanced trade with low-
wage manufacturing countries during our study period and did not experience the “China Shock” in the same way as
the U.S. and other high-wage countries. See Online Appendix H.
  50
     See Autor et al. (2013) and Dauth et al. (2014) for a discussion of the gravity residuals approach relative to the IV
approach.
  51
     In the U.S., the General Social Survey (GSS) for example only added a panel component in 2008.
  52
     Because the SOEP only started to ask about voting intentions for the full party spectrum in 1990 we use the time
windows 1990-1998 and 1998-2009, i.e. a slightly shorter period 1 compared to our main results.




                                                           34
sectors, who are also most likely to experience adverse labor market effects from import exposure.

    Without Model III, this is is far as we can go. Standard IV methods generate a causally identified

effect of import exposure on total employment (−0.024) and a causally identified effect of import

exposure on voting (0.102). We now estimate the mediation model to identify to what extent the

former explains the latter.



5    Model III: Mediation Analysis

In this section, we apply the estimation framework developed in Section 2 to estimate Model III.

This allows us to estimate the indirect effect IE of import exposure on voting that runs through

labor markets. The extent to which import exposure polarized voters because it caused labor

market adjustments is identified by a comparison of this indirect effect with the total effect of

import exposure on voting.53

    Under linearity, Model III can be estimated by evaluating the following two-stage model:


                                            Z          T          K
                                     Mit = γM · Zit + γM · Tit + γM Kit + it ,                                           (50)

                                      Yit = βYM · Mit + βYT · Tit + βYK Kit + ηit .                                       (51)


Equations (50) and (51) are exactly equations (31) and (32), except that control variables are in-

cluded and subscripts added to reflect the panel nature of the data.54

    Table 6 summarizes the results of applying our mediation model. There is good reason to

only focus on the fourth specification because it includes baseline voting controls. As a point of

comparison, however, we also report on the third specification, in columns 1 and 3. Furthermore

Table 4 suggests that LMC2 should be viewed as the main summary measure of labor market

adjustments in our data. However, since principal components are harder to interpret, we begin

in columns 1–2 with the log of total employment as the mediator, before then focusing on LMC2

as the mediator in columns 3–4. Ultimately, column 4 presents the most important evidence in the

table since it includes all relevant controls and uses our main summary measure of labor market
  53                                                                                                   T
     The total effect is estimated in Model II as 0.102, reported in table 5. The indirect effect is β̂M , reported in table 4,
multiplied by the effect of M on Y , which we now estimate.
  54
     The first-stage coefficients are denoted by γ’s instead of β’s because they do not correspond to parameters in the
causal model represented by equations (12)–(15).



                                                              35
                              Table 6: Main Estimates of the Mediation Model

                                            (1)         (2)                       (3)                 (4)
         Mediating Variables:              ∆ log(employment)                               LM C2
                                           Panel A: Second Stage (51)

         βYM                             -6.275***          -6.113***           -0.441**           -0.401***
                                           [0.009]              [0.000]          [0.017]            [0.003]

         DE = βYT                         -0.009             -0.050              -0.036            -0.071**
                                           [0.820]              [0.107]          [0.344]            [0.014]
               T · βM
         IE = βM                          0.142*             0.140**            0.140**            0.130**
                    Y
                                           [0.056]              [0.024]          [0.049]            [0.023]
                                                 0.141                0.140             0.140               0.130
         IE/T E                       1.078 =    0.131   1.372 =      0.102   1.067 =   0.131   1.274 =     0.102


                                       Panel B: First Stage Equation (50)
          EX
         γM                              0.006***           0.006***            0.079***           0.082***
                                           [0.000]              [0.000]          [0.000]            [0.000]
          IM
         γM                              -0.004**           -0.004**             -0.018             -0.024
                                           [0.046]              [0.030]          [0.344]            [0.187]
          T
         γM                                0.001                0.001            -0.086             -0.074
                                           [0.837]              [0.747]          [0.128]            [0.171]

         Controls                         +Socio            + Voting            +Socio             + Voting
         Observations                       730                730                730                 730
         R-Squared                         0.471              0.506              0.354               0.401
Notes: (a) Columns 1–2 and 3–4 present results for two different mediators, ∆log(employment) and LM C2 . (b) Panel A
reports estimates from the second-stage equation (51). The point estimate β̂YM in column 2 indicates that a one-percent
drop in employment raises the change in the extreme right’s vote share by 0.06 percentage points (6.113/100). The
implied IE is −6.113 × −0.023 = 0.140, which is 137% of the total effect T E of 0.102 reported in table 5. In our main
specification in column 4, the implied IE is −0.401 × −0.324 = 0.130. (c) Panel B presents results of the the first-stage
equation (50). The estimated coefficients have the expected sign. (d) p-values are reported in square brackets, with
standard errors are clustered at the level of 96 commuting zones (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1).




                                                           36
adjustments as the mediator.

    The bottom panel reports on estimating the first stage equation (50). It is helpful to estimate

the first stage with a prior about coefficients’ expected signs. As discussed, the literature worries

about domestic industry-specific demand conditions as a source of confounding bias. German

industries that experience negative domestic demand shocks will see fewer imports and less em-

ployment. The discussion in section 2 suggests that, conditional on Germany’s imports T , other

countries’ imports may proxy for negative German demand. This is what we find in the top-panel

of table 6. Other countries’ imports from China worth e1,000 per worker reduce German employ-
                       IM = −0.004), while the same amount in exports to China increases German
ment by 0.4 percent (γ̂M
                             EX = 0.006).55
employment by 0.6 percent (γ̂M

    The top panel reports on estimating the second stage equation (51). The point estimate β̂YM

in column 2 indicates that a one-percent drop in employment raises the change in the extreme

right’s vote share by 0.06 percentage points, i.e. 6.113/100, relative to an average per-decade

increase of 0.43 percentage points during the 22 years we study. The indirect effect is the product

of β̂YM × β̂M
            T , with the latter reported in table 4 (−6.113 × −0.023 = 0.140). In column 2, the indirect


effect is 137 percent of the total effect reported in table 5. Table 4 showed that LMC2 is the only

principal component that responded to import competition in the data. In column 4, the indirect

effect implied by LMC2 is 127 percent of the total effect. This is our preferred estimate since LMC2

provides a summary measure of the impact of import exposure on German labor markets. The

relative size of the estimated indirect effect to the total effect is less in columns 1 and 3 (108 and 107

percent respectively), but this is fully explained by a larger total effect in the denominator when

baseline voting controls are not included.

    In summary, our estimation framework suggests that the percentage of the total populist effect

that is explained by labor markets ranges from 107 percent to 138 percent. When we consider only

our preferred fourth specification, the range is tighter, from 127 percent to 138 percent. For the

indirect effect to be more than 100 percent of the total, it needs to be partly offset by the direct effect.

In other words, other channels linking import exposure to voting need to be politically moderating
                            T in Table 6 consistently has a negative sign.56 This implies that if
in the aggregate. Indeed, β̂M
  55                                     IM    EX
     As before, we use two instruments Zit  , Zit , but the important point of our theory is that we need instruments for
only one endogenous variable, namely T .
  56
     While we can only speculate, other channels that are potentially moderating are import exposure’s effect on task-


                                                           37
                                                         Figure 1: Graphing the Bounds

                                                1.5                                                    ρT Y
                Estimated parameters given κ                                                           ρM Y
                                                  1                                                     βYM
                                                                                                        βYT
                                                0.5                                                     σY
                                                                                                       T
                                                                                                      βM βYM
                                                  0

                                               −0.5

                                                −1

                                               −1.5
                                                 −0.5   −0.25         0          0.25       0.5
                                                            Values of Paramater κ
Notes: The horizontal axis is for the auxiliary variable κ; see section 2.3. On the horizontal axis are the five model
parameters βYM , βYT , ρT Y , ρM Y , σ2Y that are not point identified when we relax Assumption A-2. The κ-interval that
complies with the model restrictions of Section 2.3, namely κ ∈ [−.003, 0.085], is delimited by vertical lines. This
                                                                                                                   T
interval generates the bounds for the correlations ρT Y , ρM Y ; the coefficients βYM , βYT ; the indirect effect βM · βYM . and
the standard error σY . The estimates in table 5 refer to the point estimates generated by setting κ to zero. Indeed, the
parameter κ is defined as κ = ρY T · σY , thus ρY T = 0 ⇒ κ = 0.




the only effect of import exposure was to decrease employment, the political response would be

stronger than the one observed in the data.

    Our framework applies to mediation settings where T is endogenous in a regression of Y on T

only because of confounding factors that influence M (Assumption A-2). In our setting, this means

that the effect of import exposure on voting is confounded only by unobserved factors that si-

multaneously impact imports and local labor markets, such as for example negative local demand

shocks. The identifying assumptions underlying IV are always strong, and this is no different.

While we view the stated assumption as plausible in our research setting, there are invariably

many mediation settings our method could be applied to, where the identifying assumption is

less plausible, or even implausible.

    It is therefore important to be able to ask how our results would change if we relaxed this
upgrading (Becker and Muendler, 2015), and switching production towards more differentiated and higher mark-up
varieties (Holmes and Stevens, 2014). Other channels that could work in the opposite direction may involve anxiety
about the future (Mughan and Lacy, 2002; Mughan et al., 2003) or a general aversion to changes in the status quo
economic structure. Of course, one can think of some of these also as labor market channels broadly speaking. The
more important point here is that they are not part of the readily available labor market aggregates usually studied.


                                                                       38
assumption,by allowing ρT Y 6= 0. In section 2.3 we showed that we can do this and still calculate

bounds on the model parameters. Formally, we define an auxiliary variable κ = ρM Y · σY . We

show that all coefficients are point-identified for a given value of κ. We thus investigate the values

of κ that comply with the model restrictions discussed in Section 2.3. In our empirical setting,

the κ-interval that accords with model restriction is given by κ ∈ [−.003, 0.085]. This interval in

turn implies bounds on the five model parameters βYM , βYT , ρT Y , ρM Y , σ2Y . Figure 1 shows this

graphically, and Table 7 reports the results.


                                  Table 7: Bounds on the Mediation Model

         Estimated Parameters                  Assumption A-2 holds          Bounds (No Assumption A-2)
         Correlation                   ρT Y                 0                         [−0.003, 0.110]
         Correlation                  ρM Y                  0                          [0.001, 0.236]
         Correlation                   ρT M              0.502                              0.502
         Coefficient                    βYM             −0.401                       [−0.218, −0.406]
         Direct Effect           DE = βYT               −0.071                        [−0.073, 0.020]
         Indirect effect   IE      T · βM
                                = βM                     0.130                         [0.071, 0.131]
                                        Y
         Share               S = IE/T E                  1.274                         [0.690, 1.284]
Notes: (a) The reported values of the direct and indirect effect when Assumption A-2 holds are those reported in column
4 of of Table 6. Relaxing Assumption A-2 corresponds to allowing ρT Y 6= 0. The possible range of values of ρT Y is
dictated by the model restrictions in section 2.3.




       There is a range of possible correlations ρT Y ∈ [−0.003, 0.110]. Different correlations ρT Y im-

ply different direct and indirect effects (while the total effect is unchanged by ρT Y ). The range

ρT Y ∈ [−0.003, 0.110] implies the following bounds on the direct effect βYT ∈ [−0.073, 0.020] and
                 T · β M ∈ [0.071, 0.131]. The range ρ
indirect effect βM    Y                                T Y ∈ [−0.003, 0.110] contains zero. Therefore,

all causal effects evaluated under the assumption that ρT Y = 0 (column 4 of Table 6) belong to

the causal effect intervals generated by relaxing this correlation assumption. By contrast, the es-

timated bounds for T , M and M , Y are strictly positive. This is reassuring in corroborating our

identification reasoning, although it should not be interpreted as a statistical test of Assumption A-

2, being as these are not statistical bounds but implied by the model restrictions in section 2.3.57
  57
     We do not impose the bounds for ρT Y to contain 0. Suppose that zero did not belong to the bounds of ρ. As
a consequence, the estimates of causal effects under the assumption ρT Y = 0 would not belong to their respective
bounds when the assumption ρT Y = 0 is relaxed. This would not necessarily amount to a statistical rejection of the
identifying assumption. It is still useful to consider the full range of values implied by the bounds in addition to the


                                                          39
    The correlation structure in the data is consistent with labor market adjustments explaining

between 69 and 128 percent of the observed political response to import exposure. Even at the

lower end of this range, the evidence presented here clearly suggests that effective responses to

political populism need to focus on labor markets first and foremost.



6    Conclusion

A substantial body of recent evidence suggests that in high-wage manufacturing countries like

Germany and the U.S., import exposure has had significant detrimental effects on the labor market

outcomes of manufacturing workers. In this paper we show that import exposure has also induced

voters to turn to protectionist, populist, and nationalist policy agendas represented by Germany’s

extreme right. The focus of our paper is to ask whether the effect of import exposure on voting

for the extreme right is explained by (mediated by) import exposure’s effect on labor markets.

There is good reason to believe it is: The aggregate effects coincide in the data and are mirrored in

an individual-level analysis where those most prone to tilt towards the right are also those most

vulnerable to the labor market consequences of import exposure.

    In trying to answer this question, we face an empirical problem that is common to many re-

search settings: Even though we can use standard IV methods to causally identify the effect of a

treatment (import competition Tit ) on a final outcome (voting Yit ) and we can causally identify the

effect of T on a proposed mechanism outcome (total employment Mit ), we cannot identify how

much of the former is explained by the latter. To make headway, we develop a new methodology

that allows us to perform the required mediation analysis in an IV setting. Applying our method,

we find that the effect of import exposure that is mediated by labor market adjustments is larger

than the total effect of import exposure on extreme-right voting, which in turn implies that other

channels that link import exposure to voting (the ‘direct effect’) are moderating in the aggregate.

Our findings provide a first causal estimate of the importance of labor market adjustments in ex-

plaining the effect of import exposure on voting. The novel methodology we develop for this

purpose may be useful in a broad range of empirical applications studying causal mechanisms

in IV settings. While our identifying assumption plausibly holds in our setting, we caution that
point estimate.



                                                 40
researchers need to critically evaluate its validity before applying it to other mediation-type IV

settings.


References
Acemoglu, D. and P. Restrepo (2017). Robots and jobs: Evidence from us labor markets. MIT
  Umpublished Mimeo..

Art, D. (2007). Reacting to the radical right lessons from germany and austria. Party Politics 13(3),
  331–349.

Arzheimer, K. (2009). Contextual Factors and the Extreme Right Vote in Western Europe, 1980-
  2002. American Journal of Political Science 53(2), 259–275.

Autor, D. and D. Dorn (2013). The Growth of Low-Skill Service Jobs and the Polarization of the
 US Labor Market. American Economic Review 103(5), 1553–1597.

Autor, D., D. Dorn, and G. Hanson (2013). The China Syndrome: Local Labor Market Effects of
 Import Competition in the United States. American Economic Review 103(6), 2121–68.

Autor, D., D. Dorn, G. Hanson, and K. Majlesi (2016). Importing political polarization? the elec-
 toral consequences of rising trade exposure. NBER Working Paper.

Autor, D., D. Dorn, and G. H. Hanson (2015). Untangling trade and technology: Evidence from
 local labour markets. The Economic Journal 125(584), 621–646.

Bade, F.-J., C.-F. Laaser, and R. Soltwedel (2003). Urban specialization in the internet ageempirical
  findings for germany, processed. Kiel Institute for World Economics.

Bagues, M. and B. Esteve-Volart (2014). Politicians’ Luck of the Draw: Evidence from the Spanish
  Christmas Lottery. Accepted at Journal of Political Economy.

Baron, R. M. and D. A. Kenny (1986). The moderator–mediator variable distinction in social psy-
  chological research: Conceptual, strategic, and statistical considerations. Journal of personality
  and social psychology 51(6), 1173.

Becker, S. O. and M.-A. Muendler (2015). Trade and tasks: an exploration over three decades in
  germany. Economic Policy 30(84), 589–641.

Bender, S., A. Haas, and C. Klose (2000). Iab employment subsample 1975-1995 opportunities for
  analysis provided by the anonymised subsample. IZA Discussion Paper 117.

Bloom, N., M. Draca, and J. Van Reenen (2016). Trade induced technical change? the impact of
  chinese imports on innovation, it and productivity. The Review of Economic Studies 83(1), 87–117.

Blundell, R. and J. Powell (2003). Endogeneity in nonparametric and semiparametric regression
  models. In L. P. H. M. Dewatripont and S. J. Turnovsky (Eds.), Advances in Economics and Econo-
  metrics: Theory and Applications, Eighth World Congress, Volume 2. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
  University Press.

Blundell, R. and J. Powell (2004, July). Endogeneity in semiparametric binary response models.
  Review of Economic Studies 71(3), 655–679.

                                                 41
Brunner, E., S. L. Ross, and E. Washington (2011). Economics and policy preferences: causal evi-
  dence of the impact of economic conditions on support for redistribution and other ballot pro-
  posals. Review of Economics and Statistics 93(3), 888–906.

Burgess, S., R. M. Daniel, A. S. Butterworth, and S. G. Thompson (2015). Network mendelian ran-
  domization: using genetic variants as instrumental variables to investigate mediation in causal
  pathways. International Journal of Epidemiology 44(2), 484–495.

Charles, K. K. and M. J. Stephens (2013). Employment, wages, and voter turnout. American Eco-
 nomic Journal: Applied Economics 5(4), 111–143.

Che, Y., Y. Lu, J. R. Pierce, P. K. Schott, and Z. Tao (2016). Does trade liberalization with china
  influence us elections? Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Christensen, G. S. and E. Miguel (2016). Transparency, reproducibility, and the credibility of eco-
  nomics research. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Conley, T. G., C. B. Hansen, and P. E. Rossi (2012). Plausibly exogenous. Review of Economics and
  Statistics 94(1), 260–272.

Dahl, C. M., M. Huber, and G. Mellace (2017). It’s never too late: A new look at local average
 treatment effects with or without defiers. Discussion Papers on Business and Economics, University
 of Southern Denmark, 2/2017.

Dauth, W., S. Findeisen, and J. Suedekum (2014). The Rise of the East and the Far East: German
 Labor Markets and Trade Integration. Journal of European Economic Association 12(6), 1643–1675.

Dippel, C., R. Gold, and S. Heblich (2015). Globalization and its (dis-) content: Trade shocks and
  voting behavior. NBER Working Paper (w21812).

Dix-Carneiro, R. (2014). Trade liberalization and labor market dynamics. Econometrica, 825–885.

Dunn, G. and R. Bentall (2007). Modelling treatment-effect heterogeneity in randomized con-
 trolled trials of complex interventions (psychological treatments). Statistics in Medicine 26(26),
 4719–4745.

Duranton, G. and D. Puga (2005). From sectoral to functional urban specialisation. Journal of Urban
 Economics 57(2), 343–370.

Dustmann, C., B. Fitzenberger, U. Schönberg, and A. Spitz-Oener (2014). From sick man of europe
 to economic superstar: Germany’s resurgent economy. The Journal of Economic Perspectives 28(1),
 167–188.

Falck, O., R. Gold, and S. Heblich (2014). E-lections: Voting Behavior and the Internet. American
  Economic Review 104(7), 2238–65.

Falck, O., S. Heblich, and A. Otto (2013). Agglomerationsvorteile in der wissensgesellschaft: Em-
  pirische evidenz für deutsche gemeinden. ifo Schnelldienst 66(3), 17–21.

Falk, A., A. Kuhn, and J. Zweimüller (2011). Unemployment and Right-wing Extremist Crime.
  The Scandinavian Journal of Economics 113(2), 260–285.

Feigenbaum, J. J. and A. B. Hall (2015). How legislators respond to localized economic shocks:
  Evidence from chinese import competition. Journal of Politics 77(4), 1012–30.

                                                42
Frank, T. (March 7th 2016). Millions of ordinary americans support donald trump. here’s why. The
  Guardian.

Frey, C. B. and M. A. Osborne (2017). The future of employment: How susceptible are jobs to
  computerisation? Oxford Martin School Umpublished Mimeo..

Frolich, M. and M. Huber (2017). Direct and indirect treatment effectscausal chains and mediation
  analysis with instrumental variables. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical
  Methodology), n/a–n/a.

Geneletti, S. (2007). Identifying direct and indirect effects in a non-counterfactual framework.
 Journal of the Royal Statistical Society B 69(2), 199–215.

Gennetian, L. A., J. Bos, and P. Morris (2002). Using instrumental variables analysis to learn more
 from social policy experiments. Mdrc working papers on research methodology, MDRC (Man-
 power Demonstration Research Corporation).

Giuliano, P. and A. Spilimbergo (2014). Growing up in a recession. The Review of Economic Stud-
  ies 81(2), 787–817.

Goos, M., A. Manning, and A. Salomons (2009). Job polarization in europe. The American Economic
 Review 99(2), 58–63.

Goos, M., A. Manning, and A. Salomons (2014). Explaining job polarization: Routine-biased tech-
 nological change and offshoring. The American Economic Review 104(8), 2509–2526.

Grumke, T. (2012). The Extreme Right in Europe. Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht.

GSOEP (2007). The German Socio-Economic Panel Study (SOEP) - Scope, Evolution and Enhance-
 ments. Technical Report 1.

Hafeneger, B. and S. Schönfelder (2007). Politische Strategien gegen die extreme Rechte in Parlamenten.
 Folgen für kommunale Politik und lokale Demokratie. Friedrich-Ebert-Stiftung: Berlin.

Hagan, J., H. Merkens, and K. Boehnke (1995). Delinquency and Disdain: Social Capital and
 the Control of Right-Wing Extremism Among East and West Berlin Youth. American Journal of
 Sociology 100(4), 1028–1052.

Heckman, J. and R. Pinto (2017). Unordered monotonicity. Forthcoming Econometrica.

Heckman, J. J. (2008). The principles underlying evaluation estimators with an application to
 matching. Annales d’Economie et de Statistiques 91–92, 9–73.

Heckman, J. J. and R. Pinto (2015a). Causal analysis after Haavelmo. Econometric Theory 31(1),
 115–151.

Heckman, J. J. and R. Pinto (2015b). Econometric mediation analyses: Identifying the sources of
 treatment effects from experimentally estimated production technologies with unmeasured and
 mismeasured inputs. Econometric reviews 34(1-2), 6–31.

Heckman, J. J., R. Pinto, and P. A. Savelyev (2013). Understanding the mechanisms through
 which an influential early childhood program boosted adult outcomes. American Economic Re-
 view 103(6), 2052–2086.


                                                  43
Heckman, J. J. and E. J. Vytlacil (2005, May). Structural equations, treatment effects and economet-
 ric policy evaluation. Econometrica 73(3), 669–738.

Hiscox, M. J. (2002). Commerce, coalitions, and factor mobility: Evidence from congressional votes
  on trade legislation. American Political Science Review 96(3), 593–608.

Holmes, T. J. and J. J. Stevens (2014). An alternative theory of the plant size distribution, with
 geography and intra-and international trade. Journal of Political Economy 122(2), 369–421.

Imai, K., L. Keele, and D. Tingley (2010). A general approach to causal mediation analysis. Psy-
  chological Methods 15(4), 309–334.

Imai, K., L. Keele, D. Tingley, and T. Yamamoto (2011a). Unpacking the black box of causality:
  Learning about causal mechanisms from experimental and observational studies. American Po-
  litical Science Review 105(4), 765–789.

Imai, K., L. Keele, D. Tingley, and T. Yamamoto (2011b). Unpacking the black box of causality:
  Learning about causal mechanisms from experimental and observational studies. American Po-
  litical Science Review 105, 765–789.

Imai, K., L. Keele, and T. Yamamoto (2010). Identification, inference and sensitivity analysis for
  causal mediation effects. Statistical Science 25(1), 51–71.

Imbens, G. W. and J. D. Angrist (1994, March). Identification and estimation of local average
  treatment effects. Econometrica 62(2), 467–475.

Jensen, J. B., D. P. Quinn, and S. Weymouth (2016). Winners and losers in international trade: The
  effects on us presidential voting. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Jhun, M. A. (2015). Epidemiologic approaches to understanding mechanisms of cardiovascular diseases:
  genes, environment, and DNA methylation. Ph. D. thesis, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.

Jun, S. J., J. Pinkse, H. Xu, and N. Yildiz (2016). Multiple discrete endogenous variables in weakly-
  separable triangular models. Econometrics 4(1).

Kling, J. R., J. B. Liebman, and L. F. Katz (2007). Experimental analysis of neighborhood effects.
  Econometrica 75(1), 83–119.

Krueger, A. B. and J.-S. Pischke (1997). A Statistical Analysis of Crime Against Foreigners in
  Unified Germany. Journal of Human Resources 32(1), 182–209.

Krugman, P. R. (2008). Trade and Wages, Reconsidered. Brookings Papers on Economic Activ-
  ity 2008(1), 103–154.

Lubbers, M. and P. Scheepers (2001). European Sociological Review 17(4), 431–449.

MacKinnon, D. P. (2008). Introduction to statistical mediation analysis. Routledge.

Malgouyres, C. (2014). The impact of exposure to low-wage country competition on votes for the
 far-right: Evidence from french presidential elections. working paper.

Malgouyres, C. (2017). The impact of chinese import competition on the local structure of employ-
 ment and wages: Evidence from france. Journal of Regional Science 57(3), 411–441.



                                                  44
Mocan, N. H. and C. Raschke (2014). Economic Well-being and Anti-Semitic, Xenophobic, and
 Racist Attitudes in Germany. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 20059.

Mudde, C. (2000). The Ideology of the Extreme Right. Manchester University Press.

Mughan, A., C. Bean, and I. McAllister (2003). Economic globalization, job insecurity and the
 populist reaction. Electoral Studies 22(4), 617–633.

Mughan, A. and D. Lacy (2002). Economic Performance, Job Insecurity and Electoral Choice.
 British Journal of Political Science 32(3), 513–533.

New York Times (2009). Ancient citys nazi past seeps out after stabbing. February 11th.

Pearl, J. (2011). The mediation formula: A guide to the assessment of causal pathways in nonlinear
  models. Forthcoming in Causality: Statistical Perspectives and Applications.

Pearl, J. (2014). Interpretation and identification of causal mediation. Psychological Methods, Special
  Section: Naturally Occurring Section on Causation Topics in Psychological Methods 19, 459–481.

Petersen, M. L., S. E. Sinisi, and M. J. Van der Laan (2006). Estimation of direct causal effects.
  Epidemiology 17, 276–284.

Pierce, J. R. and P. K. Schott (2016). The surprisingly swift decline of us manufacturing employ-
  ment. American Economic Review 106(7), 1632–62.

Pinto, R. (2015). Selection bias in a controlled experiment: The case of Moving to Opportunity.
  Unpublished Ph.D. Thesis, University of Chicago, Department of Economics.

Powdthavee, N. (2009). Does education reduce blood pressure? estimating the biomarker effect
  of compulsory schooling in England. Discussion Paper 09/14, University of York, Department
  of Economics, York, UK.

Robins, J. M. (2003). Semantics of causal dag models and the identification of direct and indirect
  effects. In N. L. P. J. Green, Hjort and S. Richardson (Eds.), Highly Structured Stochastic Systems,
  MR2082403, pp. 70–81. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Robins, J. M. and S. Greenland (1992). Identifiability and exchangeability for direct and indirect
  effects. Epidemiology 3(2), 143–155.

Rodrik, D. (1995). Political economy of trade policy. Handbook of international economics 3(3), 1457–
  1494.

Rogowski, R. (1987). Political cleavages and changing exposure to trade. American Political Science
  Review 81(4), 1121–1137.

Rosenbaum, P. R. and D. B. Rubin (1983, April). The central role of the propensity score in obser-
  vational studies for causal effects. Biometrika 70(1), 41–55.

Rubin, D. B. (2004). Direct and indirect causal effects via potential outcomes (with discussion).
  Scandinavian Journal of Statistics 31, 161–170.

Scheve, K. F. and M. J. Slaughter (2001). What Determines Individual Trade-Policy Preferences?
  Journal of International Economics 54(2), 267–292.



                                                  45
Small, D. S. (2012). Mediation analysis without sequential ignorability: using baseline covariates
  interacted with random assignment as instrumental variables. Journal of Statistical Research 46(2),
  91–103.

Sommer, B. (2008). Anti-capitalism in the name of ethno-nationalism: ideological shifts on the
  german extreme right. Patterns of Prejudice 42(3), 305–316.

Stöss, R. (2010). Rechtsextremismus im Wandel. Technical report, Friedrich Ebert Stiftung.

Ten Have, T. R., M. M. Joffe, K. G. Lynch, G. K. Brown, S. A. Maisto, and A. T. Beck (2007, Septem-
  ber). Causal mediation analyses with rank preserving models. Biometrics 63(3), 926–934.

The Economist (July 30th 2016). The new political divide.

Voigtländer, N. and H.-J. Voth (2015). Taught to Hate: Nazi Indoctrination and Anti-Semitic Beliefs
  in Germany. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences Forthcoming.

Yamamoto, T. (2014, March). Identification and estimation of causal mediation effects with treat-
  ment noncompliance. Manuscript. Department of Political Science, Massachusetts Institute of
  Technology, Cambridge.




                                                 46
Appendix A            Proofs

Proof P-1 The treatment equation T = fT (Z, T ) in (1) implies that Z ⊥
                                                                       ⊥ T. Thus our task is to proof two
                                                                       

exclusion restrictions: Z ⊥⊥ M (t) and Z ⊥⊥ Y (t). According to (4), the counterfactual mediation is given

by M (t) = fM (t, M ). But Assumption A-1 states that Z ⊥⊥ (T , M , Y ). In particular, we have that:


                                Z ⊥⊥ T ⇒ Z ⊥⊥ fM (t, M ) ⇒ Z ⊥⊥ M (t).                                    (52)


We can use iterated substitution to express the outcome counterfactual Y (t) in (5) as the following function

of error terms:


                                Y (t) = fY (t, M (t), Y ) = fY (t, fM (t, M ), Y ) by (4),               (53)

            by A-1 we have that: Z ⊥⊥ (M , Y ) ⇒ Z ⊥⊥ fY (t, fM (t, M ), Y ) ⇒ Z ⊥⊥ Y (t).              (54)


Proof P-2 The lemma requires two proofs. The first consists in showing that Z is not independent of

M conditioned on T, that is, Z ⊥
                               ⊥ M |T. The second consists in showing that the exclusion restriction
                               

Z ⊥⊥ Y (m)|T holds under the independence condition T ⊥⊥ Y in Assumption A-2.

    A intuitive justification for Z ⊥
                                    ⊥ M |T relies on interpreting the correlations generated by condition on
                                    

T. Recall that the treatment equation is given by T = fT (Z, T ). Thus, conditioning on T = t is equivalent

to conditioning on the values of Z, T such that fT (Z, T ) = t. This induces a correlation between Z and

T and thereby Z ⊥
                 ⊥ T |T. Moreover, T correlates with M and therefore we also have that Z ⊥
                                                                                           ⊥ M |T.
                                                                                            

But if Z ⊥
         ⊥ M |T, then Z ⊥
                        ⊥ fM (T, M )|T and therefore we have that Z ⊥
                                                                     ⊥ M |T as M = fM (T, M ).
                                                                      

In summary, conditioning on T induces a correlation between Z and T , but error term T correlates with

M , which in turn generates a correlation between Z and M.

    It remains to show that the the independence relation T ⊥⊥ Y generate the exclusion restriction

Z ⊥⊥ Y (m)|T where the outcome counterfactual Y (m) is given by Y (m) = fY (T, m, Y ) as in (6). The

following rationale justify this assessment. Assumptions A-1–A-2 generate the unconditional independence

relation (T , Z ) ⊥⊥ Y . Let f1 (·), f2 (·), f3 (·) be three arbitrary non-degenerate functions such that f1 :

supp(Z ) × supp(T ) → R, f2 : supp(Z ) → R, f3 : supp(Y ) → R. Under this notation, we have that:


            (T , Z ) ⊥⊥ Y   ⇒     Z ⊥⊥ Y |f1 (Z , T )   ⇒     f2 (Z ) ⊥⊥ f3 (Y )|f1 (Z , T ).    (55)


                                                       47
In particular, we can set functions f1 (T ), f2 (Y ), f3 (Z , T ) in (55) to the following expressions: f1 (Z ) =

fZ (Z ), f2 (Y ) = fY (t, m, Y ), and f3 (Z , T ) = fT (fZ (T ), Z ). Thus:


         f2 (Z ) ⊥⊥ f3 (Y ) | f1 (Z , T )                                                                    (56)
                                                                  
             ⇒ fZ (Z ) ⊥⊥ fY (t, m, Y ) | fT (fZ (T ), Z ) = t ∀(t, m) ∈ supp(T ) × supp(M )                 (57)
                                             
             ⇒ Z ⊥⊥ fY (t, m, Y ) | T = t ∀(t, m) ∈ supp(T ) × supp(M )                                         (58)

             ⇒ Z ⊥⊥ Y (m)|T.                                                                                     (59)


Proof P-3 Assumptions A-1–A-2 implies that Y ⊥⊥ (Z, T ). According to Equations (6), we have that:


                         P (Y (m) ≤ y|T = t) = P (fY (t, m, Y ) ≤ y|T = t),

                                                 = P (fY (t, m, Y ) ≤ y|fT (Z, T ) = t),

                                                 = P (fY (t, m, Y ) ≤ y),

                                                 = P (Y (t, m) ≤ y),


where the third equality comes from Y ⊥⊥ (Z, T ).




                                                          48
                        Figure A1: Tit in 1987–1998 (Left), and 1998–2009 (Right)




Notes: Trade Shocks mapped into 322 West German counties for 1987–1998 (left) and into 408 German counties for
1998–2009 (right). The two circles enclose the regions in Palatine (on the left) and Bavaria (on the right).




Appendix B             Graphical Representation and Qualitative Evidence

Figure A1 shows the spatial dispersion of our key regressor Tit . While our empirical analysis will

use fixed effects to wash out any secular trends, it is reassuring that even in the raw data there

appears to be little correlation in Tit in space or time.58 This reflects both Germany’s diverse pat-

tern of industrial production and the fact that the dominant driver of Tit changed from Eastern

Europe in 1987–1998 to China in 1998–2009 (Dauth et al., 2014). The enclosed region in the south-

west of our map is Southwest-Palatine (Südwestpfalz), a region that traditionally produced shoe

and leather manufacturing firms. In our data, Southwest-Palatine is in the top decile of negatively

shocked districts in both periods. In 2005, the region’s biggest city, Pirmasens, had an unemploy-

ment rate of 20 percent. At the same time, extreme-right parties increased their vote-share from 1.3

percent in 1987 to 3.45 percent in 2009. A study commissioned by the Friedrich Ebert Foundation

conducted interviews with local politicians which suggested that the local Republikaner managed
  58
     We use period-specific fixed effects for four broad regions. With East Germany as one of the regions we thus have
a total of seven period-by-region fixed effects in our stacked panel.


                                                         49
to mobilize enough voter support to enter Pirmasens’ city parliament by explicitly linking import

competition to social hardships (Hafeneger and Schönfelder, 2007). The enclosed counties in the

south eastern part of the map are Rottal-Inn, Passau, Freyung-Grafenau, Regen, and Cham. This

is a traditional manufacturing region specialized in glass products and furniture making. This

region too saw high import exposure, declining employment, and increasing support for the ex-

treme right in the last decades, attracting international attention when neo-Nazis carried out a

near-fatal attack on Passau’s police chief in 2008 (New York Times, 2009). Additional descriptive

statistics are reported in Online Appendix H.



Appendix C             Identification of T on Y with Gravity Residuals

An alternative approach to the IV approach pursued in the paper is to estimate gravity equations,

which exploit essentially the same source of exogenous variation. The endogeneity concern with

increasing imports ∆IMGjt is that they reflect not only increasing competitiveness of Chinese and

Eastern European (‘CE’) industries59 , but also German industry-specific demand changes. The

gravity approach to solving this problem is to compare changes in German industries’ exports to

other countries O in relation to Chinese and Eastern European exports to O. This comparison re-

flects changes in Chinese and Eastern European comparative advantage over Germany, and allows
                                                    grav
constructing an exogenous measure ∆IMGjt to replace ∆IMGjt .60 Online Appendix J shows how
                                            grav                                                            grav
to obtain the gravity-residuals ∆IMGjt that replace ∆IMGjt the gravity-residuals ∆EXGjt that

replace ∆EXGjt . An exogenous measure for changes in in German industries’ import exposure
                                                                                            grav          grav
can be obtained from netting out both effects such that ∆Tradegrav
                                                              Gjt = ∆IMGjt − ∆EXGjt . Sub-

stituting ∆TradeGjt in equation (46) with ∆Tradegrav
                                                Gjt provides an exogenous measure of regional

import exposure based on the gravity approach as


                                                        X Lijt ∆Tradegrav
                                                                     Gjt
                                          Titgrav   =                                                              (60)
                                                             Ljt   Lit
                                                         j

       We now substitute Tit from our baseline regression with Titgrav directly. Otherwise, we run

exactly the same specifications as before.
  59
    Competitiveness increases due to productivity increases, better market access, and decreasing relative trade cost.
  60
    As before, we chose Belgium, France, Greece, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Portugal, Spain, and the UK as
”other countries” O for our gravity regressions, to be comparable with Dauth et al. (2014).


                                                             50
                             Table 8: Gravity Results for Effect of Tit on Voting
                                                 (1)                (2)         (3)             (4)            (5)
                                               Baseline         + Structure   +Socio         + Voting       Standard.
                                               Gravity            Gravity     Gravity        Gravity         Gravity
                                                0.000**          0.000*       0.000**         0.000*         0.002*
Δ Turnout
                                                (2.143)          (1.774)      (1.980)         (1.706)        (1.706)

Established Parties:
                                                 0.006            0.003         0.003          0.001          0.000
Δ Vote Share CDU/CSU
                                                (0.873)          (0.392)       (0.342)        (0.089)        (0.089)

                                                 -0.008           -0.004       -0.005          0.004          0.000
Δ Vote Share SPD
                                                (-1.197)         (-0.674)     (-0.720)        (0.668)        (0.668)

                                                 0.001            0.006         0.004         0.007*         0.001*
Δ Vote Share FDP
                                                (0.204)          (1.365)       (1.064)        (1.933)        (1.933)

                                                0.006**           0.000         0.001          0.000          0.000
Δ Vote Share Green Party
                                                (2.021)          (0.071)       (0.408)        (0.012)        (0.012)

Non-established Parties
                                                0.004*           0.006**      0.006**         0.003*         0.002*
Δ Vote Share Extreme-Right Parties
                                                (1.855)          (2.430)      (2.276)         (1.779)        (1.779)

                                                -0.011*          -0.012*      -0.012*        -0.013**       -0.003**
Δ Vote Share Far-Left Parties
                                                (-1.814)         (-1.884)     (-1.894)       (-2.177)       (-2.177)

                                                 0.002            0.002         0.003         -0.001          -0.001
Δ Vote Share Other Small Parties
                                                (0.755)          (0.696)       (1.141)       (-0.766)        (-0.766)

Period-by-region F.E.                             Yes              Yes          Yes            Yes             Yes
Observations                                      730              730          730            730             730

Notes: (a) Each cell reports results from a separate regression. The data is a stacked panel of first-differences at the
Landkreis level. Each regression has 730 observations, i.e. 322 Landkreise in West Germany, observed in 1987–1998 and
1998–2009, and 86 Landkreise in East Germany, observed only in 1998–2009. We drop three city-states (Hamburg, Bre-
men, and Berlin in the East). (b) All specifications include region-by-period fixed effects. Column 1 controls only for
start-of-period manufacturing. Column 2 adds controls for the structure of the workforce (share female, foreign, and
high-skilled). Column 3 adds controls for dominant industries (employment share of the largest industry, in automo-
biles, and chemicals). Column 4 adds start-of-period voting controls. Column 5 adds socioeconomic controls at the
start of the period (population share of unemployed individuals, and individuals aged 65+). This is our preferred
specification. Finally, Column 6 presents our preferred specification with standardized outcome variables to facili-
tate comparison. (c) All standard errors are clustered at the level of 96 commuting zones. All specifications include
region-by-period fixed effects. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                           51
    Results are reported in Table 8. Again, each cell reports results from a different regression.

Rows specify different outcome variables, and columns refer to different regression specifications.

Results are consistent with our main specifications reported in table 5. The key observation is

that the positive effect of import exposure on extreme-right party votes is confirmed by this al-

ternative identification strategy. In addition, a few other effects that were insignificant in table 5

become sharper here: there is more evidence for a positive effect of import exposure on turnout.

Moreover, the positive effect on the vote share of the market-liberal party FDP turns significant

in our preferred specification in column 5. Additionally, the negative effect on far-left parties is

significant in the gravity regressions. Overall, these patterns are all internally consistent, and do

not detract from our focus on extreme-right vote shares in the IV setting.



Appendix D              Individual-Level Evidence

In this section, we test whether our regional-level results can be confirmed at the individual level.

For each party P, we aggregate individuals’ self-reported voting intentions into a decadal cumu-
                                                                                       P as the
lative share of years in which a respondent stated he would vote for it. We calculate Ywt

ratio of the number of years that w states a preference for party P, divided by the number of years

that w answered the question in the SOEP.61 For each party P, the dependent variable is a share

between 0 and 1 for individual w in time period t and we separately estimate


                               P               P
                              Ywt = γYY − 1 · Ywt−1 + γTY · Tit + γXY · Xit−1 + wt .                              (61)


                                                          P
for each party outcome. With a slight abuse of notation, Ywt−1 controls for w’s survey response to

the same question in the base year. Xit refers to the same set of regional controls for the base-year

as in table 5. Our focus is on estimating γTY , the effect of region i’s import exposure Tit on a resi-

dent worker w’s reported party support. Table 9 reports the results. Across rows it mimics closely

our main table 5, except that there is no turnout measure in the SOEP. Every coefficient in table

9 reports the estimate of γTY from a separate regression. Tit is always instrumented as before, we
   61
      It is better to measure the outcome as a cumulative share for the whole period instead of using a first difference
approach because the latter relies only on individuals’ answer at the beginning and the end of the period. Moreover,
respondents do not answer all questions in every year, which increases the number of missing observations in a first
difference specification. As a result, we obtain about three times as many ‘person-decade’ observations, and corre-
spondingly more precise estimates, using the share measure than with the first-difference measure.


                                                          52
do not report the first stage regressions again. Column 1 includes the period-region fixed effects

and the regional economic controls from table 5. We also add region i’s base-year socio-economic

and voting controls Xit−1 from table 5 for each period. To better gauge magnitudes, column 2

reports the same specification with standardized outcomes. Import exposure shifts individuals’

preferences to the extreme right, though the effect is weaker in the SOEP than it was in the ac-

tual voting data in table 5, with a t-statistic of only 1.62. By contrast there is stronger evidence of

a reduction in preference for the established left party, the SPD. No other party across the spec-

trum shows a response that is close to being significant. We also find distinctive results on what

types of workers are driving these patterns. In columns 5–7 we split the sample by skill as well

as by whether an individual works in manufacturing, i.e. whether their employment sector is

more heavily exposed to trade competition.62 Both the extreme right effect and the SPD effect

are entirely driven by low-skill workers, while high-skill workers do not respond at all.63 Split-

ting the low-skill sample into manufacturing and non-manufacturing employment, we see that

the extreme-right response is entirely driven by low-skill workers in manufacturing sectors. This

implies that those who are most likely to experience adverse labor market effects from trade are

the ones most likely to turn towards the extreme right because of increasing import exposure in

their region. By contrast, the reduction in the change in the SPD’s vote share is driven by low-skill

non-manufacturing workers. A possible explanation is that low-skill workers in the service sector

are affected by competition from laid-off manufacturing workers, or that laid-off manufacturing

workers had to accept unattractive jobs in the service sector. In either case, they might blame the

SPD-initiated labor market reforms.




  62
     In an earlier working paper, we focused on comparing the effect of individuals’ import exposure due to their
industry of employment relative to their regions’ import exposure (Dippel et al., 2015). However, we have come to the
conclusion that individuals’ industry of employment is measured too coarsely in the SOEP to draw strong conclusions
about the relative importance of these two types of import exposure.
  63
     The SOEP reports skills as educational attainment according to the ‘ISCED-1997’ classification, where ‘high’ means
some college.


                                                          53
                                         Table 9: Individual-Level Analysis
                                                 (1)               (2)              (3)            (4)                (5)
                                                                                                Low-Skill &       Low-Skill &
                                           All Controls      Standardized       High-Skill
                                                                                                  Manuf.          Not Manuf.
Established Parties:
                                               0.001             0.003            -0.007            -0.013            0.008
   Would Vote CDU/CSU
                                              (0.292)           (0.292)          (0.278)           (0.794)           (0.827)
                                              -0.008*           -0.016*           -0.013            -0.011           -0.017*
   Would Vote SPD
                                              (1.901)           (1.901)          (0.460)           (0.400)           (1.930)
                                               0.001             0.005            -0.018            0.011             0.007
   Would Vote FDP
                                              (0.459)           (0.459)          (0.420)           (0.664)           (0.568)
                                               0.003             0.012            0.070             0.025             0.002
   Would Vote Green Party
                                              (1.000)           (1.000)          (1.474)           (0.909)           (0.152)
Non-Established Parties:
                                               0.003             0.023            0.010            0.083**            0.006
   Would Vote Extreme-Right Parties
                                              (1.619)           (1.619)          (0.875)           (2.206)           (0.475)
                                               -0.001            -0.007           -0.051            0.019             -0.009
   Would Vote Far-Left Parties
                                              (1.059)           (1.059)          (1.358)           (1.356)           (1.055)
                                               -0.001            -0.007           0.005             -0.026            -0.003
   Would Vote Other Small Parties
                                              (0.642)           (0.642)          (0.182)           (1.053)           (0.190)

Period-by-region F.E.                           Yes                Yes             Yes               Yes               Yes
Observations                                   9,669             9,669            1,348             2,199             6,122
Notes: (a) Each cell in this table reports on a separate regression. An observation is an individual w over a period t, where
we consider 1990–1998, and 1998–2009, closely mirroring the local labor market results. Each row reports on stated
preferences for a differnt party. The outcome in each row is the ratio of the number of years that w states a preference
for party P, divided by the number of years that w answered the question in the SOEP. The reported coefficient in all
cells is the IV coefficient of regional import exposure Tit . (b) Column 1 is the baseline specification which includes
period and four region fixed effects as well as all the regional economic, voting and demographic controls from table
5, and individuals’ base-year stated political preferences. This is the full set of controls included in all columns. To
better gauge magnitudes, column 2–5 standardize all outcomes by their mean. In columns 3–5, we break the sample by
individuals’ skill as well as by whether they are employed in the manufacturing sector (1,348 + 2,199 + 6,122 = = 9,669).
High-skill workers (column 3) do not change their political support at all in response to import exposure. Column 4
shows that it is the population most affected by import exposure – low-skill manufacturing workers – that drives the
effects on the far right. (c) t-statistics are reported in round brackets, standard errors are clustered at the region level. ***
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                              54
                               Online Appendix – Not for Publication




                 Online Appendix

                         to

 “Instrumental Variables and Causal Mechanisms:
Unpacking the Effect of Trade on Workers and Voters”
                                                                   Online Appendix – Not for Publication


Online Appendix A               The Sequential Ignorability Assumption
A large literature on mediation analysis relies on the Sequential Ignorability Assumption A-3 of
Imai et al. (2010) to identify mediation effects.

Assumption A-3 Sequential Ignorability (Imai et al., 2010):

                               Y (t0 , m), M (t) ⊥⊥ T |X
                                                
                                                                                                       (62)
                                                 0
                                             Y (t , m) ⊥⊥ M (t)|(T, X),                                (63)

where X denotes pre-intervention variables that are not caused by T, M and Y such that 0 < P (T =
t|X) < 1 and 0 < P (M (t) = m|T = t, X) < 1 holds for all x ∈ supp(X) and m ∈ supp(M ).
Under Sequential Ignorability A-3, it is easy to show that the distributions of counterfactual vari-
ables are identified by P (Y (t, m)|X) = P (Y |X, T = t, M = m) and P (M (t)|X) = P (M |X, T = t)
and thereby the mediating causal effects can be expressed as:
           Z                                                                                      !
                                                                                
ADE(t) =        E(Y |T = t1 , M = m, X = x) − E(Y |T = t0 , M = m, X = x, X = x) dFM |T =t,X=x (m) dFX (x)

                                                                                                       (64)
           Z                                                                       !
                                        h                                         i
AIE(t) =       E(Y |T = t, M = m, X = x) dFM |T =t1 ,X=x (m) − dFM |T =t0 ,X=x (m) dFX (x).            (65)


 Imai, Tingley, Keele and Yamamoto offer a substantial line of research that explores the identify-
ing properties of Sequential Ignorability Assumption A-3. See Imai, Keele, Tingley, and Yamamoto
(2011b) for a comprehensive discussion of the benefits and limitations of the sequential ignorabil-
ity assumption.
    The main critics of Sequential Ignorability A-3 is that it does not hold under the presence of
either Confounders or Unobserved Mediators (Heckman and Pinto, 2015b).
    The independence relation (62) assumes that T is exogenous conditioned on X. There exists no
unobserved variable that causes T and Y or T and M. For instance, the Sequential Ignorability A-3
holds for the model defined in (??) because:

                              fY (t0 , m, Y ), fM (t, M ) ⊥⊥ fT (T ) ⇒    Y (t0 , m), M (t) ⊥⊥ T.
                                                                                            
      Y , M ⊥⊥ T ⇒                                                                                  (66)
       Y ⊥⊥ M |T ⇒          fY (t0 , m, Y ) ⊥⊥ fM (t, M )|fT (T ) ⇒     Y (t0 , m) ⊥⊥ M (t)|T,   (67)

 where the initial independence relation in (66) and (67) comes from the independence of error
terms.
    This assumption is expected to hold in experimental data when treatment T is randomly as-
signed. The independence relation (63) assumes that M is exogenous conditioned on X and T .
It assumes that no confounding variable causing M and Y. Sequential Ignorability A-3 is an ex-
tension of the Ignorability Assumption of Rosenbaum and Rubin (1983) that also assumes that a
treatment T is exogenous when conditioned on pre-treatment variables. Robins (2003); Petersen,
Sinisi, and Van der Laan (2006); Rubin (2004) state similar identifying criteria that assume no con-
founding variables. Those assumptions are not testable.
    Sequential Ignorability A-3 assumes that: (1) the confounding variable V is observed, that is,
the pre-treatment variables X; and (2) that there is no unobserved mediator U. This assumption
is unappealing for many because it solves the identification problem generated by confounding
variables by assuming that those do not exist (Heckman, 2008).
    Consider a change in the treatment variable T denoted by ∆(t) = t1 − t0 . The Direct and
                                                            Online Appendix – Not for Publication


indirect effects can be expressed by:
                                                                                     
                ADE(t0 ) = λY T · t1 + λY M · E(M (t0 )) − λY T · t0 + λY M · E(M (t0 ))
               ∴ ADE = λY T · ∆(t)                                                           (68)
                                                                                    
           and AIE(t0 ) = λY T · t0 + λY M · E(M (t1 )) − λY T · t0 + λY M · E(M (t0 ))
                                                                           
                        = λY T · t0 + λY M λM · t1 − λY T · t0 + λY M λM · t0
                 ∴ AIE = λY M · λM · ∆(t)                                                    (69)
                                                                     Online Appendix – Not for Publication


Online Appendix B              Identification of Causal Parameters
When we additionally allow for an unobserved mediator U that is caused by T and causes both
M and Y (see Remark 2.1), the linear mediation model we investigate can be fully described by
the following equations:



  Instrumental Variable Z = Z ,                                                                       (70)
              Treatment T = ξZ · Z + ξV · VT + T ,                                                    (71)
 Unobserved Mediator U = ζT · T + U ,                                                                 (72)
   Observed Mediator M = ϕT · T + ϕU · U + δY · VY + δT · VT + M ,                                    (73)
              Outcome Y = βT · T + βM · M + βU · U + βV · VY + Y ,                                    (74)
  Exogenous Variables      Z, VT , VM , Z , T , U , M , Y are statistically independent variables, (75)
     Scalar Coefficients   ξZ , ξV , ζT , ϕT , ϕU , δY , δT , βT , βM , βU , βV                        (76)
 Unobserved Variables      VT , VM , U, Z , T , U , M , Y .                                       (77)

We assume that all variables have mean zero. This assumption does not incur in less of generality,
but simplify notation as intercepts can be suppressed.
    We first eliminate the unobserved mediator U from Equations (73)–(74) by iterated substitu-
tion. Equations (74)–(74) are then expressed as:



                    M = (ϕT + ϕU ζT ) · T + ϕU · U + δY · VY + δT · VT + M ,                         (78)
                     Y = (βT + βU ζT ) · T + βM · M + βU · U + βV · VY + Y .                         (79)


   We use the following transformation of parameters to save on notation:

                                             ϕ
                                             eT = ϕT + ϕU ζT ,                                         (80)
                                             βeT = βT + βU ζT ,                                        (81)
                                               U
                                               e = U .                                                (82)

We use equations (78)–(82) to simplify Model (70)–(74) into the following equations:



               Instrumental Variable Z = Z ,                                                          (83)
                         Treatment T = ξZ · Z + ξV · VT + T ,                                         (84)
                Observed Mediator M = ϕeT · T + ϕU · Ue + δ Y · V Y + δ T · V T + M ,                 (85)
                          Outcome Y = βeT · T + βM · M + βU · U  e + β V · V Y + Y .                  (86)


   In this linear model, the counterfactual outcomes M (t), Y (t), Y (m), Y (m, t) are given by:
                                                                             Online Appendix – Not for Publication




    M (t) = ϕeT · t + ϕU · U
                           e + δ Y · V Y + δ T · V T + M ,                                                   (87)
    Y (m) = βeT · T + βM · m + βU · U  e + βV · VY + Y .                                                     (88)
   Y (t, m) = βeT · t + βM · m + βU · Ue + βV · VY + Y .                                                     (89)
      Y (t) = βeT · t + βM · M (t) + βU · U
                                          e + βV · VY + Y .
            = (βeT + βM ϕeT ) · t + (βU + βM ϕU ) · U
                                                    e + (βV + βM δY ) · VY + βM δT · VT + βM · M + Y .      (90)


    We claim that the coefficients associated with unobserved variables VT , U    e , VY may only be
identified up a linear transformation. Consider the coefficients δT , βV that multiply the unob-
served variable VT in Equations (84) and (85) respectively. Suppose a linear transformation that
multiplies VT by a constant κ 6= 0. The model would remain the same if coefficients δT , βV were
divided by the same constant κ. This is a typical fact in the literature of linear factor models. We
solve this non-identification problem by impose that each unobserved variable VT , U    e , VY has unit
variance:

                                     var(VT ) = var(U
                                                    e ) = var(VY ) = 1.                                       (91)

Assumption (91) is typically termed as anchoring of unobserved factors in the literature of factor
analysis. This assumption does not incur in any loss of generality for the identification of direct,
indirect or total causal effects of T (and M ) on Y as expressed in the following section.

Online Appendix B.1           Defining Causal Parameters
The literature of mediation analysis term relevant causal parameters as:
                                         dE(Y (t))
   • Total Effect of T on Y, that is,       dt     .
                                          ∂E(Y (t,m))
   • Direct Effect of T on Y, that is         ∂t      .
                                   dE(Y (m))
   • Effect of M on Y, that is,       dm     .
                                   dE(M (t))
   • Effect of T on M, that is,       dt     .
                                            ∂E(Y (t,m))        dE(M (t))
   • Indirect Effect of T on Y, that is        ∂m          ·      dt     .
   According to the counterfactual variables in (87)–(90), these causal effects are given by:

                                                       dE(Y (t))
                         Total Effect of T on Y :                =ϕ eT · βM + βeT .                           (92)
                                                          dt
                                                       ∂E(Y (t, m))
                        Direct Effect of T on Y :                   = βeT .                                   (93)
                                                           ∂t
                                                       dE(Y (m))
                               Effect of M on Y :                 = βM .                                      (94)
                                                          dm
                                                       dE(M (t))
                               Effect of T on M :                =ϕ  eT .                                     (95)
                                                          dt
                                                       ∂E(Y (t, m)) dE(M (t))
                      Indirect Effect of T on Y :                    ·            = βM · ϕ
                                                                                         eT .                 (96)
                                                           ∂m              dt
                                                                Online Appendix – Not for Publication


Online Appendix B.2         Identifying Equations
Model (83)–(86) can be conveniently expressed in matrix notation. In Equation (97) we define
X = [Z, T, M, Y ]0 as the vector of observed variables, V = [VT , VY , Ue ]0 as the vector of unobserved
                                                   0
confounding variables, and  = [Z , T , M , Y ] as the vector of exogenous error terms. According
to (75), the random vectors V and  are independent, that is, V ⊥⊥ . We use K in (97) for the
matrix of parameters that multiply X and A for the matrix of parameters that multiply V.
                                                                                                        
    Z                                    Z               0     0        0   0               0      0    0
                       VT                                 ξZ
   T                                    T                    0        0   0            ξV      0    0 
X=
   M ,
                V =  VY  ,          =
                                          M  ,
                                                      K=
                                                          0
                                                                                 ,       A=                  .
                                                                ϕeT        0   0            δY     δY   ϕU 
                       Ue
    Y                                      Y               0   βeT       βM   0               0     βV   βU
                                                                                                             (97)

Using the notation in (97), we can express the linear system (83)–(86) as following:
                                                                                           
             Z       0        0         0   0     Z         0    0     0                       Z
                   ξZ                                                              VT
            T               0         0   0   T      ξV    0     0  
                                                                                               T 
               =                           ·      +                 ·        VY  +         ,      (98)
            M   0        ϕeT         0   0   M      δT   δY    ϕU                       M 
                                                                                    Ue
             Y       0      βeT        βM   0     Y         0   βV    βU     |      {z }         Y
                                                                                     V
         |   {z } |               {z          } | {z   } |      {z       }                 |     {z }
             X                    K               X             A                                

                 X = K · X + A · V + .                                                                     (99)

 The coefficients in matrices K, A are identified through the covariance matrices of observed vari-
ables. We use ΣX = cov(X, X) for the covariance matrix of observed variables X, and Σ =
cov(, ) for the vector of error terms . Σ is a diagonal matrix due to statistical independence
of error terms. We also use ΣV = cov(V, V) for the covariance of unobserved variables V. The
unobserved variables in V are statistically independent and have unit variance (91), thus ΣV = I
where I is the identity matrix. Moreover, V ⊥⊥  implies that cov(V, ) = 0, where 0 is a matrix of
elements zero.
    Equation (102) determines the relation between the covariance matrices of observed and un-
observed variables:

                   X = K · X + A · V +  ⇒ (K − I) X = A · V + ,                                         (100)
                                                                      0               0
                                                ⇒ (K − I) ΣX (K − I) = AΣV A + Σ ,                       (101)
                                                                      0         0
                                                ⇒ (K − I) ΣX (K − I) = AA + Σ ,                          (102)

where the second equation is due to V ⊥⊥  and the third equations comes from ΣV = I.
    Equation (102) generates ten equalities. Four equalities are due to the diagonal of the covari-
ance matrices (K − I) ΣX (K − I)0 and AA0 + Σ in (102). The remaining six equalities from the
off-diagonal relation of the covariance matrices in (102).
    The diagonal elements of Σ are the variances of the error terms Z , T , M , Y . Thereby each
diagonal equation generated by (102) adds one unobserved term to the system of quadratic equa-
tions. The point-identification of the model coefficients arises from the six off-diagonal equations
                                                                    Online Appendix – Not for Publication


generated by (102). Those are listed below:

                                       cov(Z, T ) − cov(Z, Z) · ξZ = 0                                   (103)
                                      cov(Z, M ) − cov(Z, T ) · ϕ  eT = 0                                (104)
                     cov(Z, Y ) − cov(Z, M ) · βM − cov(Z, T ) · βeT = 0                                 (105)
                     cov(T, Y ) − cov(T, T ) · βeT − cov(T, M ) · βM = 0                                 (106)
                   cov(M, Y ) − cov(T, M ) · βeT − cov(M, M ) · βM = βU · ϕU + βV · δY                   (107)
                                      cov(T, M ) − cov(T, T ) · ϕeT = δT · ξV                            (108)

 Simple manipulation of Equations (103)–(108) generate the identification of the following param-
eters:
                        cov(Z, T )
                   ξZ =                                                                  from Eq.(103)   (109)
                        cov(Z, Z)
                        cov(Z, M )
                  ϕeT =                                                                  from Eq.(104)   (110)
                        cov(Z, T )
                         cov(Z, T ) cov(T, Y ) − cov(T, T ) cov(Z, Y )
                  βM =                                                            from Eqs.(105)–(106)   (111)
                        cov(T, M ) cov(Z, T ) − cov(T, T ) cov(Z, M )
                        cov(Z, M ) cov(T, Y ) − cov(Z, Y ) cov(T, M )
                  βeT =                                                           from Eqs.(105)–(106)   (112)
                        cov(T, T ) cov(Z, M ) − cov(Z, T ) cov(T, M )
    βU · ϕU + βV · δY = cov(M, Y ) − cov(M, M ) · βM − cov(T, M ) · βeT                  from Eq.(107)   (113)
                           cov(T, M ) cov(Z, M ) − cov(T, T ) cov(Z, Y )
              δ T · ξV =                                                                 from Eq.(108)   (114)
                                           cov(Z, M )

Moreover, if we divide Equation (105) by cov(Z, T ) we obtain:
                                cov(Z, Y ) cov(Z, M )           cov(Z, T ) e
                                           −             · βM −            · βT = 0                      (115)
                                cov(Z, T )    cov(Z, T )        cov(Z, T )
                                cov(Z, Y )
                           ⇒               −ϕeT · βM − βeT = 0                                           (116)
                                cov(Z, T )
                                                 cov(Z, Y )
                           ⇒    eT · βM + βeT =
                                ϕ                           .                                            (117)
                                                 cov(Z, T )

 The four causal of interest parameters defined in (92)–(95) are respectively identified by Equations
(110), (111), (112) and (117):
                          dE(M (t))             cov(Z, M )
                                    =ϕ eT     =             ,                                            (118)
                             dt                 cov(Z, T )
                         dE(Y (m))               cov(Z, Y ) cov(T, T ) − cov(Y, T ) cov(Z, T )
                                    = βM      =                                                ,         (119)
                            dm                  cov(Z, M ) cov(T, T ) − cov(M, T ) cov(Z, T )
                       ∂E(Y (t, m))             cov(Z, M ) cov(T, Y ) − cov(Z, Y ) cov(T, M )
                                    = βeT     =                                                 ,        (120)
                            ∂t                  cov(T, T ) cov(Z, M ) − cov(Z, T ) cov(T, M )
                dE(Y (t))                       cov(Z, Y )
                          =ϕeT · βM + βeT     =            .                                             (121)
                   dt                           cov(Z, T )

Next section explains that each causal effect (118)–(121) can be evaluated by standard Two-stage
Least Squares regressions.
                                                                      Online Appendix – Not for Publication


Online Appendix C                   Exploring Alternative Approaches and Related Lit-
                                    erature
We investigate the mediation model in which the treatment variable T and the mediator vari-
able M are endogenous. Our solution imposes causal relations among unobserved variables that
enable the identification of three causal effects using only one dedicated instrument for T .
     Our method contrasts to two broad alternative approaches to gaining identification in media-
tion analysis. One of these is to assume that the treatment T and the mediator M are exogenous
given observed variables (Imai et al., 2010, 2011b,a).64 In this case, treatment T is as good as
randomly assigned and the resulting model is equivalent to assuming no confounding variables
and no unobserved mediators U in Model III of Table 1.65 Relatedly, Yamamoto (2014) studies the
case of a binary treatment indicator and a single instrument, assuming that the instrument Z is
independent of the counterfactual outcome Y (m, t) and that the mediator variables is exogenous
conditioned on treatment compliance.66
     A second class of models relies on additional instrumental variables dedicated to the media-
tor M . Powdthavee (2009); Burgess, Daniel, Butterworth, and Thompson (2015) and Jhun (2015)
achieve identification using two instruments and parametric assumptions that shape the endo-
geneity of T and M. Two important contributions to this literature that use non-parametric identi-
fication are Frolich and Huber (2017) and Jun et al. (2016).67 This second class of models does not
assume away confounding effects; i.e. variables T, M, Y remain endogenous. It thus constitutes
an alternative approach to our identification problem, which is to seek for another instrument that
is dedicated to M.68 Because of its natural appeal, we discuss this approach here and contrast
its identification requirements explicitly to ours. A standard mediation model with confounding
variables V and two separate dedicated instrumental variables (for separate endogenous vari-
ables) is described as follows:

                                   Treatment variable: T = fT (ZT , V, T ),                                    (122)
                                  Observed Mediator: M = fM (T, ZM , V, M ),                                   (123)
                                           Outcome: Y = fY (T, M, V, Y ),                                      (124)
                                                where: (ZT , ZM ) ⊥⊥ V.                                         (125)

This model is presented as a DAG in Table 1. In this model, the exclusion restriction ZM ⊥⊥ Y (m)
and also ZM ⊥⊥ Y (m)|T hold. Thereby ZM can be used to evaluate the causal effects of M on Y .69
   The empirical challenge in evaluation Model (122)–(125) is to find a suitable candidate for ZM .
There are three potential concerns with any dedicated instrument for M : (i) ZM may correlate
with V ; (ii) ZM may directly affect Y ; and (iii) ZM may correlate with ZT . Concerns (i) and (ii)
   64
      Robins and Greenland (1992) and Geneletti (2007) consider instruments that perfectly correlate with the mediator
variable such that the exogeneity condition still holds.
   65
      If the treatment T were indeed randomly assigned, then one could use the interaction of the treatment with ob-
served covariates as instruments to identify the causal effect of M on Y . Versions of this approach are examined in
Ten Have, Joffe, Lynch, Brown, Maisto, and Beck (2007); Dunn and Bentall (2007); Small (2012); Gennetian, Bos, and
Morris (2002).
   66
       In our notation, this means that Y (m, t) ⊥⊥ Z and Y (t, m) ⊥⊥ M (t)|(T, P = c), where T denotes treatment
assignment and P stands for an indicator of treatment compliance. Neither assumption holds in Model III or Model IV
of Table 1.
   67
      Both papers examine the effect of a binary indicator for treatment T . Frolich and Huber (2017) relies on two
dedicated instruments (for T and M ) and a monotonicity restriction with respect to M. Jun et al. (2016) uses three
dedicated instruments but does not require the monotonicity restriction.
   68
      Recently, Frolich and Huber (2017) provide an important contribution on the mediation model with two dedicated
instruments.
   69
      If T were to cause ZM , then only ZM ⊥⊥ Y (m)|T would hold.
                                                                       Online Appendix – Not for Publication



   Online Appendix Table 1: General Mediation Model and Violation of Exclusion Restrictions

                 A. Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG) Representation

                 General IV Model with Two Instruments        Violations of the Exclusion Restriction


                                     V                                           V


                           T         M         Y                       T        M          Y


                          ZT        ZM                                ZT        ZM

The left figure gives the directed acyclic graph (DAG) representation of the general IV Model with two dedicated
instruments. The right figure gives the same DAG, but also depicts the identification concerns discussed in the body of
the text.


define the usual requirements for any valid instrument to identify the effect of M on Y . The latter
concern (iii) is specific to the mediation context. The three concerns are depicted as dashed errors
in the right figure of Table 1. A potential candidate for ZM is automation. Automation, i.e. re-
placing workers with machines, robots and computer-assisted technologies, is usually viewed as
the ‘other big shock’ that has hit high-wage labor markets in the last decades. For example, Ace-
moglu and Restrepo (2017) estimate that an additional robot per thousand workers has reduced
employment in the U.S. by about 0.18–0.34 percentage points and wages by 0.25–0.50 percent. The
effects of automation are not expected to abate. For example, Frey and Osborne (2017) predict that
47% of U.S. workers are at risk of automation over the next two decades. In brief, automation has
had and will likely continue to have substantial effects on labor market outcomes M and there-
fore seems like a good candidate dedicated instrument ZM . We view concern (iii) as addressed in
this context because Autor et al. (2015) have provided convincing evidence that automation and
import exposure are largely orthogonal, making the two forces separable in the data at both the
industry-level and the regional level. Concern (i) still is that firms may automate in response to
other unobserved factors that could directly impact their labor demand. Indeed, firm-level tech-
nology upgrading does appear to respond to the China shock as shown by Bloom, Draca, and
Van Reenen (2016). This violates the independence ZM ⊥⊥ V in (125) and thereby the exclusion
restriction ZM ⊥⊥ Y (m)|T does not hold. However, this concern may again be largely addressed if
we think of ZM not as actually measured technology upgrading but as some more exogenous mea-
sure, e.g. exposure to robot adoption as in Acemoglu and Restrepo (2017) or employment-weighted
occupational measures like routine task intensity (Autor and Dorn, 2013) or automatability (Frey and
Osborne, 2017). In our empirical context, concern (ii)—automation could impact voting behavior
through channels other than M —is the most worrisome, and in fact clearly disqualifies automa-
tion as a dedicated instrument for M . While a German assembly-line worker will likely neither
observe nor care about Australian imports of Chinese consumer electronics (i.e. ZT ), he/she will
not only be aware of the potential automatability of their assembly-line job (i.e. ZM ) but may in-
deed seek out a more protectionist political agenda in anticipation of automation’s consequences,
i.e. even before any detrimental effects in the labor market.
                                                                  Online Appendix – Not for Publication


Online Appendix D                 Estimation of Causal Parameters
Our goal is to show that the four causal parameters listed in Equations (118)–(121) can be estimated
using the standard Two-stage Least Square (2SLS) estimator. We revise the standard equations of
the 2SLS estimators for sake of completeness.
    Equations (126)–(127) present the first and stages of a generic 2SLS regression in which T
stands for the endogenous variable, Z is the instrumental variable and Y is the targeted outcome.

                                     First Stage: T = κ1 + β1 · Z + 1 ,                          (126)
                                   Second Stage: Y = κ2 + β2 · T + 2 .                           (127)

The 2SLS estimator relies on the assumptions that the instrument Z is statistically independent of
the term 2 while T is not. It is well-known that the 2SLS estimator β̂2 is given by the ratio of the
sample covariances cov(Z, Y ) and cov(Z, T ). Moreover β̂2 is a consistent estimator of parameter
β2 :

                                                      cov(Z, Y )
                                       plim(β̂2 ) =              = β2 .                           (128)
                                                      cov(Z, T )

Consider the inclusion of additional covariates X in both stages of the 2SLS method. Variables X
in (129)–(130) play the role of control covariates in the first stage and second stages of the 2SLS
estimator. Control covariates X directly causes Y in (130) while the instrument Z only causes Y
though it impact on T.

                              First Stage: T = κ1 + β1 · Z + ψ1 · X + 1 ,                        (129)
                           Second Stage: Y = κ2 + β2 · T + ψ2 · X + 2 .                          (130)

The 2SLS model (129)–(130) relies on the assumption that the instrument Z and control covariates
X are independent of error term 2 , that is, (Z, X) ⊥⊥ 2 . The 2SLS estimator β̂2 for parameter β2
is expressed by Equation (131) and it is a consistent estimator under model assumptions.

                                  cov(Z, Y ) cov(X, X) − cov(Y, X) cov(Z, X)
                   plim(β̂2 ) =                                              = β2 .               (131)
                                  cov(Z, T ) cov(X, X) − cov(T, X) cov(Z, X)

The 2SLS estimator ψ̂2 for parameter ψ2 is expressed by Equation (132) and it is a consistent esti-
mator under model assumptions.

                                   cov(Z, Y ) cov(T, X) − cov(Y, X) cov(Z, T )
                  plim(ψ̂2 ) = −                                               = ψ2 .             (132)
                                   cov(Z, T ) cov(X, X) − cov(T, X) cov(Z, X)

   Each of the identification formulas for the causal effects in (118)–(121) describes a ratio of co-
variances that corresponds to one of the three 2SLS formulas (128), (131) or (131).
   The effect of choice T on mediator M is given by:

                                     dE(M (t))       cov(Z, M )
                                               =ϕ
                                                eT =            .
                                        dt           cov(Z, T )

According to Equation (128), this effect can be estimated by the 2SLS regression (126)–(127) in
which Z is the instrument, T is the endogenous variable and M is the outcome.
                                                           Online Appendix – Not for Publication


   The total effect of T on outcome Y is given by:

                             dE(Y (t))                  cov(Z, Y )
                                        eT · βM + βeT =
                                       =ϕ                          .
                                dt                      cov(Z, T )

According to Equation (128),this effect can be estimated by the 2SLS regression (126)–(127) in
which Z is the instrument, T is the endogenous variable and Y is the outcome.
   The causal effect of mediator M on outcome Y is given by:

                 dE(Y (m))         cov(Z, Y ) cov(T, T ) − cov(Y, T ) cov(Z, T )
                           = βM =                                                ,
                    dm            cov(Z, M ) cov(T, T ) − cov(M, T ) cov(Z, T )

which can be estimated by the 2SLS regression (126)–(127) where Z is the instrument, T is the
endogenous variable and M is the outcome.
   The causal effect of mediator M on outcome M is given by:

                 dE(Y (m))         cov(Z, Y ) cov(T, T ) − cov(Y, T ) cov(Z, T )
                           = βM =                                                .
                    dm            cov(Z, M ) cov(T, T ) − cov(M, T ) cov(Z, T )

According to the 2SLS estimator in (131), this causal effect can be estimated by β̂2 in the 2SLS
regression (129)–(130) in which Z plays the role of the instrument, M is the endogenous variable,
T is the control covariate and Y is the outcome.
    The Indirect Effect of choice T on outcome Y is given by:

                ∂E(Y (t, m))         cov(Z, M ) cov(T, Y ) − cov(Z, Y ) cov(T, M )
                             = βeT =                                               .
                   ∂m                cov(T, T ) cov(Z, M ) − cov(Z, T ) cov(T, M )

According to the 2SLS estimator in (132), this causal effect can be estimated by ψ̂2 in the 2SLS
regression (129)–(130) in which Z plays the role of the instrument, M is the endogenous variable,
T is the control covariate and Y is the outcome.
                                                                      Online Appendix – Not for Publication


Online Appendix E                    Total, Indirect and Direct Effects under One In-
                                     strument
Online Appendix B.2 describes a linear mediation model whose primary causal effects are identi-
fied by the following equations:
                                         dE(Y (t))    cov(Z, Y )
             Total Effect of T on Y :              =             .                                           (133)
                                            dt        cov(Z, T )
                                         ∂E(Y (t, m))     cov(Z, M ) cov(T, Y ) − cov(Z, Y ) cov(T, M )
           Direct Effect of T on Y :                  =                                                  .   (134)
                                             ∂t           cov(T, T ) cov(Z, M ) − cov(Z, T ) cov(T, M )
                                         ∂E(Y (t, m))      cov(Z, T ) cov(T, Y ) − cov(T, T ) cov(Z, Y )
                 Effect of M on Y :                   =                                                      (135)
                                             ∂m           cov(T, M ) cov(Z, T ) − cov(T, T ) cov(Z, M )
                                         dE(M (t))     cov(Z, M )
                  Effect of T on M :               =                                                         (136)
                                            dt          cov(Z, T )
                                         ∂E(Y (t, m)) dE(M (t))
          Indirect Effect of T on Y :                 ·            .                                         (137)
                                             ∂m              dt


    The literature of mediation analysis typically expresses the total effect of T on Y as the sum of
its direct and indirect effects. In our notation, this decomposition is is stated as following:

                        dE(Y (t))   ∂E(Y (t, m)) ∂E(Y (t, m)) dE(M (t))
                                  =             +            ·          .                                    (138)
                           dt } |
                        | {z            ∂t
                                        {z     } |  ∂m {z        dt }
                          Total Effect       Direct Effect            Indirect Effect


    We show that the decomposition described in (138) is exact in the case of a single instrument.
That is to say that the covariance ratio that identifies the total effect of T on Y in equation (133) is
equal to the covariance ratio that identifies the direct effect in Equations (134) plus the multipli-
cation of the covariance ratios that identify the effect of T on M in (136) and the effect of M on Y
                                                                          Online Appendix – Not for Publication


described in Equation (135). We thank David Slichter for pointing out this fact.
 ∂E(Y (t, m)) ∂E(Y (t, m)) dE(M (t))
             +            ·
 |   ∂t
     {z     } |  ∂m {z        dt }
      Direct Effect                    Indirect Effect

    cov(Z, M ) cov(T, Y ) − cov(Z, Y ) cov(T, M )   cov(Z, T ) cov(T, Y ) − cov(T, T ) cov(Z, Y ) cov(Z, M )
  =                                               +                                               ·
    cov(T, T ) cov(Z, M ) − cov(Z, T ) cov(T, M ) cov(T, M ) cov(Z, T ) − cov(T, T ) cov(Z, M ) cov(Z, T )
    |                     {z                    } |                       {z                     } | {z }
                                 ∂E(Y (t,m))                                 ∂E(Y (t,m))              dE(M (t))
                                     ∂t                                         ∂m                       dt

                                                                                               cov(Z,M )
    cov(Z, M ) cov(T, Y ) − cov(Z, Y ) cov(T, M ) cov(Z, M ) cov(T, Y ) − cov(T, T ) cov(Z, Y ) cov(Z,T )
  =                                               +
    cov(T, T ) cov(Z, M ) − cov(Z, T ) cov(T, M )     cov(T, M ) cov(Z, T ) − cov(T, T ) cov(Z, M )
                                                                       cov(Z,M )
    cov(Z, M ) cov(T, Y ) − cov(Z, Y ) cov(T, M ) cov(T, T ) cov(Z, Y ) cov(Z,T ) − cov(Z, M ) cov(T, Y )
  =                                               +
    cov(T, T ) cov(Z, M ) − cov(Z, T ) cov(T, M )     cov(T, T ) cov(Z, M ) − cov(Z, T ) cov(T, M )
      cov(T, T ) cov(Z, Y ) cov(Z,M )
                            cov(Z,T ) − cov(Z, Y ) cov(T, M )
  =
             cov(T, T ) cov(Z, M ) − cov(Z, T ) cov(T, M )
      cov(T, T ) cov(Z, M ) cov(Z,Y )
                            cov(Z,T ) − cov(Z, Y ) cov(T, M )
  =
             cov(T, T ) cov(Z, M ) − cov(Z, T ) cov(T, M )
      cov(T, T ) cov(Z, M ) cov(Z,Y )                         cov(Z,T )
                            cov(Z,T ) − cov(Z, Y ) cov(T, M ) cov(Z,T )
  =
                      cov(T, T ) cov(Z, M ) − cov(Z, T ) cov(T, M )
      cov(T, T ) cov(Z, M ) cov(Z,Y )                         cov(Z,Y )
                            cov(Z,T ) − cov(Z, T ) cov(T, M ) cov(Z,T )
  =
            cov(T, T ) cov(Z, M ) − cov(Z, T ) cov(T, M )
                                                                
      cov(T, T ) cov(Z, M ) − cov(Z, T ) cov(T, M )     cov(Z, Y )
  =                                                  ·
      cov(T, T ) cov(Z, M ) − cov(Z, T ) cov(T, M )     cov(Z, T )
    cov(Z, Y )     dE(Y (t))
  =            =             .
    cov(Z, T ) | {z   dt }
                            Total Effect




 The first equality expresses the total effect of T on Y in terms of its direct and indirect effects. The
second equality substitutes the direct and indirect effects by their identification formulas described
in (134), (135) and (133). The third equation isolates and eliminates the common term cov(Z, M ) in
the denominator of dE(Y    (m))
                          dm    . The fourth equation flips the sign of the terms in the last covariance
ratio. Now the overall sum has the same denominator. The fifth equation eliminates the common
term in the sum of the numerators of both ratios. The sixth equation exchange the covariances
cov(Z, M ) and cov(Z, Y ) of the first term of the numerator. The seventh equation includes the
term cov(Z,T   )
       cov(Z,T ) which is equal to one. The eight equation exchange the covariances cov(Z, Y ) and
cov(Z, T ) of the second term of the numerator. The night equation isolates the common denomi-
nator of the expression. The tenth equation eliminates the common first term of both numerator
and denominator. The resulting formula is the covariate ratio cov(Z,Y       )
                                                                    cov(Z,T ) which, according to (133),
is equal to the total effect of choice T on outcome Y.
                                                                        Online Appendix – Not for Publication


Online Appendix F                   Data Sources
Online Appendix F.1             Election Data
We focus on federal elections (Bundestagswahlen) because the timing of state elections (Landtagswahlen)
and local elections (Kommunalwahlen) varies widely across German regions. Federal elections took
place in 1987, in December 1990 after the reunification on October 3, and in 1994, 1998, 2002, 2005,
and 2009. We define the first-period outcomes as changes in the vote-share from 1987 to 1998,
and second-period outcomes as changes from 1998 to 2009. Election outcomes are observed at the
level of 412 districts (‘Landkreis’) in Period 2 and 322 West German districts in Period 1.
    The average vote share of extreme-right parties is persistently below 5 percent in both periods.
This presented a major challenge for our data collection, since official election statistics do not re-
port all votes shares below the 5 percent minimum threshold separately by party. To extract infor-
mation on extreme-right parties form this residual category, we had to contact the statistical offices
of the German states and digitize some results from hard copies. By doing so, we have generated
a unique data set that provides detailed insight into Germany’s political constellation and allows
us to create a precise measure of spatial variation in preferences also for friinge parties. This mea-
sure eventually allows us to extend existing studies on spatial variation of extreme-right activities
and partisanship that were typically bound to the state level (Falk, Kuhn, and Zweimüller (2011),
Lubbers and Scheepers (2001)) or limited in their time horizon (Krueger and Pischke (1997)) to a
new level of detail.

Online Appendix F.2             Trade Data
Our trade data stem from the U.N. Commodity Trade Statistics Database (Comtrade). The database
provides information on trade flows between country pairs, detailed by commodity type. As in
Dauth et al. (2014), we express all trade flows in thousands and convert them to 2005 Euros. To
merge four-digit SITC2 product codes with our three-digit industry codes, we use a crosswalk pro-
vided by Dauth et al. (2014), who themselves employ a crosswalk provided by the U.N. Statistics
Division to link product categories to NACE industries. In 92 percent of the cases, commodities
map unambiguously into industries. For ambiguous cases, we use national employment shares
from 1978 to partition them to industries. In this way, we end up with 157 manufacturing indus-
tries (excluding fuel products), classified according to the WZ73 industry classification.

Online Appendix F.3             Labor Market Data
We obtain information on local labor markets from two different sources. Information on employ-
ment, education, and the share of foreigners stems from the Social Security records in Germany.70
Based on the Social Security records, we calculate the import exposure measures for local labor
markets, the share of high-skilled workers (with a tertiary degree), foreign workers, workers in
the automobile or chemical industry, and wages. For the years before 1999, social security data are
recorded at the place of work only. After 1999, place-of-work and place-of-residence information
is available.
    The remaining variables are provided by the German Federal Statistical Office. These variables
include the overall population, the female population share, the population share of individuals
  70
    See Bender et al. (2000) for a detailed description of the data from the Institute for Employment Research (IAB). For
an additional description of the regional distribution of wages across German municipalities, see Falck, Heblich, and
Otto (2013)
                                                                         Online Appendix – Not for Publication


of working age (aged 18 to 65), the population share of individuals older than 65, and the un-
employment rate, which is calculated by dividing the number of unemployed individuals by the
working-age population.


Online Appendix G                     Background on German Politics 1987 to 2009
Online Appendix G.1               The German Election System
Since the end of WWII, Germany has had a multiparty party system, with the two largest parties–
the Christian Democratic Union (CDU) and the Social Democratic Party of Germany (SPD)–forming
coalitions with either the Free Democratic Party (FDP) or the Greens (Bündnis 90/Die Grünen) dur-
ing our observation period (1987 to 2009).71 German elections are based on the principle of pro-
portionality. The main vote, called the “second vote” (Zweitstimme), is being cast for parties but
not for individual candidates.72 We will exclusively focus on this party vote. The overall number
of parliamentary seats is determined in proportion to a party’s share of the second vote. Parties
further have to surpass a 5 percent minimum threshold to be represented in federal parliament.
However, this does not mean that small parties do not capture any votes. Small parties that failed
to pass the 5 percent threshold still captured about 11 percent of the total votes in our election
data.

Online Appendix G.2               The Political Party Spectrum in Germany
We always classify the CDU, the SPD, the FDP, and the Greens as established parties. The con-
servative CDU and the social-democratic SPD are the dominant parties in Germany, in terms of
both membership and votes obtained. For our period of analysis, one of those two parties was
always in power. The liberal FDP participated in governments led by the CDU. The Greens are,
for ideological reasons, usually the SPD’s preferred coalition partner. On the extreme right of the
political spectrum, three parties have regularly run in federal elections. The National Democratic
Party of Germany (NPD - Nationaldemokratische Partei Deutschlands), founded in 1964, the Repub-
licans (REP - Die Republikaner), founded in 1983, and the German People’s Union (DVU - Deutsche
Volksunion), founded in 1987 (and merged with the NPD in 2011).73 They all follow neo-Nazi
ideologies, are anti-democratic, polemicize against globalization, and agitate against immigrants
and foreigners. All three have been monitored by the German Federal Office for the Protection
of the Constitution (Verfassungsschutz). None of these extreme-right parties has ever passed the
5 percent hurdle required to enter Germany’s national parliament, and it is unthinkable that any
mainstream party would ever form a coalition with them (see Art (2007)). On the far left of the
political spectrum, there are around 10 parties and factions that are often related with each other.
Besides the left party (Die Linke) and its predecessors, the Party of Democratic Socialism (PDS) and
Labour and Social Justice The Electoral Alternative (WASG), three branches have been dominant: Suc-
cessors to the Communist Party of Germany, which had been outlawed in 1956, e.g., the German
Communist Party (DKP) and the Communist Party of Germany (KPD); Leninist, Stalinist, and Maoist
  71
      In this paper, we will always report votes for the CDU and its Bavarian subsection Christian Social Union (CSU) as
combined CDU votes and refer to it as the CDU.
   72
      Voters can additionally elect individual candidates on a first-past-the-post basis. Ironically, this second ballot is
called the “primary vote” (Erststimme). In every election district, the candidate who wins the majority of primary
votes is directly elected to parliament. However, electoral law ensures that this has no significant effect on the overall
distribution of seats, which is determined by the second vote.
   73
      In Online Appendix G.4, we provide a history of these three parties. See also comprehensive work by Stöss (2010)
or Mudde (2000).
                                                                       Online Appendix – Not for Publication


organizations like the Marxist-Leninist Party of Germany (MLPD); and Trotskyist organizations
such as the Party for Social Justice (PSG). Like the parties on the extreme right, these far-left par-
ties are regularly monitored by either the Federal Office for the Protection of the Constitution or
its state-level equivalents. We classify other parties that ran for elections but do not fit the above
categories as small parties (see Falck et al. 2014).

Online Appendix G.3              Stance on Trade and Globalization
Both the large parties CDU and SPD have market-liberal as well as protectionist factions. In com-
parison, the CDU tends to be more market-friendly. Still, it was a government led by the SPD
that implemented substantial labor market reforms in 2003-2005, amongst others decreasing em-
ployment protection, unemployment benefits, and establishing a low wage sector in Germany.
The smaller FDP explicitly follows a market-liberal agenda, while the Green party focusses on
environmental issues. More generally, the political left has traditionally been seen as opposing
globalization and capturing the anti-globalization vote.74 However, this is no unambiguous rela-
tionship, as the The Economist (2016) observes when headlining “Farewell, left versus right. The
contest that matters now is open against closed.” Throughout Europe, the political left has found
it difficult to take a coherent position against globalization in the last two decades, often ham-
pered by internal intellectual conflicts (Sommer 2008, Arzheimer 2009). In contrast, the right and
far right successfully attended an anti-globalization agenda (Mughan et al., 2003). For the case
of Germany, Sommer (2008, p. 312) argues that “in opposing globalization, the left-wing usually
criticizes an unjust and profit-oriented economic world order. [It] does not reject globalization per
se but rather espouses a different sort of globalization. In contrast, the solutions proposed by the
extreme right keep strictly to a national framework. The extreme right’s claim, therefore, that it
is the only political force that opposes globalization fundamentally [...] rings true.” The following
excerpt from the extreme-right NPD’s ‘candidate manual’ illustrates how Germany’s far right rolls
protectionist anti-globalization themes into its broader nationalistic, anti-Semitic agenda: “Glob-
alization is a planetary spread of the capitalist economic system under the leadership of the Great
Money. This has, despite by its very nature being Jewish-nomadic and homeless, its politically
and military protected location mainly on the East Coast of the United States” (Grumke, 2012,
p. 328).75

Online Appendix G.4              The Extreme-Right in West Germany
There is a strong sense of historical cultural roots and their time-persistence when it comes to
explaining votes for far-right parties in Germany today. Mocan and Raschke (2014) use state-
level survey aggregates from the ALLBUS, a general population survey for Germany, to show
that people who live in states that had provided above-median support of the Nazi party in the
1928 elections have stronger anti-semitic feelings today. Voigtländer and Voth (2015) use the same
data to show that the effects of historical antisemitic attitudes on today’s political attitudes was
amplified for the cohorts that grew up during Nazi Germany’s indoctrination programs in 1933–
1945.
   Having said that, there is substantial time-variation in the popularity of the far-right in Ger-
many. The NPD, the oldest of the three major right-wing parties we consider, was founded in 1964
  74
     To some extent this may still be the case. Che et al. (2016) for example argue that trade liberalization with China
has turned American voters towards the Democrats, though it seems as if this might have not been true for the 2016
presidential elections.
  75
     The bundling of protectionist anti-globalization themes with xenophobic content has also been noted in the 2016
U.S. presidential election, see for example The Guardian ( 2016).
                                                             Online Appendix – Not for Publication


as the successor to the German Reich Party (DRP). Its goal was to unite a number of fragmented
far-right parties under one umbrella. Between 1966 and 1968, the NPD was elected into seven
state parliaments, and in the 1969 federal election it missed the 5 percent minimum threshold by
just 0.7 percentage points. Afterwards, support for the NPD declined and it took the NPD more
than 25 years to re-enter state parliaments in Saxony (2004) and Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania
(2006). In both states, the party got reelected in the subsequent elections, in 2009 and 2011, respec-
tively. In 2001, the federal parliament brought in a claim to the German Constitutional Court to
forbid the NPD due to its anti-constitutional program. The claim was turned down in 2003 be-
cause the NPD’s leadership was infiltrated by domestic intelligence services agents, which caused
legal problems. A second claim to forbid the party, filed on December 7th 2015, was denied by the
constitutional judges on January 17th 2017.
    The DVU was founded by publisher Gerhard Frey as an informal association in 1971. Frey
published far-right newspapers such as the German National Newspaper (DNZ) and a number
of books with the goal of mitigating Germany’s role in WWII. His reputation as a publisher of
far-right material helped Frey to become an influential player in the German postwar extreme
right scene (Mudde (2000)). In 1986, Frey took it one step further starting his own far-right party
German List (Deutsche Liste). After some name changes, the party became known as German
People’s Union (DVU) from 1987 on. Since its foundation, the DVU got parliamentary seats in the
state assemblies of Brandenburg (1999, 2004), Bremen (1991, 1999, 2003, 2007), Schleswig-Holstein
(1992), and Saxony-Anhalt (1998). In 2010, the DVU merged with the NPD.
    The Republicans (Die Republikaner) were founded in 1983 as an ultraconservative breakaway
from the Christian Democratic Union (CDU) and the Christian Social Union of Bavaria (CSU).
Under their leader, Franz Schönhuber (who also ran as a candidate for the DVU and NPD in his
later political career), the party moved further to the extreme right by propagating a xenophobic
view on immigrants, and particularly asylum seekers. Compared to the NPD and DVU, the Re-
publicans were considered to be less openly extreme right which helped it secure votes from the
ultraconservative clientele. The REP got parliamentary seats in Berlin’s senate (1989) and the state
parliament of Baden-Wuerttemberg (1992, 1996).



Online Appendix G.5         The Extreme-Right in East Germany after the Reunification
In the first decade after reunification, only the two mainstream parties, CDU and SPD, were able to
establish themselves regionwide in East Germany next to the Party of Democratic Socialism (PDS),
the successor of the Socialist Unity Party (SED), which had been ruling the German Democratic
Republic till its collapse.
    During this time smaller parties were struggling to put a party infratructure into place in East
Germany. Accordingly, while all three extreme-right parties tried to establish themselves in East
Germany after reunification, they did not gain major political attention until the late 1990s (Hagan,
Merkens, and Boehnke, 1995). At the same time, we saw some of the worst excesses of far-right
crime in East Germany in the early 1990s, when migrants’ and asylum seekers’ residences were set
on fire and a mob of people from the neighborhood applauded. Research by Krueger and Pischke
(1997) suggests that neither unemployment nor wages can explain these incidences of extreme-
right-driven crime from 1991 to 1993. It is more likely that the sudden increase in the number of
immigrants and asylum seekers caused these xenophobic excesses in the early 1990s.
    In the mid-1990s, the initial euphoria of reunification passed and East German labor mar-
kets experienced stronger exposure to international competition. East Germany now faced almost
twice as much unemployment as West Germany, and this economic malaise caused feelings of
                                                                         Online Appendix – Not for Publication


deprivation that often transformed into violent crime against immigrants. Militant right-wing
groups declared “nationally liberated zones” in East Germany where foreigners were undesired.
In line with that, Lubbers and Scheepers (2001) find that unemployed people have been more
likely to support extreme right parties in Germany, and Falk et al. (2011) find a significant rela-
tionship between extreme-right crimes and regional unemployment levels over the years 1996–
1999.76 The story goes that the political heritage of the GDR may have preserved ethnic chauvin-
ism, which, in in combination with subsequent economic hardship, provided a fertile ground for
extreme-right parties.


Online Appendix H                     Descriptive Statistics
Table 2 provides descriptive statistics for our main variables. The table is organized in the follow-
ing way: Each row presents the distribution of one variable, sliced into its 25th percentile, median,
and 75th percentile. Columns 1–3 do this for Period 1 from 1987–1998, and columns 4–6 for Period
2 from 1998–2009. Tit is defined in units of 1,000 e per worker in constant 2005 prices.
    A comparison of columns 1–3 and 4–6 shows that import exposure was relatively balanced
between import competition and export access in Period 1, with an average Tit of just 68 e per
worker. In Period 2, import exposure was more export-heavy, with changes in export access ex-
ceeding changes in import competition by on average 663 e per worker.77
    Looking at the labor market outcomes, we find evidence of economic stagnation in Period 1.
Most importantly, we see a decline in the share of manufacturing employment across all regions
concurrent with increasing unemployment. Indeed, Germany was considered “the sick man of
Europe” during the 1990s. The period of stagnation was followed by an equally prolonged ex-
port and productivity boom. Following Gerhard Schröder’s electoral victory in 1998, Germany’s
inflexible labor market institutions underwent substantial reforms. In the course of these reforms,
we observe important changes in the behavior of trade unions and employers’ associations. Most
importantly, firms and local labor union chapters were now allowed to deviate from collective
bargaining agreements to flexibly adopt to local labor market conditions; see (Dustmann, Fitzen-
berger, Schönberg, and Spitz-Oener, 2014).78 As a result of these reforms, the decline in manufac-
turing employment slowed down significantly during Period 2.
    Finally, the table shows substantial variation in political trends across the two periods. From
1987 to 1998, established parties saw an average 4.7 percentage point reduction in their share of
the popular vote, while small parties and the extreme right saw an increasing vote share. From
1998 to 2009, the main parties CDU and SPD as well as the extreme-right parties lost electoral
support.79 In summary, period 1 (1987–1998) saw changes in import competition and export access
that roughly balanced out, economic stagnation and an increase in support for the extreme right.
This was followed by increased export access, economic stabilization, and political moderation in
period 2.
  76
      Note that Falk et al.’s (2011) findings do not necessarily contradict Krueger and Pischke (1997) who find no rela-
tionship between unemployment and extreme-right-driven crimes. It may very well be that the motivation for crimes
changed over the 1990s.
   77
      Dauth et al. (2014) explore this finding in detail
   78
      A perusal of the OECD Labour Market Policies and Institutions Indicators Database nicely illustrates this regulatory
change. On the core ‘strictness of employment protection’ index, Germany stayed in a tight band between 3.13–3.25
throughout Period 1, but this measure then dropped rapidly to an average of 1.46 during Period 2. See
www.oecd.org/employment/emp/employmentdatabase-labourmarketpoliciesandinstitutions.htm
   79
      The large decrease in SPD vote share reflects the party breaking with its left wing, which subsequently merged
with the socialist party PDS to form the new party Die Linke. In our data, Die Linke is classified as far left. See section
Online Appendix G for more details.
                                                                         Online Appendix – Not for Publication




             Online Appendix Table 2: The Core Variables in 1987–1998 and in 1998–2009


                                                      (1)        (2)        (3)          (4)        (5)        (6)
                                                      Period 1 (1987-1998),              Period 2 (1998-2009),
   percentile:                                       25th     median       75th         25th      median      75th
   T it                                             -0.264     0.068       0.521       -1.222     -0.663     -0.144

   ෢࢏࢚ (instrumented with Zit)
   ࢀ                                                -0.068     0.143       0.402       -1.150     -0.574     -0.113

   Yit:       Δ Turnout                             -0.034     -0.020     -0.012       -0.167     -0.128     -0.095

              Δ Vote Share CDU/CSU                  -9.234     -7.659     -5.730       -4.493     -2.258      0.620

              Δ Vote Share SPD                      4.120      6.472       8.248      -19.904 -17.936 -16.079

              Δ Vote Share FDP                      -2.933     -2.188     -1.467       6.942       8.459      9.820

              Δ Vote Share Green                    -1.779     -1.282     -0.616       2.513       3.673      4.770

              Δ Share Extreme-Right                 1.520      2.086       3.099       -1.525     -1.021     -0.478

              Δ Share Far-Left                      0.677      0.908       1.165       5.688       7.078      8.373

              Δ Share Small Parties                 1.211      1.487       1.796       0.716       1.514      2.525

   Mit: Δ log(Total Employment)                     -0.067     0.001       0.081       -0.110     -0.044      0.021
Notes: Period one (1987–1998) is for West German labor markets only, N = 322. Period two (1998–2009) is for West plus
East German labor markets, N = 408. The numbers for 1998–2009 do not change substantively if we drop the East.
The table displays the 25th percentile, median, and 75th percentile of Tit , the voting outcomes Yit , and manufacturing’s
share of employment Mit .
                                                                       Online Appendix – Not for Publication



                             Online Appendix Table 3: OLS Version of Table 4
                                                       (1)                (2)              (3)                (4)
                                                     Baseline         + Industry          +Socio           + Voting
                                                      OLS                OLS               OLS               OLS

                                                    -0.013***          -0.011**          -0.009**          -0.009*
Δ log(Total Employment)
                                                     (-3.138)          (-2.514)          (-2.070)          (-1.919)

                                                    -0.502***         -0.524***         -0.496***         -0.502***
Δ Share Manufacturing Employment
                                                     (-3.348)          (-3.486)          (-3.289)          (-3.362)

                                                     -0.003**          -0.004**          -0.003**          -0.003**
Δ log(Mean Manufacturing Wage)
                                                     (-2.122)          (-2.262)          (-2.094)          (-2.152)

                                                      -0.001            -0.001            -0.000            -0.000
Δ log(Mean Non-Manufacturing Wage)
                                                     (-0.934)          (-0.853)          (-0.351)          (-0.433)

                                                     0.089*             0.095            0.102*           0.125***
Δ Share Unemployment
                                                     (1.659)           (1.617)           (1.732)           (2.674)

Period-by-region FE                                    Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes
Observations                                           730               730               730               730
Notes: T-statistics reported, standard errors are clustered at the level of 96 commuting zones, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.1.




Online Appendix I                  Robustness and Further Results
Online Appendix I.1            Labor Market Outcomes
Online Appendix I table 3 presents the OLS results corresponding to the paper’s table 4.

Online Appendix I.2            Additional Results on the Vote Share Table 5
Online Appendix I table 4 presents the OLS results corresponding to the paper’s table 5.
                                                                          Online Appendix – Not for Publication




                                Online Appendix Table 4: OLS Version of Table 5
                                                 (1)              (2)           (3)             (4)            (5)
                                               Baseline       + Industry       +Socio        + Voting       Standard.
                                                OLS              OLS            OLS            OLS            OLS
                                               0.004***       0.004***         0.003**        0.003**        0.040**
Δ Turnout
                                                (2.932)        (3.059)         (2.337)        (2.430)        (2.430)

Established Parties:
                                                 -0.081         -0.113          -0.062         -0.067         -0.016
Δ Vote Share CDU/CSU
                                                (-1.015)       (-1.423)        (-0.963)       (-1.020)       (-1.020)

                                                 -0.037         -0.044          0.061          0.062          0.005
Δ Vote Share SPD
                                                (-0.416)       (-0.471)        (0.884)        (0.929)        (0.929)

                                                0.094**        0.105**         0.081*         0.088**        0.016**
Δ Vote Share FDP
                                                (1.971)        (2.398)         (1.805)        (2.097)        (2.097)

                                                 0.046         0.063*          0.062*         0.068**        0.024**
Δ Vote Share Green Party
                                                (1.221)        (1.755)         (1.835)        (2.042)        (2.042)

Non-established Parties
                                                0.038*          0.036           -0.009         -0.004         -0.002
Δ Vote Share Extreme-Right Parties
                                                (1.703)        (1.522)         (-0.483)       (-0.240)       (-0.240)

                                                -0.108*         -0.109         -0.138**      -0.153**        -0.039**
Δ Vote Share Far-Left Parties
                                                (-1.669)       (-1.597)        (-2.159)      (-2.491)        (-2.491)

                                                 0.048         0.062**          0.003          0.007          0.005
Δ Vote Share Other Small Parties
                                                (1.586)        (2.186)         (0.138)        (0.259)        (0.259)

Period-by-region FE                               Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes
Observations                                      730            730             730            730            730
Notes: T-statistics reported, standard errors are clustered at the level of 96 commuting zones, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.1.
                                                                    Online Appendix – Not for Publication


Online Appendix J                Constructing Gravity Residuals
Gravity-residuals can be obtained from the residuals of the regression

                                   CE−O           G−O
                             log(EXdjt  ) − log(EXdjt ) = αd + αj + IM
                                                                     djt ,                                  (139)
                      CE−O
    where log(EXdjt        ) are industry j’s log export values from China and Eastern Europe to
                                  G−O
destination market d, log(EXdjt       ) are German industries’ exports to the same countries, αd are
destination-market and αj are industry-fixed effects.80 IM djt thus captures CE’s competitive ad-
vantage over Germany at time t in destination market d and industry j. Averaging residuals IM    djt
over destination markets d and taking first differences provides a measure for overall changes in
CE’s comparative advantage over time. Exponentiating this term and multiplying it with Ger-
                                                              grav                IM  IM
many’s start-of-period imports from CE gives rise to ∆IMGjt = IMGjt−1 × exp¯jt −¯jt−1 , which is
a counterfactual measure of changes in German industries’ import exposure that is solely driven
by CE’s increasing comparative advantage.
    Conversely, ∆EXGjt increases due to better access to the CE markets and to German-specific
supply conditions. While German-specific supply conditions will affect German exports in gen-
eral, the relative attractiveness of CE markets over other export destinations should be indepen-
dent of German-specific effects. Thus, changes in German industries’ exports to China and East-
ern Europe in relation to German industries’ exports to other countries O provides an exogenous
                 grav
measure ∆EXGit for ∆EXGjt . It can be obtained from the residuals of the regression

                                   G−CE           G−O
                             log(EXdjt  ) − log(EXdjt ) = αd + αj + EX
                                                                     djt ,                                  (140)
                   G−CE
    where log(EXdjt     ) are industry j’s log export values from Germany to China and Eastern
                 G−O
Europe, log(EXdjt ) are German industries’ exports to other countries, and αd and αj are again
destination-country and industry-fixed effects. EX
                                                 djt now captures CE’s relative attractiveness over
other sales markets at time t in destination market d and industry j. Averaging residuals EX     djt
over destination markets d and taking first differences provides a measure for overall changes in
the attractiveness of Chinese and Eastern European sales markets over time. Exponentiating this
                                                                                             grav
term and multiplying it with Germany’s start-of-period exports to CE gives rise to ∆EXGjt =
                EX    EX
EXGjt−1 ×exp¯jt −¯jt−1 , which is a counterfactual measure of changes in German industries’ export
exposure that is solely driven by CE’s increasing attractiveness as sales market.
  80
   Since many CE countries did not report trade data in the late 1980s and early 1990s, we use imports from CE and
Germany reported by other countries O to measure Germany’s and CE’s exports to O.
                                                                         Online Appendix – Not for Publication


Online Appendix K                    Subsample Results for the Effect of Trade T on La-
                                     bor M and Voting Y
Column 1 of Online Appendix K table 5 reports on total employment (as in the paper’s table 4),
estimated separately for Period 1 (1987–1998), and Period 2 (1998–2009), as well as for West Ger-
many only in Period 2. Columns 2–9 of Online Appendix K table 5 similarly decompose the same
eight political outcomes as reported in table 5. The sample sizes are 322, 408, and 322 respectively.
    The effect of trade shocks on labor markets should be more pronounced in the second period,
when German labor markers were more flexible. We found some evidence for this pattern in the
individual results in table 9. This motivates us to decompose the effect of import exposure on local
labor markets by period in this section.



                      Online Appendix Table 5: Decomposing the Results by Period
                          (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)         (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)        (9)
                       log(Total               CDU /
                                    Turnout                 SPD        FDP       Greens     Right       Left       Small
                        Empl.)                  CSU
Period 1
                         -0.027      0.000      -0.298     0.320      0.013       -0.003     -0.025     -0.001     -0.007
Tit
                        (1.600)     (0.013)    (1.159)    (1.558)    (0.150)     (0.030)    (0.243)    (0.041)    (0.105)
Period 2
                         -0.011      0.000      -0.115     -0.173     0.076       0.081     0.071*      0.058      0.003
Tit
                        (1.311)     (0.080)    (0.704)    (1.072)    (0.821)     (1.142)    (1.696)    (0.360)    (0.044)
Period 2, West only
                        -0.019**     0.002      -0.095     -0.161     0.083       0.110    0.084**      -0.023     0.001
Tit
                         (1.990)    (0.514)    (0.542)    (0.987)    (0.886)     (1.342)   (2.078)     (0.187)    (0.018)
Notes: The table reports subsample estimations. Column 1 reports on the log of total employment, as in table 4. Columns
2–9 report on the same eight political outcomes as in table 5. Every result reported in table 5 is from a 2SLS estimation
                                                                                                               IM      EX
that breaks treatment into separate import competition and export access effects, instrumented with Zit           and Zit ,
defined in (47). Every panel additional reports the results for three separate sub-samples: period 1 (1987–1998) and
period 2 (1998–2009), and period 2 without the 86 East German districts. The sample sizes are 322, 408, and 322
respectively. All specifications include region fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the level of 96 commuting
zones. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.



   Table 5 reports on the manufacturing share in employment (column 1) and on the eight voting
outcomes, with each results estimated separately for Period 1 (1987–1998), and Period 2 (1998–
2009), as well as for West Germany only in Period 2. The sample sizes are respectively 322, 408,
and again 322.
   Comparing the three sub-panels shows evidence for increasing flexibility in labor markets be-
tween Period 1 and Period 2. This is nicely reflected by the core result for manufacturing em-
ployment in column 1. The observed contrast between periods is not driven by the inclusion of
East German regions in period 2. In fact, the contrast between the two periods is more pronounced
once we focus on West Germany. Columns 2–9 show that voting responses to trade were strongest
when labor markets were least regulated. Combining the evidence, table 5 suggests that import
exposure had the biggest effect on both voting and labor markets in the second period in West
Germany, i.e. when labor markets were most deregulated and subject to market forces.
   This evidence suggests doing the same breakdowns in the SOEP data. In table 6 we also split
the individual-level SOEP results from the paper’s table 9 by period. We therefore report the
                                                                        Online Appendix – Not for Publication



                             Online Appendix Table 6: Individual-Level Analysis
                                                     (1)               (2)             (3)              (4)
                                                                                   Low-Skill &      Low-Skill &
                                                 1990-1998         1998-2009         Manuf.,        Not Manuf.,
                                                                                    1998-2009        1998-2009
      Established Parties:
                                                    -0.025           0.002            -0.006            0.003
         Would Vote CDU/CSU
                                                   (-0.743)         (0.227)          (-0.350)          (0.257)
                                                    0.027           -0.019**           0.001          -0.022**
         Would Vote SPD
                                                   (0.761)          (-2.217)          (0.031)         (-2.352)
                                                    -0.038           0.015             0.002            0.021
         Would Vote FDP
                                                   (-0.720)         (1.177)           (0.116)          (1.431)
                                                    0.019            0.016             0.007            0.007
         Would Vote Green Party
                                                   (0.409)          (1.295)           (0.363)          (0.565)
      Non-Established Parties:
                                                    0.029           0.028*           0.088**            0.016
         Would Vote Extreme-Right Parties
                                                   (0.735)          (1.802)          (2.013)           (1.035)
                                                    -0.008           -0.005            0.026           -0.010
         Would Vote Far-Left Parties
                                                   (-0.670)         (-0.751)          (1.579)         (-1.043)
                                                    0.018            -0.012          -0.048*           -0.001
         Would Vote Other Small Parties
                                                   (0.340)          (-1.072)         (-1.674)         (-0.042)

      Period-by-region F.E.                          Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes
      Observations                                  3,694            5,975             1,168            3,817
Notes: (a) Columns 1–2 split the the paper’s table 9 by period (3,694 + 5,975= 9,669). The results are driven entirely by
period 2, i.e. after Germany’s labor markets were de-regulated. No part of the political spectrum responds in period
1. In period 2, SPD support is reduced in response to import exposure and support for the extreme right goes up. In
columns 3–4, we focus on the second period, which sharpens the results of the worker-type breakdowns in the paper’s
table 9. (b) Standard errors are clustered at the region level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




results separately by period in columns 1 and 2. It turns out that both the extreme right and
SPD results are driven entirely by period 2, i.e. after Germany’s labor markets were de-regulated.
The individual-level results are thus also in the period-breakdowns consistent with the regional
results.
   We interpret this symmetry as reduced form evidence for the important role of labor markets as
mediators in the transmission from trade shocks to voting responses. However, without additional
econometric structure, it is not possible to infer on the causality of the labor market mechanisms.
