NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

STATE HEALTH INSURANCE MANDATES AND LABOR MARKET OUTCOMES:
NEW EVIDENCE ON OLD QUESTIONS
Yaa Akosa Antwi
Johanna Catherine Maclean
Working Paper 23203
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23203

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2017, Revised February 2018

This research was conducted with restricted access to Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) data. The
views expressed here do not necessarily reflect the views of the BLS, nor those of of the National
Bureau of Economic Research. We thank James Bailey, John Bowlis, Marcus Dillender, Sarah
Hammersma, Andrew Sfekas, Douglas Webber, and seminar participants at the 2016 American
Society of Health Economists Conference and the 2016 Association for Public Policy and
Management Fall Research Conference for helpful comments. All errors are our own.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Yaa Akosa Antwi and Johanna Catherine Maclean. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

State Health Insurance Mandates and Labor Market Outcomes: New Evidence on Old Questions
Yaa Akosa Antwi and Johanna Catherine Maclean
NBER Working Paper No. 23203
February 2017, Revised February 2018
JEL No. H2,I13,J3
ABSTRACT
In this study we re-visit the relationship between private health insurance mandates, access to
employer-sponsored health insurance, and labor market outcomes. Specifically, we model
employer-sponsored health insurance access and labor market outcomes across the lifecycle as a
function of the number of high cost mandates in place at labor market entrance. Our analysis
draws on a long panel of workers from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979 and
exploits variation in five high cost state mandates between 1972 and 1989. Four principal
findings emerge from our analysis. First, we find no strong evidence that high cost state health
insurance mandates discourage employers from offering insurance to employees. Second,
employers adjust both wages and labor demand to offset mandate costs, suggesting that
employees place some value on the mandated benefits. Third, the effects are persistent, but not
permanent. Fourth, the effects are heterogeneous across worker types. These findings have
implications for thinking through the full labor market effects of health insurance expansions.

Yaa Akosa Antwi
Johns Hopkins University
Carey Business School
100 International Drive
Baltimore, MD 21202
y.akosa.antwi@jhu.edu
Johanna Catherine Maclean
Department of Economics
Temple University
Ritter Annex 869
Philadelphia, PA 19122
and NBER
catherine.maclean@temple.edu

1. Introduction
Private health insurance historically has been regulated at the state level in the United
States (Morrisey 2014). In particular, states have regulated the generosity and scope of private
health insurance coverage through the implementation of legislation commonly referred to as
“mandates” since the 1940s. Mandates typically stipulate coverage for specific treatments (e.g.,
mental health), providers (e.g., optometrists), and population categories (e.g., dependents) within
the private market (Morrisey 2014). Pennsylvania passed the first mandate in 1949: requiring
coverage for healthcare services provided by osteopaths and dentists (Laugesen et al. 2006).
The number of mandates has increased substantially over time, from roughly 1,000 mandates in
1991 (Gruber 1994b) to 2,156 mandates in 2010 (Bunce and Wieske 2010).
The key economic argument for mandates is resolution of the adverse selection problem
(Lahey 2012): only those individuals who expect to utilize a particular healthcare service are
willing to pay for insurance that covers this service, which leads to a cycle of increasing
premiums and a smaller, less healthy pool of beneficiaries. 1 Positive externalities from
healthcare interventions (e.g., vaccines) also motivate the use of mandates. Advocates contend
that mandates are welfare enhancing as they compel private insurers to provide an equitable and
appropriate level of coverage (Gruber 1994b). Mandate critics argue that these regulations
unduly increase labor costs, contribute to the overall rise in healthcare costs, and, consequently,
the decline of employer-sponsored health insurance (ESI) within the U.S. (Litow 2002).
The contentious policy debate on the merits and demerits of mandates is not close to
resolution. The inability to reach a consensus about the value of mandated benefits is, in part,
due to the conflicting research findings on mandate effects. For example, a series of studies
documents that mandates increase access to valuable healthcare services (Dave and Mukerjee
2011, Maclean, Popovici, and Stern 2017, Akosa Antwi, Moriya, and Simon 2015) and improve
health (Courtemanche and Zapata 2014, Popovici, Maclean, and French 2017) without
substantially distorting the labor market (Kaestner and Simon 2002). A different set of studies
suggests mandated health insurance benefits in private markets may have negative
consequences, such as terminated health insurance coverage (Gabel and Jensen 1992), increased
insurance costs (Bailey and Blascak 2016, Depew and Bailey 2015), distortions in the labor
market (Bailey and Webber 2016), and moral hazard (Klick and Stratmann 2006) with limited

In the extreme, the market will enter a “death spiral” in which the premiums become so high that no individuals
are willing to purchase insurance leading to a collapse of the market.

1

2

impact on access to healthcare services (Pacula and Sturm 2000, Sturm 2000).
In this study we explore the persistent effect of mandated benefits in private insurance
markets on access to ESI and labor market outcomes among new labor market entrants. As such
we add new information to the large economic literature on the effect of mandated benefits on
U.S. labor markets. While our study cannot reconcile the controversy within the mandated
benefits literature, we attempt to shed light on a question that, to the best of our knowledge, has
not yet been studied. Specifically, we ask, Are there persistent effects of high cost mandates on
access to ESI and labor market outcomes for new labor market entrants? In other words, (i) do
high cost mandates affect access to ESI and labor market outcomes among new labor market
entrants; and (ii) will there be persistent differences over the lifecycle of two workers, one who
enters a labor market characterized by highly regulated private insurance contracts and the other
who enters a labor market with limited regulation of private insurance contracts? Economic
theories that allow for labor market frictions suggest that shocks to labor demand, such as
mandates, at initial labor market entrance can lead to persistent effects. Broadly, these theories
suggest that a worker’s initial compensation package can persistently effect his compensation
and labor supply profiles. Thus, shocks to labor demand can have long-lasting implications for
new labor market entrants.
We consider the following outcomes: whether an employee has an offer of ESI, hourly
wages, and labor supply (weeks worked per year and the probability of full-time employment).
Our contributions to the literature are twofold. First, by using private health insurance mandates
data spanning 1973 to 1990, we leverage variation in the number and scope of several costly
mandated benefits that were implemented prior to widespread self-insurance on the part of
employers. Second, we explore dynamics of mandate effects across the lifecycle.
To answer this question, we draw a long panel of workers from the National
Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979 (NLSY79). The NLSY79 tracks workers from initial labor
market entrance through mid-career when workers are in their mid-50s. The mandated benefits
we study are: alcohol abuse treatment, illicit drug abuse treatment, mental health treatment,
chiropractors, and continuing coverage for terminated employees and their dependents. During
our study period, health insurance mandates accounted for over 30% of employers’ health
insurance costs, with these specific mandates generating over 50% of these costs (Gruber
1994b). Moreover, self-insurance by employers—which is common in the current labor market
and may allow firms to circumvent state insurance regulations—was relatively rare, with
3

roughly 8% of firms self-insuring during our study period (McDonnell et al. 1986). Thus, the
costly mandates we study may have had a greater “bite” during the period we study compared to
recent periods. We estimate differences-in-differences models that control for time-invariant and
time-varying state-level factors that may be correlated with both the passage of high cost
mandates, ESI offers, and labor market outcomes. Over our study period, numerous states
implemented at least one or more of the mandates we study, offering us substantial variation for
identification.
We find no evidence that the state health insurance mandates we study discourage
employers from offering ESI, but employers reduce wages and labor demand (measured by
weeks and hours worked) to offset the cost of mandates. Collectively, these findings suggest
that employees value the mandated benefits, but not fully. The effects we estimate are persistent
but not permanent: they dissipate with time spent in the labor market. However, our findings
suggest a high degree of persistence as we observe that effects can endure for 12 years or more,
depending on the outcome, after labor market entrance. Lastly, the adverse effects appear to be
concentrated among workers who began their careers with small employers and non-unionized
employers, and lesser skill workers (workers with no college education). We confirm these
findings in the Current Population Survey (CPS), a large-scale state-representative dataset that is
commonly utilized in the health insurance mandates literature. While our CPS results are in line
with our NLSY79 findings for wages and labor supply, we find evidence in the CPS that high
cost mandates at labor market entrance persistently, but not permanently, reduce the probability
that an individual is covered by ESI. We hypothesize that an explanation for our ESI coverage
finding could be post mandate, employers may increase employee cost-sharing (e.g., premiums,
deductibles, and copays) which may lead to lower take up among employees.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the economics of
mandated benefits and related literature. Section 3 outlines our conceptual framework and
hypotheses. Our data, variables, and methods are described in Section 4. Section 5 reports our
main results, while extensions to the main analysis and robustness checking are reported in
Section 6. Finally, Section 7 concludes.
2. Empirical evidence on health insurance mandates
A comprehensive review of the vast literature on ESI and labor market effects of health
insurance mandates is beyond the scope of our study. Thus, for brevity, we focus our attention
on studies that are closely related to our research question: those that examine the concurrent
4

effect of mandates and rising health insurance cost on ESI, wages, and labor supply. 2 We refer
readers to reviews by Jensen and Morrisey (1999), Monheit et al. (2007), Lahey (2012), and
Morrisey (2014) for more details.
2.1. Employer sponsored health insurance
Gabel and Jensen (1992) examine the effect of state insurance regulation on small (<100
workers) employers’ decisions to offer health insurance coverage. Using data on 1,320 small
employers, the authors find mixed evidence on mandate effects. Continuation-of-coverage
mandates decrease the likelihood that a small employer offers ESI whereas drug abuse treatment
mandates increase this probability. Overall, implementation of the two mandates reduces the
likelihood that a small employer offers ESI. Gruber (1994b) uses data from the CPS and five
high cost mandates to investigate the mandate-ESI relationship. 3 The author finds no evidence
that mandates effect employers’ propensity to offer ESI. Subsequent studies support Gruber’s
null finding (Cseh 2008, Kaestner and Simon 2002, Bao and Sturm 2004, Sturm 2000).
2.2. Wages and labor supply
In a seminal study, Gruber (1994a) evaluates the labor market response to state and
federal mandates for comprehensive coverage for childbirth among married women of
childbearing age (i.e., the target population of this mandate). Using CPS data, Gruber tests the
effect of the mandates on wages, hours worked, and employment of married women of
childbearing age. He finds evidence that employers shift the cost of mandated maternity
benefits to married women of childbearing age, but no evidence that mandates affect such
women’s hours worked or employment propensity. The decrease in wages combined with no
change in hours or employment suggests that these women value the mandated benefit.
Kaestner and Simon (2002), using CPS data, find that the number of state-mandated
insurance benefits have no effect on wages and weeks of work. However, the authors show that
the number of mandates increases weekly work hours.
Cseh (2008) studies the effect of state mental health mandates on labor market outcomes
and finds that these mandates reduce wages, suggesting that employees value the mandated
benefit, but no evidence that measures of labor supply are affected by passage of this mandate.
Andersen (2015) builds on Cseh’s work to study heterogeneity in the effect of mental health
To the best of our knowledge, at the time of writing, no studies have examined persistent effects of mandated
benefits as we do here.
3
The five high cost mandates are: mandated minimum benefits for alcohol abuse treatment, drug abuse treatment,
and mental illness; mandated coverage for chiropractic services; and mandated continuation of health insurance
benefits for terminated employees and their dependents. We examine the same high cost mandates in our study.
2

5

mandates on labor market outcomes. Specifically, Anderson shows that among employees with
poor mental health, mandates increase wages and working hours. 4 Relatedly, Lahey (2012)
finds that wages are unaffected by infertility mandates, though labor supply decreases by 1.07
weeks per year among women of childbearing age.
Overall, the literature on the effects of mandates on health insurance and labor market
outcomes is somewhat mixed.5 However, while mixed, the literature does suggest some scope
for mandates to effect the labor market outcomes examined in this study.
2.3. Rising health insurance cost and labor market outcomes
A related series of studies relevant to our work has investigated how rising healthcare
costs generally affect labor market outcomes. Cutler and Madrian (1998) document that
increases in health insurance costs lead to increases in average hours worked in the CPS and
Survey of Income Program Participation. The authors interpret their findings to imply that, due
to the increased cost per employee, employers opt to extract more work time from incumbent
employees rather than hiring new employees. Baicker and Chandra (2006) assess the effect of
rising health insurance premiums on wages, employment, and the distribution of full-time and
part-time workers. Using malpractice cost as an instrument for estimated health insurance
premiums, the authors find that workers bear some of the cost of rising health insurance
premiums in the form of lower wages. Institutional constraints, however, prevent employers
from passing on all costs to workers. In addition, as costs rise, employers and workers have an
incentive to move from full-time employment with benefits to part-time employment without.
Research on the public sector (school districts), which has a sizable union presence and
is less affected by market forces than the private sector, finds that health insurance cost increases
are partially offset by increases in premiums (Lubotsky and Olson 2015), with no measurable
change in wages or salaries (Lubotsky and Olson 2015, Clemens and Cutler 2014), employment,
or quality of employed workers (Lubotsky and Olson 2015).
As in the mandate literature, findings from studies that focus on the labor market effects
of rising healthcare costs suggest that employers pass some healthcare costs on to employees.
3. Conceptual framework
We next review several strands of economic theory that point toward (i)
Additionally, Andersen (2015) finds that mandates increase the probability of an ESI offer and ESI coverage
among those with poor mental health.
5
Lahey (2012) argues that the lack of consensus in the literature is not surprising. Because mandates vary in terms
of scope, costs to employers, affected population, and characteristics, economic theory necessarily predicts the
mixed results observed within the literature.
4

6

contemporaneous effects of mandates on access to ESI and labor market outcomes, and (ii)
persistent effects of mandates on these outcomes.
3.1. A brief review of the economics of health insurance mandates
Summers (1989) provides one of the early economic analyses of health insurance
mandates on labor market outcomes. Prior to implementation of a mandate, the labor market is
in equilibrium at the intersection 𝐷𝐷1 and 𝑆𝑆1, with employment level 𝐸𝐸1 and wages of 𝑊𝑊1 as

depicted in Figure 1. Summers, assuming that the cost of the mandate is a per hour rate, argues
that health insurance mandates increase labor costs and should, all else equal, lead to a decrease
in demand for labor among employers by the cost of the mandate, from 𝐷𝐷1 to 𝐷𝐷2 . Thus, the
mandate should lead to a lower level of employment and wages (𝐸𝐸2′ ,𝑊𝑊2′ ). However, if

employees value the mandate, then this valuation will lead to an increase in labor supply (from
𝑆𝑆1 to 𝑆𝑆2 ). The labor supply increase will have two effects: it will attenuate the employment

decline and increase the wage decline. At the new equilibrium, wages and employment will fall
(𝐸𝐸2 ,𝑊𝑊2 ). The extent to which the mandate affects wages and employment levels is determined

by employees’ valuation of the benefit.

If employees fully value the benefit, the incidence of the mandate will be entirely passed
on to the employees in terms of lower wages, and there will be no effect on employment levels.
Alternatively, if employees do not value the mandated benefit, costs will borne by employers,
wages will be unchanged, and overall employment will decline to offset mandate costs.
Intermediate valuations of the mandated benefit by employees will lead to both lower wages and
employment levels, with the relative magnitudes of these effects determined by employee
preferences and the elasticities of labor supply and demand. Summers (1989) notes that features
of the U.S. labor market, such as minimum wages and anti-discrimination laws, limit employers’
ability to reduce wages to offset costs.
Subsequent economic research offers a number of potential extensions to the Summers
framework. Sloan and Conover (1998) highlight the possibility that, if mandates become too
costly, employers may elect to self-insure. Self-insured firms are exempt from state regulations
of the healthcare market under Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (ERISA).
Gabel and Jensen (1992) note that employers, when faced with higher mandate costs, could
choose to eliminate ESI altogether. Such actions would reduce the probability of access to ESI,
but would mute wage and employment effects. 6 Cutler and Madrian (1998) develop a model in
6

Indeed, if employers drop ESI and wish to maintain the same level of compensation for employees, we might

7

which employers may increase the labor supply of current employees rather than hire additional
employees. 7 Moreover, employers may opt to rely on part-time or temporary workers who are
generally not eligible for employer-sponsored benefits such as health insurance. 8
In summary, worker valuation of mandated benefit, institutional constraints on wages
(e.g., minimum wage) and benefits (e.g., anti-discrimination laws), and the elasticities of labor
supply and demand will determine the magnitude of the effect of mandates on ESI, wages, and
labor supply. The ambiguity of theory offers premise for empirical study.
3.2. Persistence
A unique contribution of our study is that we explore the persistent effects of mandates
for new labor entrants. While firms may absorb increased labor cost by increasing premiums for
workers, they could also offset the cost through adjustment in wages. For instance, forwardlooking employers could offer less comprehensive compensation packages to new workers to
account for higher non-wage compensation in the future and/or stifle wage growth of incumbent
workers. We focus on new job market entrants since employers may find it more feasible to
offer lower wage contracts to new hires than to reduce wages of existing employees when faced
with increases in mandated benefits. 9
To the best of our knowledge, there is no specific economic theory that considers the
persistence of mandates on ESI or labor market outcomes. Thus, we draw on existing theories
of career development to establish the possibility of a relationship between high cost mandates
at labor market entry and employment outcomes across the life course.
Under the assumptions of perfect competition, the labor market operates as a spot
market. In such a market, we would not expect initial conditions, including insurance
regulations, to have a persistent effect as only current conditions are important for labor market
outcomes. There are numerous reasons, however, to suspect that the U.S. labor market departs

expect wages (or other forms of compensation) to rise.
7
Cutler and Madrian (1998) note that, in U.S. labor markets, ESI is generally not paid on a per hour rate (an
assumption made by Summers [1989]) and instead is a fixed cost per employee.
8
It is worth noting that if employers are able to pass some, or all, of the mandate costs to employees in the form of
health insurance premium increases and/or additional cost sharing (e.g., copayments, deductibles) then the labor
market implications of mandates would be muted (Bailey and Blascak 2016, Bailey 2014). We are unable to study
this mechanism with our data.
9
In particular, due to employment laws and concerns regarding employee morale and other factors, we hypothesize
that employers may be more likely to offer lower wages to new hires, including new labor market entrants who
have no previous reference point for their wages, than incumbent employees. We note that employer concerns
regarding equity between different workers (i.e., new hires and incumbents) and the potential implications for
reduced employee morale/productivity will likely prevent outrageously large declines in wage offers to new hires
(Bewley 1998).

8

from the perfectly competitive ideal (Webber 2015). More specifically, frictions in the labor
market suggest persistent effects stemming from adverse career experiences.
A key source of frictions is the cost of switching from one job to another. Job switching
involves search, training, time, financial, reputation, and psychic costs. Incomplete information
about job opportunities and finite job offer arrival rates also lead to frictions. Broadly, frictions
limit the ability of workers to switch from one job to another and therefore may force workers to
remain stuck in poor job matches (Kondo 2015). While frictions effect all workers, they may be
particularly salient for new labor market entrants as early career is a critical period of wage
growth and skill accumulation (Neumark 2002, Topel and Ward 1992).
If mandates induce employers to cut labor costs by extracting additional hours from
current workers rather than hiring new workers (Cutler and Madrian 1998), the quantity of job
opportunities for new labor market entrants could be restricted. A job matching model predicts
that individuals who leave school in such a market will experience a longer initial job search
spell as there are fewer open jobs (Jovanovic 1979). Relatedly, if mandates affect the
distribution of firms in the labor market (Bailey and Webber 2016), the types of firms that offer
jobs may also be altered. Finally, lower wages attributable to mandates may lead employees
who do not value the mandate to spend more time searching for a job that offers a wage at or
above their reservation wage. Such a demand shock at labor market entrance could lead to new
entrants accepting poor job matches, lower earnings, and temporary jobs with fewer hours.
If workers are initially mismatched to their jobs they may acquire the “wrong” human
capital. Such accumulation may be particularly harmful for workers’ wage profiles if a job
requires firm- or task-specific, rather than general, human capital. If workers are unemployed at
labor market entrance, or unemployed for longer spells as they search for a job, they may fail to
accumulate human capital and/or experience depreciation in their human capital stock, causing
these workers to fall behind in terms of their skills. Such limited human capital accumulation
opportunities can lead to a persistently flatter wage profile (Genda, Kondo, and Ohta 2010).
In addition, the labor market may incorrectly interpret the first job placement as a
measure of ability rather than luck (Oyer 2006). In such a model, a worker who enters the labor
market during a negative shock to labor demand may carry the incorrect (negative) first
placement signal throughout his career. Moreover, it is possible that worker preferences for job
attributes (wage compensation vis-á-vis non-wage compensation, work hours, etc.) may be
shaped by the initial job match (Oyer 2006).
9

Supporting these hypotheses, there is ample evidence that adverse labor market
conditions, often proxied with the unemployment rate, at labor market entrance have long-run
effects on the earnings, access to ESI, job prestige, and labor supply of workers (Ellwood 1982,
Kahn 2010, Oreopoulos, von Wachter, and Heisz 2012, Maclean 2014, Altonji, Kahn, and Speer
2016, Genda, Kondo, and Ohta 2010). 10 For instance, using longitudinal Canadian data,
Oreopoulos, von Wachter, and Heisz (2012) find that male college graduates who enter the labor
market during a recession experience an initial earnings loss of 9% that persists for 10 years.
Moreover, Genda, Kondo, and Ohta (2010) show that workers who leave school during periods
of weak labor demand are persistently more likely to be unemployed. Maclean (2014)
demonstrates that workers who enter the labor market during a recession are persistently less
likely to have access to ESI and other forms of non-wage compensation. Although these studies
explore the implications of a different type of labor demand shock (i.e., a decline in aggregate
demand vs. an increase in price), they do open the door to the possibility that in general shocks
experienced at labor market entrance may have long-lasting effects for workers.
4. Data, variables, and methods
4.1. Data
We draw data on a long panel of workers from the NLSY79. We use the geocoded data,
which allows us to access information on state of residence. The original NLSY79 sample
consists of 12,686 youth ages 14 to 22 in 1979. The survey was administered annually by the
Bureau of Labor Statistics between 1979 and 1993, and bi-annually from 1994 onward. These
data are particularly well suited to our research question as the NLSY79 was specifically
designed to track a cohort of workers as they transition into the labor market and throughout
their career. We have information on ESI offers, wages, and labor supply. We are able to follow
workers from labor market entrance, which we define as the first job held after leaving school,
through mid-career. Specifically, in 2012 workers are in their early to mid-50s.
We focus on a sample of workers ages 18 to 54 (Gruber 1994b, Kaestner and Simon
2002). These exclusions, and others necessary to construct our analysis sample that are detailed
later in the paper, leave us with a sample of 11,013 unique workers and 168,527 worker/year
pairs (as discussed later, sample sizes differ across outcomes).

We note that these studies explore the persistent effects of reduced aggregate labor demand while we examine an
increase in the price of labor which should affect the quantity of labor demanded. We expect that, at the market
level, both types of labor demand shocks can lead to changes in wage and non-wage compensation, and labor
supply for workers.
10

10

4.2. ESI and labor market outcomes
We focus on four outcomes using the ESI and labor market data available across years.
NLSY79 respondents can list information, including the ESI offers and wage variables we study
here, on multiple jobs. The number of jobs varies across survey years. For comparability across
survey years we assume the first job reported by the respondent is the dominant job (Maclean
2014). The labor supply measures we examine are cumulative across all jobs.
First, we construct a binary indicator for whether or not a worker has access to ESI. The
specific question wording in 1979 was, “Does your employer make health insurance available to
you? Medical, surgical, or hospital insurance that covers injuries or major illnesses off the
job?” 11 We code respondents as one if they report this offer, and zero otherwise. 12
Next, we construct three labor market outcomes. First, we consider the hourly wage; we
inflate nominal wages to 2012 dollars using the Consumer Price Index—Urban Consumers. We
exclude workers with wages less than $1 per hour and those with wages greater than $1,000 per
hour (Kahn 2010). Second, we construct two measures of the past year’s labor supply: weeks
worked (this variable is generated by NLSY79 administrators and reflects the sum of weeks
worked across all jobs) and full-time work (an indicator variable coded 1 if the respondent
usually works 35 or more hours per week, 0 otherwise). 13 We take the logarithm of wages and
weeks worked. 14 Regression coefficient estimates have the interpretation of an approximation to
the percent change. 15 Due to differences in survey universe and item non-response, our sample
sizes vary to some extent across outcomes. To preserve sample size, we rely on the unbalanced
panel of workers. Results based on a sample with complete information on all four outcome
variables are comparable. 16
The specific question wording has changed across survey years to some extent. Moreover, the ESI question was
not asked in the 1981 round of the NSLY79, thus we do not have a value for this outcome in 1981. Interested
readers can consult the NLSY79 codebook: http://www.bls.gov/nls/nlsy79.htm (accessed February 20th, 2018).
12
Unlike previous studies that use the CPS to examine the impacts of state health insurance mandates on the
provision of ESI (Kaestner and Simon 2002), we are able to isolate offers from take-up of ESI. Thus, we are able to
avoid confounding offers with endogenous take-up decisions by employees. Although we argue that our ESI offer
variable is advantageous, this variable has at least three important caveats. First, this variable captures whether an
employee is aware of an offer of ESI. Respondents may decide not to take up this offer for myriad reasons. We are
unable to capture such reasons here. Second, this variable does not measure the generosity of any offered ESI, thus
we cannot assess whether the respondent’s ESI offer covers the mandated benefits. Third, the ESI question
described here is only asked to workers, and thus our findings may be vulnerable to sample-selection bias.
13
We have estimated regression models in which the outcome variable is the logarithm of hours worked. Results
are comparable and are reported in Supplementary Appendix Table 1.
14
We focus only on those individuals with positive values of these outcomes.
15
Results using unlogged values of hourly wage and weeks worked are not appreciably different from those
reported here. See Supplementary Appendix Table 1.
16
Results are reported in Supplementary Appendix Table 2.
11

11

4.3. High cost health insurance mandates at school-leaving
To measure the number of high cost mandates in place at labor market entrance, we use
data on five high cost mandates for services, providers, and covered beneficiaries studied by
Gruber (1994b). The mandates are: alcohol abuse treatment, illicit drug treatment, mental health
treatment, coverage of chiropractic services, and continuing coverage.
To investigate the effect of high cost mandates at the time of labor market entrance, we
must locate the state and year in which each individual left school, the location and period in
which most students enter the labor market. A limitation of the NLSY79 data is that we only
have state of residence beginning in 1979 (the first year of the survey), but many individuals in
our sample entered the labor market before this year (respondents are ages 14 to 22 in 1979).
We use state of birth as a proxy for the labor market entrance state for all workers. We exclude
respondents with a missing birth state or who were born outside the U.S. Use of the birth state
leads to measurement error for those individuals who crossed state lines between birth and labor
market entrance. However, for the study period where we observe most respondents enter the
labor market, less than 3% of the U.S. population moved across state lines annually (Bureau of
Labor Statistics, 1976). Thus, we suspect that measurement error is not substantial. Moreover,
as a sensitivity check, we have re-estimated our models using the state of residence at age 14,
state of residence in 1979 for those who left school in 1979 or earlier, and interview state for
those who left school after 1979 to proxy the labor market entrance state. Results are not
appreciably different from those reported here. 17 We refer to birth states as “labor market
entrance” states henceforth in the paper.
We locate the year of labor market entrance using retrospective information on schoolleaving collected between 1979 and 1998. Non-enrolled NLSY79 respondents are asked to
report the year in which they left school. If a respondent indicated that they completed no
formal education, we exclude them from the analysis sample as we cannot locate a labor market
entrance year. We focus on the sample of workers who entered the labor market between 1973
and 1990. These exclusions lead us to drop 133 observations. We exclude those who entered
the labor market in earlier (pre-1973) years as cohort sizes are small (less than 20 per year).
However, we have relaxed this assumption as a sensitivity check, and results are not appreciably

Results are reported in Supplementary Appendix Table 3. We choose to not drop individuals who entered the
labor market before 1979 as this would substantially reduce the number of observations in our analysis sample and,
more importantly, the number of policy changes that we exploit to identify the effect of high cost mandates on
health insurance and labor supply measures. See Table 1.

17

12

different than those reported here. 18 We exclude respondents who entered the labor market after
1990 (n=81) as our policy data are only available through 1989 (Gruber 1994b), and in our
regressions (detailed later) we lag mandates one year. 19 Appendix Table A reports the number of
respondents (unweighted and weighted) entering the labor market by year. The largest cohort
was 1979 (unweighted n=1,441) and the smallest cohort was 1990 (unweighted n=29). 20 21
Table 1 reports the effective date for each of the high cost mandates through 1989. By
1989, all states with the exception of Idaho and Wyoming had implemented at least one of these
mandates. Three states (Kansas, Virginia, and Wisconsin) implemented all five mandates by
1989. Only states that implement high cost mandates during our study period contribute
variation in our empirical models (differences-in-differences). We use bold text in Table 1 to
indicate these changes. During our study period, 25 states implemented an alcohol treatment
mandate, 15 states implemented an illicit drug treatment mandate, 11 states implemented a
mental health treatment mandate, 27 states implemented a chiropractor mandate, and 30 states
implemented a continuing coverage mandate. 22 We take the unweighted count of the number of
high cost mandates. This variable ranges from 0 to 5.
4.4. Control variables
We include a set of pre-determined individual-level variables that are expected to predict
the probability of an ESI offer, hourly wages, and labor supply in all regression models:
race/ethnicity (African American and Hispanic, with White as the omitted group), age at labor
market entrance, level of education at labor market entrance (high school, some college, and a
college degree, with less than high school as the omitted category), a proxy for ability (ageResults are reported in Supplementary Appendix Table 4. Specifically, we included all respondents for whom we
could locate a labor market entrance year and birth state, regardless of when they entered the labor market (with the
exception of those leaving after 1990).
19
Only 81 observations meeting other eligibility criteria for our sample that entered the labor market after 1990,
suggesting that failure to include these observations might not lead to substantial bias in our estimates.
20
We have estimated regressions dropping the school-leaving year 1973 from the analysis sample as ERISA
became effective in 1974. Results are not appreciably different from those reported here. See Supplementary
Appendix Table 5.
21
We have explored the possibility that mandates influence the age at school-leaving. We find no evidence to
support this hypothesis. Details available on request.
22
In 1985 the federal government passed the Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act. This act became
effective in April 1986 and mandated that a private insurance program give some employees the ability to
continue health insurance coverage after leaving employment for a period up to 18 months. Therefore, this act
superseded the state continuing coverage laws studied here, and these state laws may have little bite post-1986. To
address this issue, we re-estimated our regression models excluding the continuing coverage mandate from our high
cost mandate variable. More specifically, we construct our high cost mandate variable as the count of alcohol abuse
treatment, illicit drug treatment, mental health treatment, and coverage of chiropractic services mandates only (this
variable ranges from 0 to 4). Results, reported in Supplementary Appendix Table 6, are not appreciably different
from those reported here.
18

13

standardized Armed Forces Qualification Test [AFQT]), parental education as measured by
mother’s and father’s years of education entered linearly and separately, rural residence at age
14, and indicators for access to cultural materials within the household at age 14 (library card,
newspapers, and magazines). In addition, we include the number of years (entered linearly)
between labor market entrance and the periods in which our outcome variable is measured. This
variable is our proxy for potential experience in the labor market (Maclean 2013).
We include indicators for missing covariates and assign missing observations to the
sample mean (continuous variable) or mode (binary variable) in our regression models. Results
are robust if we instead drop all observations with missing covariate information. 23
We also include labor market entrance state characteristics. Ideally, we would like to
control for variables that influence both our outcomes and a state’s propensity to pass the high
cost mandates we study. We leverage information contained in the Annual Social and Economic
Supplement to the CPS: unemployment rate, poverty rate, share of the population with some
college education, average age, and the share of the population working for pay with a private
employer. 24
4.5. Empirical model
Equation (1) presents the regression model we use to estimate the effects of high cost
mandates at labor market entrance on ESI and labor market outcomes across the lifecycle:
(1) 𝐿𝐿𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 = 𝛼𝛼0 + 𝛼𝛼1 𝑀𝑀𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠 + 𝛼𝛼2 𝐸𝐸𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖−𝑡𝑡 + 𝛼𝛼3 𝑀𝑀𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠 ∗ 𝐸𝐸𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖−𝑡𝑡 + 𝛼𝛼4′ 𝑋𝑋𝑖𝑖 + 𝛼𝛼5′ 𝐶𝐶𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠 + 𝐺𝐺𝑔𝑔 + 𝑆𝑆𝑠𝑠 + 𝐷𝐷𝑡𝑡 + 𝜀𝜀𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖

𝐿𝐿𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 is an outcome measured for individual i in labor market entrance state s and labor

market entrance year t measured in survey year g. 𝑀𝑀𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠 is the lagged number of high cost

mandates in labor market entrance state s and labor market entrance year t. 25 This variable
captures the contemporaneous effects of high cost mandates for new labor market entrants.
𝐸𝐸𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖−𝑡𝑡 is potential labor market experience. 𝑀𝑀𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠 ∗ 𝐸𝐸𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖−𝑡𝑡 is the interaction between the number of
high cost mandates at labor market entrance and potential experience. Including this interaction
term allows the effect of high cost mandates at labor market entrance to vary across time. For
example, the effects (if present) may increase or decrease with time spent in the labor market.
See Supplementary Appendix Table 7.
In the years 1973 to 1976 the CPS did not separately identify all states; smaller states were suppressed due to
confidentiality concerns (details available on request). We developed a crosswalk to create state-level
characteristics for our analysis. Details are available on request and results are not appreciably different if we
exclude these state-level controls from our regression models. However, we note that findings for ESI offers are
more precisely estimated. See Supplementary Appendix Table 8.
25
We re-estimated our model using the number of high cost mandates at labor market entrance (i.e., we did not lag
the mandate variable). Results are not appreciably different. See Supplementary Appendix Table 9.
23
24

14

This specification is in line with previous analyses within the career development literature
(Kahn 2010, Maclean 2014, Altonji, Kahn, and Speer 2016)
𝑋𝑋𝑖𝑖 is a vector of personal characteristics 26 and 𝐶𝐶𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠 is a vector of labor market entrance

state characteristics. 𝐺𝐺𝑔𝑔 includes survey year fixed effects. 𝑆𝑆𝑠𝑠 and 𝐷𝐷𝑡𝑡 are vectors of labor

market entrance state and year fixed effects. Inclusion of the labor market entrance state fixed
effects implies that we use within labor market entrance state variation in high cost mandates to
identify effects. These fixed effects control for time invariant and difficult-to-observe (to the
econometrician) between labor market entrance state differences that may be correlated with
both the number of high cost mandates in the labor market entrance state and our outcomes. 27
We utilize linear probability models (LPMs) for binary outcomes 28 and OLS for
continuous outcomes. We estimate separate models for men and women given established
differences across sex in terms of labor market outcomes (Blau and Kahn 2007). We apply
NLSY79 sample weights, but unweighted results are similar. 29 Standard errors are clustered
around the labor market entrance state.
The NLSY79 does not offer us sufficient information to determine whether a
respondent’s employer is compelled by passage of a high cost mandate to change insurance
offerings to employees, wages, or labor demand; i.e., we cannot estimate the treatment on the
treated (TOT). Instead, our estimates are intent-to-treat (ITT). We note our inability to estimate
the TOT as a limitation of our study. We return to the ITT nature of our estimates after
presenting our results.
5. Results
5.1. Summary statistics
Summary statistics are reported in Table 2. Male workers have slightly higher values for
all our outcome variables than female workers, which is in line with higher labor market
attachment among men than women. For instance, 79% of male workers report an employer
sponsored health insurance offer compared to 76% of female workers. In addition, men report
These characteristics are time invariant. One may be concerned that including age at school-leaving, schoolleaving year, and potential experience may lead to collinearity issues. We re-estimated Equation (1) with no
individual characteristics. Results are not appreciably different. However, we note that findings for ESI offers are
more precisely estimated. See Supplementary Appendix Table 10.
27
Results are not appreciably different if we instead include labor market entrance state-specific linear or quadratic
time trends. Results are also robust to including state-of-residence at the time outcome variables are measured. See
Supplementary Appendix Table 11.
28
We choose the LPM over a probit or logit model as the LPM is not vulnerable to the incidental parameters
problem (Greene 2004).
29
See Supplementary Appendix Table 12.
26

15

higher hourly wages ($22.08 vs. $16.68) and likelihood of working full-time (89.7% vs. 72.4%).
The lagged mean number of high cost mandates in place at school-leaving is similar for both
sexes. Demographics are also broadly similar for both men and women, and are comparable to
an older sample such as the NLSY79. For example, the sample is less racially and ethnically
diverse, and has lower educational attainment, relative to the current U.S. population.
5.2. Life course effects of high costs mandates on ESI and labor market outcomes
Table 3 reports estimates of the effect of high cost mandates at labor market entrance on
ESI offers, wages, and labor supply. 30
We find no statistically significant effect of high cost mandates on the probability that an
employer offers health insurance to either men or women. However, male and female workers
incur an initial wage penalty of 4% and 2.7%, respectively, for each additional high cost
mandate. While these effects dissipate with time in the labor market, they are observable for 12
years for both men and women after entering the job market. 31 Passage of a high cost mandate
leads to a reduction in the number of weeks worked among men but not women. More
specifically, men who enter a labor market with an additional high cost mandate work 1.7%
fewer weeks per year than otherwise comparable men, and this disparity is observable for
roughly 13 years. In terms of full-time employment, we find that entering a labor market with
high cost mandates reduces the propensity of working full-time among both men and women,
but these effects are not permanent. Indeed, an additional high cost mandate at labor market
entrance reduces the probability of full-time work by 2.3 percentage points for both men (2.5%)
and women (3.2%). These effects are observable for men approximately 13 years after labor
market entrance. For women, the coefficient estimate on the interaction term is not precise, so
we cannot rule out the absence of a persistent effect.
Our findings that wages and the probability of working full-time decrease in response to
mandates can be interpreted in the context of our conceptual framework that workers place some
value on these high cost mandates. The decline is also in line with Baicker and Chandra (2006),
who find evidence that as health insurance costs increase, employers pass on the cost by
decreasing wages and substitute part-time workers for full-time workers.
Interestingly, our findings for persistent effects of mandates are comparable to several
studies that explore the career consequences of entering the labor market in a recession (i.e., a
A full set of regression coefficient estimates is reported in Supplementary Appendix Tables 13A and 13B.
We calculate the number of years at which the effects become zero by taking the derivative of Equation (1) with
respect to 𝑀𝑀𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠 , setting the derivative to zero, and solving for 𝐸𝐸𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖−𝑡𝑡 .
30
31

16

reduction in aggregate demand). For example, Oreopoulos, von Wachter, and Heisz (2012) find
that the wage effects of a 1 percentage point increase in the unemployment rate at labor market
entrance are observable for up to 10 years among college educated Canadian men. Similarly,
Kahn (2010), using a sample of college educated white men drawn from the NLSY79, shows
that a 1 percentage point increase in the state unemployment rate at labor market entrance leads
to lower wages that are apparent 15 years later. An exception is full-time work propensity
among women, we are unable to rule out a permanent effect for this outcome.
5.3. The importance of employer size at labor market entrance
We next separately estimate Equation (1) for workers whose first job after school-leaving
is with a small employer or with a large employer. We expect that the mandate effects will be
stronger for those individuals who began their careers with small employers (Kaestner and
Simon 2002). Although the previous literature has used contemporaneous employer size in
analyses of mandate effects, because we are examining the importance of mandates at labor
market entry we argue that it is the employer size at labor market entrance that is relevant here.
A limitation of the NLSY79 data is that employer size is not available between 1981 and
1985. These years are important as many workers in our sample entered the labor market in the
early 1980s (see Appendix Table A). Moreover, we lack data on employer size before the
NLSY79 survey commences, and many workers in our sample also entered the labor market in
the 1970s (see Appendix Table A). Thus, this limitation of the NLSY79 prevents us from
accurately identifying the sample of firms for whom the mandates may bind.
We use information on employer size available in 1979 to impute employer size in the
first job for individuals who entered the labor market between 1973 and 1978. Thus, we
implicitly assume that employer size remains constant across these years. Next, we use
information on employer size in 1980 to impute employer size for the workers who entered the
labor market between 1981 and 1985. 32 For workers who entered the labor market in other
years (i.e., 1979, 1980, and 1986–1990), we use the employer size information from the labor
market entrance year. We stratify workers in the following manner: employer size at labor
market entrance less than or equal to 100 workers vs. more than 100 workers.
This exercise potentially leads to a substantial degree of measurement error.
Additionally, if employer size at labor market entrance is endogenous to the number of high cost
mandates in place—for example, if mandates effect the propensity that a worker’s first job is
32

If employer size is missing in 1979, we use the 1980 value (if non-missing) and vice-versa.

17

with a small employer (Bailey and Webber 2016)—then we may be stratifying our sample on an
endogenous variable, which can lead to bias. Moreover, we are unable to impute a firm size
value at labor market entrance for all observations. Thus, the overall sample sizes (small firm
workers and large firm workers) are smaller than the full sample. For these reasons, we interpret
findings from this analysis cautiously and encourage readers to do the same.
Tables 4A and 4B report results for men and women, respectively. The findings for both
are in line with the hypothesis that mandates should have larger effects among workers who start
their careers working for smaller employers. Both men and women experience a wage penalty
and are less likely to work full-time if they begin their careers with a small firm. We observe
that, for men, there are wrong-signed (positive) coefficient estimates for the sample of workers
who start careers with large employers.
6. Robustness checks and extensions
We next report results from several robustness checks to examine the stability of our
findings to different modeling approaches. We also explore extensions to the main model.
6.1. CPS replication
We replicate our NLSY79 analysis in the Annual Social and Economic Supplement
(ASEC) to the CPS. We chose to replicate our analysis in the CPS given that it is a commonly
utilized dataset to study state mandate effects. Moreover, the CPS has the advantage of being
representative at the state and national (vs. only national) level; we are somewhat concerned that
smaller states (e.g., Wyoming) may have limited coverage in the NLSY79. To this end, we use
CPS data available through the Integrated Public Use Microdata Series project (Flood et al.
2017). We draw data from the 1976 to 2013 CPS surveys and focus on individuals 18 to 54
years, the same age range we examine in our study and in previous investigations of mandate
effects (Kaestner and Simon 2002). 33
33
We continue to view the NLSY79 as more useful than the CPS for our purposes as we can (i) accurately measure
labor market entrance, (ii) track the same workers over the life course, and (iii) examine employer offers of health
insurance rather than take up of employer-sponsored health insurance. Moreover, the CPS did not regularly collect
reported hourly wage until 1989, after the majority of mandates we study were already in place (Table 1). Thus, as
outlined later in the manuscript, we construct wages using annual wage income, weeks worked in the past year, and
usual hours worked per week. Constructing wages in this manner likely leads to measurement error in our wage
variable. To dig deeper into this issue, we have compared reported hourly wages and constructed hourly wages
over the period 1989 to 2013 in the ASEC within the sample of workers for which we have both wage variables.
We apply the same outlier-corrections as we apply in the analysis (excluding hourly wages less than $1 and greater
than $1,000). We also apply weights for the ASEC sample. Mean (median) inflation-adjusted constructed hourly
wage is $16.84 ($13.95) and mean (median) inflation-adjusted reported hour wage is $15.56 ($13.17). These values
are similar, but not identical. We note our use of constructed wages in the CPS as a limitation of the study. Further,
we argue that, for a study of persistent wage effects over our study period, the NLSY79 is a more suitable dataset
given that this dataset includes reported hourly wages.

18

We truncate the CPS study period in 2013 as, after this point, there were substantial
changes to the insurance and income questions, both of which we leverage in our replication.
We use CPS variables that pertain to the last calendar year (we call this the “income year”), thus
our study period is 1975 to 2012. We are unable to use earlier years of the CPS as some of our
outcome variables are not available until 1976. 34 We do not have the year of labor market
entrance in the CPS and instead must impute this information. We assign the labor market
entrance year using the following formula: income year − age + 6 + years of completed
schooling at the time of the survey. 35 Hence, we assume that the years of schooling reported at
the time of the CPS survey accurately captures completed schooling at labor market entrance. If
individuals return to school after labor market entrance, this behavior will lead to measurement
error. Potential experience is measured as the difference between the income year and the
imputed year of labor market entrance.
We estimate the following regression model in the CPS:
(2) 𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 = 𝛽𝛽0 + 𝛽𝛽1 𝑀𝑀𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠 + 𝛽𝛽2 𝑀𝑀𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠 ∗ 𝐸𝐸𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖−𝑡𝑡 + 𝛽𝛽3′ 𝑋𝑋𝑖𝑖 + 𝛽𝛽′4 𝐶𝐶𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠 + 𝑆𝑆𝑠𝑠 + 𝐺𝐺𝑔𝑔 + 𝜇𝜇𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖

Thus, this regression model is similar to Equation (1). 36 Given near perfect collinearity

we control for age and not potential experience in Equation (2); however, we do control for the
interaction between the number of high cost mandates at labor market entrance and potential
experience. 37 Moreover, we use current state to proxy for the labor market entrance state. 38
Our outcome variables closely match our NLSY79 outcomes and pertain to the income year:
holding ESI (0/1), 39 the logarithm of the hourly wage, 40 the logarithm of weeks worked, and
34
Specifically, the CPS underwent a major redesign between 1975 and 1976. Based on our analysis of the CPS
data, our measures of wages and labor supply cannot be easily compared before and after this change. Our measure
of ESI is only available in the CPS from 1980 onward as this is the year in which the question was first asked to
ASEC CPS respondents.
35
As an example, a respondent who is 25 years in CPS income year 2000 with high school education would be
computed as entering the labor market in 1993 at age 18. If the same person has college-level education, their
estimate job market entrance year would be 1997 at age 22. This approach is similar to the method employed by
Genda, Kondo, and Ohta (2010) in their analysis of the persistent effects of entering the labor market in a recession.
36
This regression model is also similar to studies that explore the contemporaneous effects of health insurance
mandates on ESI and labor market outcomes. For example, Gruber (1994b) and Kaestner and Simon (2002).
37
We derive our labor market entrance state characteristics using the CPS. Thus, where relevant, to construct the
state-level CPS variables we exclude the respondent to avoid peer effects concerns. See Angrist and Pischke (2009)
for a discussion of this issue. Details available on request.
38
The CPS has less detailed information on respondent personal characteristics than the NLSY79. Thus, we cannot
include all controls that we include in Equation (1). Instead, we control for current age, race/ethnicity, and
education. However, as noted earlier in the manuscript, removing individual-level controls from Equation (1) does
not lead to appreciably different findings. Due to the manner in which we assign labor market entrance, we are
unable to control for both labor market entrance year fixed effects and income year fixed effects.
39
We cannot separate ESI offers from ESI take-up as we can in the NLSY79.
40
As we do in the NLSY79 analyses, we drop outlier wages: hourly wages less than $1 and greater than $1000.

19

full-time work (working 35 hours per week or more; 0/1). We apply ASEC sample weights 41
and cluster standard errors around the state. Results are reported in Appendix Table B1.
Our CPS findings confirm our NLSY79 findings: those individuals who enter labor
markets characterized by a higher number of mandates have lower wages, work fewer weeks per
year, and are less likely to work full-time than comparable workers, but mandate effects
dissipate with time in the labor market. Interestingly, we find statistically significant evidence
that high cost mandates do reduce the probability that a worker holds ESI, but this effect
dissipates with time in the labor market. In line with previous literature, we have also excluded
non-private firm workers and the self-employed in unreported analyses to focus on samples of
workers most likely to be affected by the mandates (Kaestner and Simon 2002). Results,
reported in Appendix Table B2, are not appreciably different after making these exclusions.
It may be worthwhile to consider why we identify ESI take up and labor market effects,
while some other studies (see Section 2.1), using similar data and research designs, have reached
different (often null) conclusions. We suspect that our focus on an earlier time period (our
health insurance mandate data cover the period 1975 to 1989) is a potential explanation (most
studies that leverage the CPS consider data from the 1980s and onward). State mandates may
have been more binding in the 1970s than they have in more recent periods (National Council
of State Legislatures 2017). That is, employers did not voluntarily choose to cover such benefits
prior to state regulations. Moreover, we focus on high cost mandates rather than overall counts
of mandates, and the latter parametrization may dilute high cost mandate effects. Mandates may
have been binding for a majority of employers as self-insurance among firms was less common
in the earlier years we study here. For example, only 8% of firms were self-insured in 1984
(McDonnell et al. 1986); this estimate reflects firm self-insurance status during the second half
of our study period and the rate was plausibly lower during earlier years of this period. We also
focus on labor market entrants rather than a general sample of workers, employers may find it
more feasible to adjust compensation (wage and non-wage) for labor market entrants vs. more
experienced or incumbent workers.
In addition, our ESI effects differ across the NLSY79 and the CPS. The NLSY79
measures the probability of having an ESI offer whereas the CPS measures the probability of
holding ESI; the latter confounds offers and take-up decisions. The findings from the NLSY79
and the CPS are in line with the hypothesis that mandates have no significant effect on an
41

Unweighted results are very similar. See Supplementary Appendix Table 14.

20

employer’s decision to offer ESI but decrease the likelihood of holding ESI if employers pass on
mandate cost to workers by charging higher premiums and imposing substantial cost-sharing
requirements (Abraham and Feldman 2010, Cooper and Vistnes 2003). In addition, our sample
spans the 1980s and 1990s, when public health insurance crowded out private health insurance
(Cutler and Gruber 1996, Gruber and Simon 2008) so individuals with ESI offer may have
chosen to take up public insurance instead.
6.2. Accounting for differences in mandate costs
In the main analyses we use an unweighted count of the number of high cost mandates in
the state/year of labor market entrance. However, it is plausible that the five mandates we study
impose different costs on employers and/or are differently valued by workers. To explore this
possibility, we follow a weighting scheme developed by Gruber (1994b) to account for
differences in mandate cost (Gruber’s weighting scheme, based on his analysis of the specific
mandate costs, upweights more costly mandates and downweights less costly mandates). We
construct the weighted number of mandates in the state/year of labor market entrance with the
following equation:
(3)

𝑊𝑊𝑊𝑊𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠 = 𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴ℎ𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠 + 𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠 + 5 ∗ 𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠 + 1.5 ∗ 𝐶𝐶ℎ𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠 + 3 ∗ 𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶 𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠

where 𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴ℎ𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠 , 𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠 , 𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠 , 𝐶𝐶ℎ𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠 , and 𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶 𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠 are alcohol treatment,

illicit drug treatment, mental health treatment, access to a chiropractor, and continuing coverage

mandates, respectively. Thus, this variable upweights mental health treatment, chiropractor, and
continuing coverage mandates relative to alcohol treatment and illicit drug treatment mandates
to account for differences in costs. As noted by Gruber, this weighting scheme will lead to
biased estimates if the costs and hence the weights changes with time. Given that we study a

somewhat earlier period (1973 to 1990) than Gruber (1979, 1983, and 1989), this potential bias
is of concern for our study and hence we interpret the results cautiously. Results are reported in
Appendix Table C and are broadly similar to those generated in Equation (1), which equally
weights the mandates we study. It is important to note that for all estimates, the confidence
interval with and without weighted mandates overlap; hence, while we note that the specific
point estimates and associated standard error estimates differ across the two specifications, we
cannot reject the hypothesis that the estimates are equal.
6.3. Worker skill
We next estimate separate regressions for workers of different skill levels. We focus on
workers who left school with a high school diploma or less (“lesser skill workers”) and some
21

college education (“higher skill workers”). 42 Ex ante, it is not clear whether we should expect
stronger mandate effects for lesser or higher skill workers. On the one hand, higher skill
workers have higher human capital investment, and thus adverse labor demand shocks may have
larger implications for their life course employment outcomes. Alternatively, lesser skill
workers may work for employers who are more likely to pass on labor costs to employees. In
general, lesser skill workers are more adversely affected during recessions (a reduction in
aggregate demand) than higher skill workers, suggesting that they are more vulnerable to
negative contemporaneous labor demand shocks than higher skill workers (Hoynes, Miller, and
Schaller 2012). Finally, Buchmueller, DiNardo, and Valletta (2011) note that theory suggests
that the effects of a mandate should be largest for workers who place a low value on health
insurance and thus have lower rates of ESI in the absence of a mandate; in particular, such
workers are likely to be of lower skill.
Appendix Tables D1 and D2 present estimates by skill level at school-leaving for the
male and female samples. Our findings suggest that lesser skill workers, especially those who
are male, disproportionately bear the incidence of mandate costs: coefficient estimates are
generally larger and more precisely estimated in the sample of lesser skill workers.
6.4. Unionization
We also explore heterogeneity across union status at school-leaving. Institutional
restrictions such as union rules limit the ability of firms to pass on all benefit costs to workers
(Baicker and Chandra 2006). We hypothesize that unionized jobs may offer some protections
against the negative effects of private health insurance mandates on labor market outcomes.
Information on union status is collected in all years of the NLSY79, but we do not have
information on union status in years before 1979. Thus, similar to our firm size variable, we
assign the 1979 value to school-leaving years 1973 to 1978 (see Section 5.3). Appendix Tables
E1 and E2 report results by unionization.
We find that workers whose first jobs are unionized are potentially less affected by high
cost mandates than those workers whose first jobs are non-unionized. These findings suggest
that the wages and hours of unionized workers may be protected from market factors such as the
health insurance mandates we study. These results are in line with Lubotsky and Olson (2015)
whose study on teachers, a group of workers that is typically unionized, finds that employers do
Specifically, we classify those workers who entered the labor market with 12 years or less as “lesser skill
workers” and those workers who entered the labor market with some college (but less than a college degree), a
college degree, or a graduate degree as “high skill workers.”
42

22

not adjust wages and hours in response to increasing healthcare costs. We cannot discriminate
between this hypothesis and the hypothesis that unionized workers are more likely to work for
self-insured employers who are not bound by ERISA (Acs et al. 1996). However, given the low
level of self-insurance during our study period, 8% of firms were self-insured (McDonnell et al.
1986), we suspect that differences in the propensity to self-insurance between unionized and
non-unionized firms cannot fully explain differences in the estimates across these two groups.
6.5. Heterogeneity across mandates
We also estimate Equation (1) entering one mandate at a time into the regression model.
The purpose of this exercise is to assess whether there are differences in the relationship
between the mandates and our outcomes. Results are reported in Appendix Tables F1 to F5. We
chose not to include all mandates in the same regression as collinearity between the mandates
may impede our ability to precisely estimate treatment effects (Gruber 1994b, Meer and West
2011). We find that there is heterogeneity in the relationship between the mandates that we
study here and our outcomes. For example, when we use the count of high cost mandates in our
key specification, we find no statistically significant evidence that mandates effect the
probability that a worker receives an offer of health insurance from his employer or the number
of weeks worked in the past year. However, when we study the mandates separately we find
suggestive evidence that chiropractor mandates reduce the probability that a worker is offered
ESI. Moreover, the wage effects we identify in our main findings appear to be driven by alcohol
treatment and continuing coverage mandates.
We suspect that differences across mandates in terms of employer costs and/or employee
valuation of the mandated benefit may drive differences in treatment effects. Additionally, the
variation we use for identification for each specific mandate is driven by a different set of states
(see Table 1). Finally, omitted variable bias may also lead to differences.
6.6. Contemporaneous mandates as an additional control variable
One concern with our analysis thus far is that we do not control for contemporaneous
high cost mandates in the regression model, and that failure to include this variable may lead us
to falsely attribute the effect of contemporaneous mandates to mandates at labor market
entrance. To explore this possibility, we next re-estimate our core regression model including
contemporaneous mandates as an additional control variable. 43 Results are reported in
To construct our contemporaneous mandates, we used information contained in multiple industry documents
(e.g., Blue Cross Blue Shield annual reports) to capture mandate changes post-1989 (the last year for which we
have mandate data from Gruber (1994b)). There are some discrepancies across the various sources; thus, we chose
43

23

Appendix Table G and are nearly identical to our core findings. The similarity of the results
suggests that our failure to include contemporaneous mandates does not lead to substantial bias.
6.7. Alternative specification for mandate dynamics
We next estimate a model that allows for a more flexible relationship between the
number of high cost mandates at labor market entrance and potential experience. To this end,
we interact the high cost mandates variable with indicators for 1 to 10, 11 to 20, and 21 or more
years of potential labor market experience. We report results generated in this specification in
Appendix Tables H1 and H2. Overall, these results are in line with our main findings but are
generally imprecise. We suspect that the lack of precision may be due to somewhat small labor
market entrance state cell sizes in the experience categories. The results, however, conform with
our broad finding that workers who enter a highly regulated market (in terms of private health
insurance) have lower wages, work fewer weeks per year, and are less likely to work full-time
than comparable workers who enter a less regulated labor market. We find no evidence that the
mandated benefits we study affect the propensity of employers to offer insurance to employees.
Interestingly, we find some evidence that, among men only, wages (while they are initially
lower) appear to rebound 11 to 20 years after labor market entrance.
7. Discussion
The debate over the relative merits and demerits of mandated benefits on access to
equitable and affordable health insurance and labor market outcomes is both long-standing and
contentious. While we do not propose that our study can provide consensus on the broader
welfare effects of mandated benefits, we are able to offer new insight on mandate effects.
Specifically, we are the first study to explore the persistent effects of high cost mandates on new
labor market entrants’ access to ESI, wages, and labor supply.
Three central findings emerge from our analysis. First, mandates at labor market
entrance reduce wages and labor supply as measured by weeks worked and the probability of
holding a full-time job. Second, mandate effects are persistent but not permanent, as they
generally dissipate with time spent in the labor market. Third, the findings are concentrated
among lesser skill workers and workers who began their career with small (less than 100
workers) and non-unionized employers. Thus, while the previous literature on health insurance
mandates, and mandated benefits more broadly, has focused on contemporaneous effects, we
document that these mandates lead to persistent distortions in labor market outcomes.
to report this analysis as a robustness check rather than the main specification. Details available on request.

24

Our results have an intent-to-treat (ITT), and not a treatment on the treated (TOT),
interpretation. Thus, it is important to think through whether or not our estimated ITT effect
sizes are reasonable. To the best of our knowledge, there is no standard manner in which to
address this question. We therefore turn to several lines of related evidence and attempt to
compare our estimates with benchmarks derived from other studies to put our estimates in
perspective. First, Gruber (1994b) shows that the mandates we study increased premiums by
12% and accounted for 50% of overall mandated benefit costs during the 1970s and 1980s.
Hence, these mandates were costly to employers and most likely relevant during our study
period. Second, Jensen and Morrisey (1999) state that passage of a state mandated benefit law
affects 33% to 42% of the population using data from 1995. Because we use mandated benefit
data from an earlier period when self-insurance by firms – a key factor that may mute the scope
of state mandates – was lower, we argue that share of the population that was affected during
our study period (1973 and 1990) was potentially above the range established by Jensen and
Morrisey (1999). Third, there is evidence that state mandates specifically and employer
healthcare costs generally influence the outcomes that we study (see Section 2). Our main point
estimates (reported in Table 3) imply a 1.7% to 4.0% and 2.3% to 3.2% contemporaneous
reduction in the outcomes we study among men and women respectively (we note that not all
estimates are precise and only consider statistically significant effects in this discussion).
Examination of the upper tail of the 95% confidence intervals surrounding these point estimates
suggests that we cannot rule out effect sizes as small as -1% to -0.05%. Overall, we argue that
these statistics imply that our estimated ITT effect sizes are not outrageously large.
Our study, while novel, is not without limitations. First, we focus on older cohorts of
workers and five specific health insurance mandates. Therefore, the generalizability of our
findings to different cohorts and mandates is not clear. Second, we lack information on the
generosity of ESI held by respondents. For instance, employers can pass on the cost of
mandates by increasing premiums and or copays, or by offering insurance coverage that is less
generous along other dimensions (Bailey 2014). Our research is silent on this possible channel
of adjustment, although our analysis of the Current Population Survey is suggestive that
employers may leverage this margin to pass on higher healthcare costs to employees. Third, the
NLSY79 is representative at the national, not state, level and hence some of the labor market
entrance state-year cells are small. We note, however, that we are able to replicate our labor
market results from the NLSY in the CPS, which has sizable state-year cells.
25

Our findings may be useful for thinking through health policy recommendations that
extend employers’ responsibility for health insurance. Our estimates suggest that any law that
increases the cost of health insurance for employers may lead to distortions of wages and labor
supply, and that these distortions will be experienced by current workers as well as those
entering the labor market. It is not clear whether workers’ trade-offs between generous health
insurance, wages, and labor supply are welfare-enhancing. At a minimum, policy makers should
consider the downstream and perhaps unintended consequences of these regulations.
While state mandates arguably have less “bite” in current U.S. labor markets than in the
historical labor markets of the 1970s and 1980s that we study, our findings are nevertheless
important for understanding how healthcare costs may affect employer-sponsored health
insurance, wage compensation, and labor demand for more recent cohorts. In particular,
between 2012 and 2017 the average total cost of an employer-sponsored family insurance plan
rose from $15,745 to $18,764, a 19% increase (Claxton et al. 2017). Employer contributions
increased by 14.2% over this period, and employee contributions increased by 27% while
earnings increased just 12%. Collectively, these findings suggest that healthcare costs are high
and rising for both employers and employees, and employees are shouldering a larger share of
this burden overtime with earnings that are not commensurately increasing. Extrapolating from
our findings for mandates, which increase healthcare costs, suggests that workers who enter
labor markets with high healthcare costs may persistently experience lower wages and labor
demand by employers to offset healthcare costs.

26

Table 1. State private health insurance high cost mandate effective dates
Alcohol
Illicit
Mental
Continuing
treatment
drug treatment
health treatment
Chiropractor
coverage
State
mandate
mandate
mandate
mandate
mandate
AK
1989
1989
AL
1984
AR
1975
AZ
1971
1979
CA
1976
1983
CO
1971
1969
1985
CT
1977
1975
1986
DE
1989
1975
FL
1963
GA
1974
IA
1980
1986
ID
1984
IL
1972
IN
1969
1978
1984
KS
1978
1978
1974
KY
1973
1978
LA
1976
1986
1980
MA
1976
1973
1975
MD
1981
1979
1984
1985
1977
ME
1984
1984
1974
1983
MI
1982
1982
1981
MN
1968
1978
1978
MO
1977
1973
1974
MS
1975
1984
1976
1985
MT
1984
1984
1980
NC
1967
1985
ND
1985
1985
1977
1982
NE
1976
1983
NH
1975
1981
NJ
1969
1977
1981
NM
NV
1985
1985
1973
1983
NY
1981
1988
1979
1975
1988
OH
1979
1973
OK
1969
1984
1984
OR
1971
1984
1984
1976
PA
1986
1981
RI
1971
1980
1988
SC
1968
1977
SD
1979
TN
1970
1984
TX
1990
1986
1981
1981
UT
1977
1977
1986
VA
1978
1978
1975
1986
VT
1986
1973
1986
WA
1971
1975
1975
WI
1971
1975
1975
WY
1988
1980
Notes: Bold text indicates changes that occur during study period 1972 to 1989 (mandates are lagged one year in
regression models). Data source: Gruber (1994b).

27

Table 2. Summary statistics: NLSY79 1979-2012
Sample:
Men
Women
Outcome Variables
ESI†
0.790
0.761
Hourly wage
22.08
16.68
Weeks worked, past year
46.11
43.95
Work full-time, past year
0.897
0.724
Private health insurance mandates
Lagged high cost mandates at labor market entrance
1.439
1.414
Demographics
Age at labor market entrance
18.78
18.60
White
0.818
0.817
African American
0.129
0.132
Hispanic
0.052
0.051
Less than high school at labor market entrance
0.177
0.132
High school at labor market entrance
0.493
0.493
Some college at labor market entrance
0.149
0.192
College degree at labor market entrance
0.181
0.183
Age-adjusted AFQT score
-0.038
-0.037
Mother’s education
11.72
11.63
Father’s education
11.90
11.76
Rural residence at age 14
0.232
0.226
Live with both biological parents at age 14
0.768
0.757
Library card in the home at age 14
0.739
0.784
Magazines in the home at age 14
0.679
0.670
Newspapers in the home at age 14
0.854
0.840
Labor market entrance year
1979.9
1979.7
Survey year
1992.7
1992.8
Labor market entrance state level characteristics
Unemployment rate
0.048
0.048
Poverty rate
0.124
0.125
Some college education rate
0.282
0.280
Age
33.17
33.14
Private wage-earning worker rate
0.751
0.750
Unweighted observations
85,616
82,911
Notes: Sample includes observations that provide a valid response to one of the four outcome variables, thus this
sample departs from the sample sizes in the regression tables. NLSY79 weights applied.
†
ESI=Employer-sponsored health insurance offer.

28

Table 3. The persistent effect of high cost mandates at labor market entrance on ESI access and labor market
outcomes: NLSY79 1979-2012
Outcome:
ESI1
Log(wages)
Log(weeks)
Full-time
Male sample
Sample proportion/mean
0.790
22.08
46.11
0.897
High cost mandates
-0.0133
-0.0399**
-0.0165**
-0.0226***
(0.0080)
(0.0154)
(0.0081)
(0.0054)
High cost mandates ×
0.0005
0.0032***
0.0013***
0.0018***
potential experience
(0.0003)
(0.0008)
(0.0004)
(0.0003)
Unweighted observations
68,464
79,806
83,489
82,179
Female sample
Sample proportion/mean
0.761
16.68
43.95
0.724
High cost mandates
-0.0122
-0.0272***
0.0027
-0.0234***
(0.0074)
(0.0089)
(0.0088)
(0.0075)
High cost mandates ×
0.0005
0.0022***
-0.0004
0.0007
potential experience
(0.0004)
(0.0005)
(0.0003)
(0.0004)
Unweighted observations
64,163
76,596
80,012
78,855
Notes: All models estimated with least squares (continuous variables) or a linear probability model (binary
variables), and control for demographics, labor market entrance state fixed effects, and labor market entrance year
fixed effects. NLSY79 sample weights applied. Standard errors are clustered around the labor market entrance
state and reported in parentheses.
1
ESI=Employer-sponsored health insurance offer.
***;**;*=statistically different from zero at the 1%; 5%;10% level.

29

Table 4A. The persistent effect of high cost mandates at labor market entrance on ESI access and labor
market outcomes by employer size at labor market entrance: NLSY79 men 1979-2012
Outcome:
ESI1
Log(wages)
Log(weeks)
Full-time
≤100 employees
Sample proportion/mean
0.798
22.92
47.43
0.905
High cost mandates
-0.0210
-0.0670***
-0.0174*
-0.0340***
(0.0125)
(0.0229)
(0.0098)
(0.0078)
High cost mandates ×
0.0008
0.0038***
0.0012***
0.0023***
potential experience
(0.0005)
(0.0009)
(0.0003)
(0.0004)
Unweighted observations
25,192
29,116
30,274
29,800
>100 employees
Sample proportion/mean
0.864
23.49
47.54
0.940
High cost mandates
0.0076
-0.0010
0.0483***
0.0018
(0.0197)
(0.0412)
(0.0145)
(0.0160)
High cost mandates ×
0.0014
0.0035**
0.0001
0.0012*
potential experience
(0.0009)
(0.0016)
(0.0004)
(0.0006)
Unweighted observations
7,124
7,867
8,086
7,988
Notes: All models estimated with least squares (continuous variables) or a linear probability model (binary
variables), and control for demographics, labor market entrance state fixed effects, and labor market entrance year
fixed effects. NLSY79 sample weights applied. Standard errors are clustered around the labor market entrance
state and reported in parentheses. The sum of the ≤ 100 employees and > 100 employees sample is smaller than the
full sample reported in Table 3 due to a substantial amount of missing information. See the text associated with this
table for more details.
***;**;*=statistically different from zero at the 1%;5%;10% level.
1
ESI=Employer-sponsored health insurance offer.

30

Table 4B. The persistent effect of high cost mandates at labor market entrance on ESI access and labor
market outcomes by employer size at labor market entrance: NLSY79 women 1979-2012
Outcome:
ESI1
Log(wages)
Log(weeks)
Full-time
≤100 employees
Sample proportion/mean
0.759
17.07
45.05
0.718
High cost mandates
-0.0142
-0.0456**
-0.0048
-0.0374***
(0.0147)
(0.0222)
(0.0170)
(0.0110)
High cost mandates ×
-0.0001
0.0023***
-0.0002
0.0008
potential experience
(0.0006)
(0.0008)
(0.0005)
(0.0006)
Unweighted observations
20,006
23,880
24,773
24,408
>100 employees
Sample proportion/mean
0.835
19.06
46.62
0.765
High cost mandates
-0.0027
-0.0397
-0.0023
-0.0361
(0.0219)
(0.0420)
(0.0198)
(0.0245)
High cost mandates ×
0.0007
0.0046***
0.0001
0.0010
potential experience
(0.0009)
(0.0013)
(0.0006)
(0.0010)
Unweighted observations
7,220
8,293
8,583
8,455
Notes: All models estimated with least squares (continuous variables) or a linear probability model (binary
variables), and control for demographics, labor market entrance state fixed effects, and labor market entrance year
fixed effects. NLSY79 sample weights applied. Standard errors are clustered around the labor market entrance
state and reported in parentheses. The sum of the ≤ 100 employees and > 100 employees sample is smaller than the
full sample reported in Table 3 due to a substantial amount of missing information. See the text associated with this
table for more details.
***;**;*=statistically different from zero at the 1%;5%;10% level.
1
ESI=Employer-sponsored health insurance offer.

31

Appendix Table A. Labor market entrance cohort size: NLSY79 1979-2012
Labor market
Number of labor market
Total number of labor market
entrance year
Entrants (unweighted)
entrants (weighted)
1973
88
181,518
1974
165
403,624
1975
601
1,519,011
1976
988
2,410,380
1977
1,164
2,817,389
1978
1,423
3,572,607
1979
1,441
3,809,763
1980
1,189
3,134,488
1981
1,136
3,209,784
1982
1,023
3,077,539
1983
632
2,009,049
1984
404
1,309,966
1985
270
922,537
1986
203
802,908
1987
123
405,266
1988
76
250,557
1989
58
174,093
1990
29
9,5623
Total
11,013
30,106,099
Notes: One observation per respondent that has a valid response to at least one of the outcome variables.

32

Appendix Table B1. The persistent effect of high cost mandates at labor market entrance on ESI and labor
market outcomes: Current Population Survey 1976-2013
Outcome:
ESI1
Log(wages)
Log(weeks)
Full-time
Men
Sample proportion/mean
0.770
17.99
44.61
0.864
High cost mandates
-0.0298***
-0.0521***
-0.0379***
-0.0331***
(0.0042)
(0.0066)
(0.0091)
(0.0045)
High cost mandates ×
0.0025***
0.0046***
0.0034***
0.0031***
potential experience
(0.0003)
(0.0005)
(0.0004)
(0.0004)
Unweighted observations
22,2603
310,973
332,131
332,131
Women
Sample proportion/mean
0.721
14.37
42.24
0.713
High cost mandates
-0.0279***
-0.0352***
-0.0152
-0.0204***
(0.0054)
(0.0050)
(0.0101)
(0.0050)
High cost mandates ×
0.0022***
0.0033***
0.0018***
0.0021***
potential experience
(0.0003)
(0.0004)
(0.0003)
(0.0003)
Unweighted observations
176,761
278,728
290,164
290,164
Notes: All models estimated with least squares (continuous variables) or a linear probability model (binary
variables), and control for demographics, labor market entrance state fixed effects, and labor market entrance year
fixed effects. CPS sample weights applied. Standard errors are clustered around the state and reported in
parentheses.
1
ESI=Hold employer-sponsored health insurance. This variable is only available 1980-2013.
***;**;*=statistically different from zero at the 1%; 5%;10% level.

Appendix Table B2. The persistent effect of high cost mandates at labor market entrance on ESI and labor
market outcomes among private, non-self-employed workers: Current Population Survey 1976-2013
Outcome:
ESI1
Log(wages)
Log(weeks)
Full-time
Men
Sample proportion/mean
0.788
17.77
44.28
0.864
High cost mandates
-0.0313***
-0.0549***
-0.0359***
-0.0337***
(0.0039)
(0.0072)
(0.0093)
(0.0043)
High cost mandates ×
0.0027***
0.0048***
0.0033***
0.0032***
potential experience
(0.0003)
(0.0005)
(0.0004)
(0.0004)
Unweighted observations
181,351
268,162
269,225
269,225
Women
Sample proportion/mean
0.723
14.06
42.08
0.715
High cost mandates
-0.0245***
-0.0328***
-0.0150
-0.0206***
(0.0051)
(0.0051)
(0.0104)
(0.0057)
High cost mandates ×
0.0023***
0.0033***
0.0019***
0.0022***
potential experience
(0.0003)
(0.0004)
(0.0003)
(0.0003)
Unweighted observations
141,515
235,740
236,751
236,751
Notes: Non-employed, non-private, and self-employed workers excluded from the sample. All models estimated
with least squares (continuous variables) or a linear probability model (binary variables), and control for
demographics, labor market entrance state fixed effects, and labor market entrance year fixed effects. CPS sample
weights applied. Standard errors are clustered around the state and reported in parentheses.
1
ESI=Hold employer-sponsored health insurance. This variable is only available 1980-2013.
***;**;*=statistically different from zero at the 1%; 5%;10% level.

33

Appendix Table C. The persistent effect of high cost mandates at labor market entrance on ESI access and
labor market outcomes using a weighted count of high cost mandates: NLSY79 1979-2012
Outcome:
ESI1
Log(wages)
Log(weeks)
Full-time
Male sample
Sample proportion/mean
0.790
22.08
46.11
0.897
High cost mandates
-0.0047
-0.0107*
-0.0055*
-0.0085***
(0.0033)
(0.0058)
(0.0029)
(0.0027)
High cost mandates ×
0.0000
0.0010***
0.0004**
0.0006***
potential experience
(0.0001)
(0.0003)
(0.0001)
(0.0001)
Unweighted observations
68,464
79,806
83,489
82,179
Female sample
Sample proportion/mean
0.761
16.68
43.95
0.724
High cost mandates
-0.0033
-0.0109***
0.0023
-0.0073**
(0.0034)
(0.0034)
(0.0037)
(0.0033)
High cost mandates ×
0.0002
0.0008***
-0.0002*
0.0003
potential experience
(0.0002)
(0.0002)
(0.0001)
(0.0002)
Unweighted observations
64,163
76,596
80,012
78,855
Notes: All models estimated with least squares (continuous variables) or a linear probability model (binary
variables), and control for demographics, labor market entrance state fixed effects, and labor market entrance year
fixed effects. NLSY79 sample weights applied. Standard errors are clustered around the labor market entrance
state and reported in parentheses. The weighted mandate count is using the following formula: alcohol mandate +
illicit drug mandate + 5 * mental health mandate + 1.5 *chiropractor mandate + 3 * continuing coverage mandate.
***;**;*=statistically different from zero at the 1%;5%;10% level.
1
ESI=Employer-sponsored health insurance offer.

34

Appendix Table D1. Effect of high cost mandates at labor market entrance on labor market outcomes by
worker skill at labor market entrance: NLSY79 men 1979-2012
Outcome:
ESI1
Log(wages)
Log(weeks)
Full-time
2
Lesser skill workers
Sample proportion/mean
0.752
18.50
45.39
0.899
High cost mandates
-0.0298**
-0.0382**
-0.0198*
-0.0221***
(0.0136)
(0.0157)
(0.0100)
(0.0050)
High cost mandates ×
0.0007
0.0021***
0.0010**
0.0017***
potential experience
(0.0005)
(0.0006)
(0.0005)
(0.0003)
Unweighted observations
48,413
57,532
60,000
59,036
Higher skill workers3
Sample proportion/mean
0.841
25.00
46.64
0.805
High cost mandates
0.0111
-0.0118
-0.0044
-0.0174
(0.0164)
(0.0265)
(0.0119)
(0.0113)
High cost mandates ×
0.0006
0.0020*
0.0017***
0.0013***
potential experience
(0.0005)
(0.0012)
(0.0006)
(0.0004)
Unweighted observations
20,051
22,274
23,489
23,143
Notes: All models estimated with least squares (continuous variables) or a linear probability model (binary
variables), and control for demographics, labor market entrance state fixed effects, and labor market entrance year
fixed effects. NLSY79 sample weights applied. Standard errors are clustered around the labor market entrance
state and reported in parentheses.
***;**;*=statistically different from zero at the 1%;5%;10% level.
1
ESI=Employer-sponsored health insurance offer.
2
Lesser skill workers=A high school diploma or less at labor market entrance.
3
Higher skill workers=Some college at labor market entrance.

35

Appendix Table D2. Effect of high cost mandates at labor market entrance on labor market outcomes by
worker skill at labor market entrance: NLSY79 women 1979-2012
Outcome:
ESI1
Log(wages)
Log(weeks)
Full-time
2
Lesser skill workers
Sample proportion/mean
0.725
14.07
42.81
0.723
High cost mandates
-0.0107
-0.0286*
-0.0043
-0.0259***
(0.0104)
(0.0144)
(0.0142)
(0.0093)
High cost mandates ×
0.0003
0.0019***
-0.0003
0.0009**
potential experience
(0.0005)
(0.0005)
(0.0005)
(0.0004)
Unweighted observations
40,760
49,647
51,634
50,892
Higher skill workers3
Sample proportion/mean
0.863
29.36
47.55
0.891
High cost mandates
-0.0222
-0.0187
0.0029
-0.0342**
(0.0141)
(0.0188)
(0.0111)
(0.0150)
High cost mandates ×
0.0009*
0.0018
0.0002
0.0008
potential experience
(0.0005)
(0.0011)
(0.0005)
(0.0007)
Unweighted observations
23,403
26,949
28,378
27,963
Notes: All models estimated with least squares (continuous variables) or a linear probability model (binary
variables), and control for demographics, labor market entrance state fixed effects, and labor market entrance year
fixed effects. NLSY79 sample weights applied. Standard errors are clustered around the labor market entrance
state and reported in parentheses.
***;**;*=statistically different from zero at the 1%;5%;10% level.
1
ESI=Employer-sponsored health insurance offer.
2
Lesser skill workers=A high school diploma or less at labor market entrance.
3
Higher skill workers=Some college at labor market entrance.

36

Appendix Table E1. Effect of high cost mandates at labor market entrance on labor market outcomes by
union status at labor market entrance: NLSY79 men 1979-2012
Outcome:
ESI1
Log(wages)
Log(weeks)
Full-time
Unionized
Sample proportion/mean
0.857
22.23
47.31
0.924
High cost mandates
-0.0102
-0.0450
0.0433**
-0.0051
(0.0211)
(0.0302)
(0.0163)
(0.0135)
High cost mandates ×
0.0000
0.0016
-0.0005
0.0006
potential experience
(0.0009)
(0.0017)
(0.0005)
(0.0008)
Unweighted observations
8,204
9,221
9,418
9,324
Non-unionized
Sample proportion/mean
0.780
22.06
45.94
0.893
High cost mandates
-0.0141
-0.0415**
-0.0250***
-0.0242***
(0.0092)
(0.0167)
(0.0083)
(0.0056)
High cost mandates ×
0.0006*
0.0034***
0.0014***
0.0019***
potential experience
(0.0003)
(0.0008)
(0.0004)
(0.0003)
Unweighted observations
60,260
70,585
74,071
72,855
Notes: All models estimated with least squares (continuous variables) or a linear probability model (binary
variables), and control for demographics, labor market entrance state fixed effects, and labor market entrance year
fixed effects. NLSY79 sample weights applied. Standard errors are clustered around the labor market entrance
state and reported in parentheses.
***;**;*=statistically different from zero at the 1%;5%;10% level.
1
ESI=Employer-sponsored health insurance offer.
Appendix Table E2. Effect of high cost mandates at labor market entrance on labor market outcomes by
union status at labor market entrance: NLSY79 women 1979-2012
Outcome:
ESI1
Log(wages)
Log(weeks)
Full-time
Unionized
Sample proportion/mean
0.829
17.61
45.73
0.759
High cost mandates
0.0023
-0.0399
0.0143
-0.0244
(0.0191)
(0.0331)
(0.0234)
(0.0300)
High cost mandates ×
0.0020**
0.0050***
0.0013
0.0030***
potential experience
(0.0008)
(0.0012)
(0.0008)
(0.0011)
Unweighted observations
4,772
5,517
5,694
5,598
Non-unionized
Sample proportion/mean
0.756
16.61
43.81
0.721
High cost mandates
-0.0176**
-0.0309***
-0.0002
-0.0261***
(0.0075)
(0.0098)
(0.0091)
(0.0084)
High cost mandates ×
0.0004
0.0021***
-0.0004
0.0006
potential experience
(0.0004)
(0.0005)
(0.0003)
(0.0005)
Unweighted observations
59,391
71,079
74,318
73,257
Notes: All models estimated with least squares (continuous variables) or a linear probability model (binary
variables), and control for demographics, labor market entrance state fixed effects, and labor market entrance year
fixed effects. NLSY79 sample weights applied. Standard errors are clustered around the labor market entrance
state and reported in parentheses.
***;**;*=statistically different from zero at the 1%;5%;10% level.
1
ESI=Employer-sponsored health insurance offer.

37

Appendix Table F1. The persistent effect of alcohol treatment mandates at labor market entrance on ESI
access and labor market outcomes: NLSY79 1979-2012
Outcome:
ESI1
Log(wages)
Log(weeks)
Full-time
Male sample
Sample proportion/mean
0.790
22.08
46.11
0.897
Alcohol treatment mandate
0.0031
-0.1099***
-0.0332*
-0.0454***
(0.0228)
(0.0302)
(0.0184)
(0.0136)
Alcohol treatment mandate ×
0.0006
0.0083***
0.0023**
0.0031***
potential experience
(0.0007)
(0.0018)
(0.0010)
(0.0009)
Unweighted observations
68,464
79,806
83,489
82,179
Female sample
Sample proportion/mean
0.761
16.68
43.95
0.724
Alcohol mandate
-0.0174
-0.0349
0.0237
-0.0092
(0.0138)
(0.0244)
(0.0167)
(0.0213)
Alcohol treatment mandate ×
0.0006
0.0041***
-0.0015**
0.0002
potential experience
(0.0008)
(0.0012)
(0.0007)
(0.0012)
Unweighted observations
64,163
76,596
80,012
78,855
Notes: All models estimated with least squares (continuous variables) or a linear probability model (binary
variables), and control for demographics, labor market entrance state fixed effects, and labor market entrance year
fixed effects. NLSY79 sample weights applied. Standard errors are clustered around the labor market entrance
state and reported in parentheses.
1
ESI=Employer-sponsored health insurance offer.
***;**;*=statistically different from zero at the 1%; 5%;10% level.

38

Appendix Table F2. The persistent effect of illicit drug treatment mandates at labor market entrance on ESI
access and labor market outcomes: NLSY79 1979-2012
Outcome:
ESI1
Log(wages)
Log(weeks)
Full-time
Male sample
Sample proportion/mean
0.790
22.08
46.11
0.897
Illicit drug treatment
-0.0195
-0.0411
-0.0335
-0.0318***
mandate
(0.0294)
(0.0441)
(0.0222)
(0.0111)
Illicit drug treatment mandate ×
0.0004
0.0041*
0.0032**
0.0039***
potential experience
(0.0012)
(0.0023)
(0.0013)
(0.0008)
Unweighted observations
68,464
79,806
83,489
82,179
Female sample
Sample proportion/mean
0.761
16.68
43.95
0.724
Illicit drug treatment
-0.0115
-0.0347
0.0076
-0.0768***
mandate
(0.0272)
(0.0300)
(0.0209)
(0.0230)
Illicit drug treatment mandate ×
0.0018*
0.0046***
0.0002
0.0029***
potential experience
(0.0011)
(0.0014)
(0.0010)
(0.0011)
Unweighted observations
64,163
76,596
80,012
78,855
Notes: All models estimated with least squares (continuous variables) or a linear probability model (binary
variables), and control for demographics, labor market entrance state fixed effects, and labor market entrance year
fixed effects. NLSY79 sample weights applied. Standard errors are clustered around the labor market entrance
state and reported in parentheses.
1
ESI=Employer-sponsored health insurance offer.
***;**;*=statistically different from zero at the 1%; 5%;10% level.

39

Appendix Table F3. The persistent effect of mental health treatment at labor market entrance on ESI access
and labor market outcomes: NLSY79 1979-2012
Outcome:
ESI1
Log(wages)
Log(weeks)
Full-time
Male sample
Sample proportion/mean
0.790
22.08
46.11
0.897
Mental health treatment
-0.0112
-0.0054
-0.0320
-0.0452**
mandate
(0.0251)
(0.0461)
(0.0195)
(0.0181)
Mental health treatment
-0.0011
0.0023
0.0019*
0.0023***
mandate × potential experience
(0.0008)
(0.0024)
(0.0010)
(0.0008)
Unweighted observations
68,464
79,806
83,489
82,179
Female sample
Sample proportion/mean
0.761
16.68
43.95
0.724
Mental health treatment
-0.0082
-0.0194
0.0376
-0.0174
mandate
(0.0285)
(0.0241)
(0.0272)
(0.0243)
Mental health treatment
0.0014
0.0047***
-0.0015**
0.0015
mandate × potential experience
(0.0011)
(0.0010)
(0.0007)
(0.0013)
Unweighted observations
64,163
76,596
80,012
78,855
Notes: All models estimated with least squares (continuous variables) or a linear probability model (binary
variables), and control for demographics, labor market entrance state fixed effects, and labor market entrance year
fixed effects. NLSY79 sample weights applied. Standard errors are clustered around the labor market entrance
state and reported in parentheses.
1
ESI=Employer-sponsored health insurance offer.
***;**;*=statistically different from zero at the 1%; 5%;10% level.

40

Appendix Table F4. The persistent effect of chiropractor mandates at labor market entrance on ESI access
and labor market outcomes: NLSY79 1979-2012
Outcome:
ESI1
Log(wages)
Log(weeks)
Full-time
Male sample
Sample proportion/mean
0.790
22.08
46.11
0.897
Chiropractor mandate
-0.0509*
-0.0076
-0.0076
0.0009
(0.0274)
(0.0447)
(0.0225)
(0.0140)
Chiropractor mandate ×
0.0025***
0.0004
0.0008
0.0004
potential experience
(0.0007)
(0.0018)
(0.0007)
(0.0008)
Unweighted observations
68,464
79,806
83,489
82,179
Female sample
Sample proportion/mean
0.761
16.68
43.95
0.724
Chiropractor mandate
-0.0528**
0.0015
-0.0494*
-0.0523**
(0.0206)
(0.0292)
(0.0287)
(0.0233)
Chiropractor mandate ×
0.0005
-0.0005
0.0013
0.0006
potential experience
(0.0008)
(0.0011)
(0.0008)
(0.0010)
Unweighted observations
64,163
76,596
80,012
78,855
Notes: All models estimated with least squares (continuous variables) or a linear probability model (binary
variables), and control for demographics, labor market entrance state fixed effects, and labor market entrance year
fixed effects. NLSY79 sample weights applied. Standard errors are clustered around the labor market entrance
state and reported in parentheses.
1
ESI=Employer-sponsored health insurance offer.
***;**;*=statistically different from zero at the 1%; 5%;10% level.

41

Appendix Table F5. The persistent effect of continuing coverage mandates at labor market entrance on ESI
access and labor market outcomes: NLSY79 1979-2012
Outcome:
ESI1
Log(wages)
Log(weeks)
Full-time
Male sample
Sample proportion/mean
0.790
22.08
46.11
0.897
Continuing coverage
-0.0219
-0.1193***
-0.0176
-0.0548***
mandate
(0.0208)
(0.0340)
(0.0222)
(0.0159)
Continuing coverage
0.0004
0.0089***
0.0014
0.0045***
mandate × potential experience
(0.0010)
(0.0020)
(0.0015)
(0.0008)
Unweighted observations
68,464
79,806
83,489
82,179
Female sample
Sample proportion/mean
0.761
16.68
43.95
0.724
Continuing coverage
0.0026
-0.1131***
0.0038
-0.0343
mandate
(0.0250)
(0.0309)
(0.0211)
(0.0275)
Continuing coverage
-0.0008
0.0045***
-0.0015
0.0015
mandate × potential experience
(0.0009)
(0.0017)
(0.0009)
(0.0015)
Unweighted observations
64,163
76,596
80,012
78,855
Notes: All models estimated with least squares (continuous variables) or a linear probability model (binary
variables), and control for demographics, labor market entrance state fixed effects, and labor market entrance year
fixed effects. NLSY79 sample weights applied. Standard errors are clustered around the labor market entrance
state and reported in parentheses.
1
ESI=Employer-sponsored health insurance offer.
***;**;*=statistically different from zero at the 1%; 5%;10% level.

42

Appendix Table G. The persistent effect of high cost mandates at labor market entrance on ESI access and
labor market outcomes include contemporaneous high cost mandates: NLSY79 1979-2012
Outcome:
ESI1
Log(wages)
Log(weeks)
Full-time
Male sample
Sample proportion/mean
0.790
22.08
46.11
0.897
High cost mandates
-0.0134
-0.0396**
-0.0165**
-0.0227***
(0.0081)
(0.0153)
(0.0081)
(0.0055)
High cost mandates ×
0.0006
0.0032***
0.0013***
0.0018***
potential experience
(0.0003)
(0.0008)
(0.0004)
(0.0003)
Unweighted observations
68,464
79,806
83,489
82,179
Female sample
Sample proportion/mean
0.761
16.68
43.95
0.724
High cost mandates
-0.0121
-0.0264***
0.0024
-0.0231***
(0.0074)
(0.0088)
(0.0087)
(0.0076)
High cost mandates ×
0.0004
0.0021***
-0.0004
0.0007
potential experience
(0.0004)
(0.0005)
(0.0003)
(0.0004)
Unweighted observations
64,163
76,596
80,012
78,855
Notes: All models estimated with least squares (continuous variables) or a linear probability model (binary
variables), and control for demographics, labor market entrance state fixed effects, and labor market entrance year
fixed effects. NLSY79 sample weights applied. Standard errors are clustered around the labor market entrance
state and reported in parentheses.
1
ESI=Employer-sponsored health insurance offer.
***;**;*=statistically different from zero at the 1%; 5%;10% level.

43

Appendix Table H1. The persistent effect of high cost mandates at labor market entrance on ESI access and
labor market outcomes allowing for a more flexible relationship of mandate effects over time among men:
NLSY79 1979-2012
Outcome:
ESI1
Log(wages)
Log(weeks)
Full-time
Sample proportion/mean
0.790
22.08
46.11
0.897
1-10 years
-0.0081
-0.0204*
-0.0016
-0.0052
(0.0068)
(0.0121)
(0.0063)
(0.0048)
11-20 years
-0.0019
0.0293**
-0.0006
0.0059
(0.0084)
(0.0112)
(0.0060)
(0.0044)
21 years+
-0.0079
0.0137
0.0031
0.0061
(0.0078)
(0.0141)
(0.0060)
(0.0052)
Unweighted observations
68,464
79,806
83,489
82,179
Notes: All models estimated with least squares (continuous variables) or a linear probability model (binary
variables), and control for demographics, labor market entrance state fixed effects, and labor market entrance year
fixed effects. NLSY79 sample weights applied. Standard errors are clustered around the labor market entrance
state and reported in parentheses.
1
ESI=Employer-sponsored health insurance offer.
***;**;*=statistically different from zero at the 1%; 5%;10% level.

44

Appendix Table H2. The persistent effect of high cost mandates at labor market entrance on ESI access and
labor market outcomes allowing for a more flexible relationship of mandate effects over time among women:
NLSY79 1979-2012
Outcome:
ESI1
Log(wages)
Log(weeks)
Full-time
Sample proportion/mean
0.761
16.68
43.95
0.724
1-10 years
-0.0051
-0.0091
0.0066
-0.0099
(0.0060)
(0.0077)
(0.0075)
(0.0067)
11-20 years
-0.0048
0.0112
-0.0118
-0.0201***
(0.0061)
(0.0070)
(0.0076)
(0.0075)
21 years+
-0.0091
0.0115
-0.0088
-0.0139
(0.0064)
(0.0108)
(0.0065)
(0.0088)
Unweighted observations
64,163
76,596
80,012
78,855
Notes: All models estimated with least squares (continuous variables) or a linear probability model (binary
variables), and control for demographics, labor market entrance state fixed effects, and labor market entrance year
fixed effects. NLSY79 sample weights applied. Standard errors are clustered around the labor market entrance
state and reported in parentheses.
1
ESI=Employer-sponsored health insurance offer.
***;**;*=statistically different from zero at the 1%; 5%;10% level.

45

Figure 1. The effect of mandated benefits on wages and employment

Notes: Figure based on Summers (1989). The magnitude of the shifts in the demand and supply curves are
arbitrarily chosen and are for illustrative purposes only.

46

Supplementary Appendix Table 1. The persistent effect of high cost mandates at labor market entrance on
usual hours worked per week and non-logged hourly wages and weeks worked: NLSY79 1979-2012
Outcome:
Log(hours)
Wages (not logged)
Weeks (not logged)
Male sample
Sample mean (non-transformed)
44.67
22.08
46.11
High cost mandates
-0.0220***
-1.4011**
-0.4239*
(0.0076)
(0.5499)
(0.2171)
High cost mandates ×
0.0017***
0.1060***
0.0354***
potential experience
(0.0002)
(0.0338)
(0.0094)
Unweighted observations
82,160
79,806
83,489
Female sample
Sample mean (non-transformed)
37.60
16.68
43.95
High cost mandates
-0.0164*
-0.6529*
0.0882
(0.0086)
(0.3786)
(0.2202)
High cost mandates ×
0.0001
0.0423*
-0.0033
potential experience
(0.0005)
(0.0222)
(0.0078)
Unweighted observations
78,838
76,596
80,012
Notes: All models estimated with least squares and control for demographics, labor market entrance state fixed
effects, and labor market entrance year fixed effects. NLSY79 sample weights applied. Standard errors are
clustered around the labor market entrance state and reported in parentheses.
1
ESI=Employer-sponsored health insurance offer.
***;**;*=statistically different from zero at the 1%; 5%;10% level.
Supplementary Appendix Table 2: The persistent effect of high cost mandates at labor market entrance on
labor market outcomes using the sample with complete information on all outcome variables: NLSY79 19792012
Outcome:
ESI1
Log(wages)
Log(weeks)
Full-time
Male sample
Sample proportion/mean
0.799
22.91
45.32
0.934
High cost mandates
-0.0121
-0.0313**
-0.0089
-0.0126***
(0.0084)
(0.0147)
(0.0065)
(0.0036)
High cost mandates ×
0.0004
0.0027***
0.0007**
0.0011***
potential experience
(0.0003)
(0.0008)
(0.0003)
(0.0002)
Unweighted observations
64,097
64,097
64,097
64,097
Female sample
Sample proportion/mean
0.772
17.50
39.51
0.798
High cost mandates
-0.0100
-0.0318***
-0.0008
-0.0179***
(0.0072)
(0.0104)
(0.0077)
(0.0058)
High cost mandates ×
0.0005
0.0021***
0.0002
0.0006
potential experience
(0.0004)
(0.0005)
(0.0003)
(0.0004)
Unweighted observations
59,622
59,622
59,622
59,622
Notes: All models are estimated with least squares (continuous variables) or a linear probability model (binary
variables) and control for demographics, labor market entrance state fixed effects, and labor market entrance year
fixed effects. NLSY79 sample weights applied. Standard errors are clustered around the labor market entrance
state and reported in parentheses.
1
ESI=Employer-sponsored health insurance offer.
***;**;*=statistically different from zero at the 1%; 5%;10% level.

47

Supplementary Appendix Table 3A: The persistent effect of high cost mandates at labor market entrance on
labor market outcomes using alternative approaches to proxying labor market entrance state: NLSY79 men
1979-2012
Outcome:
ESI1
Log(wages)
Log(weeks)
Full-time
State of residence at age 14
Sample proportion/mean
0.790
22.08
46.11
0.897
High cost mandates
-0.0108
-0.0459**
-0.0105
-0.0214***
(0.0098)
(0.0189)
(0.0077)
(0.0078)
High cost mandates ×
0.0005
0.0037***
0.0013***
0.0017***
potential experience
(0.0004)
(0.0010)
(0.0004)
(0.0003)
Unweighted observations
68,464
79,806
83,489
82,179
State of residence in 1979
Sample proportion/mean
0.790
22.08
46.11
0.897
High cost mandates
-0.0101
-0.0419**
-0.0101
-0.0221***
(0.0098)
(0.0176)
(0.0077)
(0.0072)
High cost mandates ×
0.0005
0.0035***
0.0012***
0.0017***
potential experience
(0.0004)
(0.0009)
(0.0004)
(0.0003)
Unweighted observations
68,464
79,806
83,489
82,179
Notes: All models are estimated with least squares (continuous variables) or a linear probability model (binary
variables) and control for demographics, labor market entrance state fixed effects, and labor market entrance year
fixed effects. NLSY79 sample weights applied. Standard errors are clustered around the labor market entrance
state and reported in parentheses.
1
ESI=Employer-sponsored health insurance offer.
***;**;*=statistically different from zero at the 1%; 5%;10% level.
Supplementary Appendix Table 3B: The persistent effect of high cost mandates at labor market entrance on
labor market outcomes using alternative approaches to proxying labor market entrance state: NLSY79
women 1979-2012
Outcome:
ESI1
Log(wages)
Log(weeks)
Full-time
State of residence at age 14
Sample proportion/mean
0.790
22.08
46.11
0.897
High cost mandates
-0.0144
-0.0372***
0.0114
-0.0231**
(0.0088)
(0.0081)
(0.0094)
(0.0088)
High cost mandates ×
0.0004
0.0024***
-0.0005
0.0009**
potential experience
(0.0004)
(0.0006)
(0.0004)
(0.0004)
Unweighted observations
64,163
76,596
80,012
78,855
State of residence in 1979
Sample proportion/mean
0.790
22.08
46.11
0.897
High cost mandates
-0.0162
-0.0326***
0.0104
-0.0244**
(0.0099)
(0.0100)
(0.0087)
(0.0093)
High cost mandates ×
0.0006
0.0024***
-0.0004
0.0009**
potential experience
(0.0004)
(0.0006)
(0.0003)
(0.0004)
Unweighted observations
64,163
76,596
80,012
78,855
Notes: All models are estimated with least squares (continuous variables) or a linear probability model (binary
variables) and control for demographics, labor market entrance state fixed effects, and labor market entrance year
fixed effects. NLSY79 sample weights applied. Standard errors are clustered around the labor market entrance
state and reported in parentheses.
1
ESI=Employer-sponsored health insurance offer.
***;**;*=statistically different from zero at the 1%; 5%;10% level.

48

Supplementary Appendix Table 4: The persistent effect of high cost mandates at labor market entrance on
labor market outcomes including pre-1973 school-leavers: NLSY79 1979-2012
Outcome:
ESI1
Log(wages)
Log(weeks)
Full-time
Male sample
Sample proportion/mean
0.789
22.08
46.10
0.896
High cost mandates
-0.0123
-0.0393**
-0.0165**
-0.0230***
(0.0080)
(0.0150)
(0.0073)
(0.0051)
High cost mandates ×
0.0005
0.0032***
0.0013***
0.0018***
potential experience
(0.0003)
(0.0008)
(0.0004)
(0.0003)
Unweighted observations
68,643
80,048
83,758
82,443
Female sample
Sample proportion/mean
0.761
16.66
43.93
0.725
High cost mandates
-0.0116
-0.0267***
0.0018
-0.0240***
(0.0074)
(0.0091)
(0.0089)
(0.0072)
High cost mandates ×
0.0005
0.0022***
-0.0004
0.0007*
potential experience
(0.0004)
(0.0005)
(0.0003)
(0.0004)
Unweighted observations
64,472
76,974
80,407
79,238
Notes: All models are estimated with least squares (continuous variables) or a linear probability model (binary
variables) and control for demographics, labor market entrance state fixed effects, and labor market entrance year
fixed effects. Regressions do not include the labor market entrance poverty rate variable as the CPS does not
provide this variable for all labor market entrance years in our sample. More details available on request from the
corresponding author. NLSY79 sample weights applied. Standard errors are clustered around the labor market
entrance state and reported in parentheses.
1
ESI=Employer-sponsored health insurance offer.
***;**;*=statistically different from zero at the 1%; 5%;10% level.

Supplementary Appendix Table 5: The persistent effect of high cost mandates at labor market entrance on
labor market outcomes excluding 1973: NLSY79 1979-2012
Outcome:
ESI1
Log(wages)
Log(weeks)
Full-time
Male sample
Baseline proportion/mean
0.764
20.11
44.87
0.884
High cost mandates
-0.0124
-0.0388**
-0.0144*
-0.0219***
(0.0080)
(0.0155)
(0.0078)
(0.0054)
High cost mandates ×
0.0005
0.0032***
0.0012***
0.0018***
potential experience
(0.0003)
(0.0008)
(0.0004)
(0.0003)
Unweighted observations
68,101
79,332
83,001
81,697
Female sample
Baseline proportion/mean
0.762
16.71
37.60
0.724
High cost mandates
-0.0124
-0.0262***
0.0028
-0.0232***
(0.0075)
(0.0088)
(0.0088)
(0.0075)
High cost mandates ×
0.0004
0.0022***
-0.0004
0.0007*
potential experience
(0.0004)
(0.0005)
(0.0003)
(0.0004)
Unweighted observations
63,774
76,096
79,484
78,335
Notes: All models are estimated with least squares (continuous variables) or a linear probability model (binary
variables) and control for demographics, labor market entrance state fixed effects, and labor market entrance year
fixed effects. NLSY79 sample weights applied. Standard errors are clustered around the labor market entrance
state and reported in parentheses.
1
ESI=Employer-sponsored health insurance offer.
***;**;*=statistically different from zero at the 1%; 5%;10% level.

49

Supplementary Appendix Table 6. The persistent effect of high cost mandates at labor market entrance on
labor market outcomes excluding continuing coverage mandate from high cost mandates variable: NLSY79
1979-2012
Outcome:
ESI1
Log(wages)
Log(weeks)
Full-time
Male sample
Sample proportion/mean
0.790
22.08
46.11
0.897
High cost mandates
-0.0126
-0.0348**
-0.0190**
-0.0218***
(0.0100)
(0.0167)
(0.0087)
(0.0059)
High cost mandates ×
0.0006
0.0029***
0.0014***
0.0017***
potential experience
(0.0004)
(0.0010)
(0.0004)
(0.0003)
Unweighted observations
68,464
79,806
83,489
82,179
Female sample
Sample proportion/mean
0.761
16.68
43.95
0.724
High cost mandates
-0.0149**
-0.0152
0.0040
-0.0231***
(0.0067)
(0.0106)
(0.0082)
(0.0076)
High cost mandates ×
0.0007*
0.0021***
-0.0003
0.0007
potential experience
(0.0004)
(0.0006)
(0.0003)
(0.0005)
Unweighted observations
64,163
76,596
80,012
78,855
Notes: All models are estimated with least squares (continuous variables) or a linear probability model (binary
variables) and control for demographics, labor market entrance state fixed effects, and labor market entrance year
fixed effects. NLSY79 sample weights applied. Standard errors are clustered around the labor market entrance
state and reported in parentheses.
1
ESI=Employer-sponsored health insurance offer.
***;**;*=statistically different from zero at the 1%; 5%;10% level.

Supplementary Appendix Table 7. The persistent effect of high cost mandates at labor market entrance on
labor market outcomes excluding observations with missing control variables: NLSY79 1979-2012
Outcome:
ESI1
Log(wages)
Log(weeks)
Full-time
Male sample
Sample proportion/mean
0.799
22.63
44.82
0.898
High cost mandates
-0.0132
-0.0377**
-0.0178*
-0.0226***
(0.0083)
(0.0153)
(0.0096)
(0.0063)
High cost mandates ×
0.0004
0.0028***
0.0012***
0.0018***
potential experience
(0.0004)
(0.0008)
(0.0004)
(0.0003)
Unweighted observations
57,019
66,179
69,244
68,163
Female sample
Sample proportion/mean
0.771
16.95
37.55
0.723
High cost mandates
-0.0135*
-0.0327***
0.0001
-0.0267***
(0.0074)
(0.0079)
(0.0081)
(0.0075)
High cost mandates ×
0.0004
0.0022***
-0.0003
0.0008
potential experience
(0.0004)
(0.0006)
(0.0003)
(0.0005)
Unweighted observations
54,159
64,558
67,506
66,536
Notes: All models are estimated with least squares (continuous variables) or a linear probability model (binary
variables) and control for demographics, labor market entrance state fixed effects, and labor market entrance year
fixed effects. NLSY79 sample weights applied. Standard errors are clustered around the labor market entrance
state and reported in parentheses.
1
ESI=Employer-sponsored health insurance offer.
***;**;*=statistically different from zero at the 1%; 5%;10% level.

50

Supplementary Appendix Table 8. The persistent effect of high cost mandates at labor market entrance on
labor market outcomes excluding time-varying state-level controls from regression model: NLSY79 19792012
Outcome:
ESI1
Log(wages)
Log(weeks)
Full-time
Male sample
Sample proportion/mean
0.790
22.08
46.11
0.897
High cost mandates
-0.0151*
-0.0375**
-0.0175**
-0.0226***
(0.0086)
(0.0152)
(0.0077)
(0.0051)
High cost mandates ×
0.0006
0.0032***
0.0013***
0.0018***
potential experience
(0.0003)
(0.0008)
(0.0004)
(0.0003)
Unweighted observations
68,464
79,806
83,489
82,179
Female sample
Sample proportion/mean
0.761
16.68
43.95
0.724
High cost mandates
-0.0133
-0.0264***
0.0010
-0.0223***
(0.0079)
(0.0097)
(0.0091)
(0.0076)
High cost mandates ×
0.0005
0.0022***
-0.0004
0.0007
potential experience
(0.0004)
(0.0005)
(0.0003)
(0.0004)
Unweighted observations
64,163
76,596
80,012
78,855
Notes: All models are estimated with least squares (continuous variables) or a linear probability model (binary
variables) and control for demographics, labor market entrance state fixed effects, and labor market entrance year
fixed effects. NLSY79 sample weights applied. Standard errors are clustered around the labor market entrance
state and reported in parentheses.
1
ESI=Employer-sponsored health insurance offer.
***;**;*=statistically different from zero at the 1%; 5%;10% level.

Supplementary Appendix Table 9. The persistent effect of high cost mandates at labor market entrance on
labor market outcomes without lagging the mandate variables by one year: NLSY79 1979-2012
Outcome:
ESI1
Log(wages)
Log(weeks)
Full-time
Male sample
Sample proportion/mean
0.790
22.08
46.11
0.897
High cost mandates
-0.0117
-0.0428***
-0.0104
-0.0237***
(0.0086)
(0.0147)
(0.0094)
(0.0059)
High cost mandates ×
0.0005
0.0027***
0.0010***
0.0018***
potential experience
(0.0003)
(0.0007)
(0.0004)
(0.0003)
Unweighted observations
68,464
79,806
83,489
82,179
Female sample
Sample proportion/mean
0.761
16.68
43.95
0.724
High cost mandates
-0.0071
-0.0159
-0.0044
-0.0158**
(0.0077)
(0.0121)
(0.0080)
(0.0073)
High cost mandates ×
0.0005
0.0021***
-0.0002
0.0008*
potential experience
(0.0004)
(0.0005)
(0.0003)
(0.0004)
Unweighted observations
64,163
76,596
80,012
78,855
Notes: All models are estimated with least squares (continuous variables) or a linear probability model (binary
variables) and control for demographics, labor market entrance state fixed effects, and labor market entrance year
fixed effects. NLSY79 sample weights applied. Standard errors are clustered around the labor market entrance
state and reported in parentheses.
1
ESI=Employer-sponsored health insurance offer.
***;**;*=statistically different from zero at the 1%; 5%;10% level.

51

Supplementary Appendix Table 10. The persistent effect of high cost mandates at labor market entrance on
labor market excluding individual-level controls from the regression model: NLSY79 1979-2012
Outcome:
ESI1
Log(wages)
Log(weeks)
Full-time
Male sample
Sample proportion/mean
0.790
22.08
46.11
0.897
High cost mandates
-0.0188**
-0.0464***
-0.0227***
-0.0239***
(0.0089)
(0.0162)
(0.0084)
(0.0054)
High cost mandates ×
0.0005
0.0031***
0.0013***
0.0018***
potential experience
(0.0003)
(0.0008)
(0.0004)
(0.0003)
Unweighted observations
68,464
79,806
83,489
82,179
Female sample
Sample proportion/mean
0.761
16.68
43.95
0.724
High cost mandates
-0.0162*
-0.0413***
-0.0014
-0.0239***
(0.0083)
(0.0113)
(0.0086)
(0.0071)
High cost mandates ×
0.0005
0.0022***
-0.0003
0.0008*
potential experience
(0.0004)
(0.0006)
(0.0003)
(0.0004)
Unweighted observations
64,163
76,596
80,012
78,855
Notes: All models are estimated with least squares (continuous variables) or a linear probability model (binary
variables) and control for demographics, labor market entrance state fixed effects, and labor market entrance year
fixed effects. NLSY79 sample weights applied. Standard errors are clustered around the labor market entrance
state and reported in parentheses.
1
ESI=Employer-sponsored health insurance offer.
***;**;*=statistically different from zero at the 1%; 5%;10% level.

52

Supplementary Appendix Table 11A. The persistent effect of high cost mandates at labor market entrance on
labor market outcomes using different controls for between-state differences: NLSY79 men 1979-2012
Outcome:
ESI1
Log(wages)
Log(weeks)
Full-time
Sample proportion/mean
0.790
22.08
46.11
0.897
Include state-specific linear
trends
High cost mandates
-0.0058
-0.0428**
-0.0161*
-0.0235***
(0.0105)
(0.0207)
(0.0094)
(0.0034)
High cost mandates ×
0.0004
0.0033***
0.0012***
0.0018***
potential experience
(0.0003)
(0.0008)
(0.0004)
(0.0003)
Include state-specific
quadratic trends
High cost mandates
0.0005
-0.0242
-0.0127
-0.0194***
(0.0110)
(0.0237)
(0.0091)
(0.0043)
High cost mandates ×
0.0005
0.0033***
0.0012***
0.0018***
potential experience
(0.0003)
(0.0008)
(0.0004)
(0.0003)
Include current state fixed
effects
High cost mandates
-0.0117
-0.0376**
-0.0157*
-0.0223***
(0.0080)
(0.0147)
(0.0080)
(0.0056)
High cost mandates ×
0.0005
0.0032***
0.0013***
0.0018***
potential experience
(0.0003)
(0.0008)
(0.0004)
(0.0003)
Unweighted observations
68,464
79,806
83,489
82,179
Notes: All models are estimated with least squares (continuous variables) or a linear probability model (binary
variables) and control for demographics, labor market entrance state fixed effects, and labor market entrance year
fixed effects. NLSY79 sample weights applied. Standard errors are clustered around the labor market entrance
state and reported in parentheses.
1
ESI=Employer-sponsored health insurance offer.
***;**;*=statistically different from zero at the 1%; 5%;10% level.

53

Supplementary Appendix Table 11B. The persistent effect of high cost mandates at labor market entrance on
labor market outcomes using different controls for between-state differences: NLSY79 men 1979-2012
Outcome:
ESI1
Log(wages)
Log(weeks)
Full-time
Sample proportion/mean
0.761
16.68
43.95
0.724
Include state-specific linear
trends
High cost mandates
-0.0126
-0.0391***
0.0026
-0.0272***
(0.0092)
(0.0126)
(0.0112)
(0.0078)
High cost mandates ×
0.0005
0.0022***
-0.0003
0.0008*
potential experience
(0.0004)
(0.0005)
(0.0003)
(0.0004)
Include state-specific
quadratic trends
High cost mandates
-0.0209*
-0.0429***
0.0042
-0.0190**
(0.0111)
(0.0118)
(0.0112)
(0.0094)
High cost mandates ×
0.0005
0.0022***
-0.0004
0.0008*
potential experience
(0.0004)
(0.0005)
(0.0003)
(0.0004)
Include current state fixed
effects
High cost mandates
-0.0114
-0.0290***
0.0017
-0.0224***
(0.0072)
(0.0088)
(0.0088)
(0.0070)
High cost mandates ×
0.0004
0.0022***
-0.0004
0.0007
potential experience
(0.0004)
(0.0005)
(0.0003)
(0.0005)
Unweighted observations
64,163
76,596
80,012
78,855
Notes: All models are estimated with least squares (continuous variables) or a linear probability model (binary
variables) and control for demographics, labor market entrance state fixed effects, and labor market entrance year
fixed effects. NLSY79 sample weights applied. Standard errors are clustered around the labor market entrance
state and reported in parentheses.
1
ESI=Employer-sponsored health insurance offer.
***;**;*=statistically different from zero at the 1%; 5%;10% level.

54

Supplementary Appendix Table 12. The persistent effect of high cost mandates at labor market entrance on
labor market removing survey weights: NLSY79 1979-2012
Outcome:
ESI1
Log(wages)
Log(weeks)
Full-time
Male sample
Unweighted sample
0.763
20.07
43.95
0.884
proportion/mean
High cost mandates
-0.0099
-0.0487***
-0.0110*
-0.0281***
(0.0066)
(0.0151)
(0.0064)
(0.0050)
High cost mandates ×
0.0005*
0.0035***
0.0013***
0.0019***
potential experience
(0.0003)
(0.0008)
(0.0003)
(0.0003)
Unweighted observations
68,464
79,806
83,489
82,179
Female sample
Unweighted sample
0.752
15.77
37.80
0.734
proportion/mean
High cost mandates
-0.0167**
-0.0268**
0.0048
-0.0207***
(0.0073)
(0.0105)
(0.0104)
(0.0057)
High cost mandates ×
0.0006*
0.0025***
-0.0007**
0.0009**
potential experience
(0.0003)
(0.0004)
(0.0003)
(0.0004)
Unweighted observations
64,163
76,596
80,012
78,855
Notes: All models are estimated with least squares (continuous variables) or a linear probability model (binary
variables) and control for demographics, labor market entrance state fixed effects, and labor market entrance year
fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered around the labor market entrance state and reported in parentheses.
1
ESI=Employer-sponsored health insurance offer.
***;**;*=statistically different from zero at the 1%; 5%;10% level.

55

Supplementary Appendix Table 13A. The persistent effect of high cost mandates at labor market entrance on
labor market outcomes showing all coefficient estimates: NLSY79 men 1979-2012
Outcome:
ESI1
Log(wages)
Log(weeks)
Full-time
Sample proportion/mean
0.790
22.08
46.11
0.897
High cost mandates
-0.0133
-0.0399**
-0.0165**
-0.0226***
(0.0080)
(0.0154)
(0.0081)
(0.0054)
High cost mandates ×
0.0005
0.0032***
0.0013***
0.0018***
potential experience
(0.0003)
(0.0008)
(0.0004)
(0.0003)
Potential experience
0.0064***
0.0138***
0.0104***
0.0037***
(0.0008)
(0.0016)
(0.0009)
(0.0005)
Personal characteristics
Age at labor market
0.0050**
0.0099
0.0075***
0.0026
entrance
(0.0025)
(0.0063)
(0.0023)
(0.0018)
High school at labor market
0.1493***
0.1150***
0.1135***
0.0246***
entrance
(0.0109)
(0.0157)
(0.0105)
(0.0064)
Some college at labor market
0.1598***
0.1774***
0.1315***
0.0151
entrance
(0.0175)
(0.0306)
(0.0124)
(0.0093)
College at labor market
0.2088***
0.4258***
0.1501***
0.0509***
entrance
(0.0184)
(0.0410)
(0.0147)
(0.0101)
African American
-0.0221
-0.1040***
-0.1097***
-0.0384***
(0.0139)
(0.0164)
(0.0091)
(0.0073)
Hispanic
0.0209
0.0163
-0.0167
-0.0084*
(0.0186)
(0.0297)
(0.0171)
(0.0047)
Age-adjusted AFQT
0.0395***
0.0965***
0.0122**
-0.0023
score
(0.0072)
(0.0089)
(0.0048)
(0.0050)
Mother’s education
-0.0035*
0.0027
0.0015
-0.0013
(0.0021)
(0.0035)
(0.0014)
(0.0009)
Father’s education
-0.0011
0.0044
-0.0035***
-0.0016*
(0.0013)
(0.0028)
(0.0011)
(0.0009)
Rural residence at age 14
-0.0248***
-0.0231
0.0121
0.0112*
(0.0092)
(0.0176)
(0.0092)
(0.0063)
Live with both biological
0.0315***
0.0434***
0.0405***
0.0131**
parents at age 14
(0.0088)
(0.0159)
(0.0110)
(0.0058)
Library card in household at
-0.0309***
0.0071
-0.0125
-0.0115**
age 14
(0.0086)
(0.0173)
(0.0075)
(0.0049)
Magazines in household at age
0.0224**
0.0502***
0.0067
0.0046
14
(0.0095)
(0.0182)
(0.0074)
(0.0050)
Newspapers in household at
-0.0026
0.0057
0.0247**
0.0031
age 14
(0.0134)
(0.0175)
(0.0109)
(0.0070)
Labor market entrance state
characteristics
Unemployment rate
-0.6763
-1.6350***
0.1505
0.2105
(0.5623)
(0.4026)
(0.2989)
(0.2063)
Poverty rate
0.2980
0.6592*
0.4366*
0.2600
(0.2925)
(0.3287)
(0.2584)
(0.1683)
College degree
-0.4067
0.2462
-0.2033
-0.0715
(0.3608)
(0.3298)
(0.2474)
(0.1621)
Age
0.0012
0.0134
-0.0038
0.0017
(0.0068)
(0.0095)
(0.0070)
(0.0048)
Private worker
0.2423
0.4452
0.2086
-0.0301
(0.2425)
(0.3852)
(0.1545)
(0.1396)
Unweighted observations
68,464
79,806
83,489
82,179
Notes: All models are estimated with least squares (continuous variables) or a linear probability model (binary
variables) and control for indicators for missing covariates, labor market entrance state fixed effects, and labor
market entrance year fixed effects. AFQT denotes age-standardized Armed Forces Qualification Test. NLSY79
sample weights applied. Standard errors are clustered around the labor market entrance state and reported in
parentheses.

56

ESI=Employer-sponsored health insurance offer.
***;**;*=statistically different from zero at the 1%; 5%;10% level.
1

57

Supplementary Appendix Table 13B. The persistent effect of high cost mandates at labor market entrance on
labor market outcomes showing all coefficient estimates: NLSY79 women 1979-2012
Outcome:
ESI1
Log(wages)
Log(weeks)
Full-time
Sample proportion/mean
0.761
16.68
43.95
0.724
High cost mandates
-0.0122
-0.0272***
0.0027
-0.0234***
(0.0074)
(0.0089)
(0.0088)
(0.0075)
High cost mandates ×
0.0005
0.0022***
-0.0004
0.0007
potential experience
(0.0004)
(0.0005)
(0.0003)
(0.0004)
Potential experience
0.0077***
0.0121***
0.0145***
0.0036***
(0.0009)
(0.0014)
(0.0011)
(0.0007)
Personal characteristics
Age at labor market
0.0016
0.0142**
0.0043
-0.0071**
entrance
(0.0036)
(0.0062)
(0.0037)
(0.0034)
High school at labor market
0.1079***
0.1226***
0.2147***
0.0567***
entrance
(0.0160)
(0.0232)
(0.0153)
(0.0182)
Some college at labor market
0.1239***
0.1871***
0.2574***
0.0772***
entrance
(0.0243)
(0.0372)
(0.0230)
(0.0249)
College at labor market
0.1551***
0.3390***
0.2598***
0.0958***
entrance
(0.0303)
(0.0559)
(0.0325)
(0.0307)
African American
0.0438***
0.0483***
-0.0344***
0.0471***
(0.0093)
(0.0148)
(0.0114)
(0.0147)
Hispanic
0.0220*
0.1117***
0.0207
0.0251*
(0.0117)
(0.0325)
(0.0158)
(0.0146)
Age-adjusted AFQT
0.0408***
0.1269***
0.0405***
0.0044
score
(0.0066)
(0.0121)
(0.0078)
(0.0079)
Mother’s education
-0.0023
0.0046
-0.0008
-0.0034*
(0.0015)
(0.0033)
(0.0020)
(0.0020)
Father’s education
-0.0018
0.0051**
-0.0004
-0.0050***
(0.0013)
(0.0025)
(0.0019)
(0.0014)
Rural residence at age 14
-0.0021
-0.0278
0.0071
-0.0034
(0.0095)
(0.0206)
(0.0086)
(0.0094)
Live with both biological
0.0339***
0.0241
0.0199
0.0064
parents at age 14
(0.0120)
(0.0170)
(0.0119)
(0.0096)
Library card in household at age
0.0180
0.0370**
0.0128
-0.0028
14
(0.0122)
(0.0160)
(0.0111)
(0.0081)
Magazines in household at age
0.0066
0.0039
0.0019
-0.0133**
14
(0.0093)
(0.0143)
(0.0099)
(0.0066)
Newspapers in household at age
0.0114
0.0140
0.0208
0.0232*
14
(0.0173)
(0.0207)
(0.0129)
(0.0120)
Labor market entrance state
characteristics
Unemployment rate
-0.0419
-1.4517
-0.4771
-0.9253*
(0.5565)
(0.9948)
(0.4953)
(0.4931)
Poverty rate
0.3518
0.1145
-0.2750
-0.1728
(0.3588)
(0.4149)
(0.2947)
(0.2829)
College degree
-0.1540
-0.4966
-0.5191**
-0.0609
(0.2251)
(0.3605)
(0.2225)
(0.2414)
Age
-0.0074
0.0250**
0.0046
0.0036
(0.0053)
(0.0120)
(0.0059)
(0.0067)
Private worker
0.2741
0.1856
-0.4559*
-0.1866
(0.2780)
(0.3180)
(0.2409)
(0.2508)
Unweighted observations
64,163
76,596
80,012
78,855
Notes: All models are estimated with least squares (continuous variables) or a linear probability model (binary
variables) and control for indicators for missing covariates, labor market entrance state fixed effects, and labor
market entrance year fixed effects. AFQT denotes age-standardized Armed Forces Qualification Test. NLSY79
sample weights applied. Standard errors are clustered around the labor market entrance state and reported in
parentheses.

58

ESI=Employer-sponsored health insurance offer.
***;**;*=statistically different from zero at the 1%; 5%;10% level.
1

59

Supplementary Appendix Table 14. The persistent effect of high cost mandates at labor market entrance on
ESI and labor market outcomes removing survey weights: Current Population Survey 1976-2013
Outcome:
ESI1
Log(wages)
Log(weeks)
Full-time
Men
Unweighted sample
0.759
18.11
44.66
0.867
proportion/mean
High cost mandates
-0.0266***
-0.0476***
-0.0369***
-0.0339***
(0.0038)
(0.0065)
(0.0078)
(0.0043)
High cost mandates ×
0.0021***
0.0042***
0.0030***
0.0029***
potential experience
(0.0003)
(0.0005)
(0.0004)
(0.0004)
Unweighted observations
222,603
310,973
332,131
332,131
Women
Unweighted sample
0.708
14.32
42.19
0.708
proportion/mean
High cost mandates
-0.0224***
-0.0331***
-0.0141
-0.0174***
(0.0045)
(0.0052)
(0.0086)
(0.0046)
High cost mandates ×
0.0018***
0.0030***
0.0014***
0.0017***
potential experience
(0.0002)
(0.0004)
(0.0003)
(0.0003)
Unweighted observations
176,761
278,728
290,164
290,164
Notes: All models estimated with least squares (continuous variables) or a linear probability model (binary
variables), and control for demographics, state fixed effects, labor market entrance year fixed effects, and year fixed
effects. CPS sample weights applied. Standard errors are clustered around the state and reported in parentheses.
1
ESI=Hold employer-sponsored health insurance. This variable is only available 1980-2013.
***;**;*=statistically different from zero at the 1%; 5%;10% level.

60

References:
Abraham, Jean Marie, and Roger Feldman. 2010. "Taking up or turning down: New estimates of
household demand for employer-sponsored health insurance." Inquiry 47 (1):17-32.
Acs, G, S H Long, M S Marquis, and P F Short. 1996. "Self-insured employer health plans:
prevalence, profile, provisions, and premiums." Health Affairs 15 (2):266-278.
Akosa Antwi, Yaa, Asako S. Moriya, and Kosali I. Simon. 2015. "Access to health insurance and
the use of inpatient medical care: Evidence from the Affordable Care Act young adult
mandate." Journal of Health Economics 39:171-187.
Altonji, Joseph G., Lisa B. Kahn, and Jamin D. Speer. 2016. "Cashier or Consultant? Entry
Labor Market Conditions, Field of Study, and Career Success." Journal of Labor
Economics 34 (S1):S361-S401.
Andersen, Martin. 2015. "Heterogeneity and the effect of mental health parity mandates on the
labor market." Journal of Health Economics 43:74-84.
Angrist, Joshua D., and J Pischke. 2009. Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An Empiricist's
Companion. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. Book. Original edition, Princeton
University Press.
Baicker, Katherine, and Amitabh Chandra. 2006. "The labor market effects of rising health
insurance premiums." Journal of Labor Economics 24 (3):609-634.
Bailey, James. 2014. "The effect of health insurance benefit mandates on premiums." Eastern
Economic Journal 40 (1):119-127.
Bailey, James, and Nathan Blascak. 2016. "The effect of state health insurance benefit mandates
on premiums and employee contributions." Applied Economics Letters:1-5.
Bailey, James, and Douglas Webber. 2016. "Health Insurance Benefit Mandates and Firm Size
Distribution." Journal of Risk and Insurance In Press.
Bao, Yuhua, and Roland Sturm. 2004. "The Effects of State Mental Health Parity Legislation on
Perceived Quality of Insurance Coverage, Perceived Access to Care, and Use of Mental
Health Specialty Care." Health Services Research 39 (5):1361-1378.
Bewley, Truman F. 1998. "Why not cut pay?" European Economic Review 42 (3):459-490.
Blau, F., and L. Kahn. 2007. "Changes in the Labor supply behavior of married women: 19802000." Journal of Labor Economics 25 (3):393-438.
Buchmueller, Thomas C, John DiNardo, and Robert G Valletta. 2011. "The effect of an
employer health insurance mandate on health insurance coverage and the demand for
labor: Evidence from Hawaii." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 3 (4):2551.
Bunce, V.C., and J.P. Wieske. 2010. Health Insurance Mandates in the States 2010. Washington,
DC: Council for Affordable Health Insurance.
Claxton, G., M. Rae, M. Long, A. Damico, H. Whitmore, and G. Foster. 2017. "Health Benefits
In 2017: Stable Coverage, Workers Faced Considerable Variation In Costs." Health
Affairs 36 (10):1838-1847.
Clemens, Jeffrey, and David M. Cutler. 2014. "Who pays for public employee health costs?"
Journal of Health Economics 38:65-76.
Cooper, Philip F, and Jessica Vistnes. 2003. "Workers’ decisions to take-up offered health
insurance coverage: assessing the importance of out-of-pocket premium costs." Medical
Care 41 (7):III-35-III-43.
Courtemanche, Charles J., and Daniela Zapata. 2014. "Does Universal Coverage Improve
Health? The Massachusetts Experience." Journal of Policy Analysis and Management
33 (1):36-69.
61

Cseh, Attila. 2008. "Labor market consequences of state mental health parity mandates." Forum
for Health Economics & Policy 11 (2).
Cutler, D. M., and J. Gruber. 1996. "Does public insurance crowd out private insurance?"
Quarterly Journal of Economics 111 (2):391-430.
Cutler, David M, and Brigitte C Madrian. 1998. "Labor Market Responses to Rising Health
Insurance Costs: Evidence on Hours Worked." The Rand Journal of Economics:509530.
Dave, D., and S. Mukerjee. 2011. "Mental health parity legislation, cost-sharing and substanceabuse treatment admissions." Health Economics 20 (2):161-183.
Depew, B., and J. Bailey. 2015. "Did the Affordable Care Act's dependent coverage mandate
increase premiums?" Journal of Health Economics 41:1-14.
Ellwood, David T. 1982. "Teenage unemployment: Permanent scars or temporary blemishes?" In
The youth labor market problem: Its nature, causes, and consequences, 349-390.
University of Chicago Press.
Flood, S., M. King, S. Ruggles, and J.R. Warren. 2017. Integrated public use microdata series,
Current Population Survey. Minneapolis, MN.
Gabel, Jon R, and Gail A Jensen. 1992. "Can a universal coverage system temper the
underwriting cycle?" Inquiry:249-262.
Genda, Yuji, Ayako Kondo, and Souichi Ohta. 2010. "Long-Term Effects of a Recession at
Labor Market Entry in Japan and the United States." Journal of Human Resources 45
(1):157-196.
Greene, William. 2004. "The behaviour of the maximum likelihood estimator of limited
dependent variable models in the presence of fixed effects." The Econometrics Journal 7
(1):98-119.
Gruber, J. 1994a. "The Incidence of Mandated Maternity Benefits." American Economic Review
84 (3):622-641.
Gruber, J. 1994b. "State-Mandated Benefits and Employer-Provided Health-Insurance." Journal
of Public Economics 55 (3):433-464.
Gruber, Jonathan, and Kosali Simon. 2008. "Crowd-out 10 years later: Have recent public
insurance expansions crowded out private health insurance?" Journal of Health
Economics 27 (2):201-217.
Hoynes, H., D. L. Miller, and J. Schaller. 2012. "Who Suffers During Recessions?" Journal of
Economic Perspectives 26 (3):27-47.
Jensen, G. A., and M. A. Morrisey. 1999. "Employer-sponsored health insurance and mandated
benefit laws." The Milbank Quarterly 77 (4):425-59.
Jovanovic, Boyan. 1979. "Job matching and the theory of turnover." The Journal of Political
Economy:972-990.
Kaestner, Robert, and Kosali Ilayperuma Simon. 2002. "Labor market consequences of state
health insurance regulation." Industrial & Labor Relations Review 56 (1):136-159.
Kahn, Lisa B. 2010. "The long-term labor market consequences of graduating from college in a
bad economy." Labour Economics 17 (2):303-316.
Klick, J., and T. Stratmann. 2006. "Subsidizing addiction: Do state health insurance mandates
increase alcohol consumption?" Journal of Legal Studies 35 (1):175-198.
Kondo, Ayako. 2015. "Differential effects of graduating during a recession across gender and
race." IZA Journal of Labor Economics 4 (1):1-24.
Lahey, Joanna N. 2012. "The efficiency of a group‐specific mandated benefit revisited: The
effect of infertility mandates." Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 31 (1):6392.
62

Laugesen, Miriam J, Rebecca R Paul, Harold S Luft, Wade Aubry, and Theodore G Ganiats.
2006. "A comparative analysis of mandated benefit laws, 1949–2002." Health Services
Research 41 (3p2):1081-1103.
Litow, M. 2002. Our own worst enemies: Explaining premium increases in the individual health
insurance market. In Issues and Answers. Alexandria, VA: Council for Affordable Health
Insurance.
Lubotsky, Darren, and Craig A. Olson. 2015. "Premium copayments and the trade-off between
wages and employer-provided health insurance." Journal of Health Economics 44:6379.
Maclean, J. C. 2014. "Does leaving school in an economic downturn impact access to employersponsored health insurance?" IZA Journal of Labor Policy 3 (1):1-27.
Maclean, J. C., I. Popovici, and E. Stern. 2017. Health Insurance Expansions and Provider
Behavior: Evidence from Substance Use Disorder Providers. In National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper Series. Cambridge, MA.
Maclean, J.C. 2013. "The health effects of leaving school in a bad economy." Journal of Health
Economics 32 (5):951-964.
McDonnell, Patricia, Abbie Guttenberg, Leonard Greenberg, and Ross H. Arnett. 1986. "Selfinsured health plans." Health Care Financing Review 8 (2):1-16.
Meer, Jonathan, and Jeremy West. 2011.
Monheit, A., J. Rizzo, Joel Cantor, and J Abramo. 2007. Assessing the Impact of Mandated
Health Insurance Benefifi ts on Cost and Coverage. Rutgers, NJ: Rutgers Center for
State Health Policy.
Morrisey, M.A. 2014. "State Insurance Mandates in the USA." In Encyclopedia of Health
Economics, edited by A J Culyer, 348-351. San Diego, CA: Elsevier.
National Council of State Legislatures. 2017. "State laws mandating or regulating mental health
benefits." [Website], accessed May 27 2017. http://www.ncsl.org/research/health/mentalhealth-benefits-state-mandates.aspx.
Neumark, D. 2002. "Youth labor markets in the United States: Shopping around vs. staying put."
Review of Economics and Statistics 84 (3):462-482.
Oreopoulos, Philip, Till von Wachter, and Andrew Heisz. 2012. "The Short- and Long-Term
Career Effects of Graduating in a Recession." American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics 4 (1):1-29.
Oyer, Paul. 2006. "Initial Labor Market Conditions and Long-Term Outcomes for Economists."
The Journal of Economic Perspectives 20 (3):143-160.
Pacula, Rosalie Liccardo, and Roland Sturm. 2000. "Mental health parity legislation: much ado
about nothing?" Health Services Research 35 (1 Pt 2):263.
Popovici, I., J. C. Maclean, and M. French. 2017. The effects of health insurance parity laws for
substance use disorder treatment on traffic fatalities: Evidence of unintended benefits. In
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper Series. Cambridge, MA.
Sloan, Frank A., and Christopher J. Conover. 1998. "Effects of State Reforms on Health
Insurance Coverage of Adults." Inquiry 35 (3):280-293.
Sturm, Roland. 2000. "State parity legislation and changes in health insurance and perceived
access to care among individuals with mental illness: 1996–1998." The Journal of
Mental Health Policy and Economics 3 (4):209-213.
Summers, Lawrence H. 1989. "Some simple economics of mandated benefits." The American
Economic Review 79 (2):177-183.
Topel, Robert H, and Michael P Ward. 1992. "Job Mobility and the Careers of Young Men." The
Quarterly Journal of Economics:439-479.
63

Webber, D. A. 2015. "Firm market power and the earnings distribution." Labour Economics
35:123-134.

64

