NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

AFTERSHOCKS OF MONETARY UNIFICATION:
HYSTERESIS WITH A FINANCIAL TWIST
Tamim Bayoumi
Barry Eichengreen
Working Paper 23205
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23205

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2017

Bayoumi’s work was undertaken while he was affiliated with the Peterson Institute of
International Economics. Eichengreen’s was supported by the Clausen Center at the University of
California, Berkeley. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Tamim Bayoumi and Barry Eichengreen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Aftershocks of Monetary Unification: Hysteresis with a Financial Twist
Tamim Bayoumi and Barry Eichengreen
NBER Working Paper No. 23205
February 2017
JEL No. F0,F3,F41
ABSTRACT
Once upon a time, in the 1990s, it was widely agreed that neither Europe nor the United States
was an optimum currency area, although moderating this concern was the finding that it was
possible to distinguish a regional core and periphery (Bayoumi and Eichengreen, 1993).
Revisiting these issues, we find that the United States is remains closer to an optimum currency
area than the Euro Area. More intriguingly, the Euro Area shows striking changes in correlations
and responses which we interpret as reflecting hysteresis with a financial twist, in which the
financial system causes aggregate supply and demand shocks to reinforce each other. An
implication is that if the Euro Area wishes to avoid financial booms and busts it will need
vigorous, coordinated regulation of its banking and financial systems by a single supervisor—that
monetary union without banking union will be prone to economic and financial instability.

Tamim Bayoumi
International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street NW
Washington, DC 20431
tbayoumi@imf.org
Barry Eichengreen
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
549 Evans Hall 3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
eichengr@econ.Berkeley.edu

2

I. INTRODUCTION
Once upon a time, in the 1990s, it was widely agreed that neither Europe nor the United
States was an optimum currency area. Neither fully satisfied the preconditions for a
smoothly-functioning monetary union. Both experienced asymmetric shocks, aggregate
supply and demand disturbances that differed across regions. This in turn constituted a case
against a one-size-fits-all monetary policy in the absence of other instruments
accommodating the need for different policy stances in regional economies experiencing
different economic conditions.
Moderating this concern was the finding that it was possible in both Europe and the U.S. to
distinguish a regional core and periphery, and that the problem of asymmetric disturbances
was less in the core. In Europe this strengthened the case for a relatively small monetary
union centered on Germany, France and a handful of Northern European countries. It
suggested that if Europe instead went ahead with a large monetary union including, inter alia,
Portugal, Italy, Ireland, Greece, and Spain, outcomes in the resulting monetary union could
well be problematic.
We documented these points in Bayoumi and Eichengreen (1993). In addition, we showed
there that the dispersion of shocks was larger in Europe than the United States, suggesting
that monetary union, however configured, might not operate as smoothly in the EU.
That said, the fact that much of the difference was on the demand side – the difference was
most pronounced in the case of aggregate demand disturbances, in other words – raised the
possibility that the lack of correlation in Europe was a figment of the monetary regime.
While different candidate countries continued to run different monetary policies for the
moment, this would change in the direction of greater symmetry with the establishment of
monetary union.
In this paper we revisit these issues after the passage of 25 years.2 As in our earlier work, we
distinguish temporary and permanent disturbances to output, what are traditionally

2

See Bayoumi and Eichengreen (1993), circulated in 1992 as an NBER working paper. After we started work
on this update, we discovered the related work of Campos and Machiarello (2016). Their analysis is compatible
with ours, although their emphasis and interpretation differ. Their sample starts earlier, in 1989, and hence puts
less weight on the recent financial super-cycle (more on which see below). They find relatively high
correlations with Germany for Belgium, Ireland, and Portugal. They argue that an over-identifying restriction
that all supply shocks have the same impact on supply is rejected most decisively for Spain, Ireland, Portugal,
and Greece, and hence that these countries continue to constitute a euro area periphery. Our own results, unlike
theirs, do not impose the restriction that aggregate supply shocks should have the same long-run impact in all
countries; rather, we allow the magnitude of that impact to vary with the structure of each economy as in our
earlier work. We find little difference in the significance of the output effect of the aggregate supply shock from
zero (a more sensible test in our view) for the so-called GIIPS (Portugal, Ireland, Italy, Greece, and Spain)
versus the rest of the Euro area. In interpreting the results we place more weight on the impulse-response

(continued…)

3
interpreted as disturbances to aggregate demand and supply.3 Utilizing data from the
transition to the euro (Stages I and II of the transition blueprint sketched in the Maastricht
Treaty) and then from the monetary union itself, we examine whether the pattern of
disturbances looks different today. We ask whether warnings against a European monetary
union based on this pattern, and warnings against a large monetary union in particular, are
borne out by subsequent experience. We ask whether the United States, where the geography
of production and employment has evolved over the last quarter century, looks more or less
like a smoothly-functioning monetary union.
We find that the United States continues to resemble an optimum currency area more closely
than the Euro Area if the condition for optimality is the symmetry of supply and demand
disturbances. This will not surprise close observers of Europe’s trials and tribulations.4
In addition, while there remains a clear distinction between a Euro Area core and Euro Area
periphery, as in the earlier period, the Euro Area core is now made up, surprisingly and in
contrast the earlier period, of Germany together with none other than Portugal, Ireland, Italy,
Spain and Greece.5 Recall that the core is defined as countries whose aggregate supply and
demand shocks are relatively highly correlated with Germany’s. In contrast to the earlier
period, we find that since the Maastricht Treaty shocks to aggregate demand and sometimes
also to aggregate supply in the so-called GIIPS countries are now correlated more highly
with those in Germany, not less, compared to shocks to other Euro Area countries. This
unlikely set of countries, which on other conventional criteria appears to be less integrated
with Germany than do closer neighbors like Belgium and France, suggests that the shocks we

functions associated with the vector autoregressions specified and analyzed below, as opposed to the correlation
of estimated disturbances across countries.
3

Temporary disturbances to output are logically interpreted as aggregate demand disturbances in the presence
of a vertical long-run supply curve, while permanent changes in output are interpretable as aggregate supply
disturbances – as shifts in that vertical long-run supply curve. However, we will have reason to revisit this
interpretation below.
4

The extent of the difference, as we estimate it, depends however on the period considered, as documented in
the appendix. The difference between Europe and the U.S. is less when we shorten the period from 1994-2014
to 1999-2014, reflecting the extent to which the more recent period is heavily dominated by the financial cycle,
a demand disturbance that affects different European countries similarly. (Some will argue that Euro Area
countries were also subject to more symmetric monetary shocks following the transition to monetary union,
although we would argue that the convergence of monetary policies was already underway during Stage II of
the transition to the euro, and we would caution that transmission mechanisms could continue to differ. We are
not really able to distinguish these hypotheses.) The Euro Area also looks better, compared to the United States,
when we include 2009 in the analysis, since this was a year of exceptionally large aggregate supply and demand
disturbances affecting all advanced countries, (affecting them symmetrically, in other words). What conclusion
is warranted on the basis of these findings depends on which years one views as predictive of experience going
forward.
5

Germany is a member of the core by construction (as explained in more detail below).

(continued…)

4
have identified may reflect distortions in operation of the monetary union as much as
underlying integration.
Moreover, there are striking changes in the response of prices to temporary and permanent
shocks to output in the Euro Area. Temporary positive shocks to output in the U.S. raise
prices permanently, consistent with the standard interpretation of them as positive shocks to
aggregate demand. Similarly, permanent positive shocks to output in the U.S. reduce prices,
consistent with interpreting them as positive shocks to aggregate supply.6 These results
resemble what we found for the U.S. in the earlier period. We similarly find the same basic
pattern in other non-Euro Area countries.
In the Euro Area, in contrast, the price response is different. Prices now rise rather than
falling in response to permanent shocks to output (what are otherwise interpretable as
positive aggregate supply shocks). This price response is not consistent with the standard
aggregate-supply-aggregate demand model, in contrast to the situation in the U.S., in other
non-Euro Area countries, and indeed in Europe itself prior to the euro.
Our interpretation is in terms of hysteresis with a financial twist. Hysteresis is the idea that
aggregate demand and aggregate supply shocks are endogenously linked (see e.g., Blanchard
and Summers 1986). Demand shocks give rise endogenously to supply shocks, and
conceivably vice versa. Familiar variants of the hysteresis argument posit that negative
aggregate-demand shocks create negative aggregate-supply shocks.7 One channel through
which this is thought to occur is for temporary unemployment to degrade the labor force
through loss of experience and erosion of skills. Another is the possibility that temporary
reductions in output cause firms to reduce investment, in turn lowering the capital stock and
potential output.
The forms of hysteresis we emphasize in this paper, which we think of as especially relevant
to the Euro Area through its first 15 years of existence, operate through financial markets
rather than labor markets. In the Euro Area, positive shocks to aggregate supply produced a
lending boom that fueled an increase in spending and aggregate demand. Positive supply
shocks that enhanced the productivity of existing capital and labor increased margins and
profitability and therefore raised asset prices. Higher asset prices encouraged bank lending
both by increasing European bank capital (allowing banks to expand their lending) and by
stimulating borrowing (which was used to finance additional investment, consistent with the
now higher level of Tobin’s q). More investment meant more aggregate supply, causing
output to continue rising over time. And more demand meant higher rather than lower prices.

6
Nothing in our methodology imposes the constraint that prices must rise in response to temporary shocks and
fall in response to permanent ones; rather, this result serves as a check on our interpretation.
7

And, symmetrically, that positive aggregate demand shocks give rise to positive aggregate supply shocks.
This last idea is one rationale for running what is referred to as a “high-pressure economy” (that is, as subjecting
the economy to a positive aggregate demand shock).

5
Meanwhile, negative demand shocks that would normally that would be expected to reduce
both output and prices had little visible output effect in the Euro Area because the short-run
aggregate supply curve was relatively inelastic, reflecting real rigidities in product and labor
markets. But the lower product prices associated with this negative shock to aggregate
demand also reduced asset prices, causing the financial mechanism described in the previous
paragraph to run in reverse. Lower asset prices discouraged lending, depressed borrowing,
and caused demand to fall still further. The result of the negative demand shock was thus an
exaggerated fall in output and deflation, consistent with what Europe experienced in recent
years.
This interpretation emphasizing hysteresis operating via the financial sector suggests an
explanation for why disturbances to Germany became more highly correlated with
disturbances to the GIIPS. When Germany experienced a positive aggregate supply shock, in
the form of the Hartz II reforms adopted shortly after the advent of the euro, not only did the
country’s own growth accelerate but bank finance flowed from Germany and other Northern
European countries toward the GIIPS, which were an attractive destination for now more
abundant bank finance, as a result of their heretofore high interest rates.8 Thus, Germany and
the GIIPS experienced correlated aggregate supply and aggregate demand shocks in the first
post-Euro decade. When the global financial crisis hit and banks in Germany and elsewhere
retrenched, the same process then operated in reverse. This financial distortion appears to be
what is driving some of our otherwise counter-intuitive results.
For this explanation to be consistent with the observed contrast between the U.S. and the
Euro Area, there must be reasons to think that the bank-lending response, the mechanism
through which positive supply shocks endogenously generate positive demand shocks,
operated more powerfully in the Euro Area than the U.S. and, for that matter, than in Europe
itself in the earlier (pre-euro) period. To explain the greater elasticity of bank lending in the
Euro Area than the United States, we point to lesser reliance of European bank regulators on
simple leverage ratios, and to their greater reliance on banks’ own internal models, which are
inherently procyclical. To explain the greater elasticity of bank lending in post-euro than preeuro Europe, we point to the intensification of bank competition with completion of the
Single Market, the elimination of exchange risk courtesy of the euro, and the temptation of
national regulators to favor their national champions through the adoption of light-touch
regulation.
An implication is that if the Euro Area wishes to avoid financial booms and busts it will
need vigorous, coordinated regulation of its banking and financial systems by a single
supervisor (that monetary union without banking union will be prone to economic and
financial instability). This perhaps encourages a somewhat optimistic conclusion, since the
Euro Area may in fact moving toward banking union. But another implication is that the
Euro Area will remain prone to financial booms and busts, and therefore to destabilizing
8

On the Hartz II Reforms, see Kemmerling and Bruttel (2006).

6
shocks, so long as regulators continue to rely on banks’ internal models. To the extent they
do, this leads one to a rather more pessimistic conclusion.

II. ESTIMATION RESULTS
We follow the same procedures as in our earlier work, collecting data on real GDP and the
GDP deflator through 2014 for the eleven initial members of European Monetary Union and
ten additional advanced countries, and Gross State Product and the associated deflator for the
eight U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis regions.9 Growth and inflation are the first
difference of the logarithm of real GDP and the GDP deflator, respectively. Since the VARs
are estimated using two lags, the estimation period is 1990-2014, or 25 years of data. This is
the same length of time as in our earlier work, which covered 1963-1988.
We used a Blanchard-Quah decomposition to differentiate between two types of shocks,
those that have permanent effects on both output and prices, which we will refer (for now) to
as aggregate supply shocks, and those that have only a temporary effect on output but a
permanent effect on prices, which we will call aggregate demand shocks (more on this
assignment below). The logic for this interpretation is the canonical aggregate-demandaggregate-supply model shown in Figure 1.
Figure 1. U.S. Adjustment AS/AD

The left hand panel labeled AS shows the response to an increase in aggregate supply.
Initially, output rises and prices fall as the supply shock traces out the downward sloping
9

The eleven Euro area members are Germany, France, Italy, Spain, the Netherlands, Belgium, Austria, Ireland,
Portugal, Greece, and Finland, as well as the Euro area as a whole. The 8 US regions are the Mideast, New
England, Southeast, Southwest, Great Lakes, Plains, Rocky Mountains, and the Far West. The additional
advanced countries are the United States, Japan, the United Kingdom, Canada, Sweden, Switzerland, Australia,
New Zealand, Denmark, and Norway.

7
aggregate demand curve. Over time the aggregate supply curve rotates to become vertical at
the new higher level of potential output, and the initial path is further extended along the
aggregate demand curve. The final outcome is permanently higher output, and permanently
lower prices.
The right hand panel marked AD shows the path following an aggregate demand shock. In
this case the impact is to raise both output and prices, as the shock traces out the upwardsloping aggregate supply curve. But as the short-run aggregate supply curve becomes
vertical in the long run at the initial level of output, output falls back to its initial value, even
as prices continue to rise. These dynamics trace out the aggregate demand curve. Thus, a
positive aggregate supply shock should produce a gradual rise in output and fall in prices,
while a positive aggregate demand shock should initially produce a rise in output and prices,
followed by a gradual reversion of output to initial levels and a continuing rise in prices.
Estimation only requires (effectively, enforces) that there is one permanent and one
temporary shock to output. In particular, it does not require that prices rise in the second case
and fall in the first. Whether these implications follow is purely dependent on the data. The
estimation results and associated impulse responses can therefore be used to check whether
patterns are consistent with the interpretation suggested by the textbook aggregate-supplyaggregate-demand model. In our earlier paper, the data and impulse responses in both Europe
and the United States were consistent with these textbook predictions. Prices fell in response
to permanent positive shocks but rose in response to temporary ones. The impulses indicated
relatively large negative aggregate supply shocks in the 1970s, around the time of the first
and second OPEC oil shocks. These findings encouraged us to interpret the two underlying
shocks in terms of aggregate demand and again supply.
The results for the United States for the recent period replicate this pattern. Figure 2 shows
the impulse response functions associated with our estimated equations, in price-output
space, for the U.S. as a whole. The aggregate supply curve traces out a downward sloping
aggregate demand curve with a slope about 30 degrees below the vertical. The aggregate
demand shock, depicted in blue, traces out a short-run aggregate demand curve with a slope
of 30-45 degrees, followed by a return to the initial level of output along a path that has a
similar slope to that traced out by the aggregate supply shock (shown in orange, directly
below). Results for individual U.S. regions in the appendix display the same basic patterns,
with some intuitive differences.10

10
For example, the mineral-rich Southwest and Rocky Mountain regions both have relatively flat aggregate
supply curves, as one would expect.

8
Figure 2. U.S. Impulse Responses
0.04

0.03

price

0.02

0.01

0
-0.01

0

‐0.01

0.01

0.02

0.03

0.04

output
Aggregate Demand

Aggregate Supply

In the case of the Euro Area, however, the results (Figure 3) are less intuitive and do not
conform to the predictions of the standard textbook model. One shock raises output and
lowers prices, but this is the “aggregate demand” shock with only a temporary impact on
output. The other shock, which raises output permanently, produces almost no change in
prices initially, followed by a gradual increase in prices over time. Looking at the individual
results for the 11 long-term members of the Euro Area (where Luxembourg is aggregated
with Belgium and Greece is included despite only joining in 2001), seven of the countries in
question, including Germany, display this same pattern, with the exceptions, France,
Belgium, Austria, and Finland, conforming to the traditional pattern, as in our earlier paper
and as in the United States (impulse responses for all countries and the eight US regions are
shown in the appendix). The ten other advanced economies for which we have comparable
data and estimates also conform to the traditional U.S. pattern, with the sole exception of
Japan. It would appear, then, that these unconventional responses are essentially a Euro Area
phenomenon.11

11
And to the extent that they are also a Japanese phenomenon, that may telling us something about their
interpretation (more on this below).

9
Figure 3. Euro Area Impulse Responses
0.03
0.025
0.02
0.015

price

0.01
0.005
0
-0.02

-0.01

0

0.01

0.02

0.03

-0.005
-0.01
-0.015
-0.02

output

Aggregate Demand

Aggregate Supply

The responses in Figure 3 are not easily explained using the standard aggregate-demandaggregate-supply framework. To make sense of the “aggregate demand” shock would require
a downward sloping aggregate supply curve and an upward sloping aggregate demand
function, the opposite of the textbook model. Even then it would be hard to rationalize an
aggregate supply shock that had little impact on prices initially but a large impact
subsequently. That said, these patterns cannot be dismissed as a figment of the data, given
that they obtain for a substantial number of Euro Area countries.
Our interpretation of the phenomenon is “hysteresis with a financial twist.” At its most basic,
the hysteresis argument is that aggregate demand and supply shocks are linked (see e.g.,
Blanchard, Cerutti, and Summers, 2015). Familiar variants of the hysteresis argument see
aggregate-demand shocks as creating a long-term aggregate-supply response. One such
channel allows temporary unemployment to degrade the labor force (through loss of
experience and erosion of skills). Another is the possibility that temporary reductions in
output cause firms to reduce investment, in turn reducing the capital stock and potential
output.
An alternative is that the aggregate supply shock comes first and that this then leads to
changes in aggregate demand in anticipation of its future impact. This possibility has not
been much discussed in the literature, although it cannot be ruled out a priori.

10
Our explanation synthesizes these two views. In a world where the supply of credit by the
financial sector is responsive to asset prices, anticipations of positive aggregate-supply
shocks will become self-fulfilling (they will create their own demand). Expected increases in
supply will generate a loosening of financial conditions (a “credit boom”) through a financial
accelerator (a la Bernanke, Gertler, and Gilchrist, 1999) that in turn produces an increase in
spending. Much of the increase in spending goes into investment and results in additional
hiring, thereby increasing aggregate supply at least in the short-term. Asset prices rise
because the same factors of production produce more output in the short run following the
positive supply shock (productivity and profitability both rise, other things equal). Lending
responds because financial institutions using internal risk models interpret higher asset prices
as a reduction in risk, requiring them to hold thinner risk buffers and allowing them to lend
more (more on this below).
The dynamics are depicted in Figure 4. Consider a shock that is anticipated to raise aggregate
supply, shifting the AS curve rightward to AS’ and therefore also affecting aggregate
demand. This is the shock in the left-hand panel labeled AS+D. Since the financial system
responds to the higher asset prices associated with this positive shock, credit becomes more
abundant, spending rises, and aggregate demand shifts right to AD’. Because the financial
accelerator moves the aggregate demand and aggregate supply curves together and in the
same direction, the normal downward pressure on prices from an aggregate supply shock is
offset. That impact on prices may be offset more or less than completely; in the figure we
depict the case where it is offset more than completely. Over time, the impact on financial
conditions continues stimulate higher lending. Since this effects persists after the initial
shock, aggregate demand continues to rise, shifting AD further to the right, ultimately to
LRAD, even as aggregate supply rotates to become vertical at its higher long-run level
LRAS. The result is that the permanent increase in output is accompanied by an upward
spiral in prices.
Observers of Europe since 2008 may prefer to run this experiment in reverse. A negative
shock to aggregate supply due to, say, disruptions to the financial system leads to a decline in
output and also a decline in credit, spending, demand and prices. The observed decline in
output is associated with deflation, in other words. Over time, as output falls further, that
deflation deepens.12 This interpretation can also help us understand why the impact on output
and prices is larger in the GIIPS than the center, including in Germany (as documented in the
Appendix), insofar as the negative shock associated with the disruption to financial system is
greater in the Southern European countries.

12

Note that in this example we have added a second channel through which the negative supply shock can
depress demand, spending, prices and output: along with the negative impact on credit supply of lower asset
prices, impairment of the financial system further reduces credit supply. There is no incompatibility between the
two channels. Their coexistence reinforces our point.

11
Figure 4. Euro Area Adjustment: Financial Hysteresis

Why might this hysteresis only have affected the Euro Area and not also the United States?
One answer is that the Euro Area banking system was more sensitive to changes in asset
prices. For most of this period, Euro Area banks operated under Basel capital rules, applying
risk weights to all or many of their assets. The major universal banks were also permitted to
use their own internal risk models when gauging the adequacy of the capital they held against
their expanding investment banking operations, and the banks in question were overseen by
national supervisors. Intense regulatory competition within the Single Market, which was
effectively completed for financial services in this period, provided supervisors incentives to
support their banking systems through regulatory means that ended up increasing the
elasticity of credit supply. Insofar as Europe was overbanked, banks had an incentive to
aggressively expand lending in boom periods in the effort to survive. Large Euro area banks
used the flexibility afforded by pro-cyclical Basel capital rules and their national supervisors
to increase lending aggressively when asset prices rose. Higher asset prices signaled
additional lending opportunities (as indicated by Tobin’s q). They reduced required capital
holdings (they allowed additional lending and assets to be piled atop existing bank capital)
insofar as they were associated higher credit ratings and lower risk weights. Since addition
lending led to further increases in asset prices, this process was self-reinforcing. It generated
powerful and long-lasting financial accelerator effect.
U.S. commercial banks, by contrast, were required to comply with a U.S.-specific “simple
leverage ratio” that limited the extent to which they could respond to higher asset prices. The
leverage ratio was imposed in the wake of the Saving & Loan crisis of the early 1980s. It was
part the “prompt corrective action” aimed to enforce timely and hence less costly
interventions in failing financial institutions. Specifically, it required commercial banks to
hold at least 5 cents of capital for every dollar of assets. Since this U.S.-specific overlay to
the Basel capital-adequacy rules used total assets rather than risk-weighted assets. it shortcircuited the flexibility in Basel risk-weights that was used and abused in Euro area. Hence,
the U.S. regulatory system limited the operation of the self-reinforcing financial accelerator-

12
process evident in the Euro area, where higher asset prices led to more lending which in turn
led to even higher asset prices.
Banks elsewhere were also under Basel rules but with stronger supervision, smaller
investment banking operations, and fewer competitive incentives to expand lending, all of
which reduced the financial accelerator. An interesting intermediate case is the United
Kingdom, where banks had many of the same incentives as in the Euro Area banks but a
significant share of the commercial banking system had close links with the more
conservative Hong Kong banking model. Indeed, the UK represents an intermediate result
insofar as the initial downward pressure on prices after an aggregate supply shock is
gradually reversed as prices come back to the initial level, suggesting some role for an
expansion in aggregate demand through the financial system (again, see the appendix). It is
also possible to understand the otherwise peculiar results for Japan in this light, insofar as the
Japanese economy operated under the influence of highly procyclical bank lending – a crisis
in the banking system, and in bank lending, that was associated with a persistent growth
crisis starting in the early 1990s.
If aggregate supply and aggregate demand shocks are linked to one another via the financial
system, what then is the interpretation of the “aggregate demand” shock with only a
temporary impact on output shown in the AD+S panel in Figure 4? We interpret it as a
reduction in aggregate demand with little or no effect on asset prices and therefore on bank
lending. Since the financial system is the main mechanism through which increases in
aggregate demand affect real economic activity, most of the impact of the reduction in
aggregate demand in this case feeds through to lower product prices rather than output. This
is consistent with the observed impulse-response for Europe in Figure 3. It is the result of an
aggregate demand shock when the short-run aggregate supply curve is relatively inelastic, as
we have drawn it in Figure 4. (Compare Figure 1 above for the United States.) A relatively
inelastic short-run aggregate supply curve is conventionally understood as reflecting the
prevalence of real rigidities (Romer 2011). A substantial literature concludes that these
rigidities are more prevalent in Europe than in the United States (see e.g., Bauer, Bonin,
Goette and Sunde 2007 and Babecky, Du Caju, Kosma, Lawless, Messina and Room 2010).
In Figure 3, output rises rather than falling in the short run. This indicates that the negative
aggregate demand shock is being accompanied by a downward (outward) shift in the shortrun aggregate supply curve. In Europe, reductions in aggregate demand that were not linked
to the financial cycle, such as moves to fiscal austerity, were accompanied by lower wages
and prices that improved competitiveness within the currency union. As lower costs widened
margins on exports, firms were able to expand production even if the resulting increase in
costs offset some of the downward pressure on prices. Since there is no increase in long-term
potential output in this scenario, the result can be interpreted as a reduction in the price level
P’ around which the short run aggregate supply curve AS’ rotates.

13
In the case we have drawn designed to correspond to the impulse response shown in
Figure 3, the positive competitiveness effect outweighs the negative demand effect in the
short run. This is not necessarily the case, however. We could have as easily shown the case
where the negative demand shock dominates in the short run, leading to a fall in output rather
than a rise. Over time, real rigidities bring about a continuing fall in aggregate demand to
LRAD. This leads to lower prices even as the aggregate supply curve becomes vertical and
output reverts to its initial level. The underlying point, confirmed in our empirical analysis, is
that the change in output is small as there is no financial sector impact.
This perspective enables us to interpret the shocks observed over time in the Euro Area and
the United States, as shown in the two panels of Figure 5. The 2008/9 crisis in the United
States is primarily a negative aggregate demand shock—a temporary shock that lowered
output and prices but was reversed subsequently—along with a smaller negative supply
component. This negative demand shock followed a series of positive demand shocks in
2004-06, which are plausibly associated with the country’s housing bubble.
In the Euro Area, in contrast, the 2008/9 crisis is identified primarily as a permanent
“aggregate supply” disturbance as the financial accelerator reinforces the initial negative
shock to output. After being partially offset in 2010 by fiscal support, these negative shocks
persist into 2011 and 2012 via their self-reinforcing aggregate demand effects.
The pattern of shocks around the transition to the euro is also intuitive. There was a run of
negative (i.e., deflationary) aggregate demand shocks in the run-up to monetary union in
1996 through 1999, as countries engaged in fiscal consolidation in the effort to meet the
“convergence criteria” for entry into the monetary union. The ERM crises of the early 1990s
appear as negative aggregate supply shocks, which were followed by a set of largely positive
supply shocks from 1997 to 2008 as EMU became what appeared to be, at the time, a wellfunctioning reality.

14
Figure 5. US and Euro Area Aggregate Demand and Supply Shocks Over Time

EA "AD" and "AS" shocks

US "AD" and "AS" Shocks
3

3

2

2
1

1

-2

2014

2012

2010

2008

2006

2004

2002

2000

1998

1996

1994

1992

-1

2014

2012

2010

2008

2006

2004

2002

2000

1998

1996

1994

1992

1990

-1

1990

0

0

-2
-3

-3

-4
Aggregate Demand Shocks
Aggregate Supply Shocks

Aggregate Demand Shocks
Aggregate Supply Shocks

III. CORRELATION RESULTS
We now compare the correlation of shocks across U.S. regions and Euro Area members.
Doing so requires selecting a pair of anchor regions, which following our earlier paper we
take as the Mideast (the mid-Eastern Seaboard) in the United States and Germany in the Euro
Area. For the results reported here we make two adjustments to the sample. First, we start the
calculations using shocks from 1994 rather than 1990. Although the Maastricht Treaty was
negotiated in 1991 and signed in 1992, this was followed by the crises in the Exchange Rate
Mechanism (ERM) in 1992 (when the UK and Italy were forced to leave the mechanism) and
1993 (when France was almost forced to do likewise before it was saved by an expansion of
the bands from +/-2¼ percent to +/-15 percent).
The ERM crises matter because they cast doubt over the future of the single currency, more
so once Denmark rejected the Maastricht Treaty in a referendum and France barely accepted
it in another. It seems reasonable, therefore, to conclude that the true start of the run-up to
EMU, when a consensus existed that the monetary union would actually come into existence,
was in 1994, which is logically therefore also the breakpoint after which one should expect to
observe different financial-market behavior.
Second, we exclude 2009 from the analysis, since in both the U.S. and the Euro Area (as in
other advanced economies) this year is characterized by an exceptionally large and highly
correlated (across countries) global shock.13 Including this observation would strongly bias
13

When we include it, 2009 is characterized as both a negative aggregate demand and negative aggregate
supply shock

15
the results toward finding highly correlated shocks everywhere. Little information is added,
in other words, by including a shock where all regions experienced very similar shocks
(although we will return to the ubiquitous nature of the 2009 crisis below).
Figure 6 shows the resulting correlations, where aggregate supply shocks are on the vertical
axis and aggregate demand shocks are on the horizontal. The United States shows an
inner/outer structure similar to the one in our analysis of the earlier period. Four regions are
located relatively close to the top-right hand corner of the figure, which means that both
shocks are highly correlated with those in the Mideast: the regions in question are New
England, the Great Lakes, and the Southeast, which are contiguous to the anchor region, and
the Far West, which is not. The “periphery” is composed of the Rocky Mountains and
Southwest, which depend relatively heavily on mineral extraction, and the Plains, which is
specialized in agriculture.
Figure 6. Correlation: Euro area versus US
Storyline goes here

US
EA

1

0.8

Supply

0.6

Southeast

Italy
Southwest
Netherlands
Austria

New England

Great Lakes
Far West
Portugal
Rocky Mountain

Spain

0.4

Belgium

Ireland

France
Plains

0.2

Greece

Finland

0
0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

Demand

The main change from our earlier results is that the Southeast and the Plains have switched
positions, with the Southeast joining the inner core and the Plains joining the periphery. The
Southeast plausibly became more integrated with the core as it shed low-value-added

16
manufacturing in favor of services and motor vehicle production. By contrast, the
agriculturally-specialized Plains is less tightly linked to the U.S. anchor region, since
agricultural products were traded increasingly on global rather than domestic markets.
The Euro area displays lower correlations and less well defined subgroups. Still, it is possible
to distinguish one set of countries with relatively correlated “aggregate demand” and
“aggregate supply” shocks; these constitute was came to be known as the Euro Area
periphery during the crisis (Italy, Portugal, Spain, and Ireland and Greece, although Greece
only shows a relative high correlation of “aggregate demand” shocks). Of the remaining
countries, the Netherlands and Austria exhibit high correlations of “aggregate supply” shocks
with those in Germany, while France, Belgium, and Finland do not – they are clearly in the
outer circle. This inverts one of the findings of our earlier study, in which the inner circle
could be interpreted as a Euro Area core (the Netherlands, France, and Belgium—Austria
was not included in the analysis) and the outer circle was composed of Italy, Spain, Ireland,
Portugal, and Greece.
We interpret these results are consistent with a financial cycle that linked Germany and the
periphery, as described above. One element was optimism about the future for the periphery
that raised asset prices, increased lending and spending, and sucked in exports from Germany
(the lower correlations for Greece reflect the fact it was still a relatively closed economy).
Improved prospects in Germany, reflecting the Hartz II reforms and a competitive Euro Area
exchange rate, raised asset prices; much of the resulting lending and spending affected the
GIIPS, whose economic prospects consequently came to be seen as brighter. The resulting
financial accelerator then fed on itself. This amplification of the financial cycle in the
outlying countries is also consistent with their much larger observed output and prices
responses to an “aggregate supply” shock for the GIIPS (shown the appendix).14 The results
also suggest similar, but less potent, process affected an economy otherwise closely linked to
Germany, namely the Netherlands. Finally, shocks to four economies least associated with
this financial super-cycle, France, Belgium, Finland, and (to a lesser extent) Austria, were the
least correlated with those in Germany.
The differing role of aggregate supply shocks in the Euro Area from the rest of the world can
also be seen in changes in their coherence over time. Table 1 shows the percentage of the
variance of the underlying aggregate-demand and aggregate-supply shocks explained by the
first principal component in the first half of the sample (1990-2001) and the second half
(2002-2014 less 2009). In the Euro Area, the coherence of the supply shocks rises after 2002,
from the first principal component explaining 48 to 63 percent of the total variance, while its
share falls both for U.S. regions and for the other non-Euro Area advanced economies.
In contrast, there is no increase in the correlation of aggregate demand shocks in the Euro
Area despite the advent of the single currency. This suggests that in the Euro Area the
14

This is less true of Italy than Greece, Ireland, Portugal, and Spain.

17
financial cycle and (ultimately mistaken) forward-looking expectations about supply-side
improvements melded aggregate demand and supply shocks, so that the greater coherence
caused by a single monetary policy comes through aggregate supply shocks rather than
aggregate demand shocks.
Table 1. Proportion of Variance Explained by the First Principal Component

EMU

US regions

Other Advanced

Aggregate Demand
1990-2001
2002-2014 less 09
Difference

0.31
0.29
-0.02

0.75
0.60
-0.15

0.41
0.52
0.11

Aggregate Supply
1990-2001
2002-2014 less 09
Difference

0.48
0.63
0.15

0.68
0.59
-0.09

0.41
0.40
-0.01

Further Results
We carried out two further experiments to establish the consistency of our hypothesis that the
high correlations of the GIIPS countries reflect the financial cycle. First we added the United
Kingdom, Sweden, and Denmark into the European analysis. While these countries are not
part of the Euro Area they were under the same type of financial regulation as the Euro Area
countries. Since these countries exhibit impulse responses in line with the traditional
aggregate-demand-aggregate-supply model, their correlations with Germany should also be
low. As can be seen in Figure 7 these countries also form part of the European periphery,
with supply-shock correlations similar to those of France, Belgium, Austria, and Finland.
Strikingly, for two of these countries aggregate demand shocks are negatively correlated with
those in Germany, consistent with the view that maintaining monetary independence via a
separate currency reduces the coherence of monetary disturbances and hence the correlation
aggregate demand shocks. (To be fair, one of these countries is Denmark, which pegs to the
Euro.

18
Figure 7. Correlations: Euro Area vs. non-Euro countries

1994-2014 (2009 data omitted)
EA

1

non-EA
0.8

Supply

0.6

Netherlands

Italy
Portugal
Austria
Spain
Ireland

0.4

Denmark

0.2

UK
Belgium
France
Greece

Sweden
Finland

0
-1

-0.8 -0.6 -0.4 -0.2 0 0.2
Demand

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

The second experiment involves looking more directly at the impact of the financial
accelerator. We added the contemporaneous and first lag of the change in real credit, real
equity prices, and real house prices as exogenous variables in the VAR.15 The resulting
shocks and response functions can be thought of as what would have occurred in the absence
of the financial accelerator. Comparing the baseline responses with those controlling for
financial conditions suggests that the financial accelerator was a major amplifier of
macroeconomic shocks, especially for the GIIPS. In particular, for a typical country the longterm impact on output of an “aggregate supply” shock is twice as large when the financial
channel is allowed to operate. For the GIIPS the effect is even larger: opening up the
financial channel triples the impact on output. There is also smaller but noticeable

15
Credit and house prices are standard inputs into measures of the credit cycle, while equity prices are
important indicators of animal spirits. Equity and house prices are available for virtually the entire sample
period and set of countries, while data on credit is generally only available from the late 1990s, particularly for
Euro Area countries. The house price and credit data are from the BIS, while the equity data from the IMF’s
International Financial Statistics. All results are available from the authors.

(continued…)

19
amplification of the long-term impact of “aggregate demand” disturbances on prices.16 Still
more strikingly, once the financial accelerator is removed from the estimation, the high
correlation of “aggregate supply” shocks between the GIIPS and Germany falls dramatically,
while the correlations for other European Union countries are essentially unchanged. By
contrast, there is a relatively uniform if modest reduction in correlations of “aggregate
demand” shocks.
Table 2. Average correlations of “Aggregate Supply” Disturbances with those of Germany

With Financial Accelerator
Without Financial Accelerator
Difference

GIIPS
0.42
0.12
0.30

Other Euro Area
0.34
0.32
0.01

Other EU
0.23
0.21
0.02

IV. CONCLUSION
A standard approach since the early 1990s to analyzing the suitability of a collection of
economies for joining together in a monetary union is to estimate the correlation among them
of disturbances to output – temporary and permanent shocks, or aggregate demand and
aggregate supply disturbances in the conventional interpretation – using bivariate vector
autoregressions of inflation and GDP growth with structural restrictions imposed. Updating
those results with 25 years of additional data is a way of determining whether Europe
remains further than the United States from satisfying the symmetric-disturbances criterion
for an optimum currency area. It enables us to ask whether it is still possible, as earlier, to
distinguish a Euro Area core and periphery. And it speaks to the question of whether there is
support for the endogeneity of the optimum currency area criteria – that is. whether Europe
has come closer to satisfying the asymmetric-disturbances condition following creation of the
single currency.
Utilizing this approach, we find that correlation of shocks across regional and national
economies is still higher in the U.S. than the Euro Area, suggesting that Europe remains
further from satisfying the symmetric-disturbances criterion. This finding resonates with the
observation that Europe has experienced considerable teething pains in its first decade and a
half of monetary union. It provides only limited support for the variant of the “endogeneity of

16
Comparisons of the longer-term impact of aggregate supply shocks on prices is difficult outside the GIIPS
because the long-term impact of such shocks on prices is often close to zero. Small differences in results
therefore produce large changes in estimated amplification. This is even truer of the impact of aggregate
demand disturbances on output, since the long-term impact is zero by construction.

20
the optimal currency criteria” view in which it is asserted that the asymmetric-disturbances
problem will solve itself.
We also find evidence, as before, of a Euro Area core and a Euro Area periphery – a first
group of countries where disturbances are highly correlated with those in Germany and a
second set where they are less highly correlated. But whereas in the earlier period the Euro
Area core was made up a subset of Northern European countries – namely France, Benelux,
and Denmark – it now appears, surprisingly, to be made up of the crisis countries Portugal,
Ireland, Italy, Greece, and Spain. More precisely, it is the crisis countries where disturbances
to output are most highly correlated with Germany’s in the recent period.
Our interpretation of this last finding is in terms of the financial cycle. During the years
Germany was growing strongly (after the Hartz II reforms at the turn of the century), asset
prices soared, supporting an increase in banking-system leverage and encouraging lending to
the so-called GIIPS. When the global financial crisis hit, asset prices collapsed and banks in
Germany and elsewhere retrenched, causing the same process to shift into reverse. Thus, the
increased correlation of shocks between Germany and the GIIPS should not be seen as an
indication that Europe has moved closer to satisfying the criteria for an optimum currency
area, but rather as evidence that the Euro Area continues to display a procyclical and
destabilizing banking and financial sector.
Whereas earlier work pointed to textbook-style aggregate-supply and aggregate-demand
responses (permanently higher output and permanently lower prices in response to supply
shocks, temporarily higher output and permanently higher prices in response to demand
shocks), the new impulse responses. Prices rise rather than falling in response to permanent
(“supply”) shocks. We interpret this in terms of a hysteresis effect, where positive supply
shocks raise profitability and asset prices, setting off an investment boom that stimulates
demand, so as to offset the normal downward pressure on prices from a positive supply
shock. One can equally imagine the same mechanism operating in reverse in the wake of a
negative supply shock, for example due to disruptions to the operation of the financial system
like those experienced starting in 2008.
The implication is that stabilizing the Euro Area will require more vigorous, coordinated
regulation of the European banking and financial system. Europe is now moving in this
direction, with the creation of a Single Supervisor and a common resolution mechanism. The
question is whether it is moving fast and far enough. That Single Supervisor has yet to be
battle tested. The feasibility of the common resolution mechanism is open to question. The
banking union lacks a common deposit insurance scheme with a fully funded financial
backstop. Regulators continue to rely on the banks’ own internal models for judging capital
adequacy. We worry that, so long as they do, the Euro Area will remain prone to lending
booms and busts with undesirable financial consequences.

21

References
Babecky, Jan, Philip Du Caju, Theodora Kosma, Martina Lawless, Julian Messina and Tairi
Room (2010), “Downward Nominal and Real Wage Rigidity: Survey Evidence from
European Firms,” Scandinavian Journal of Economics 112, pp.884-910.
Bauer, Thomas, Holger Bonin, Lorenz Goette and Uwe Sunde (2007), “Real and Nominal
Wage Rigidities and the Rate of Inflation: Evidence from West German Micro Data,”
Economic Journal 117, pp.508-529.
Bayoumi, Tamim and Barry Eichengreen (1993), “Shocking Aspects of European Monetary
Unificaton,” in Francisco Torres and Francesco Giavazzi eds, Adjustment and Growth
in the European Monetary Union, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp.193229.
Bernanke, Ben S., Mark Gertler, and Simon Gilchrist (1999) “The Financial Accelerator in a
Quantitative Business Cycle Framework,” in Handbook of Macroeconomics Volume
1C, editors John B. Taylor and Michael Woodford, North Holland, pp. 1341-1393.
Blanchard, Olivier, Eugenio Cerutti and Lawrence Summers (2015), “Inflation and Activity:
Two Explorations and their Implications for Monetary Policy,” IMF Working Paper
15/230 (November).
Blanchard, Olivier and Lawrence Summers (1986), “Hysteresis and the European
Unemployment Problem,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1, pp.15-90.
Campos, Nauro and Corrado Machiarelli (2016), “Core and Periphery in the European
Monetary Union: Bayoumi and Eichengreen 25 Years Later,” Economics Letters 147,
pp.127-130.
Kemmerling, Achim and Olivier Bruttel (2006), “’New Politics’ and German Labour Market
Policy? The Implications of the Recent Hartz Reforms for the German Welfare
States,” West European Politics 29, pp.90-112.
Romer, David (2011), Advanced Macroeconomics, New York: McGraw-Hill.

22

Appendix: Impulse Response Functions for the Euro area, US Regions, and
other Advanced Countries
Euro Area Countries and Euro Area

23
US Regions and US

24

Other Countries

