                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              DECLINING UNIONIZATION
                                 IN CONSTRUCTION:
                            THE FACTS AND THE REASONS




                                 Steven G. Allen




                             Working Paper No. 2320




                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 1987




Financial support was provided by the National Science Foundation and North
Carolina State University.  I am grateful to Myra Ragland and Katherine Foote
for research assistance and Jim Comer for computing assistance. I also appreciate
the helpful comments that I received from Homer Johnstone, Lou Alfeld, a seminar
at the National Bureau of Economic Research, and a presentation to the Project
2000 Committee and staff of the International Union of Bricklayers and Allied
Craftsmen. The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Labor Studiesc Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                   NBER Working Paper #2320
                                                   July 1987




                      Declining Unionization in Construction:
                             The Facts and The Reasons


                                     ABSTRACT


     This paper documents and examines the forces behind the decline of

unionization in the construction industry. The proportion of construction

workers belonging to unions has dropped from slightly less than one-half in

1966 to less than one-third in 1984. The employment share of union contractors

has declined even further because of the fraction of union members working in

the open shop rose from 29 to 46 percent between 1973 and 1981.    Initially, an
important factor in the initial decline in percentage unionized was the growth

in the union-nonunion wage gap between 1967 and 1973. However, the gap did not

widen any further after 1973 and actually has narrowed substantially since

1978. A key subsequent factor has been the erosion of the productivity

advantage of union contractors, which dropped substantially between 1972 and

1977 and vanished by 1982. The decline of unionization is unrelated to changes

in worker characteristics or changes in the mix and location of construction

activity.



                                        Steven G. Allen
                                        Department of Economics and Business
                                        North Carolina State University
                                        Box 8110
                                        Raleigh, NC 27695-8110
                                        (919)   737-3886
                                        BITNET:   NSALLEN @ TUCC
      The share of nonagricultural workers belonging to unions has declined from

 34 percent in 1954 to 19 percent in 1984. The reasons for this decline remain

 largely a matter of conjecture. Farber (1985) and Freeman and Medoff (1984) have

found that some of the decline can be statistically attributed to structural

changes in worker and job characteristics, such as the growth of the service

sector and the rise in the proportion of female workers. Another reason, pointed

out by Freeman and Medoff, Freeman (1985) and Dickens and Leonard (1985), is that

the percentage of nonunion workers who are organized through NLRB elections has

dropped substantially. These studies indicate that, if unions become no more

successful in organizing new workers than they have been over the last ten years,

percentage unionized will continue to decline asymptotically to a level of

between 10 and 15 percent.

     As the authors of all of these studies recognize, such explanations raise as

many questions as they answer. The structural change argument cannot address the

question of why the share of union workers has changed within particular groups

of workers. In particular, it cannot explain why unionization has been falling

in manufacturing and construction and why it has been rising in the public

sector. This argument also cannot deal with the possibility that the structural

changes are not exogenous. One reason behind the declining share of the

manufacturing sector and the rising share of the service sector could very well

be the lower profit rates among establishments covered by collective bargaining

agreements.

     The organizing success argument is more illuminating as it pinpoints a major

source of the decline in unionism within particular sectors. However, research

in this area has not progressed far enough to explain why union organizing

campaigns are bearing so little fruit. Some have attributed this to increased

managerial opposition, as indicated by the rising number of employer unfair

labor practices. It is not yet clear whether this increased opposition results
                                                                                 2


from changed perceptions of the cost of being unionized or from increased odds of

preventing unionization. The declining success of union organizing efforts may

also be attributable to incentives within the unions themselves that seeni to put

a high premium on providing services to the current membership and a low premium

on organizing new members. Another possibility is reduced demand by workers for

union coverage, a possible consequence of changes in nonunion personnel

practices, increased government regulation of the work place, or a drop in the

perceived economic gains from union coverage. Regardless of the reasons for the

slowdown in union organizing, this argument cannot account for changes in

unionization in sectors of the economy where NLRB elections have little or no

role to play in union organizing or changes resulting from union-nonunion

differences in the growth of employment across establishments.

     This paper represents a first attempt to bring the economic forces behind

both the structural change and organizing success arguments to the forefront in

explaining changes in percentage unionized over time. The focus is on a single

sector of the economy- -the construction industry. In addition to building on my

earlier work in this area, this has three distinct methodological advantages.

First, most of the structural change factors likely to contaminate a broader

analysis are removed. The labor force has remained fairly homogeneous (males in

mostly skilled occupations) over the period examined. Even though there have

been some major changes in the mix and location of construction activity, it will

be shown below that they have had no impact on unionization. Second, short job

durations make NLRB elections largely irrelevant to union organizing efforts in

construction, thus eliminating to a great extent the impact of legal factors.

Third, it is quite unlikely there is a single all-purpose explanation of the

decline in percentage unionized that applies to all sectors of the economy.

Instead, the answer is likely to vary, depending on such factors as government
                                                                                     3

 regulation, import competition, and the structure of collective bargaining.

 Focusing on specific sectors is likely to lead to a richer and more accurate

 explanation of unionism's decline. Although the results of this study may very

 well be specific to construction, the procedures used here can be applied easily

 to other industries.

      The results reported below are to be interpreted in terms of the
                                                                         following
 simple theoretical model. The union unilaterally sets the wage for work covered

 by collective bargaining agreements. The wage maximizes the union's objective

 function subject to the constraints outlined below.    Analytically, this

 assuniption eliminates the bargaining process itself from the model. In addition,

 it serves as a fairly close approximation to reality in the construction

 industry, as acknowledged by both critics of the building trades (Northrup

 (1984)) and more sympathetic observers (Mills (1972)). Given the union wage,

contractors determine whether it is more profitable to hire union or nonunion

labor. This decision hinges on expected wage and productivity differences

between union and nonunion labor for each particular contractor. These

differences are likely to vary with such factors as project size, location, and

type of construction. Contractors who used union labor in the previous period

must also take into account costs associated with switching to nonunion labor.

These are similar to the fixed costs of union avoidance in Lazear (1983). In

practice they may represent the legal costs of establishing a separate nonunion

subsidiary (referred to as "going double-breasted") or the risk of strikes or

violence. The initial distribution of union status is assumed exogenous.

     Once the union wage and the number of establishments in the union sector

have been set, union employment is demand-determined.    Employment will be less

than the number of union members unless full employment for its membership is the

only objective of the union (in which case unions are unlikely to exist). Union
                                                                                 4

members who do not get jobs covered by collective bargaining agreements either

work for nonunion contractors or drop out of the labor force. The market for

nonunion labor operates in textbook fashion, conditional on the union wage.

     In this simple model, declines in unionization result whenever the

profitability of operating under collective bargaining agreements falls. This

will happen when (1) the union-nonunion wage gap increases, (2) the union-

nonunion productivity gap decreases, or (3) the cost of switching from union to

nonunion construction decreases. Lacking any information on the last factor,

the focus here will be on changes in wage and productivity gaps. Before looking

at that evidence, I begin with the facts on trends in the share of construction

employees who say they are union members, focusing on data for the last twenty

years which have not been reported together previously. I also present the first

set of estimates of the percentage of union members working in nonunion

construction.



I. The Facts on Unionization in Construction

     Everyone affiliated with the construction industry knows that the market

share of union contractors has declined substantially over the last twenty

years. There is little consensus on the magnitude of the decline or the current

market share. For instance Robert Ceorgine, president of the Building and

Construction Trades Department of the AFL-CIO, claimed in 1981, "The percentage

of unionized construction is much higher than the 40% everyone talks about and is

higher than 50%" (Engineering News-Record, Nov. 5, 1981). On the other hand, the

Associated Builders and Contractors (ABC), an open shop trade association,

claimed a 20 percent market share for the open shop in 1969, a 30 percent share

in 1973, and a 65 percent share in 1983.    To get a more accurate picture of

the magnitude and the timing of the growth of the open shop, the percentage of
                                                                                  5

workers belonging to unions or covered by collective bargaining agreements for

various years between 1966 and 1984 is compiled in Table 1. A continuous source

of this information is the May Current Population Survey (CPS) public use tapes

for 1973 through 1981. Union membership status can also be ascertained for 1966

in the 1967 Survey of Economic Opportunity (SEa) and for 1970 in the March 1971

CPS. Coverage by collective bargaining agreements for all construction

contractors in the Expenditures for Employee Compensation (EEC) Surveys for

1968-72 were compiled by Freeman and Medoff (1979). These are supplemented in

Table 1 with results from special reports released by BLS between 1966 and 1971

on each two-digit construction industry. A question on collective bargaining

coverage is also available on the CPS since 1978. All of the data in Table 1 are

compiled from published sources except the May 1973-81 and 1983 CPS, which I

computed using CPS sampling weights to make them comparable to the published

data.

        The best series for making long-run comparisons is the union membership data

for all occupations. Between 1966 and 1973, there was little change in

unionization. Percentage unionized actually grew by 0.5 percentage points between

1966 and 1970, followed by a 2.5 percentage point drop between 1970 and 1973.

The evidence for construction workers (the term used by BLS to describeb1ue

collar workers in construction) over this period is more difficult to use for

comparisons over time, as the 1966 data exclude females and the 1970 data include

government workers. Union membership rates are lower for each of these groups

than for the rest of the sample. Patterns in the 1973-75 micro data indicate

that the construction worker estimate for 1966 is 0.2 percentage points too high

and the estimate for 1970 is 1.4 percentage points too low. Given these

adjustments, the data on unionization for construction workers follow the same
                                                                                 6


pattern as the data for all occupations- -no change between 1966 and 1970, and a

small drop between 1970 and 1973.

     The EEC data on collective bargaining coverage cannot be used to analyze

trends in the share of union contractors, but it is a useful independent source

of information on the size of the union sector in the late l960s and early

1970s. The estimates of collective bargaining coverage are much larger than

those for union membership in the same period. This is attributable to right to

work laws and the EEC questionnaire (which asks if a majority of an establish-

ment's production workers are covered by collective bargaining rather than for

the percentage covered). Whereas the exact influence of each of these factors

cannot be determined, the coverage estimates suggest that the employment share of

the union sector was between 50 and 55 percent of all construction workers during

this period. This is well within the range of estimates reported by Lewis (1963,

p. 250) for various years between 1939 and 1960, suggesting that the unionized

share of construction labor markets was quite stable until the early l970s.

     The employment share of the union sector continued to decline at a moderate

pace between 1973 and 1977. The percentage for workers in all occupations

dropped by 3.7 points; construction workers, 3.1 points.

     The big drops in the employment share for the union sector took place in

1977-78 and after 1981. The percentage of workers in all occupations who were

union members fell by 3.8 percentage points between May 1977 and 1978. It fell

by 4.5 percentage points for construction workers. Percentage unionized stayed

at this level in 1979 and 1980. The 1981 data indicate a 2 percentage point gain

in the employment share for all occupations and a 1.6 percentage point gain for

construction workers. These gains were wiped out within the next two years.

Between May 1981 and 1983 the union share for all occupations fell by 4.6

percentage points. It dropped 4.0 percentage points in 1984 and another 1.2
                                                                                   7

points in 1985. As a result, between 1966 and 1986 percentage union plummeted

19.4   percentage points, a 47 percent decline. Almost all of this decline took

place after 1973.

       The collective bargaining coverage estimates computed from the CPS for 1978

through 1986 tell basically the same story as the union membership estimates- -the

share of union contractors fell dramatically between 1981 and 1983. The gap

between the membership and coverage estimates seems also to have narrowed

considerably over this period.

       In summary, the facts about the decline in percentage unionized are:

       1.   The union sector never dominated the construction industry to the
            extent that its stoutest proponents and harshest critics have
            maintained. In the late 1960s and early 1970s the employment share of
            unionized contractors was about 50 to 55 percent of all construction
            workers, roughly the same as it has been since 1939.

       2.   A gradual decline in percentage unionized began after 1970 and
            continued through 1977. Over this period the proportion of union
            workers declined by 5 to 6 percentage points.

       3.   The sharpest drops in the proportion of union workers took place
            between May 1977 and May 1978 and between May 1981 and 1985. Whereas
            more than one of three employees in construction belonged to unions in
            1977, less than one of four were union members in 1986.

       Depressing as these figures may be for the building trades, there is even

more bad news. These calculations have ignored the supposedly growing proportion

of union members who work for nonunion contractors. Although this cannot be

documented as precisely as the proportion of workers belonging to unions, the

next section presents estimates of the importance of this factor.



II. Union Cards. Nonunion Jobs

       To estimate the proportion of union members working in the nonunion sector,

data from quarterly BLS reports on union wage rates for building trades were

merged into the CPS public use files for 1973 through 1981. BLS reports wages

(and benefits) for six skilled occupations (bricklayers, carpenters,
                                                                                     8

  electricians, painters, plasterers, and plumbers) and for building laborers for

 over one hundred cities. To make the merger of these data sets a manageable task

 and to impute union wages for those who do not work in those occupations or live

 in those cities, the following procedures
                                             were followed. Only the lowest wage in
 the six skilled occupations (usually
                                        painters) was merged into the CPS, along
 with the wage for laborers. For (1) persons living in SMSAs for which no BLS

 union wage data were reported, (2) those not living in SMSAs, and (3) those

 living in SMSAs not identified in the CPS, the lowest skilled wage and laborer

 wage across all SMSAs in their state (or region for persons whose state was not

 identified in the 1973-76 CPS) were merged into the CPS. In a few cases, union

 wage rates were unreported for laborers in a particular state. When this

 happened, operatives and laborers belonging to unions in that state were dropped

 from the sample.

      The proportion of union members working at less than union rates was then

calculated by comparing the self reported wage in the CPS to the union wage. The

union wage for skilled workers was assigned to craftsmen; the union wage for

laborers was assigned to operatives and laborers; half the union wage for

skilled workers was assigned to apprentices.

     Before presenting and discussing these estimates, a few comments about

sources of bias and measurement error are in order. In
                                                         making judgments about
how to merge union wage rates into the CPS, the tendency was always to produce a

downwardly biased estimate of the proportion of union members
                                                                receiving nonunion

wages. Workers in relatively high wage occupations, such as electricians and

plumbers, always have their CPS wage compared to a union wage from a relatively

low wage occupation. The union wage data are reported for July of the previous

year. This was done to offset variation across SMSAs in the timing of contract
                                                                                 9

negotiations and variable lags across SMSAs in reporting new agreements in the

seemingly more appropriate April survey.

     These judgments were intended to offset three potentially important and

unavoidable sources of upward bias. The first is reporting errors in union

status. Some nonunion workers will be mistakenly identified as union members,

and in most cases will be receiving wages below union scale. The other two

important sources arise from the lack of detail in the BLS union wage data. In

some areas lower wage rates are paid for skilled occupations in certain types of

construction, especially residential work. These are not reported by BLS and,

even if they were, could not be merged into the CPS because it does not report

type of construction. The other problem is that workers in some excluded

occupations, such as floor layers and terrazzo workers, have lower union wage

scales than workers in the six occupations reported by BLS.

     There are two additional sources of pure measurement error: errors in

reporting wages in the CPS and exclusion from the BLS union wage data of smaller

SMSAs and rural areas. Although the latter may seem at first glance to be a

source of upward bias, the use of multicounty and statewide bargaining units in

many states means that rates in rural areas can be equal to or near the highest

rates in that state. Even if the very lowest union rates in each state may not be

observed, assigning them to all rural workers would introduce additional downward

bias, the magnitude of which cannot be determined. As it turns out, the

proportion of union members receiving wages below union scale is lower in rural

areas and smaller SMSAs than in the larger SMSAs identified in the CPS in eight

out of the nine years in the sample.

     The magnitude of these biases (in percentage points) is assessed in detail

in the appendix and summarized below:
                                                                                10

     1.   Sources of upward bias
           A.   Errors in reporting union status        7.5
           B.   Lower rates in residential or other
                types of construction                   6.1
           C.   Trades with lowest wages excluded
                from BLS                                1.8
           D.   Total                                 15.4
     2.    Sources of downward bias
           A.   Union wage computed from lowest
                wage occupation                        -7.4
           B.   Union wage as of July 1 of previous
                year                                   -7.9
           C.   Total                                 -15.3
     3.    Total bias                                   0.1

These adjustment factors show that the estimates of the ratio of union members

working in the open shop are likely to be very close to the mark.

     The results in Table 2 show that in 1973 almost three of every ten union

members were working in the open shop. This proportion rose to 35 percent in

1979 and 1980, and rose dramatically again in 1981 to 46 percent. These

estimates suggest demand conditions play a strong role in determining whether

union members get jobs in the union sector. The proportion working in the open

shop rose during both the 1975 and 1979-81 downturns in construction activity.

Union members in the Northeast and Midwest are most likely to be working in the

open shop.

     How sensitive are these estimates to the procedures used in deriving them?

One way of determining this is to use 80, 90 or 110 percent of the imputed union

wage as the basis for comparison to the CPS wage. This produced the following

results for 1973-78 combined:

             Percentage of imputed union     Percentage of union members
                   wage from BLS                working in open shop


                     80                                 13.3
                     90                                 19.9
                    100                                 29.3
                    110                                 44.2
                                                                                11

 The estimate is clearly quite sensitive to the definition of the union wage.

However, even the smallest estimates show that a substantial proportion of union

members are not being paid union scale.

      Once adjustments are made for proportion working in the nonunion sector

the decline in unionization becomes larger in both absolute and relative terms.

Instead of the 5.4 percentage point and 12 percent proportional drop between 1973

and 1981 observed for union membership, there is now a 10.4 percentage point and

a 33 percent proportional drop in the share of workers who are union members

and are receiving union wages. As these calculations ignore the phenomenon of

nonunion workers covered by collective bargaining agreements, the true employment

share of union contractors is underestimated, although it is doubtful that this

has much effect on the trend.

     These figures provide a reasonably accurate picture of the market share for

union members. They have lost so much of the market to the open shop over the

last ten years that if this trend continues another five to ten years, they will

no longer be a significant factor in construction labor markets.



III. Structural Changes Within Construction

     One possible set of reasons for the decline in percentage unionized in

construction is changes in worker characteristics and changes in the mix and

location of construction projects. For instance, today workers are younger,

craftsman represent a smaller share of employment, and a higher proportion of

workers are women than ten years ago. All these factors would lead to lower

levels of unionization. There also have been important changes in the structure

of the industry. The Northeast now accounts for a smaller share of total

construction than it did ten years ago. Because of the Davis-Bacon Act and

prevailing wage laws covering construction for state and local governments, union
                                                                                12

 contractors have always been able to capture a large proportion of the

construction work done for governments. Government construction expenditures

have grown much less rapidly than private sector expenditures, so this could also

be an important factor in the decline of unionism in the industry. Although

there have been factors acting in the opposite direction to increase

unionization, such as a more educated work force and a rising share of

construction in the Pacific division, it is still possible that much of the

decrease in percentage unionized is attributable to such "exogenous" factors.

     To examine this possibility further, Table 3 reports annual estimates from

the CPS of the percentage of workers belonging to unions between 1973 and 1981 by

by region. There were 20 to 30 percent declines in unionization in every

region except the Midwest, where proportion unionized stayed at roughly the same

level throughout most of the period. This makes it unlikely that regional

shifts can explain much of the decline in unionism over this period.

     To expand the scope of the analysis beyond regional shifts, a linear

probability model of union membership was estimated over the 1973-1978 CPS.

The sample includes all occupational categories to account for trends in the use

of union foremen. The independent variables include age and its square; years of

schooling; dummy variables for occupation (8), two-digit industry (3), Census

division (8), race (2), sex, marital status (1), year (5), and SMSA status (2);

and the proportions of construction activity in each state of government,

maintenance and repair, single family home, apartment, retail, educational,

hospital, heavy, industrial, office, and highway construction. These market

share variables are included because percentage unionized varies greatly across

different types. of construction. Their coefficients should indicate how

variation in the type of construction affects unionization. To evaluate the

impact of changes in worker characteristics and changes in the mix and location
                                                                                 13

 of construction projects, the difference in the mean of each independent variable

between 1973 and 1981 (1972 and 1982 for the mix of construction variables) was

multiplied by its coefficient. The sum of these products represents the

predicted change in fraction unionized over this period.

       The results (summarized in Table 4 and reported in complete detail in

Appendix Table A) show that only two sets of "exogenous" factors contributed at

all to the decline in proportion unionized. Substitution of white collar for

blue collar labor resulted in a decline of 2.4 percentage points, and smaller

proportions of male and married workers resulted in a decline of 0.8 percentage

points. When all of the other factors--changes in labor quality, two-digit

industry, location and mix of construction- -are taken into account, the model

predicts an increase of 2.6 percentage points in unionization. The reason for

the predicted increase is •the 3.4 percentage point growth associated with changes

in the mix of construction, arising largely from the increased share of

maintenance and repair work. Because of the dubious magnitude of some of the

coefficients of the mix of construction variables, the model was also estimated

without them. The coefficients for the remaining variables changed very little.

The new model predicts a 1.1 percentage point decline in unionization, which is

very close to the prediction one would derive from Table 4 by ignoring the type

of construction variables.

       The key point of this analysis is that the structural hypothesis is

incapable of explaining the decline in unionization between 1973 and 1981.

Across all occupations, percentage unionized fell by 6.6 points. The models

predict either a 1.1 point drop or a 2.6 point increase. No more than 17 percent

(1.1    6.6) of the decline in unionization can be explained in terms of exogenous

factors. This explanation is unsatisfactory not only on statistical grounds but
                                                                                   14

also because it relies upon the dubious assumption that unions did not cause the

most important "exogenous" factor - -   substitution   of white for blue collar labor.



IV.   Changes in the Union-Nonunion Wage Gap
      Wage cuts and freezes have become commonplace in the construction industry.

For contracts signed in 1984, the average increase in wages over the life of the

contract was lower (1.0 percent) in construction than in any other major sector

of the economy. The most frequently stated rationale for these wage adjustments

is that they are necessary to preserve jobs in the union sector. This belief is

based on the premise that union wage rates grew so rapidly in the late 1960s and

the 1970s that the building trades in effect priced themselves out of the market.

      To examine this possibility, wage gap estimates for private wage and salary

workers were obtained from the May 1973-1981 and 1983 CPS using a variety of

specifications. The basic model regresses the log of the wage (or average hourly

earnings for those who are not paid by the hour) on age and its square,

schooling, and dummies for union membership, occupation, industry, region, race,

sex, marital status, and SMSA residence. It was estimated across all occupations

as well as across construction workers only. These estimates are supplemented in

Table 5 with estimates from Ashenfelter (1978) for 1967 from the SEO and 1973 and

1975 from the CPS. His model contains interaction terms with occupation,

industry, and union status in a model estimated across all occupations and

industries. Inclusion of Ashenfelter's 1973 and 1975 estimates is necessary to

make accurate comparisons of the wage gap between 1967 and later years.

      Ashenfelter's results show that the wage gap grew from 37.7 to 53.7 percent

between 1967 and 1973, and stayed at 53.7 percent in 1975. The wage gap

estimates in 1973 and 1975 are slightly higher (see column 4) when the equation

is estimated over a more restricted sample than Ashenfelter's (construction
                                                                                 15

 workers) in a specification without any interactions. In the years immediately

 after 1975, there is no trend in the wage gap estimates. The gap widened

 from 57 to 61 percent in 1976 and stayed at 60 percent in 1977 and 1978.

     The main finding in Table 5 is that the wage gap actually got smaller after

 1978. The gap fell to 43 percent in 1979 and remained no larger than 50 percent

 in 1980, 1981 and 1983. The reasons for this drop are not yet clear. Mellow

 (1982) reports similar drops in the wage gap in 1979 for all workers. One

possible reason could be differences between union and nonunion wage

responsiveness to the business cycle or inflation. Regardless of the reason, it

is impossible to use this evidence to claim that the wage gap continued to widen

after the mid-l970s. The results for all construction occupations in column 2

show the same pattern- -the wage gap was shrinking, not growing, in the late l97Os

and early 1980s.

     To examine the sensitivity of these results to the set of variables included

as controls, two additional specifications of the model were estimated: one from

which certain workers characteristics (age, schooling, race, sex, and marital

status) were dropped from the model and another from which all other control

variables (region, occupation, industry, and SMSA residence) were dropped. These

results are reported in columns 5 and 6 of Table 5. They show exactly the same

pattern as the wage gap estimates obtained when holding these factors constant.

     All of these estimates are based on the assumptions that no union members

work for nonunion contractors and no nonunion workers are employed by union

contractors. Collective bargaining coverage is reported by nonunion workers in

the 1978-1981 and 1983 CPS, allowing the construction of a new union variable

equal to one if the respondent is either a union member or works on a job covered

by collective bargaining. The coefficients for this new variable in column 7 are

about the same as those for the union membership variable over this period. To
                                                                                 16

examine the impact of the second assumption, another union variable was created

to be equal to one if the respondent was a union member and was receiving a wage

at or above union scale. Results for this variable in column 8 show a sustained

increase in the wage gap through 1977. However, after 1977 this set of wage gap

estimates also falls to values that are no greater than those for 1973.

     Another way to shed further light on this question is to estimate separate

models for each of the four major regions of the Uflited States. Table 3 showed

that the decline in percentage unionized was concentrated in the Northeast,

South, and West; the decline in the Midwest was much more modest. Accordingly,

if growth in the wage gap has been an important cause of the decline in unionism

in construction, the wage gap should either be growing less rapidly or shrinking

in the Midwest relative to the other three regions.

     Because of the decreased size of the data sets, the wage gap estimates by

region in Table 6 show greater year-to-year variability than those in Table 5.

To make comparisons over time within each region, the means for 1973-75 and

1980-83 are used rather than the values within each year. These results show

that the proportional reduction in the wage gap was greatest in the Northeast.

In 1973-75 the wage gap was largest in the Northeast; by 1979-81 it was

smallest. However, this cut in the wage gap did not prevent percentage unionized

in the Northeast from declining by a substantial amount. The wage gap changes

are roughly the same in the Midwest and West despite large differences in the

trend of unionization. Percentage unionized dropped by 12 points in the West; it

declined very little in the Midwest. This evidence makes it even more difficult

to believe that the decline in percentage unionized since 1973 was caused by a

widening wage gap.

     The above evidence ignores a potentially important source of labor cost

differences between union and nonunion contractors--employee benefits. Voluntary
                                                                                  17

benefits became a rising share of total compensation in the union sector between

1970 and 1980, rising from 11.5 percent of compensation (excluding mandatory

benefits) to 18.8 percent. As a result, wages and voluntary benefits under

collective bargaining increased at an 8.0 percent average annual rate in the

1970s, in contrast to the 7.1 percent rate for wages. Almost all of the growth

in benefits took place between 1970 and 1977.

       The impact of this growth in union benefits on the union-nonunion

compensation gap cannot be determined because there are no benefit data for the

nonunion sector. Even if benefits are nonexistent in the open shop, the growth

in union benefits only partially offsets, rather than overrides, the impact of

the post-1978 wage gap reduction on the compensation gap, as shown below:



          (1)               (2)            (3)          (4)                 (5)
                                                     Union wage
                                       Estimated     plus
       Union wage,   Union-nonunion    nonunion      voluntary    Union-nonunion
     journeymen      wage ration (from wage          benefits     compensation gap
Year (from BLS)      Table 11, col. 4) (1)   (2)     (from BLS)   (4)      (3)


1973      7.62             1.600          4.76          8.83            1.854

1974      8.14             1.555          5.25          9.59            1.826

1975      8.88             1.574          5.64         10.56            1.872

1976      9.48             1.611          5.88         11.43            1.942

1977     10.02             1.603          6.25         12.28            2.091

1978     10.61             1.595          6.65         13.07            1.965

1979     11.32             1.432          7.90         13.98            1.768

1980     12.21             1.504          8.12         15.05            1.854
                                                                                   18

V. Changes in the Union-Nonunion Productivity Gap

        Evidence in the early 1970s from both micro data on buildings in Allen

(1986) and state by industry aggregates in Allen (1984) shows that productivity

for union contractors is higher than productivity for nonunion contractors. This

productivity gap has been shown by Allen (1987) to be large enough in some cases

to offset the wage gap, making union contractors competitive in terms of unit

cost.

        Studies in other industries have shown that productivity gaps can change

considerably over fairly short periods of time. Freeman and Medoff report work

by Jonathan Leonard showing the productivity gap in manufacturing widened from 10

to 31 percent between 1972 and 1977. The productivity gap in bituminous coal

moved in the opposite direction. Connerton, Freeman, and Medoff (1983) find a 33

to 38 percent higher productivity in union mines in 1965. This advantage

evaporated by 1970 and turned into a productivity advantage for nonunion mines of

about 15 to 20 percent in 1975 and 1980.

        To determine whether similar changes have taken place in construction, the

1977 and 1982 Census of Construction Industries (CCI) were used to replicate the

results on state by two-digit industry aggregates in Allen (1984). Because

individual states are identified in the CPS starting in 1977, there are now 153

observations, one for each state, instead of the 81 observations used for the

1972 sample. Percentage unionized is obtained from the May 1977-78 CPS for the

1977 CCI and the May 1979-1981 CPS for the 1982 CCI. Wage equations estimated by

sex for nonunion workers were used to compute a labor quality variable for each

state by industry cell as in Allen (1984). The capital-labor ratio and employees

per establishment come from CCI. There is no control for the recentness of the

capital stock because net capital is not reported in the 1977 and 1982 CCI.

Exclusion of this variable from the model for the 1972 sample had no effect on
                                                                                 19

the key results, so it is quite unlikely that the absence of this variable will

make comparisons between 1972, 1977, and 1982 misleading. The model also

includes dummies for two-digit industry (2) and region (8).

     Two dependent variables are examined: value added per employee and value

added deflated by the Dodge Cost Index per employee. Because of the heavy weight

given to wage rates in the Dodge Index, there is a strong likelihood that the

deflated specification will produce a downwardly biased union coefficient. The

opposite bias is present in the undeflated specification to the extent that the

cost of higher union wage rates is passed on to owners of construction projects

in the form of higher prices rather than being absorbed by contractors in the

form of lower profits. While these biases make it difficult to infer the true

impact of unions on productivity from cross section data, they are irrelevant for

the purpose of examining the change in the impact of unions on productivity over

time. The same bias will be present in each specification in each year, making

the difference in the union coefficients between years in a given specification

an unbiased indicator of the change in the productivity gap.

     The union coefficients in both specifications in Table 7 fall substantially

between 1972 and 1982. Value added per employee was 39 percent higher in the

union sector in 1972, but only 21 percent higher in 1977 and 24 percent higher in

1982. In the deflated specification, the productivity gap estimate falls from 17

percent in 1971 to 8 percent in 1977 and 6 percent in 1982. The latter two

estimates are smaller than their standard errors. The decline in the union

coefficient between 1972 and 1982 is similar in both cases: .110 in the

undeflated specification and .099 in the deflated specifications.

    A number of other specifications of the model were examined to test the

sensitivity of this result. For instance, one possible explanation for the fall

in the union coefficient is the difference in the levels of aggregation across
                                                                                  20

the two samples. Many states had to be combined into regions in the 1972 sample

because they could not be identified in the 1973-75 CPS. If the coefficients

vary across different states, this could account not only for the drop in the

union coefficient but also for the changes in the capital-labor ratio, employees

per establishment, and the labor quality coefficients. In addition, the CPS

sample size for the smallest states may be so small in 1977-78 that there is more

measurement error in the union and labor quality variables in the 1977 sample.

Aggregation might then increase those coefficients.

     To see if aggregation was responsible for the difference in the results,

1977 and 1982 data for certain states were aggregated by region in the same way

as in the 1972 sample. This lowered the union coefficient (S.E.) in the 1977

sample to .148 (.080) in the undeflated specification and .051 (.076) in the

deflated specification. In 1982 the union coefficient (S.E.) was .050 (.134) in

the undeflated specification and - .011 (.119) in the deflated specification. All

other key coefficients were essentially unchanged in both years. Differences in

aggregation thus clearly are not responsible for the change in the union

coefficient becomes even more pronounced when the same aggregation scheme is used

in all three years. Results for 1982 indicate that the union-nonunion

productivity gap has vanished.

     Other aggregation methods that combined some of the smallest states (e.g.,

Vermont and New Hampshire) were also examined, but the basic results were

unaffected. Other tests for sensitivity involving different controls for labor

quality (average age and schooling instead of the predicted wage, no labor

quality variable), different assumptions about the average lifetime of capital

(10 or 20 years instead of 15) and a different union variable (collective

bargaining coverage instead of union membership) were also conducted. All of
                                                                                   21

 this evidence, available upon request, did not change the basic finding in Table

 7--the union productivity gap vanished between 1972 and 1982.

      What are the reasons for the drop in the productivity gap between 1972 and

 1982? There is no evidence that the negative effects of unionism on productivity

 became more pronounced. Neither strike activity nor the percentages of workers

 covered by agreements limiting or prohibiting subcontracting, limiting or

 regulating crew size, or restricting work by nonbargaining unit personnel changed

 over this period. The main sources of the union productivity advantage in the

 early 1970s seem to have been better training, better management, and economies

 in recruiting and screening provided by the union hiring hall. Possible changes

 in these factors will be examined in more detail.

      Except in a few large firms, there is no evidence of any change in training

practices over this period in the open shop. Surveys by Northrup (1984) show

that the share of open shop contractors relying mostly on informal on-the-job

training has not changed. Even the Business Roundtable's 1983 report on

construction industry productivity, usually critical of unionism, found fault

with open shop training practices:

     Less than 10 percent of those individuals completing construction craft
     training programs are being trained in open shop programs. In spite of the
     estimate that open shop contractors now perform 60 percent of all
     construction work.
     Less than 10 percent of all funds currently spent in training construction
     craftsmen are directed toward open shop programs.
     If the open shop sector of construction remains at the present level without
     a significant increase in open shop training, there could be long-term
     deterioration in the quality and productivity of the construction work
     force.
     Only in a few areas of the country is open shop construction training
     conducted at a level commensurate with the growth of open shop construction
     activity.


     There is only one reason to expect any increase in the average training of

workers in the nonunion sector- -the increased ratio of union members working in

open shop jobs. The unionization variable in Table 7 is based on union
                                                                                 22

membership, not on the share of union members working at union wages. One way to

adjust for the rising percentage of union workers employed in the nonunion sector

is to add an interaction term to the model between the union membership variable,

and the percentage of union members working at wages below union scale. This

allows the union coefficient to be a function of the proportion of union members

working in the open shop. One problem in implementing this approach is the small

number of union members in many state by industry cells, which would lead to

severe measurement error bias. To offset this, the proportion of union members

working in the open shop was calculated for each state rather than for each state

by industry cell. This proportion was included in the model directly along with

the interaction term.

     When all three sample years are pooled, the coefficient (S.E.) of the

interaction term is - .394 (.148) in the deflated specification. Based on this

finding, the increase in the percentage of union members working for nonunion

wages between 1973 and 1981 would result in a decline of the union coefficient of

.066. This accounts for over half the decline in the union coefficient in Table

7.

     This result is not as strong in other specifications. For instance, the

coefficient (S.E.) of the interaction term in the undeflated specification is a

much smaller -.225 (.170). Also, when proportion unionized is defined as the

share of construction workers in each state who are union members and are working

at union scale (and the interaction term and the ratio of union members working

in the open shop are dropped from the model), the union coefficient drops by more

than .3 between 1972 and 1982--a bigger decline than that reported in Table 7.

In summary, the increased proportion of union members working in the open

shop probably is partially responsible for the disappearance of the union
                                                                                 23

 productivity advantage, but the lack of robustness in the results using this

 variable suggests that other forces are at work.

      Another possible explanation of the disappearance of the union sector's

 productivity advantage is the increased experience open shop contractors have

 obtained in doing larger scale projects. The open shop initially was

 concentrated in residential and small commercial projects.
                                                              Many open shop
 contractors got their first experience with larger projects in the late l960s and

 early 1970s. If there is a learning curve in construction management, these

 contractors would have had much lower productivity initially than union

 contractors, even with access to the same skilled labor force.
                                                                   Eventually
the productivity gap would narrow as nonunion contractors gained experience in

larger projects. The validity of this argument cannot be tested empirically.

     A final possible explanation of the gap's disappearance is that the search

economies obtained from use of union hiring halls vanished in the face of high

unemployment rates. Unemployment rates in the construction industry rose from

10.3 percent in 1972 to 12.7 percent in 1977 and 20.0 percent in 1982. The

validity of this argument is also impossible to assess. The rise in unemployment

between 1972 and 1977 does not seem to be large enough to account for the drop in

the union coefficient over that period, but the massive unemployment observed in

1982 may have been enough to eliminate the search economies of hiring halls.

Northrup's surveys indicate that the reliance of open shop contractors on

informal contacts and advertising as hiring sources did not change over this

period.

     Regardless of the reasons for the decline in the productivity gap, it seems

quite clear that it was a major factor behind the reduction in
                                                                  percentage
unionized after 1973. Even though the wage gap did not change between 1973 and

1978, the reduced productivity gap gave owners and contractors tremendous
                                                                                 24

incentives to switch from union to nonunion labor. It also seems plausible that

the reduction in the wage gap in 1979 and later years could have been a response

to competitive pressures generated by the declining productivity gap.



VI. Conclusion

     There are five major empirical findings in this paper:

     1.     The proportion of construction workers belonging to unions has declined

from slightly less than one-half in 1966 to less than one-third in 1984. The

decline seems to have started after 1970 and continued at a very gradual rate

through 1977. The sharpest drops took place between May 1977 and May 1978 and

between May 1981 and 1985.

     2.     The market share of union contractors has declined to an even greater

extent than the percentage of union members because of the rising share of union

members who work for nonunion contractors. This share grew from 29 to 46 percent

between 1973 and 1981. While these estimates are highly sensitive to assumptions

about union wage rates, they suggest that the market share of union contractors

fell 10 percentage points between 1973 and 1981 and that only one out of five

construction workers today is a union member working for a union contractor.

     3.     The decline of unionism in construction is unrelated to changes in

worker characteristics and changes in the mix and location of construction

activity.

     4.     An important factor behind the initial decline in percentage unionized

is the growth in the union-nonunion wage gap between 1967 and 1973. However, the

gap did not widen any further after 1973 and actually has narrowed substantially

since 1978. Unless market adjustment lags are quite long, the declines in

percentage unionized since 1973 must have been caused by some other factors.
                                                                                 25

     5.   A key factor is the erosion of the productivity advantage of union

contractors, which dropped substantially between 1972 and 1977 and vanished

by 1982. This most likely resulted from the rising share of union members

working for nonunion contractors and the impact of high unemployment rates on the

search economies associated with union hiring halls.

     This paper has focused on two of the three forces predicted by the model to

determine levels of unionization. The third force- -changes in the cost of

switching from union to nonunion construction- -may also be quite important,

partly because of changes in pension regulations that make it quite expensive to

leave multiemployer pension plans, but mainly because of the growth in the

number of large union contractors that have gone double-breasted over the last

ten years. A crude estimate of the growth of double-breasting can be calculated

from Northrup's summary of the Engineering News -   Record's annual tabulations of
the 400 largest construction firms. Out of 731 firms surveyed for 1975, 57 (7.8

percent) were double-breasted. By 1980, 73 (18.2 percent) of the top 400

contractors were double-breasted.

     The reasons behind the growing share of double-breasted firms are not yet

clear. It may simply be a response to the changing wage and productivity gaps

described above. On the other hand, double-breasting can be viewed either as a

mechanism for diversification or as a legal innovation designed to meet the

letter, if not the spirit, of federal labor legislation. The open shop branch of

a double-breasted firm is supposed to be a separate concern, with its own

offices, management, and payroll. Unions have charged that in many cases these

distinctions are artificial and that the union contract legally applies to the

nonunion subsidiary. Legal outcomes depend on the evidence about the degree of

separation in operations between union and nonunion branches. It would be useful

in future work to examine this phenomenon more closely to see if double-breasting
                                                                                26

has done for unionization in construction what employer unfair labor practices

apparently have done to union organizing success in other industries.

     The results of this paper show that economic forces have played a

significant role in the decline of unionism in construction. Methodologically,

they point to the need to examine both wage and productivity (or cost or

profitability) evidence in analyzing the sources of changes in unionization over

time. A key reason behind the decline in the productivity advantage of union

contractors seems to be the rising share of union members working in the open

shop. This study has not addressed the issue of why more union members are

working in the open shop. It is quite rare to see an open shop contractor paying

higher wages than union contractors. Although it is possible that some union

members would seek nonunion jobs for other reasons (e.g. if they were dis-

satisfied with the union), the wage gap between union and nonunion jobs is so

large that it is hard to believe that voluntary mobility has been a key factor.

A stronger possibility is that the shortage of union jobs became more severe as

high interest rates and severe recessions shifted the demand curve for union

labor leftward in the late l970s and 1980s. In response union members took

nonunion jobs because they were the only jobs available.

     The findings of this study have an important implication for the future of

unionism in construction. Wage givebacks are not likely to help restore much of

the market share lost in recent years to the open shop. The productivity

advantage of union contractors has eroded to such a degree that the size of the

wage cuts needed to restore a balance between the wage and productivity gaps is

unlikely to be acceptable to rank and file. Instead, the focus of both union

leaders and unionized contractors must be on rebuilding the union productivity

advantage.
                                                                              27

Appendix


     This appendix summarizes the methods used to estimate the magnitude of the
sources of upward and downward bias in estimates of the percentage of union
members working in the open shop in Section II:

     1A. Freeman (1984) examined measurement error in union status by comparing
          employee and employer responses in the May 1977 CPS. He found that 7.5
          percent of persons claiming to be covered by collective bargaining
          worked for employers who claimed they were not.

     lB. The January 1981 Handbook of Wages and Benefits for Construction Unions
          published by the Department of Labor lists wages and estimated
          membership for most locals. The percentage of members covered by
          agreements offering less than the wage for building construction was
          calculated for five of the six skilled trades from which BLS union
          rates were taken as well as for laborers. The sixth skilled trade,
          plasterers, represented less than 1 percent of the CPS sample of
          union workers and was excluded for that reason. The results were as
          follows:


                   Bricklayers     2.9            Painters       2.1
                   Carpenters      5.0            Plumbers       1.1
                   Electricians    9.0            Laborers      10.6


The percentages for the five skilled trades were aggregated by their CPS union
employment shares into a single estimate of the percentage of skilled trades
workers covered by agreements offering lower rates than in building
construction. The average of this latter estimate and that for laborers was 6.1
percent, using the CPS union shares of all craftsmen and all operatives and
laborers as weights.

     1C. The Handbook reports three skilled trades for which average rates were
          below those of painters, who receive the lowest average wages of any of
          the six skilled trades. Members of the locals of these three trades
          (floor layers, marble setters, and terrazzo workers) account for 1.8
          percent of all skilled trades. No wage data were reported for workers
          in operative or unskilled occupations other than laborers (e.g.,
          oilers), so the 1.8 percent estimate was assumed to apply there also.

    2A. The imputed union wage rate for bricklayers, carpenters, cement masons,
         electricians, iron workers, operating engineers, plasterers, plumbers,
         roofers, and sheet metal workers was multiplied by the ratio of the
         average wage in that trade, as reported in the Handbook, to the average
         wage for painters. This adjusted union wage was then compared to the
         wage reported in the CPS to produce new estimates of the percentage
         working in the open shop. The results for 1973-1978 are:
                                                                                28


                                       Original                  Adj us ted
                                       percentage                percentage
                 Occupation            in open shop              in open shop

                 Brick masons                26.2                    32.0
                 Carpenters                  28.4                    31.4
                 Cement masons               41.7                    44.4
                 Cranemen                    25.0                    38.9
                 Electricians                18.5                    29.0
                 Excavating machine
                  operators                  34.6                    46.3
                 Painters                    40.9                    40.9
                 Plasterers                  25.8                    25.8
                 Plumbers                    19.5                    29.9
                 Roofers                     29.6                    31.0
                 Sheet metal workers         12.3                    33.6
                 Structural metal
                  workers                    12.8                    21.0
                 Total, above
                  occupations                25.7                    33.1


The increase in share of union members working the open shop arising from this
adjustment is 7.4 percentage points.


     2B. The average change in wages from July 1 in the previous year to May 1
          in the CPS survey year was estimated by prorating the monthly rate of
          change of average union wages between July 1 in the previous and July 1
          of the current year to the shorter ten month period. The imputed union
          wage was then multiplied by the estimated July to May rate of change in
          wages to get a new wage to compare to that reported in the CPS. The
          results for 1973-1978 are:


                              Original              Adj us ted
                              percentage            percentage
               Year           in open shop          in open shop

               1973                28.7                   36.9
               1974                27.9                   34.9
               1975                32.7                   42.7
               1976                28.7                   36.7
               1977                29.3                   35.4
               1978                28.9                   37 .   7
               Total               29. 3                  37.2



The increase in the share of union members working in the open shop arising from
this adjustment is 7.9 percentage points.

     Interactions between these different sources of bias have not been examined.
                                                                                   29

                                        References



Allen, Steven. "Unionized Construction Workers Are More Productive."
     Quarterly Journal of Economics 99 (1984): 251-274.

     ,       "Unionization
                      and Productivity in Office Building and School
     Construction." Industrial and Labor Relations Review 39 (1986): 187-201.

     ,       "Can Union Labor Ever Cost Less? Quarterly Journal of Economics 102
     (1987).

Ashenfelter, Orley. "Union Relative Wage Effects." In Econometric Contributions
     to Public Policy, edited by Richard Stone and William Peterson. London:
     MacMillan; New York: St. Martin's Press, 1978.

Connerton, Marguerite; Freeman, Richard; and Medoff, James. "Industrial
     Relations and Productivity: A Study of the U.S. Bituminous Coal Industry."
     Mimeographed. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University, 1983.

Dickens, William, and Leonard, Jonathon. "Accounting for the Decline in Union
     Membership, 1950-1980." Industrial and Labor Relations Review 38
     (1985): 323-334.

Farber, Henry. "The Extent of Unionization in the United States." In Challenges
     and Choices Facing American Labor, edited by Thomas Kochan. Cambridge,
     Mass.: MIT Press, 1985.

Freeman, Richard. "Longitudinal Analysis of the Effects of Trade Unions."
     Journal of Labor Economics 2 (1984): 1-26.

       ,  "Why Are Unions Faring Poorly in NLRB Representation Elections?" In
     Challenges and Choices Facing American Labor, edited by Thomas Kochan.
     Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1985.

         and Medoff, James. "New Estimates of Private Sector Unionism in the
         ,


     United States." Industrial and Labor Relations Review 32 (1979): 143-174.

         ,   and Medoff, James. What Do Unions Do? New York: Basic, 1984.

Lazear, Edward. "A Competitive Theory of Monopoly Unionism." American Economic
     Review 83 (1983): 631-643.

Lewis, H. Gregg. Unionism and Relative Wazes in the United States. Chicago:
     University of Chicago Press, 1963.

Mellow, Wesley. "Employer Size and Wages." Review of Economics and Statistics
     64 (1982): 495-501.

Mills, D. Quinn. Industrial Relations and Manpower in Construction. Cambridge,
     Mass.: MIT Press, 1972.
                                                                              30

Northrup, Herbert. Open Shop Construction Revisited. Philadelphia: University
     of Pennsylvania, 1984.

        ,   and Foster, Howard. Open Shop Construction. Philadelphia: University
    of Pennsylvania, 1975.
                                                                                         31


 Table 1. Percentage of private wage and salary workers in construction
           belonging to unions or covered by collective bargaining
           agreements, by occupation, 1966-1985


               Percentage union            Percentage covered by
                   members                 collective bargaining
                                                agreements
               All       Construction      All        Construction
 Year      occupations      workers     occupations      workers         Source
 1966        41.4          473a                                   1967 SEO
 1966                                                     45      EEC, SIC 15
1969                                                      61      EEC, SIC 17
1970        41.9           448b                                   March 1971 CPS
1971                                                      53      EEC, SIC 16
1968-72                                      53           60      EEC, all SICs
1973        39.4           44.4
1974        37.2           42.8
1975        37.0                                                  May 1974 CPS
                           42.6
1976        35.7                                                  May 1975 CPS
                           41.7
1977        35.7                                                  May 1976 CPS
                           41.1                                            CPS
1978        31.9
                                                                  May
                           36.6              37.5         42.7             CPS
1979        31.6                                                  May
                           37.5              36.9         43.3
1980        30.8                                                  May 1979 CPS
1981
                           37.4              34.8         41.9    May 1980 CPS
            32.8           39.0              38.9         44. 8

1983        28.2           32.0              30.7         34.6    May 1983 CPS
1983        27.5                             29.4                 1983 CPS, all months
1984        23.5                             24.8
1985        22.3                             23.6
1986        22.0                             23.4


aFemales excluded
blncludes government wage and salary workers
                                                                                            32




Table 2. Estintes of uniai nrket share in ccmstructiou, 1973-1981.

                            Percentage of uniai castruct1a workers
                               receiving less than the uniai wage
                                                                      Percentage w1 are
          Percentage                                                  unicti nthers ard
Year    imiai nithers       U.S.   NDrtheast   Midwest   South West   receive uniou wages


1973        44.4            28.9      32.2       32.1    28.3 22.5          31.6

1974        42.8            28.2      34.3      29.1     28.3 21.9          30.7

1975        42.6            33.1      37.4       39.9    36.2 15.4          28.5

1976        41.7            28.6      38.7       27.6    24.3 26.4          29.8

1977        41.1            29.0      40.9      27.1     31.8 21.0          29.2

1978        36.6            30.0      33.1       34.2    33.8 19.1          25.6

1979        37.5            34.9      49.9       35.5    24.8 29.5          24.4

1980        37.4            34.6      39.6       36.0    28.3 35.8          24.4

1981        39.0            45.6      52.7      48.4     40.6 40.2          21.2
                                                                              33

Table 3. Percentage of private wage and salary workers in construction
          belonging to unions, by occupational group, region, and year.


  Year          Northeast          Midwest          South          West


                               All occupations

  1973            47 .   2          46.2              24.4         54.8

  1974            44.4              47 .   1          21.7         54.2

  1975            43.3              50.9              23.9         44.3

  1976            42. 2             44.8              23.4         44.6

  1977            40.8              46 .   2          22.5         43.2

  1978            37.1              42 .   6          17. 8        42 .   3
  1979            36. 3             45.4              16 .   3     39.8

  1980            34.1              45.0             18.1          37.5

  1981            33.2              51.9             17 .    0     41.2

  1983            36.3              40.3             17.1          30 .   3


                             Construction workers

  1973            52.4              54.8             27.1          62.3

  1974            50.9              54.4             25 .    2     62.8

  1975            48.6              58.8             27.6          53.6

  1976            48.1              53.6             26.8          54.9

  1977            48.2              53.2             25.8          48.7

  1978            45.2              49.0             20.5          47.6

  1979            44.7              52.8             19.6          46.8

  1980            41.8              54.3             21.5          47.8

  1981            43.8              62.3             20.2         47.0

  1983            39.2              51.5             18 .    9     33.6
                                                                         34

Table 4. Decomposition of sources of change in unionization, 1973-1981



                                                      Effect on
                                                      percentage
                                                      unionized


    1.   Age and Schooling                               0.6

    2.   Occupation                                     -2.4

    3.   SIC                                             1.2

    4.   Census division and SMSA residence              0.6

    5.   Race, sex, marital status                      -0.8

    6.   Mix of construction activity within state       3.4

         Predicted change in unionization                2.6

         Actual change in unionization                  -6.6




Source: Appendix Table A
                                                                                                          35



 Table 5. tJriicn-nonunicn wage gap estImates, 1967-1981

 (1)   (2)          (3)          (4)            (5)              (6)         (7)                  (8)


                                                                                                 (4), adjusted
                   Ashenfelter, CPS,
       CPS, All
                                               (4), wItluit      (4),         (4), adjusted       for unicz
                   constructict  ccstructfrti persc*ial          sh1e         for collecti've     ninbers In
Year occupaticms workers         workers       characteristics   regress ic*i bargaining coverage xnuaicwi sector
1967                 37.7

1973    52.8        53.7          60.0          76.1             87.0                             68.0
1974    51.4                      55.0          67.7             82.2                             64.0
1975    54.8        53.7          57.4          70.4             83.7                             70.1
1976    54.8                      61.1          76.8             89.1                             76.1
1977    55.3                     60.3           75.9             86.4                             77.0
1978    55.0                     59.5           74.2             87.2          57.6               70.4
1979    41.5                     43.2           58,9             71.6          41.3               64.7
1980    47.2                     50.4          63.1              73.0          50.7              68.0
1981    38.8                     38.5                            61.6
                                               51.7                            41.3              57.8
1983    44.3                     45.8          59.7              64.0         44.8
                                                                             36




Table 6. Union-nonunion wage gap estimates for construction workers, by region,
          1973-1981

    Year      U.S.      Northeast      Midwest        South         West

     1973      60.0       67.5         61.0           56.0           56.4

     1974      55.0       57.1         52.8           59.8           42.6

     1975      57.4       59.8         54.5           57.4           50.4

     1976      61.1       46.1         72.3           57.1           57.4

     1977      60.3       58.6         62.2           61.6           53.6

     1978      59.5       53.7         58.4           57.9           62.9

     1979     43.2        42.6         39.4           53.6           46.1

     1980      50.4       53.9         45.6           54.3           47.2

     1981      38.5       26.6         59.7           40.8           30.7

     1983     45.6        44.5         45.8           40.1           50.6

Mean, 1973-75 57.5        61.5         56.1           57.7           49.8

Mean, 1980-83 44.8        41.7         50.4           45.1           42.8
                                                                                                                       37

 Table 7. Coefficients and standard errors of ccttstructicn Industry production fimcti

                                                                              Dependent variable:
                                                                                            1972             1977
                                                                                            'value added     value added
                                                  1972 value     1977 value 1982 value per employee          per employee
Independent           1972      1977      1982 added per         added per    added per       Dodge Cost       Dodge Cost
'variables:           nans      nans      means employee         employee     employee      Index            Index

log (K/L)             - .195     .261     .739     .253           .427         .307          .186              .319
                      (.696)   (.627)    (.520) (.046)           (.054)       (.047)        (.039)            (.045)
log (employees      2.472      2.387     2.429     .014           .168         .102          .030              .104
 per establishnEnt) (.636)     (.669)    (.685)   (.040)         (.035)       (.039)        (.033)            (.029)

Percent union          .374     .319      .300     .327           .191         .217          .160              .078
                      (.179)   (.208)    (.163)   (.070)         (.058)       (.095)        (.059)            (.049)
labor quality         1.366    1.599     1.936     .435          -.154         .064          .386             -.187
 factor               (.090)   (.093)    (.095)   (.201)         (.174)       (.263)        (.170)            (.145)

R2                                                 .915           .814         .726          .895              .794

N                                                  81             153



Note:       Each equation also contains an Intercept
            the ratio ofnet  to gross capital.
                                                       and   t industry   and eight   region diminies. The   1972   equations
                                                                                     38

Appendix Table A. Union membership equation coefficients and decomposition of sources of
unionization, 1973-1981.

                                                                                   Effect on
                                       Standard   Mean     Mean     Change         fraction
Variable              Coefficient       error     1973     1981     1973-81        unionized

1. Labor quality                                                                   .006

     Age                      .034      .002        35.7     35.1       -0.6   -   .020
    Age squared           -   .00035    .00002      1454     1396       -58        .020
    Schooling                 .0063     .0014       11.6     12.6       1.0        .006

2. Occupation                                                                  -   .024

     Professional         -   .410      .025        .021     .034       .013   - .005
     Managerial           -   .300      .016        .084     .108       .024   - .007
     Sales                -.460         .051        .002     .008       .006   - .003

     Clerical             -   .302      .022        .067     .089       .022   - .007

     Craftsmen                .022      .010        .555     .519   - .036     - .001

     Operatives               .085      .018        .050     .043   - .007     - .001
                          -   .005      .021        .031     .026   - .005           *
     Transport
     Service              -   .162      .052        .004     .005       .001         *

3. Industry                                                                        .012

     SIC 15               - .112        .017        .350     .262   -   .088       .010
     SIC 16               - .073        .018        .170     .134   -   .036       .003
     SIC 17               - .088        .016        .477     .483       .006   -   .001

4. Location                                                                        .006

    New England           - .329        .028        .060     .060       0            0
    Middle Atlantic       - .199        .025        .156     .115   - .041         .008
    E.N. Central          - .092        .021        .176     .164   - .012         .001
    W.N. Central          - .141        .020        .060     .077       .017   -   .002
    S. Atlantic           - .300        .016        .213     .179   - .034         .010
    E.S. Central          - .224        .023        .072     .061   - .011         .002
    W.S. Central          - .287        .018        .102     .150       .048   -   .014
    Mountain              - .065        .021        .060     .065       .005        *
     SMSA                     .082      .008        .674     .686       .012       .001
     SMSA missing             .020      .017

5. Demographics                                                                -   .008

     Black                -   .020      .014        .086     .068   - .018          *
     Other nonwhite           .009      .032        .011     .010   - .001          *
    Male                      .133      .021        .943     .914   - .029     -   .004
    Married, spouse
      present                 .069      .009        .741     .681   -   .060   -   .004
                                                                                           39
Table A (continued)


                                                                                   Effect on
                                      Standard      Mean      Mean      Change     fraction
Variable               Coefficient     error        1973      1981      1973-81    unionized
6. Construction niix
                                                                                       .034

     Goverruiient          .032        .139           .282      .198    -   .084   -
                                                                                       .003
     Maint., repair       1.566        .232           .110      .179        .069       .108
     Homes                 -   .020    .298           .217      .170    -
                                                                            .047       .001
     Apartments           1.775        .386           .094      .045    -   .049   -   .087
     Heavy                     .656    .276           .168      .198        .030       .020
     Retail               2.347        .698           .047      .054        .007       .016
     Education                 .807    .414                                 033
                                                      .063      .030    -          -
                                                                                       .027
     Hospital, inst.      -
                               .222    .463           .045      .045        0          0
     Industrial                .251    .337           .124      .135        .011       .003
     Office                    .078    .329           .076      .142        .066       .005
     Highway                   .198    .358           .076      .066    -   .010   -   .002
7. Year

     Intercept            -
                               .957    .279
     1974                 -    .017    .012
     1975                 -.034        .023
     1976                 -.046        .023
     1977                 -.037        .023
     1978                 -.067        .023

Predicted change
  in fraction unionized
                                                                                           .026

Actual change in
  fraction unionized                                                                   -   .066

    Note:        The regression equation was estimated over a sample of 15450 persons in
                 the May 1973-1978 Current Population Survey. The mean (S.D.) of the
                 dependent variable is .359 (.480). The summary statistics are standard
                 error, .423; F-ratio, 101.58; and R2, .225.
