NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FX MARKET METRICS:
NEW FINDINGS BASED ON CLS BANK SETTLEMENT DATA
Joel Hasbrouck
Richard M. Levich
Working Paper 23206
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23206

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2017

This paper reflects the views of the authors and should not be interpreted as reflecting the views
of CLS Bank International, New York University, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
We thank Rob Franolic, Dino Kos, and Irene Mustich for their assistance in obtaining data for
this study, discussing institutional background, and comments. We are also indebted to Carol
Osler, Angelo Ranaldo, and Andreas Schrimpf for comments on earlier drafts. We take
responsibility for all remaining errors.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w23206.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Joel Hasbrouck and Richard M. Levich. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

FX Market Metrics: New Findings Based on CLS Bank Settlement Data
Joel Hasbrouck and Richard M. Levich
NBER Working Paper No. 23206
March 2017
JEL No. F31,G12,G15,G23
ABSTRACT
Using a new and unique data set of foreign currency settlement instructions provided by CLS
Bank, we investigate activity and liquidity in the foreign exchange market. In the major currency
pairs, CLS settlement volume shares are similar to those reported in the BIS triennial surveys.
They are also similar to shares computed from EBS trade data reported by Mancini, Ranaldo and
Wrampelmeyer (2013)(MRW), but only for currency pairs that do not belong to the “UK
Commonwealth” pairs, for which EBS coverage is limited.
We estimate Amihud (2002) illiquidity ratios from CLS submissions and Olsen price records, and
examine the correlations between these ratios and price impact estimates based on high frequency
EBS data and reported by MRW. The correlation is 0.748, but with marginal statistical
significance and only when the commonwealth pairs are excluded from the analysis. When the
commonwealth pairs are included, the correlation drops to -0.130 (insignificant). We believe that,
as with the volume estimates, this reflects EBS’ limited coverage of the commonwealth currency
pairs. The common liquidity factor in our illiquidity ratios constructed from all major pairs is
highly correlated, however, with the factor based only on non-commonwealth pairs, suggesting
that liquidity factors constructed from EBS data may be good proxies for factors based on broader
samples.
Our data include numerical identifiers for counterparties to each trade which allows us to estimate
market concentration by currency pair. We find that trading is more concentrated (across
participants) in less actively traded currencies, which typically exhibit lower liquidity.

Joel Hasbrouck
Stern School of Business
New York University
Suite 9-190, MC 0268
44 West 4th Street
New York, NY 10012-1126
jhasbrou@stern.nyu.edu
Richard M. Levich
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West 4th Street
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
RLEVICH@STERN.NYU.EDU

I. Introduction and Motivation
The global foreign exchange (FX) market holds a pivotal place among financial
markets. Most international trade in goods and services as well as risk management of
international asset and liability positions depends on a liquid and efficiently functioning
currency market. With April 2013 global turnover estimated at $5.3 trillion daily, the global
FX market is acknowledged to be the world’s largest financial marketplace.1
Despite its size and importance, common liquidity and activity measures for the FX
market are difficult to track. The FX market is a geographically dispersed, broker-dealer
market. There are numerous platforms and means for executing currency transaction, and
yet, there is no central institution that records transaction data in real time or after the fact.
The Bank for International Settlements (BIS) Triennial Surveys provide the most
authoritative overview of FX market turnover – by currency, by country, by instrument, by
counterparty, by method of execution and other broad aggregate categories but only as a
snapshot every three years (Bank for International Settlements (2013)).
Over the last twenty years, a small literature has developed which investigates
patterns of FX market activity and liquidity based on trade-level data. The data derive from
diverse sources, such as proprietary data provided by dealing firms, regulatory data
collected by central banks, bilateral messaging systems, limit order markets, and various

$5.345T is the value reported in the BIS Triennial Survey for April 2013. An updated
survey for April 2016 has recently been released (Bank for International Settlements
(2016)). Moore, Schrimpf and Sushko (2016) discuss the 2016 figures, and the changes and
trends evident since 2013. As most of our data cover April 2013, however, most of our
references to the BIS data are to the 2013 release. It should be noted that the 2016 survey
contains a minor restatement of the 2013 data: $5.345T has been revised to $5.355T.
1

Page 4
aggregators/consolidators. Most recent studies of high-frequency FX trading, however, use
data from one of the two dominant electronic limit order markets: Reuters or EBS.
Among the studies based on EBS data, Chaboud, Chernenko and Wright (2007) use
one-minute time-aggregated volume and price data to document intraday volume patterns
for the EUR/USD and USD/JPY spot exchange market, and in addition, to examine price and
volume responses to macroeconomic news announcements. Mancini, Ranaldo and
Wrampelmeyer (2013) (MRW) utilize one-second time-aggregated data for nine currency
pairs. Their sample period 2007-09 allows the authors to analyze liquidity before and after
the Lehman Brothers bankruptcy, and also to identify a common factor that explains comovement in liquidity across the 9 currency pairs as well as liquidity in other principle
financial markets. Karnaukh, Ranaldo and Söderlind (2015) (KRS) use a longer sample of
EBS data covering January 2007 – May 2012 to estimate and explain time varying and
cross-sectional variation in FX liquidity. Like MRW, KRS find evidence of “significantly
stronger commonality in periods of market stress—as indicated by high FX and stock
market volatility, tight funding constraints (high TED spread), and losses of carry trade
portfolios.”2 Hagströmer and Menkveld (2016) study a sample of EBS data at 100millisecond intervals to characterize patterns of price discovery before and after the
January 15, 2015 revaluation of the Swiss franc.
While these studies reflect rigorous analysis and offer many useful insights, they
also harbor certain limitations. Firstly, although EBS claims to be “the recognized primary
KRS also analyze low frequency (LF) daily data over the same sample period and find that
liquidity measured with LF data co-moves with HF measures. See King, Osler and Rime
(2013) for a critical survey of the FX market microstructure literature and Berger, Chaboud
and Hjalmarsson (2009) for a review of the literature on FX volatility.
2

Page 5
source of global transactional spot FX market data,” it is not uniformly preeminent. King,
Osler and Rime (2012) note that, “EBS has long dominated interbank trading for the EUR,
JPY, and CHF, while Reuters dominates the GBP, AUD, CAD, and the Scandinavian
currencies.” Secondly, EBS and Reuters together constitute a small fraction of the overall FX
market, 15.0% of daily spot FX turnover by our estimate. Most spot FX transactions are
executed via other means such as single bank proprietary trading systems, multi-bank
proprietary trading systems, voice communication either directly with a dealer or
intermediated by a voice broker, and so on. Thirdly, EBS bids and offers are visible and
accessible only between participants who have established mutual credit arrangements.
They are not uniformly available across all EBS participants.3 While it is likely that most
large banks have mutually established arrangements, smaller banks may not be as wellconnected. This would limit their ability to compete as liquidity suppliers. Finally, although
MRW construct their data from individual messages, the commercially available EBS
datasets are time-aggregated and report only summary data on the trades within a given
window.4

The document EBS Dealing Rules – EBS Market Appendix notes, “Each Participant must
establish a relationship with its Counterparties, satisfy itself of the creditworthiness of its
Counterparties and extend credit to them as it sees fit. For a Match to be made in EBS
Market between two Participants, mutual credit must exist between those Participants. If
credit has not been established with or given by another Participant, or when credit given
by or to another Participant is exhausted, the prices submitted by each Participant will not
be Dealable prices for the other,” (EBS (2016)).
4 A product description from EBS (2012) summarizes the features of “Data Mine 2.0” as
follows: “One second time-slice; Best bid/offer with volume; Lowest given, highest paid;
Actual volumes.” A more detailed description of the EBS Data Mine Record Format (2011)
provides additional information about the nature of the data. As EBS (2011, p. 2) describes
it: “The Price Record lists the EBS Best prices at the end of a time-slice, and the Deal Record
lists the highest paid and the lowest given deal prices during the period of a time-slice.”
3

Page 6
The motivation for our research is to utilize a new database that seeks to overcome
some of these limitations and holds the possibility of offering new and/or more robust
insights regarding FX market conditions and liquidity based on high frequency data for a
larger sample of currency pairs. The new database comes from CLS Bank International (or
simply CLS Bank, or CLS) which operates a payment-versus-payment (PVP) settlement
service designed to mitigate settlement risk for the FX transactions of its settlement
members and their customers (known as third parties). Our data consist of submissions to
CLS that specify settlement instructions.
We estimate that CLS submissions cover about 37.2% of global spot FX turnover
considered in the 2013 BIS triennial survey (after adjusting the BIS figures for prime
brokerage). In contrast, EBS covers about 7.3%, while EBS and Reuters combined account
for 15.0%. Thus, CLS coverage of the market is substantially more comprehensive in terms
of value. Furthermore, CLS coverage is more extensive across major currency pairs than
EBS. In particular, CLS activity in the (UK) commonwealth currencies is much closer to the
2013 BIS figures. It is not the case, however, that settlement data are superior in all
respects. We find that due to limitations of timeliness and sequencing, the settlement

Thus, there seems to be no representation or assurance that the one second time slice
captures all trading activity within that interval. While EBS may provide an authoritative
close-up of FX market conditions among FX traders who post quotes and execute trades on
their platform, the EBS data appear to fall short of reporting a complete record of actual
consummated trade prices and amounts – even those executed on the EBS platform. A
more enhanced product (“Data Mine 5.0”) offers time-slices matching EBS Live, all bids and
offers (up to 10 levels of book) with volume, and other features – but not actual trade and
volume data. As of September 2012, Data Mine 5.0 was only available to current EBS
customers.

Page 7
instructions correspond only approximately to market transactions and quotes. Liquidity
measures based on the settlement data are therefore limited to estimates over broad time
windows.
This paper proceeds as follows. In the next section, we briefly describe CLS Bank
and its operations. Section III presents summary features of the settlement data. In
Section IV we discuss the BIS survey methodology, compare the coverage of BIS and CLS
samples, and perform a similar analysis for EBS data. Section V examines the properties of
the settlement network. In Section VI we augment the settlement data with bids and asks
(collected at a ten-second frequency), and discuss the extent to which settlements are likely
to correspond to market transactions. Section VII discusses Amihud liquidity measures. A
summary concludes the paper in Section VIII.
II. CLS Bank Operations
A foreign exchange settlement is the last stage of the trade process, and constitutes
irrevocable transfers (in opposing directions) of the two currencies. It is initiated when the
two parties to the transaction separately submit instructions that name each other as the
counterparty, and specify the terms of the settlement (the amounts of the two currencies
being exchanged, who is receiving which currency, and when the settlement is scheduled to
occur). When the details match, the transfers proceed.
A settlement is generally distinct from what might be considered, in other contexts,
a trade. An execution on an electronic platform, for example, would typically report price,
quantity, and a time stamp. The settlement instructions would also include counterparty
identifications, but would not identify the platform or any other attribute of the execution
process (such as the time stamp). There is another important distinction. Because many

Page 8
execution mechanisms, such as electronic limit order books or voice brokers, provide pretrade anonymity, the resulting trades are presumed to be arms-length transactions at
market prices. Settlements, however, are bilateral transfers, and the terms of the exchange
bear no necessary relation to current market prices. An exercise of an FX option, for
example, involves a transfer at the exercise price, not the current market price.
CLS Bank operates the largest FX settlement service. Developed and owned by a
consortium of major banks, it began operations in 2002, and is generally considered to be,
“the sole multi-currency settlement system of its kind, offering both liquidity savings and
settlement risk mitigation across all the major currencies, and the only one that operates
on a global basis across all the major currencies,” (Financial Stability Oversight Council
(2012)).5 It was originally formed to address Herstatt risk, a reference to a 1974 incident
of settlement failures in the US dollar/Deutschemark market that involved transfers
between entities in different time zones.6 Herstatt risk is pernicious not simply because of
the loss of principal (which in the global FX market could be substantial), but also because
of a systemic cascade effect should dealers withdraw from the market and be unwilling to
quote and trade with their normal counterparties.
As noted earlier, CLS Bank operates a payment-versus-payment (PVP) settlement
service which mitigates settlement risk in the FX transactions of its settlement members
and their customers. While the details of the entire system are complex, the general
The initials “CLS” denote “continuous linked settlement,” but the settlement procedure is
now generally characterized as “payment versus payment” (PVP). See CLS Group (2013).
6 On June 26, 1974, Herstatt Bank received Deutschemark settlement payments at its
offices in Cologne Germany, but was later that day closed down and forced to cease
operations by German banking regulators. It was thus unable to deliver US dollars to its
counterparties once US banks opened for business.
5

Page 9
principle is straightforward.7 Both counterparties independently submit to CLS Bank
detailed settlement instructions (“submissions”), which CLS then matches. On the agreedupon settlement date, during the settlement cycle window, CLS Bank receives currency A
from one counterparty and currency B from the other counterparty. Once both amounts
have been received and CLS has verified that all details match, CLS releases the funds and
pays out both counterparties. 8 Once settlement has been concluded, it is final and
irrevocable. If counterparty B fails to provide adequate funding, CLS suspends the failing
counterparty and takes remedial action to protect the full amount of counterparty A’s
principal, which avoids settlement risk.9 The transaction between A and B is left to settle in
some other manner.
Because of the complex nature of the actual CLS system – e.g. the need for a realtime gross settlements domestic payments system, the need for countries to accept the
legality of a foreign entity (CLS Bank) to deem a transaction final and irrevocable, and the
risk that CLS Bank accepts when dealing with counterparties – CLS is available only for a

For example, of transactions submitted to CLS, only those that are matched and not
rescinded will be settled, subject to satisfying certain risk tests. More detail on how CLS
works is available here: https://www.cls-group.com/About/CG/Pages/CorePrinciples.aspx
8 The FX market generally works on a “T+2” settlement schedule (or “T+1,” if both parties
are in North America). That is, when a spot trade occurs on day “T”, settlement instructions
are submitted to CLS contemporaneously, but these instructions specify that the transfer
should actually occur two days later. Forwards and far legs of swaps, of course, will have
varied settlement dates, and so will depart from this convention. The date-time stamps on
our data refer to the submission (of the settlement instructions).
9 The Allsopp Report, an influential document that prefigured CLS, refers to a “guaranteed
refund system,” wherein “counterparties are guaranteed that any settlement payment they
make will be cancelled or returned if their counterparties fail to pay what they owe,” (Bank
for International Settlements (1996)). This contrasts with the “guaranteed delivery
system” used in regulated futures and options markets, where counterparties post
collateral and a clearinghouse guarantees delivery.
7

Page 10
restricted set of eligible currencies, eligible products, and eligible counterparties or
members.
In April 2013, there were 17 CLS-eligible currencies including the major G-10
currencies plus the Korean won, South African rand, and others.10 Collectively, these 17
currencies accounted for 93.7% of global turnover in the 2013 BIS survey although this
overstates the potential reach of CLS because both currencies as well as both
counterparties in a trade must be CLS-eligible to settle in CLS. Levich and Packer (2015)
estimate that turnover among all pairs of the 17 CLS currencies measures 90.46% of global
turnover.
In April 2013, CLS settlement was available for spot FX trades, outright forward
contracts and FX swaps. Collectively, these three products accounted for 92.7% of global
turnover in the 2013 BIS survey. As of April 2013, CLS did not settle cross currency swaps
(representing 1.0% in the BIS Survey), however CLS added the initial and final notional
principal exchanges of cross currency swaps as CLS-eligible in November 2015. FX options
(representing the final 6.3% in the BIS survey) are a special case. The initial payment of an
FX option premium does not settle through CLS (the premium is simply a one-way payment
from the buyer to the seller). However, an option exercise is CLS eligible and appears as a
spot settlement when exercised. Section IV.A provides more detail.
Direct participation in CLS is limited to settlement member financial institutions (63
in number, as of April 2013). CLS also allows for indirect access. Third parties gain access
by contracting with a member acting as a Third Party Service Provider (TPSP). In effect,
The 17 currencies are listed in Table 2. Subsequently to our sample, in November 2015,
CLS added the Hungarian Forint.
10

Page 11
TPSPs act as gatekeepers to CLS, assume the risks of dealing with their third party clients,
and charge these clients for their services.11 Third party institutions can be commercial
banks, central banks, non-bank financial institutions, corporations and investment funds.
They may also be subsidiaries, affiliates, or other sub-units of settlement members. This is
significant because it precludes identifying any given member as a distinct and
independent economic agent. As of April 2013, there were over 9,000 third parties.
Although members and third parties have the right to submit eligible transactions for
settlement in CLS, they are under no obligation to do so. Bilateral settling (the accepted
practice prior to the start of CLS) is still an available option.12
III. Data and summary statistics.
Our data sample consists of all submissions to CLS during April, 2013 (to
correspond to the 2013 BIS survey of global FX turnover). Each record corresponds to one
settlement, but reflects submissions by both sides. By convention, the first member to
submit settlement instructions is designated as the “trading party,” and the currency they
are receiving as the “buy currency”; the later submitter is considered the counterparty, and
their received currency is the “sell currency”. There is no economic content to these
designations, however, as the essentials of the settlement would be identical if the

“TPSPs process all payment instructions and funding on behalf of their customers.” CLS
Third Party Evaluation Guide, August 2013, p. 3.
12 A CLS survey of their own settlement members reported that bilateral netting was used
to settle 25.8% of turnover even for trades involving CLS-eligible currencies (CLS Group
(2014)). Members may also elect other settlement methods such as on-us (when the
counterparty holds an account at the member’s financial institution), bilateral netting, or
other PVP systems. Given the risk mitigation advantages associated with using CLS and the
large number of member counterparties, it is unclear why counterparties select bilateral
settlement. See Kos and Levich (2016) for further discussion.
11

Page 12
designations were to be reversed. The two parties to the settlement are identified by Bank
Interchange Codes (BICs) that are encoded to ensure anonymity. The data are timestamped with one-second precision. Appendix A summarizes further details.13
Table 1 reports total sample counts and settlement values, categorized by CLS’
classification of instrument type. Spot settlements account for over 90% of all settlements
by number, but only approximately 25% by value. FX option exercises are imputed by CLS
based on an algorithm that identifies outlier prices.14
In most of what follows we concentrate on spot settlements. Table 2 reports shares
of turnover by currency. The dominant currencies are the USD, EUR, and JPY. The
percentages total to two hundred because each settlement has two sides/currencies. The
percentages are very close to the corresponding figures from the BIS 2013 survey reported
for comparison purposes in the last column. (Section IV presents a more thorough
reconciliation.)
The Table 2 percentages summarize the overall importance of a given currency, but
there is substantial variation across counterparty currencies. To illuminate this variation,
Table 3 reports for each currency, the relative occurrence (by value) of currencies on the
Each record reports the time when CLS accepted the submission of the trading party, the
accept time of the counterparty’s submission, and the time when the instructions were
matched. Because the trading party is designated when the first submission is processed, it
is the earliest. It is therefore closest in time to the trade or similar event that motivated the
settlement. References to “time” in this paper accordingly denote the trading party accept
times. Submissions are generally processed continuously, on arrival. In our sample,
however, each day generally contains one interval of three or four minutes where
submissions are queued and the accept times are batched. We estimate that this affects
about 0.4% of the observations. Data from 2016 onwards do not contain queued intervals.
14 FX swaps by definition involve a paired near and far leg. The near- and far-leg counts in
Table 1 are very close, but not exactly equal. We believe that the difference is due to minor
timing discrepancies in the database extraction of our sample.
13

Page 13
other side of the settlement. The percentages sum to one hundred across each row. For
example, the first row corresponds to the AUD: relative to the total value of all settlements
that have the AUD on one side, 77.8% (by value) have the USD on the other side.
Table 3 confirms that while the USD is usually the dominant contra currency, there
are some notable exceptions. Its share is relative small for the Nordic currencies (DKK,
NOK, SEK), each of which is much more likely to be exchanged for EUR. In many currencies
(CAD, HKD, ILS, KRW, SGD, ZAR) the entry in the USD column exceeds ninety percent. This
may reflect the use of the USD as a vehicle currency: if a currency pair has no established
market, each may be converted to/from USD as an intermediate step. The KRW is an
extreme case in that all of the settlements involve the USD on the other side.
Table 4 reports for each currency the distribution of settlement values. That is, each
time a given currency appears on one side of a settlement, we include the value of the
settlement. (The total number of observations is therefore twice the number of
settlements.) Across all currencies, the median settlement size is slightly under one million
USD equivalent, but there are notable extreme values. On the low end, with the exception of
the KRW, all currencies have at least one settlement valued at under one dollar. We
conjecture that these reflect transfers that have been set up to verify trading or settlement
processes. Even at the 25th percentile of the distribution, however, the sizes are generally
substantially smaller than the traditional minimum size on the interdealer platforms.
Chaboud, Hjalmarsson, Vega and Chiquoine (2009) note, for example, that the minimum
size on EBS over their 2003-2007 sample is one million units of the base currency
(generally EUR, GBP or USD). This suggests that the sample of participants and trades is
somewhat broader than the usual electronic platforms.

Page 14
At the other extreme, the largest settlements in many currencies exceed one billion
USD. We surmise that these flows do not arise from trades on the usual execution
platforms, but may instead reflect pre-arranged transfers related to securities flotations,
foreign acquisitions, or repatriation of funds.
Settlement instructions can be submitted at any time, but submissions received over
a weekend are queued until Sunday afternoon. Most activity is concentrated on weekdays,
and is further concentrated within the day in local RTGS (real-time gross settlement)
banking hours for at least one of the counterparties. (This is not a formal convention,
however, as CLS submissions do not require RTGS systems.) Figure 1 presents histograms
of settlement value by submission date, for currencies grouped according to geographic
region. (Dates are based on Central European Time.) The plots exhibit no discernible dayof-week patterns, but given the short length of the sample, a pattern would have to be very
strong to be detectible.
Figure 2 depicts histograms of values submitted for settlement by time of day (CET).
EUR and European non-EUR submissions are concentrated 9:00-17:00 CET. CAD and MXN
settlements peak roughly 15:00-17:00 CET, which corresponds to morning in the Western
hemisphere, but exhibit substantial activity later. The time distributions of USD and AsiaPacific currencies are distinctly trimodal.
We will subsequently consider other features of the CLS data that characterize
liquidity and settlement patterns between members. As earlier mentioned, however, one
important purpose of this analysis is to place the settlement data in the context of other
measures of the FX market. We turn to this in the next section.

Page 15
IV. Reconciliation and comparison of the CLS settlement data with other sources
BIS turnover estimates, EBS executions, and CLS settlements are all measures of
flow in the FX market, but they differ markedly in coverage and construction. In this
section, we survey these measures, and discuss agreements and discrepancies. We start
with the BIS survey figures, which we believe are the most comprehensive, and then turn to
CLS and EBS figures.
A. Comparison with BIS turnover.
In its capacity as a “bank to central banks,” the Bank for International Settlements
has organized a survey of global foreign exchange market turnover since 1989. 15 The first
three surveys were limited to the foreign exchange markets and from 1998 thereon, both
the foreign exchange and the derivatives markets have been surveyed. The survey design
relies on participating central banks, which collect data from banks and dealers in their
jurisdiction and calculate aggregate national results. These data are provided to the BIS
which compiles global aggregates. The April 2013 survey included 53 central banks and
other authorities who in turn collected data from about 1,300 banks and other dealers in
their jurisdictions. The BIS surveys turnover in 5 categories: spot, outright forward, FX
swaps, currency swaps, and FX options. In addition, the BIS requests information as to how
the trade was executed (e.g. voice or electronic platforms), the type of counterparty (e.g.
other reporting dealer, non-financial institution, retail, etc.), the location of the
counterparty (local or cross-border), the tenor of the forward contract or swap, and
whether the transaction was facilitated using prime brokerage, along with sub-categories

15

From the BIS mission statement at http://www.bis.org/about/mission.htm

Page 16
of many descriptors. The survey is conducted in April to minimize the impact of national
holidays and end-of-quarter transactions which could distort the results.
The gross totals in the BIS survey data simply aggregate the reported trades. In
these gross data, a transaction between a reporting bank and a non-reporting entity is
reported once. For example, if Citibank (New York) pays USD and receives EUR from a
retail customer or a mutual fund, there is one trade report (from Citibank). When both
sides of the exchange are reporting banks, however, there will be two reports. For
example, if Citibank (New York) receives 10M EUR from, and pays 12M USD to, Wells Fargo
Bank (San Francisco), both banks include the trade in their survey responses. To correct for
this, the BIS subtracts from the gross turnover one-half of the value of trades between
reporting banks. The correction is made in two stages. “Gross-net” turnover reflects
corrections for trades between reporting banks in the same survey jurisdiction (as in the
Citibank/Wells Fargo example). “Net-net” turnover additionally includes a correction for
reporting banks in different survey jurisdictions. For example, if Citibank (New York)
receives 10M EUR from, and pays 12M USD to, the Royal Bank of Scotland (London), the
trade is included in Citibank’s survey response to the Federal Reserve Bank, and also in
RBS’ response to the Bank of England.
In the examples above, all parties to the trades are acting on their own behalf. There
is also a large and growing usage of prime brokerage agreements, wherein one institution
(usually a major bank) acts as a broker, facilitating trades on behalf of another (such as an

Page 17
institutional fund, hedge fund or other proprietary trading firm).16 For example, access to
EBS was originally restricted to the member banks belonging to the consortium that
developed it. Nowadays, under prime brokerage arrangements, other institutions can trade
on EBS through the sponsorship of a member, with the member essentially guaranteeing
the trade. This has altered the structure of the FX market, transforming what was strictly
an interdealer market into one with more direct customer participation.
Suppose that hedge fund A trades with Wells Fargo, and A is using Citi as the prime
broker. There are several ways of characterizing the prime brokerage. One perspective (the
“one-trade” view) is that A has essentially done a trade with Wells Fargo, and that Citi’s role
is incidental, becoming substantial only if A were to default on settlement of the trade. The
“two trade” perspective imputes two exchanges: Citi’s with Wells Fargo, and A’s with Citi.
The one-trade interpretation emphasizes the ultimate counterparties to the trade. The twotrade view focuses on the exposures to counterparty risk: A vs. Citi and Citi vs. Wells
Fargo.17

The 2013 BIS survey instructions specified reporting conventions for prime brokered
trades: “Prime brokers are defined as institutions (usually large and highly -rated banks)
facilitating trades for their clients (often institutional funds, hedge funds and other
proprietary trading firms). Prime brokers enable their clients to conduct trades, subject to
credit limits, with a group of predetermined third-party banks in the prime broker’s name,”
(Bank for International Settlements (2012)).
17 Neither perspective has an obvious and exclusive claim to validity. In fact, the question
of how to characterize the role of broker/dealer intermediaries arises in other markets,
and both of the above views appear in different contexts. In US securities markets, for
example, an agency trade (that is, one conducted by a broker on behalf of a customer) is
conventionally reported once. Nevertheless FINRA rules also allow for two reports in
“riskless principal trades,” as when, for example, a broker buys securities in a market and
simultaneously sells them to a customer. Even when two reports are submitted, however,
only one is considered a “tape” report, and included in the usual trading volume statistics
(see FINRA’s “Trade Reporting Frequently Asked Questions,” FINRA (2015)).
16

Page 18
While we do not definitively favor one perspective or the other, we must attempt to
ensure that similar conventions apply when making comparisons across different data
sources. The CLS settlement data report a prime-brokered settlement once, as occurring
between the ultimate counterparties. The BIS survey instructions, on the other hand,
specify that when a reporting bank is acting as a prime broker it must report both legs of
the transaction as two separate deals (allocating them by instrument, currency and
counterparty). In addition, both legs are included in a turnover subtotal labeled “of which
prime brokered,” (o/wPB).
To estimate single-counted turnover in the BIS data we subtract one-half of the
o/wPB from the net-net turnover. The following example illustrates the intuition. Suppose
that (hedge fund) A trades one unit with (proprietary trader) B; A uses Citi as a prime
broker and B uses RBS. From the BIS survey perspective, the trade can be diagramed as
. Citi reports both legs, as “2 units, o/w 2 are prime brokered.”
Similarly RBS reports “2 units o/w 2 are prime brokered,” for a total gross-gross turnover
of 4 units, o/w 4 are prime brokered. The double counting of the

trade is

corrected, leaving net-net turnover of 3 units. Subtracting one-half the o/wPB leaves
, the correct single-counted volume.18, 19

This example is straightforward only because we have focused on one particular trade. In
discussions, BIS personnel have told us that the adjustment cannot be relied upon for
correcting the aggregate numbers, particular for trades in which only one side is prime
brokered.
19 BIS turnover figures also include transactions between related parties, defined in the
2013 survey instructions as, “trades between desks and offices, and trades with their own
branches and subsidiaries and between affiliated firms,” (Bank for International
Settlements (2012)). Transfers in which a bank “passes the book” between desks in
18

Page 19
The BIS turnover figures are stated on a per (business) day basis, wherein the total
over April for a given reporting area is divided by the number of official business days in
the same reporting area. We cannot implement this calculation for the CLS figures because
we do not know the locations of our settlement parties. The CLS settlement volume is
highly concentrated on twenty-two days, however, and we therefore divide the totals by 22
to arrive at per day estimates.
BIS and CLS both classify trades/settlements according to instrument type. Three of
the categories in principle agree: spot, outright forwards, and FX swaps (far leg). CLS also
reports the near legs of FX settlements, but the BIS survey asks reporting banks to include
only far legs.
Both BIS and CLS have a category labeled “options”, but the classification differs
significantly between the two entities. In the BIS survey, reporting dealers are requested to
provide information on turnover for over-the-counter (OTC) FX options. In practice, this
implies options that are created de novo rather than exchange traded options that are
created once and then bought and sold in a public market. More specifically, reporting
dealers are asked to report the notional amount of the option implying that a call option on

different time zones, for example, would appear to fall in this category. It is difficult to
generalize about the extent to which these events constitute substantive legal and
economic transfers of ownership, but few would require that the transfer be finalized by
any settlement. The BIS tabulations do not break down these transfers by instrument, so
we cannot impute an adjustment to spot turnover estimates, but the size of such an
adjustment might well be large. The survey reports related party transactions across all
instruments for April 2013 as $817,995 million (per day, USD equivalent), or roughly 15%
of the $5,344,549 million total turnover.

Page 20
10M EUR is reported as 10M EUR volume regardless of the strike price or tenor of the
contract. At the same time, the BIS asks reporting dealers to exclude option exercise as part
of spot FX trading activity. The rationale could be that option exercise reflects a contract
that was struck earlier (possibly prior to the April 2013 survey period) and the BIS survey
is intended to gauge current market conditions and activities. In the CLS submissions,
option settlements arise from option exercises. These are identified by a CLS classification
algorithm that flags outliers, that is, settlements occurring at implied rates that differ
substantially from current market rates and presumably reflect the exercise of in-themoney options.
Table 5 reports BIS turnover for the spot, forward, and swap categories (line 1). The
next lines contain the corresponding BIS “of which Prime Brokered” figures (line 2), the
implied turnover net of the prime broker adjustment (line 3), the average daily CLS
settlement volume (line 4), and the ratio of CLS volume to BIS volume.
In the spot category, CLS settlement volume extends to 37.2% of BIS spot turnover,
slightly over one-third. Although the CLS/BIS spot coverage might initially appear low, the
two sources are focusing on different market segments. The BIS turnover includes large
components representing reporting banks’ transactions directly with customers, including
retail and institutions that do not use prime broker arrangements. In the other two
categories, the CLS market share of swaps is comparable to that of spot trades, while the
share of outright forwards is substantially smaller.20

The 2013 BIS survey estimates that other reporting dealers are the counterparties for
33.0% of the spot turnover, but only 26.7% of outright forward turnover. Thus, outright
forwards may be relatively underrepresented in the settlement data.
20

Page 21
B. Comparison with overall EBS and Reuters trade volumes
EBS and Reuters report monthly averages of daily spot volume on their websites.
For EBS, the average daily volume for April 2013, $128,300 M, is indicated in Table 5 (line
6). This constitutes about 7.3% of BIS turnover net of PB (line 7). Comparison with line 5
suggests that CLS appears to cover about five times as much activity as EBS. Reuters daily
average spot turnover for the month is $133,000M (line 8). This figure reflects all Reuters
electronic systems (including Reuters Matching and FXall). The sum of EBS and Reuters
turnover accounts for 15.0% of BIS net of PB; CLS turnover is about two-and-a-half times as
large.21
C. Cross-currency comparisons with EBS
Mancini, Ranaldo and Wrampelmeyer (2013) (MRW) report (in the internet
appendix) average daily EBS trade counts for nine major currency pairs. The subsample in
their data that most closely corresponds to a BIS survey is mid-September 2008 to
December 2009 (“post-Lehman”). A triennial BIS survey was conducted in 2010.

The BIS survey classifies turnover according to execution method. In these statistics, EBS
and Reuters are combined into one category (“Reuters Matching/EBS”, a subcategory of
“electronic, indirect” turnover. The reported average daily turnover in this category is
$313,118M, a value substantially greater than $261,000M total based on the markets’ selfreported figures. We believe that the discrepancy is largely due to prime brokerage: the
markets’ own figures would report only execution volume conducted on their systems,
implying a single-counting of trades. The BIS survey instructions state that for primebrokered trades conducted on indirect electronic systems, both legs of the trade should be
counted. Interestingly, the BIS numbers (inclusive of both legs) imply that the Reuters/EBS
share of spot turnover is $313,118M/$2,046,158M=15.3%, which is very close to the
15.0% reported in Table 5.
21

Page 22
Table 6 reports activity measures for the nine MRW currency pairs, derived from
the 2013 and 2010 BIS surveys, CLS and MRW. The left side of the table reports average
daily flows; the right side of the table reports the corresponding percentage shares across
currency pairs.
The BIS turnover figures in columns (1) and (2) are stated on a “gross-gross” basis:
both sides of the trade are reported and there is no adjustment for prime brokerage. The
CLS settlement volumes are similarly reported. (The total of $1,101B (column 3) is slightly
less than twice the $650,480M reported in Table 2 due to activity in other currency pairs.)
Column (4) reports the number of CLS settlement sides (twice the number of settlements).
Column (5) contains the EBS figures reported by MRW.
Of particular interest are the market shares across currencies. The CLS percentages
for both number of settlements and turnover approximate the BIS 2013 survey turnover
percentages. A comparison of the 2008-9 EBS and 2013 CLS percentages, though, displays
differences that are consistent with prior beliefs and assumptions. Specifically, the EBS
share is markedly lower in commonwealth pairs: 1.2% (EBS) vs. 9.8% (CLS) for the
AUD/USD; 1.4% vs. 8.8% for the GBP/USD; and 0.6% vs. 5.3% for the USD/CAD.
Presumably, the flow that goes through CLS, but not EBS, in these pairs is accounted for by
other execution methods or venues (such as Reuters).22

The totals in the bottom row of Table 6 are consistent with estimates presented earlier. If
one settlement corresponds to one trade, an appropriate comparison would be
CLS settlements vs. 50,217 EBS trades. The two numbers come from
different time periods, however. We adjust for this as follows. Using figures reported on
the EBS website, the average daily turnover over the approximate MRW sample (October
2008 through December 2009) is $143.2B. The April 2013 EBS figure of $128.3B
22

Page 23
V. Activity by BIC
In this section we consider the structure of the FX market in terms of settlement
activity between particular counterparties. Each participant in the CLS system is identified
by a Bank Interchange Code (BIC). The BICs in our sample are anonymized so that while we
can trace the activity of a particular participant, we do not know its true identity.
The correspondence between BICs and distinct economic or legal entities is inexact.
As noted earlier, direct access to the CLS system is limited to settlement members, but
many more entities use CLS as third-parties. A third-party might be separate from any
settlement member, but might also be a subsidiary or affiliate of a settlement member.
Table 7 summarizes the distribution of trading activity across BICs by number of
sides (Panel A) and USD value (Panel B). All statistics (except the number of observations)
are reported on a per [business] day basis.
There are 7,267 distinct BICs in the sample of spot settlements. The first row of
Panel A reflects all BICs that had at least one submission over the month. Most of these
have low activity: the representative BIC at the 90th percentile has only 1.86 submissions
per day. The remaining rows of the table reflect subsamples constructed by currency. For
example, a BIC is included in the AUD row if it had at least one side denominated in AUD
over the month. Also, the settlement activity (number or value of sides) in the row reflects

constitutes roughly a
change, in moving from the early period to the later. Applying
this adjustment to the 2008-9 EBS numbers gives an imputed April 2013 value of
. The imputed ratio of EBS trades to CLS settlements is
. From Table 5, the ratio of CLS settlement volume to EBS trade volume is
.

Page 24
only activity in the AUD. (Note that this differs from the subsampling for sides in other
tables.)
The most active currencies by trading volume are generally characterized by larger
numbers of BICs, especially the USD and EUR. In almost all currencies, the distribution of
activity reflects a large number of low-activity BICs. The KRW is a notable exception in that
virtually all of its activity is confined to a small number of large BICs.
Table 8 reports the distribution (across BICs) of the number of counterparties (that
is, other BICs).23 The first row of Table 8 summarizes settlement links across all currencies.
The classic hub and spoke interdealer network arises when a very small number of dealers
are mutually linked, but each peripheral customer is linked to one or two dealers. The EBS
interdealer platform, for example, started as a consortium of 13 dealers. Viewed in these
terms, the CLS network is more comprehensive. The representative BIC at the 99th
percentile of the degree centrality distribution has 107 counterparties.
The rows in Table 8 below the first correspond to individual currencies. The sample
in a given row essentially reflects the sub-network of BICs that had at least one submission
in which the indicated currency appeared on one side. Although these currency networks
are smaller than the larger settlement network, they are in one sense better connected. For
example, the 95th percentile of the full network is 15 settlement parties. The corresponding
percentiles for the individual currency networks are uniformly higher.

In terms of network formalities, each BIC may be viewed as a node, and we impute an
edge (link) between two BICs if there is at least one settlement between them. The number
of counterparties is then equivalent to the degree centrality of the node (Newman (2010)).
23

Page 25
VI. Settlements and market prices.
Since most settlements occur in connection with trades, it might be supposed that
there is a correspondence between settlement prices and market quotes. While this
correspondence is broadly valid, there are also some significant differences. In the first
place, the trades being settled are not necessarily arms-length transactions at market rates
(as in the case of FX option exercises, discussed earlier).
The trading and settlement processes also place different priority on timeliness. In a
trading system (a limit order book, for example), trades are important informational
events. Users generally expect that price and quantity will be reported promptly (presently,
within microseconds). In settlement, on the other hand, while accuracy of price, quantity,
buyer identity and seller identity are important, promptness can be satisfied in seconds,
minutes, or longer. In balancing the conflicting goals of speed and accuracy, trade reporting
favors the former, while settlement favors the latter.
To investigate the relation between market and settlement activity, we supplement
the CLS data with Olsen quotes for April 2013. Olsen Financial Technologies, a commercial
data provider (olsendata.com), has compiled historical bid and ask data for major currency
pairs. Their data derive from consolidators such as Reuters, Knight Ridder, GTIS and
Tenfore. Our data are constructed over ten-second intervals, and within each interval Olsen
supplies the first new bid-ask pair. In practice, these observations are close to the start of
the interval: the lag relative to the start of the interval had sample median of 0.46 seconds
and a 90th percentile of 2.51 seconds. While the CLS data cover twenty-two days in April
2013, the Olsen data are only available for twenty-one days.

Page 26
We view these as indicative prices. They are not necessarily firm (available for
immediate execution) nor are they necessarily the best bid and offer available to any
participant. The Olsen data we use correspond to a subset of the CLS sample. There are ten
Olsen currencies (vs. seventeen CLS currencies); and thirteen Olsen pairs (vs. seventy-five
CLS pairs). The Olsen sample is concentrated in the major trading pairs, however, and so
approximately eighty-seven percent of the CLS spot trades occur in an Olsen pair.
For each Olsen currency pair, Table 9 reports the sample average of the bid-ask
midpoint and distributional statistics on the bid-ask spread. The smallest observed spread
is indicative of the tick size (pip): 0.001 when JPY is quote currency, and 0.00001
otherwise.
For purposes of illustration, Figure 3 depicts several views of EUR/USD activity on
April 17, 2013. Panel A plots the exchange rate for each of the roughly 180,000 trades that
CLS has designated spot or option exercise.24 The vast majority of the trades cluster around
a narrow band in the vicinity of $1.3100, suggesting that most of the transfers reflect trades
at market prices. Nevertheless, there are also many outliers, at rates ranging from about
$1.2200 to $1.4400. These are indicative of settlements that don’t correspond to armslength trades at market rates.
Panel B of Figure 3 plots CLS spot trades, excluding those flagged as option
exercises. The extreme outliers have been removed (although others remain). With a
narrower band of exchange rates, Panel B provides better detail, revealing two more

The CLS data include settlement instructions for options written at an earlier date and
exercised during April 2013. By comparison, BIS survey data include all FX options written
during April 2013.
24

Page 27
features of the data. First, the rates appear to exhibit high local variation. Visually, there is
substantial blurring of rates with nearby time-stamps. Secondly, there are clear hourly
effects, on-the-hour concentrations of trades at away-from-the market rates (at 9:00,
11:00, 12:00, and 13:00, for example). There is directional variation in the peaks: the rates
are sometimes above and sometimes below the market.
It is useful at this point to compare the CLS rates with the Olsen prices. Panel C of
Figure 3 plots the midpoint of the Olsen bid-ask series for the day (with CLS trades now
shown in gray). Panel D provides detail for the late afternoon 16:00-18:00 subinterval. If
the CLS prices simply reflected the quote midpoint plus some mean-zero error, we’d expect
to see the quote midpoint (solid black line) to lie in the middle of the cloud of trade
observations. Instead, the midpoint line tends to define, along the time axis, the leading
edge of the cloud. This is most clearly visible in the full-day plot (Panel C) with the
exchange rate drop that starts shortly before 16:00, and in the detail plot (Panel D) from
17:00 to 17:10.
The observed pattern seems consistent with submission delays in the CLS data. As
noted above, both parties submit instructions to CLS. However, these submissions are not
trade reports. They are not directly generated by the execution platform, and the execution
platform is not identified to CLS. For settlement purposes, it is essential that the parties to
the trade agree on buyer and seller identities, the price and the quantity, but submission
time and method of execution have little relevance.
For purposes of assessing liquidity, however, accurately time-stamped records of
trade volumes and prices are highly useful. We therefore seek better characterization of the
CLS accept times. To this end, for each CLS trade, we look backwards to find the most

Page 28
recent Olsen quote consistent with the CLS exchange rate. The process is depicted in Figure
4 for two trades denoted A and B. For trade A, the backwards search identifies one earlier
compatible price, and one imputed delay,
implies a delay of

. For trade B, the most recent compatible price

, but there is another earlier price that would lead to a longer delay of

. This procedure can therefore generally identify at best a lower bound to the delay. More
formally, denote by

the price of a CLS trade with a reported accept time of t. Searching

backwards from t, the trade is considered matched with lag
, where

when

is the average bid-ask spread for

the currency pair.
Table 10 summarizes the distribution of the imputed reporting lag for each currency
pair and the full sample. Most of the distribution lies within thirty seconds or less, and only
a negligible amount lies in the range of thirty seconds to ten minutes. Thus, if settlements
can’t be matched within thirty seconds, they generally can’t be matched within ten minutes
(or at all). Over the full sample, 95.3% of the CLS trades can be matched within thirty
seconds, but the remaining 4.7% can’t be matched within ten minutes. Across currency
pairs, match rates are generally good, but they are noticeably poorer for the JPY pairs. In
the GBP/JPY pair, 8.8% of the trades can’t be matched within ten minutes. We investigated
the sensitivity of the imputed delays to the match criterion. Using a more stringent match
criterion,

, 81.3% of the trades were matched within

30 seconds, but 18.6% of the trades couldn’t be matched within ten minutes.
We conjectured that when the difference between the trading party’s accept time
and the counterparty’s accept time was small, the match rate would be higher, on the

Page 29
theory that close agreement was likely to be more indicative of automated (and more
timely) reporting. The data did not support this conjecture.
VII. Liquidity measures
From the preceding discussion, it should be clear that the settlement data do not
closely correspond to the stream of market transactions. Most importantly, the ordering of
successive settlement records is unlikely to correspond to the ordering of the trades that
generated them. This limitation rules out liquidity measures based on ordered sequences
of trade prices, such as Roll (1984) or Hasbrouck (2009).
As an alternative, therefore, we consider the measure suggested by Amihud (2002).
The Amihud illiquidity ratio is defined as

, where

is the absolute value of

the return over some interval and Volume is the quantity traded. I is an inverse liquidity
proxy. It is analogous to Kyle’s lambda,

, where p is the

(signed) price change and the denominator is the cumulative signed order flow over the
interval (Kyle (1985)). Order is signed positive if buyer-initiated, and negative if sellerinitiated. For a single order,

and

, and so I and 

differ only by a scale factor, p. However, if the interval includes returns and order flows
that are take on positive and negative values, the absolute values used in the computation
of I will not aggregate correctly. Although the close correspondence between I and  breaks
down in this case, I is still commonly used as a proxy for .
Because I is computed using summary measures of volume, the within-interval
ordering of transactions is irrelevant. The measure is not unaffected, however, by reporting
lags that shift volume outside of the interval.

Page 30
We compute our estimates of I as follows. We initially compute illiquidity ratios over
all one-minute intervals with non-zero volume. For a given currency pair, let
the illiquidity ratio on day d;
minute intervals within the day; and

where

denote

indexes the start of all 30indexes minutes within the interval. Then

is the average of the log change in the bid and the log change in the ask over the

minute, based on the Olsen data, and multiplied by 10,000 (to arrive at basis points).25
is the cumulative value of all CLS settlements in the currency pair (that is, the
average of reported buy and sell values, in million USD). As stated in these units, a value
implies that a trade with a value of one-hundred-million USD would be associated
with an exchange rate change of

. To mitigate the influence of

outliers in trading volumes and returns, we report the medians of the one-minute I ratios.
Table 11 reports the median illiquidity ratios and confidence limits (computed
under the assumption that the one-minute observations are independent). Across pairs, the
median ratios are generally in the range of approximately 0.01 (for EUR/USD and USD/JPY)
to 0.10 (EUR/GBP, and so forth).
Among the set of estimates, the illiquidity ratio for the GBP/JPY pair, at 0.7192,
stands as a striking outlier. It might be conjectured that this is a sample artifact. At the
beginning of April 2013, the Japanese government announced a more aggressive monetary

As noted above, our Olsen data are observed at a ten-second frequency and consist of the
first bid and ask pair observed in a ten-second window. For purposes of constructing
returns, of course, it would be preferable to have prices from the end of each ten-second
window.
25

Page 31
policy intended to curb deflation. JPY volatility increased, which would directly affect the
numerator of the estimated illiquidity ratio. On the other hand, the illiquidity ratios for the
two other JPY pairs (the EUR/JPY and USD/JPY) are much lower. This suggests that JPY
volatility is unlikely to have been the sole cause of the elevated I.
The analysis of contra-currencies in Table 3, however, suggests another major
consideration. While both the EUR and USD are actively traded against the JPY (18.2% and
75.2%, respectively), GBP volume is much lower (2.2%). It is the combination, therefore, of
high volatility in the JPY and low volume in the GBP that causes the elevated GBP/JPY
illiquidity.
Comparison with other measures
Mancini, Ranaldo and Wrampelmeyer (2013) discuss a wide range of liquidity
measures based on precisely time-stamped quote and trade data from EBS. As noted above,
the correspondence between settlement records and trades is not sufficiently strong to
support estimates of the MRW measures, which is why we focus on time-aggregated
illiquidity. There is nevertheless one MRW measure which bears a strong similarity to the
illiquidity ratio: the price impact coefficient. Like the illiquidity ratio, the price impact
coefficient can be viewed as a proxy for Kyle’s lambda. MRW estimate it as

from the

specification:

where is the return on a given currency pair and
day t. The order flow measures

and

refers to the ith one-second interval on

refer respectively to the number of buyer- and

Page 32
seller-initiated trades in the interval. The difference is therefore the net order flow.26
MRW’s median price impact estimates (from their internet appendix table IA.III) are
reported in the last column of Table 11.
Figure 6 depicts a log-log scatterplot of the price impact coefficients and illiquidity
ratios. Visually there appears to be a weak positive correlation between the two measures,
but the dependence becomes stronger if we exclude the commonwealth currency pairs.
More formally, if we include all pairs, the correlations are -0.130 (Pearson) and 0.250
(Spearman), with neither statistically significant. If we exclude the commonwealth pairs,
the correlations are 0.748 (Pearson) and 0.886 (Spearman). The estimated type-I error
probabilities are 0.087 (Pearson) and 0.019 (Spearman), however, and given the small
sample size, we view these results as suggestive rather than definitive.
That the commonwealth price impacts estimated from EBS data are outliers is
nevertheless consistent with the fact that EBS is not the dominant trading platform for
these currencies. Since EBS is relatively illiquid, it is not surprising that estimated price
impacts are outliers on the high side.
A key contribution of MRW, however, is the construction and interpretation of a
liquidity risk factor. It is quite possible that even though EBS-based impact measures are
misleading for some currency pairs, dynamic variation in the common factor can be wellestimated from those remaining. To examine this possibility further, we construct common

There are several differences between the present paper’s illiquidity ratio and the price
impact coefficient . The major one is, of course, that the impact coefficient specification
uses a signed return and order flow, while the illiquidity ratio uses unsigned return and
volume. Another point of difference is that
is based on buy/sell counts; the illiquidity
ratio uses USD volume. Finally, the
specification includes lagged signed order flows.
26

Page 33
factors from our illiquidity ratios using all nine MRW pairs and also, alternatively, from the
six non-commonwealth pairs. To avoid variation associated with intraday patterns, we use
daily means of the illiquidity ratios (twenty-one days, nine currency pairs). We use three
approaches to constructing a daily common factor: the arithmetic mean of the illiquidity
ratios, the first principal component constructed from the correlation matrix, and the first
principal component constructed from the covariance matrix, for a total of six candidate
factors.
Table 12 reports the correlations between these factors. It is emphasized that the
sample is limited to the twenty-one days covered by the Olsen data , and the reported
statistical significance numbers are not corrected for degrees of freedom lost in
construction of the factors.27 There are nevertheless several noteworthy features. Firstly,
principal components constructed from correlation and covariance matrices are very
highly correlated. This is because the means and standard deviations of the illiquidity
ratios are of similar magnitudes across currency pairs. Secondly, the factors constructed as
unweighted means are only modestly correlated with the principal components. This is
consistent with the fact that the principal components method seeks only to maximize
explained variation (subject to a normalization). The weights that define the first principal
component (that is, the elements of the first eigenvector) exhibit large values of opposing
signs. Thirdly, no matter which of the three construction methods is used, the factor based
on all currency pairs is very highly correlated with that based solely on the non-

In addition, principal components are identified only up to multiplication by
. In the
present context, we set the sign so that correlation with the mean factors is positive.
27

Page 34
commonwealth pairs. Thus, exclusion of the currency pairs in which EBS is not dominant
does not appear to substantially affect the dynamics of the estimated common factor.
VIII. Conclusions
This paper provides a first look at CLS Bank FX settlement data. Like EBS and
Reuters quotes and trades analyzed by others, the submitted settlement instructions
constitute a continuous record of FX transactions. With respect to typical EBS/Reuters
datasets, the CLS settlement data have several distinctive advantages. Firstly, they are more
comprehensive in terms of currency pairs covered. Whereas Reuters concentrates on the
(British) commonwealth currencies and EBS on the non-commonwealth, the CLS
settlement data uniformly cover the seventeen major currencies that constitute the bulk of
FX trading. Secondly, the CLS data are more comprehensive in terms of volume coverage.
We estimate that EBS and Reuters together account for about 15.0% of BIS spot turnover,
after adjustment for prime brokerage. The corresponding figure for CLS is 37.2%.
The comprehensiveness of the CLS settlement flows offer insights into patterns of
exchange. Against most other currencies, the USD is the dominant contra currency: most
settlements have the USD on one side of the trade. The Scandinavian currencies (DKK, NOK,
SEK) are the exceptions, with the EUR being the dominant currency.
Platform-specific quote and trade data can still claim, however, other advantages.
They generally reflect arms-length transactions at current market prices; they are
generally correctly sequenced (at least within a given currency pair); and, they have
accurate time stamps. Settlement instructions, however, are submitted separately by the
parties to the trade, and sometimes well after a particular platform (like EBS or Reuters)
might have deemed the execution to have occurred. Furthermore, the submissions do not

Page 35
necessarily reflect arms-length transactions, and therefore may include pre-arranged
transfers on terms that are far removed from current market prices. When we attempt to
match up submissions with current market quotes, we find patterns consistent with these
limitations.
The fact that time-stamps and sequencing in settlement instructions do not appear
to correspond closely to market transactions means that many standard liquidity measures
(quoted spread, effective spread, price impact, and so forth) are not available. The Amihud
illiquidity ratio, however, can be constructed using time-aggregated price and flow data,
and this is our main liquidity measure.
We find that in the cross-section, across currency pairs, the illiquidity ratio is
positively correlated with the price impact estimates computed by MRW based on EBS
data. This association is strong, however, only for the currency pairs in which EBS is the
dominant market. EBS-based estimates of price impact in the commonwealth pairs,
however, do not agree with the illiquidity ratios. Our illiquidity ratio estimates suggest that
these markets are much more liquid than the price impact estimates would suggest. We
document time-of-day patterns in the illiquidity ratios, and find these consistent with local
business hours for most currencies.
In summary, the CLS settlement data offer a broad window on flows and liquidity in
the FX market. The correspondence between settlement instructions and market
transactions is not sufficiently precise to support the same liquidity estimates that can be
constructed from EBS/Reuters data. At all but the highest frequencies, however, the
settlement instruction data can provide useful measures of liquidity and liquidity variation
based on time-aggregated returns and volume. As larger samples of settlement data

Page 36
become available, longer series of the liquidity measures can be formed, and the relations
between liquidity and FX pricing can be studied over longer horizons and also during
specific macroeconomic and political events.

Page 37
Appendix A. Data description
The CLS data in our sample reflect FX settlements initiated during the month of April 2013,
scheduled for settlement at a later value date, and authenticated (“matched”) by CLS
against other counterparty instructions to verify all the critical details of the transaction –
currency paid, currency received, counterparty identifiers, value date, and so on. Trades
and instructions submitted to CLS that do not match have been rejected and are not in our
sample. Our data reflect settlements initiated during April (rather than settlements that
occurred during April, but arranged at some earlier time). Each record includes 14 data
fields:
TradeID

A unique record identifier

TradeDate

The trade date in Central European Time (CET), supplied by the trading
party.

ValueDate

The value (settlement) date for the trade

TradeAcceptTimeTP Date and time (CET) when settlement instructions were received from the
first counterparty
TradeAcceptTimeCP

Date and time (CET) when settlement instructions were received from the
second counterparty

StatusMatchTime

Date and time (CET) when CLS system matched trading details

TradingBIC

Anonymized Bank Identification Code for Trading Party (TP)

CounterPartyBIC

Anonymized Bank Identification Code for Counterparty (CP)

BuyCCYISO

Currency code for the bought currency (received by the trading party)

SellCCYISO

Currency code for the sold currency (received by the counterparty)

BuyAmt

Buying amount

SellAmt

Selling amount

Rate

Implied exchange rate (Buy amount / Sell amount)

InstrumentType

Spot, Outright forward, CAS Spot, Far leg, Near leg, FX Option, Other

Some spot settlements, by prior agreement of the buyer and seller, may be batched for
settlement purposes (using the CLS Aggregation Service, CAS). When this happens, we

Page 38
observe the separate component settlement instructions. For FX Swaps, CLS records the
value date for both the near leg (the date when the swap is initiated) and the far leg (when
the swap is reversed).

Page 39
References

Amihud, Yakov, 2002, Illiquidity and stock returns: Cross-section and time-series effects,
Journal of Financial Markets 5, 31-56.
Bank for International Settlements; 1996, Settlement risk in foreign exchange transactions
http://www.bis.org/cpmi/publ/d17.pdf.
Bank for International Settlements, 2012, Trienniel Central Bank Survey of Foreign
Exchange and OTC Derivatives Market Activity: Reporting Guidelines for Turnover
in April 2013.
Bank for International Settlements, 2013, Triennial Central Bank Survey of Foreign
Exchange and Derivatives Market Activity.
Bank for International Settlements, 2016, Triennial Central Bank Survey: Foreign Exchange
Turnover in 2016.
Berger, David, Alain Chaboud, and Erik Hjalmarsson, 2009, What drives volatility
persistence in the foreign exchange market?, Journal of Financial Economics 94, 192213.
Chaboud, Alain, Sergey V. Chernenko, and Jonathan H. Wright; 2007, Trading activity and
exchange rates in high-frequency EBS data (Board of Governors of the Federal
Reserve System).
Chaboud, Alain, Erik Hjalmarsson, Clara Vega, and Ben Chiquoine; 2009, Rise of the
machines: algorithmic trading in the foreign exchange markets (Board of Governors
of the Federal Reserve System).
CLS Group, 2014, CLS Settlement Methods Survey: Summary Report.
EBS, 2016, EBS Dealing Rules - EBS Market Appendix.
Financial Stability Oversight Council, 2012, 2012 Annual Report, (U.S. Department of the
Treasury).
FINRA, 2015, Trade reporting frequently asked questions.
Hagströmer, Björn, and Albert J. Menkveld; 2016, A network map of information
percolation (SSRN).
Hasbrouck, Joel, 2009, Trading costs and returns for US equities: estimating effective costs
from daily data, Journal of Finance 64, 1445-1477.

Page 40
Karnaukh, Nina, Angelo Ranaldo, and Paul Söderlind, 2015, Understanding FX Liquidity,
Review of Financial Studies 28, 3073-3108.
King, Michael R., Carol L. Osler, and Dagfinn Rime, 2012, Foreign Exchange Market
Structure, Players, and Evolution, in Jessica James, Ian W. Marsh, and Lucio Sarno,
eds.: Handbook of Exchange Rates (John Wiley & Sons).
King, Michael R., Carol L. Osler, and Dagfinn Rime, 2013, The market microstructure
approach to foreign exchange: Looking back and looking forward, Journal of
International Money and Finance 38, 95-119.
Kos, Dino, and Richard M. Levich; 2016, Settlement Risk in the Global FX Market: How Much
Remains (SSRN), https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2827530.
Kyle, Albert S., 1985, Continuous auctions and insider trading, Econometrica 53, 13151336.
Levich, Richard M., and Frank Packer; 2015, Development and Functioning of FX Markets in
Asia and the Pacific (Bank for International Settlements).
Mancini, Loriano, Angelo Ranaldo, and Jan Wrampelmeyer, 2013, Liquidity in the foreign
exchange market: measurement, commonality, and risk premiums, Journal of
Finance 68, 1805-1841.
Moore, Michael, Andreas Schrimpf, and Vladyslav Sushko, 2016, Downsized FX markets:
causes and implications, BIS Quarterly Review December, 35-51.
Newman, Mark, 2010. Networks: An Introduction (Oxford University Press).
Roll, Richard, 1984, A simple implicit measure of the effective bid-ask spread in an efficient
market, Journal of Finance 39, 1127-1139.

Page 41
Table 1. CLS Settlements, April 2013
The sample comprises all CLS settlements initiated (that is, with a trade date) in April,
2013. USD values are estimated using average spot exchange rates over the month.
N
Spot 12,642,572

Value, USD
90.0%

$14,311B

25.1%

FX Option

22,971

0.2%

$478B

0.8%

Far Leg FX Swap

239,369

1.7%

$16,817B

29.5%

Near Leg FX Swap

236,396

1.7%

$16,820B

29.5%

Other

426,278

3.0%

$6,601B

11.6%

Outright Forward

477,854

3.4%

$1,969B

3.5%

All 14,045,440 100.0%

$56,996B 100.0%

Page 42
Table 2. Market share by currency, spot settlements
The sample is all spot settlements initiated on CLS during April 2013. For each settlement,
both sides are valued in US dollars using the average exchange rates over the month.
Currency totals therefore sum to twice the total turnover. The last column is based on BIS
Triennial Survey data from the April 2013 survey (less ILS, which the survey does not
separately report).
Percentage of
Turnover
Currency

Code

CLS

BIS

US dollar

USD

83.8

87.0

Euro

EUR

38.5

38.8

Japanese yen

JPY

29.6

31.5

UK pound

GBP

12.0

11.7

Australian dollar

AUD

11.0

10.1

Canadian dollar

CAD

8.3

4.8

Swiss franc

CHF

4.6

4.3

Mexican peso

MXN

2.4

2.9

New Zeeland dollar NZD

2.2

2.0

Swedish krona

SEK

1.5

1.4

Norwegian krone

NOK

1.2

1.1

South Korean won

KRW

1.2

1.0

South African rand

ZAR

1.1

1.0

Singapore dollar

SGD

1.0

1.1

Hong Kong dollar

HKD

0.8

1.1

Danish krone

DKK

0.4

0.4

Israeli sheckel

ILS

0.2
200.0 200.0

Table 3. Contra currencies
A row summarizes all submissions in which the row-currency is involved in the exchange. Percentage entries in the row reflect
the total USD equivalent value of the submission, broken out by the other currency in the exchange. For example, of the total
dollar value of all submissions involving the AUD, 1.1% occurred in the AUD/CAD pair.
buy/sell AUD
AUD

CAD CHF DKK

EUR

GBP

1.1% 0.4%

5.9%

1.6% 0.0%

9.3%

0.0% 0.0% 3.6% 0.0% 0.2% 77.8% 0.0%

0.3%

2.9%

1.4%

1.1%

0.1% 0.0% 0.2% 0.0%

0.0% 42.6% 2.8% 0.0%

1.7%

0.1% 0.2% 0.1%

82.8% 0.9%

0.5%

CAD

1.5%

CHF

0.9% 0.6%

DKK

0.0%

EUR

1.7% 0.6% 5.1% 0.9%

GBP

1.5% 1.0% 1.1% 0.0% 20.1%

HKD

0.2%

0.0%

ILS
JPY

HKD

ILS

JPY

6.2% 0.0% 0.0% 14.0%
1.4%

0.0%
0.4%

5.3%

KRW MXN NOK

NZD

SEK

SGD

USD

ZAR

92.4%
51.0% 0.0%
15.8%

0.1% 2.1% 0.2% 2.5% 0.0% 66.5% 0.1%
0.0% 0.1% 0.3% 0.2% 0.0% 70.3% 0.0%

0.1%

97.8%

1.1%

98.9%

3.5% 0.3% 0.3% 0.0% 18.2% 2.2% 0.0%

0.0% 0.0% 0.3% 0.0% 0.0% 75.2% 0.0%

KRW

100.0%

MXN

0.1% 0.3%

1.0%

0.1%

0.1%

NOK

0.2% 0.1% 0.3%

64.5% 1.0%

0.3%

NZD

17.9% 0.9% 0.5%

2.8%

1.4%

4.0%

SEK

0.1% 0.1% 0.2%

64.1% 1.4%

0.4%

SGD

2.3%

1.1%

0.9%

USD

10.2% 9.2% 2.8% 0.1% 30.6% 10.0% 1.0% 0.2% 26.5% 1.4% 2.8% 0.3% 1.9% 0.4% 1.2%

ZAR

0.0%

0.1%

1.8%

0.2%
0.2%

1.1%

98.5%
13.2%

20.3%
0.0% 72.6%

10.7%

22.9%
0.0%

95.5%
1.3%
96.8%

Page 44
Table 4. Distribution of settlement values
The sample is all CLS spot submissions for April, 2013. Both sides of each submission are used. (For example, a submission in
the EUR/USD pair would appear in both the EUR row and the USD row.) Values are reported as USD equivalents.

N

Min

P1

P5

P10

P25

P50

P75

P90

P95

P99

Max

All

25,285,144

$0.01

$1,302.10

$10,099

$29,875 $196,816

$791,892 $1,282,030 $1.531M

$2.604M

$7.442M $3,107.754M

AUD

1,533,394

$0.01

$1,037.98

$10,380

$31,139 $207,596

$726,586 $1,037,979 $1.300M

$2.076M

$6.511M $2,173.529M

CAD

698,981

$0.01

$1,000.78

$9,815

$20,143 $196,299

$907,276 $1,002,893 $1.305M

$2.016M $10.700M $1,962.992M

CHF

655,241

$0.01

$997.67

$6,185

$15,277 $130,993

$697,815 $1,012,481 $1.313M

$2.180M

DKK

21,148

$0.35

$996.84

$9,917

$19,897

$780,142 $1,302,639 $6.512M $13.024M $32.566M

EUR

4,706,180

$0.13

$1,302.10

$13,021

$26,042 $195,315

$783,863 $1,302,099 $1.302M

$2.604M

$6.510M $2,196.033M

GBP

1,455,177

$0.02

$1,531.07

$4,593

$15,311 $142,287

$765,534 $1,531,067 $1.531M

$3.062M

$7.655M $3,062.134M

HKD

50,439

$0.03

$128.82

$3,791

$19,515 $191,938

$999,920 $1,311,515 $5.000M

$9.998M $26.998M

$499.168M

ILS

14,029

$0.01

$1,570.87

$29,707 $110,499 $673,781 $1,000,578 $1,006,932 $3.985M

$5.014M $24.994M

$274.040M

JPY

4,693,202

$0.01

$1,098.75

$10,137

$524,482 $1,010,235 $1.318M

$2.028M

$5.137M $2,035.094M

98,400 $572.49 $495030.56 $503,940 $986,765 $994,872 $1,002,088 $1,521,841 $2.996M

$4.969M

$9.998M

$199.919M

KRW
MXN

281,121

$0.12

$7,271.81

NOK

165,439

$0.05

NZD

465,459

SEK

$99,708

$30,480 $165,654

$6.526M $1,552.734M
$521.111M

$81,910 $101,036 $501,599

$995,990 $1,006,122 $1.991M

$2.793M

$9.921M

$302.469M

$984.55

$15,624

$657,582 $1,296,190 $1.328M

$2.619M

$7.858M

$639.554M

$0.42

$848.14

$4,241

$419,249

$848,144 $1.035M

$1.696M

$4.241M

$968.776M

198,667

$0.16

$1,541.28

$17,473

$65,897 $172,928

$665,224 $1,296,973 $1.376M

$2.629M

$7.821M $1,155.961M

SGD

112,543

$0.52

$999.25

$10,021

$64,718 $250,884

$998,850 $1,002,312 $2.006M

$4.000M $10.014M

USD

9,955,218

$0.01

$1,306.37

$11,449

$45,886 $239,990 $1,000,000 $1,096,492 $1.540M

$2.618M

$7.850M $3,107.754M

ZAR

180,506

$0.10

$219.73

$7,690

$12,634 $109,863

$2.027M

$5.893M

$52,375 $172,503
$8,481

$84,814

$975,298 $1,007,191 $1.515M

$300.923M
$219.726M

Page 45
Table 5. Alternative activity measures, April, 2013
BIS turnover figures are from the 2013 BIS Survey (Bank for International Settlements (2013)); CLS settlement volume is
estimated from data supplied by the CLS Bank; EBS and Reuters values are reported on their websites. All flows are
normalized “per day”.
Line
1
2
3

Source

Total

Spot Outright forwards

BIS turnover $4,953,781 M $2,046,158 M
BIS o/w PB

$818,354 M

$598,252 M

BIS net of PB $4,544,604 M $1,747,032 M

FX Swaps Far

$679,994 M $2,227,629 M
$115,917 M

$104,185 M

$622,036 M $2,175,536 M

4

CLS $1,504,382 M

$650,480 M

$89,514 M

$764,389 M

5

33.1%

37.2%

14.4%

35.1%

6

EBS turnover

7

$128,300 M
7.3%

8 Reuters spot turnover

$133,000 M

9

$261,300 M

10

EBS + Reuters

15.0%

Page 46
Table 6. Alternative activity measures for MRW currency pairs, April, 2013
Table reports comparative activity measures and relative shares. Columns (1)-(3) report turnover (Billion $US per day), in the
indicated currency pair. Following the BIS convention, these figures reflect both sides of the trade. Columns (1)-(5) report
levels, per day; columns (6)-(10) report percentage shares. Sources: cols. (1), (2), BIS (2013); cols. (3), (4), the present paper;
col. (5), internet appendix to Mancini, Ranaldo and Wrampelmeyer (2013), Tale IA-II, post-Lehman subsample.
Levels
Turnover (Billion USD)
(1)

(2)

(3)

Source, Sample BIS, 2013 BIS, 2010 CLS, 2013

Percentage shares
Settlements

Trades

(4)

(5)

CLS, 2013

EBS,
2008-9

Turnover (Billion USD)
(6)

(7)

(8)

BIS, 2013 BIS, 2010 CLS, 2013

Settlements

Trades

(9)

(10)

CLS, 2013

EBS
2008-9

Pair
EUR/USD

1,289

1,098

333

131,953

21,590

33.9%

37.7%

30.3%

28.1%

43.0%

USD/JPY

978

567

290

143,388

12,355

25.7%

19.5%

26.3%

30.5%

24.6%

AUD/USD

364

248

112

46,235

617

9.6%

8.5%

10.1%

9.8%

1.2%

GBP/USD

472

360

109

41,376

697

12.4%

12.4%

9.9%

8.8%

1.4%

USD/CAD

200

182

100

25,095

310

5.3%

6.3%

9.1%

5.3%

0.6%

EUR/JPY

147

111

70

42,493

5,871

3.9%

3.8%

6.4%

9.1%

11.7%

EUR/GBP

102

109

31

12,969

544

2.7%

3.7%

2.8%

2.8%

1.1%

USD/CHF

184

166

30

15,964

4,938

4.8%

5.7%

2.8%

3.4%

9.8%

EUR/CHF

71

71

25

9,993

3,295

1.9%

2.4%

2.3%

2.1%

6.6%

3,807

2,912

1,101

469,466

50,217

100%

100%

100%

100%

100%

Total

Page 47
Table 7. Distribution of trading activity by BICs
The trading activity for each BIC (account) in the sample is measured by the total number of its sides (Panel A) and the total
USD value of its sides (Panel B). The row labeled “All” contains all BICS, and each BIC is measured by its total activity. A row
with a currency identifier contains just those BICs that had at least one side in that currency, and each BIC is measured by its
activity in that currency. All table entries except “N” are reported on a daily basis.
Panel A. Number of sides per day
N

P10

P25

P50

7,267 0.05 0.05 0.05

0.05

0.09

0.23

0.68 1.86 19.45 920.32 168,967

AUD 1,135 0.05 0.05 0.05

0.05

0.05

0.09

0.91

12

77

1,237

9,785

CAD

907 0.05 0.05 0.05

0.05

0.05

0.14

0.73

8

67

622

4,234

CHF 1,297 0.05 0.05 0.05

0.05

0.05

0.09

0.36

5

21

505

4,118

DKK

657 0.05 0.05 0.05

0.05

0.05

0.09

0.23

1

4

42

106

EUR 3,568 0.05 0.05 0.05

0.05

0.05

0.09

0.32

3

24

639

32,216

GBP 2,608 0.05 0.05 0.05

0.05

0.05

0.09

0.32

2

8

286

9,276

HKD 1,670 0.05 0.05 0.05

0.05

0.05

0.14

0.32

1

3

29

198

253 0.05 0.05 0.05

0.05

0.05

0.09

0.32

6

19

45

59

JPY 1,805 0.05 0.05 0.05

0.05

0.05

0.14

0.45

13

69

1,670

35,493

35 0.55 0.55 0.86 12.55 51.86 91.27 158.09 280

462

530

530

All

ILS
KRW

Min

P1

P5

P75

P90

P95

P99

Max

MXN

656 0.05 0.05 0.05

0.05

0.05

0.09

0.32

4

37

696

2,084

NOK

802 0.05 0.05 0.05

0.05

0.05

0.09

0.36

3

14

267

970

NZD

513 0.05 0.05 0.05

0.05

0.09

0.23

1.23

26

117

1,492

3,265

SEK

920 0.05 0.05 0.05

0.05

0.05

0.09

0.39

2

12

275

1,116

SGD

636 0.05 0.05 0.05

0.05

0.05

0.14

0.64

8

29

255

713

USD 5,085 0.05 0.05 0.05

0.05

0.05

0.18

0.41

2

22

704

64,283

ZAR

0.05

0.05

0.14

0.77

8

45

511

1,065

517 0.05 0.05 0.05

Page 48
Panel B. USD value
N
All

Min

P1

P5

P10

P25

P50

P75

P90

P99

Max

7,267

$2

$120

$889

$2,721

$15,900

$97,995

$1M

AUD 1,135

$2

$97

$398

$1,063

$9,614

$103,503

$1,804,763

$24M $125M $1,319M

$9,328M

CAD

907

$1

$22

$319

$1,098

$8,141

$72,725

$1,421,653

$37M $186M $1,499M

$4,822M

CHF 1,297

$1

$46

$419

$1,455

$9,479

$62,263

$693,663

$8M

$30M

$507M

$3,876M

DKK

657

$0

$7

$318

$1,017

$5,022

$35,043

$259,136

$3M

$12M

$94M

$417M

EUR 3,568

$0

$106

$701

$1,949

$10,237

$55,559

$418,753

$10M

GBP 2,608

$1

$49

$456

$1,461

$9,677

$57,295

$427,813

$5M

$22M

$419M

$9,189M

HKD 1,670

$0

$78

$578

$1,522

$6,690

$29,277

$142,204

$1M

$9M

$104M

$266M

253

$6

$25

$427

$1,130

$3,868

$30,811

$376,705

$11M

$45M

$92M

$108M

JPY 1,805

$0

$61

$697

$2,884

$16,651

$125,502

$1,030,312

ILS
KRW

$6M

P95

$57M $1,621M $171,297M

$51M $1,005M $34,126M

$22M $111M $1,704M $31,045M

35 $145,241 $145,241 $864,334 $18,371,745 $101,514,741 $179,172,249 $332,997,096 $453M $695M

$697M

$697M

MXN

656

$4

$74

$879

$2,296

$11,107

$52,671

$532,480

$8M

$56M

$788M

$2,377M

NOK

802

$0

$63

$274

$868

$4,783

$34,931

$384,580

$5M

$21M

$332M

$886M

NZD

513

$3

$77

$416

$838

$5,116

$115,656

$2,347,817

$27M $100M

$742M

$2,194M

SEK

920

$0

$45

$390

$1,148

$5,869

$41,298

$580,734

$5M

$21M

$364M

$1,125M

SGD

636

$2

$93

$501

$1,527

$7,343

$46,658

$665,090

$13M

$38M

$233M

$846M

USD 5,085

$0

$58

$678

$2,084

$11,528

$64,970

$473,811

$7M

$67M $1,426M $70,213M

$14

$50

$50

$424

$14,094

$93,955

$651,572

$9M

$51M

ZAR

517

$348M

$820M

Table 8.
Number of settlement entities and counterparties.
For settlement purposes, counterparties are identified by BICs. The table reports, for the
full sample and by currency, the number of distinct BICs, and the number of counterparty
BICs. In the “all currencies” row, for a given BIC, another BIC is considered a counterparty if
there is at least one settlement between them (involving any currency). The separate
tabulations for the individual currencies are constructed as follows. A BIC is considered a
member of the Australian dollar (AUD) set if it participated in at least one AUD settlement,
and the number of counterparties refers to the number of counterparty BICs in AUD trades.
Number of counterparty BICs
Currency

Number of BICs Min P1 P5 P10 P25 P50 P75 P90 P95 P99 Max

All Currencies

7,267

1

1

1

1

1

3

5

9

15 107 2,629

AUD

1,730

1

1

1

1

1

2

4

15

42 144

536

CAD

1,198

1

1

1

1

1

2

4

16

42 166

377

CHF

2,093

1

1

1

1

1

2

3

9

23 136

550

DKK

1,062

1

1

1

1

1

1

3

7

15

243

EUR

4,766

1

1

1

1

1

2

4

8

18 124 1,535

GBP

3,819

1

1

1

1

1

2

4

8

15

HKD

2,214

1

1

1

1

1

2

4

8

13 134

653

ILS

364

1

1

1

1

1

1

3

13

35

80

130

JPY

2,485

1

1

1

1

1

2

4

12

32 151

750

KRW

35

1

1

1

12

22

25

29

31

32

MXN

961

1

1

1

1

1

2

4

NOK

1,123

1

1

1

1

1

1

NZD

697

1

1

1

1

1

SEK

1,531

1

1

1

1

SGD

886

1

1

1

USD

6,341

1

1

ZAR

779

1

1

95

97 1,076

32

32

9

28 126

248

3

11

24 125

300

2

7

29

52 167

286

1

1

3

9

19 119

409

1

1

2

5

18

48 138

289

1

1

1

2

5

10

17 123 2,236

1

1

1

2

5

19

42 144

231

Page 50
Table 9. Summary statistics on Olsen pairs, April 2013

Mean

Min

P10

P25

P50

P75

P90

bam

spread

spread

spread

spread

spread

spread

AUD/USD

1.0382 0.00001 0.00006 0.00013 0.00017 0.00022 0.00030

EUR/CHF

1.2199 0.00001 0.00009 0.00015 0.00022 0.00030 0.00036

EUR/GBP

0.8506 0.00001 0.00006 0.00011 0.00016 0.00021 0.00028

EUR/JPY 127.2645 0.00100 0.00600 0.01700 0.02200 0.02600 0.03300
EUR/NOK

7.5449 0.00001 0.00139 0.00222 0.00316 0.00500 0.00798

EUR/SEK

8.4475 0.00001 0.00137 0.00220 0.00327 0.00541 0.00800

EUR/USD

1.3018 0.00001 0.00003 0.00010 0.00014 0.00019 0.00025

GBP/JPY 149.6099 0.00100 0.01200 0.02100 0.03300 0.04300 0.07000
GBP/USD

1.5305 0.00001 0.00008 0.00015 0.00021 0.00026 0.00031

NZD/USD

0.8474 0.00001 0.00011 0.00019 0.00024 0.00028 0.00040

USD/CAD

1.0187 0.00001 0.00006 0.00013 0.00020 0.00026 0.00040

USD/CHF

0.9371 0.00001 0.00008 0.00013 0.00018 0.00025 0.00040

USD/JPY

97.7469 0.00100 0.00300 0.00800 0.01300 0.02000 0.03000

Table 10. Imputed reporting delays
For a CLS trade with an accept time of t and a price of , the imputed reporting delay is
, where, searching backwards
from t, s is the time of the first match encountered. The criterion for a match is
,
where
are the Olsen quotes at time s, and
is the average bid-ask spread for the currency pair. Table
reports frequencies in the indicated categories. Unmatched trades are included in “
”.
Distribution of imputed reporting delay,
N
All

All

10,963,087 100.0% 12.9% 38.0%

42.8%

1.6%

0.0%

0.0%

4.7%

AUD/USD

1,016,446

100.0

12.8

38.5

42.0

3.0

0.0

0.0

3.7

EUR/CHF

219,690

100.0

13.9

39.5

44.6

0.9

0.0

0.0

1.0

EUR/GBP

285,182

100.0

13.2

38.7

43.5

1.6

0.0

0.0

3.1

EUR/JPY

934,005

100.0

12.8

36.7

41.7

1.6

0.0

0.0

7.1

EUR/NOK

88,074

100.0

14.8

39.0

43.2

2.8

0.1

0.0

0.1

EUR/SEK

110,097

100.0

15.1

38.9

42.6

2.7

0.2

0.1

0.4

EUR/USD

2,901,009

100.0

13.1

38.3

42.8

1.6

0.0

0.0

4.3

GBP/JPY

163,755

100.0

12.5

36.3

41.5

0.9

0.0

0.0

8.8

GBP/USD

909,705

100.0

12.9

38.5

43.6

0.8

0.0

0.0

4.2

NZD/USD

280,897

100.0

13.0

38.8

43.1

2.4

0.1

0.0

2.7

USD/CAD

551,472

100.0

12.9

39.1

43.0

2.4

0.0

0.0

2.5

USD/CHF

350,945

100.0

13.4

39.1

43.5

1.1

0.0

0.0

2.8

USD/JPY

3,151,810

100.0

12.5

37.3

42.9

1.2

0.0

0.0

6.1

Table 11. Amihud Illiquidity Measures, April 2013
Estimated medians for illiquidity ratios. For a given pair, the illiquidity ratio is
. The time subscripts on all variables are days
half-hour intervals
; and minute within the interval
.
/2, where
are the changes
in the log of the (Olsen) bid and ask over the minute.
is the cumulative value (in
Million USD) of all settlements in the pair over the minute.
is computed for each
minute with at least one settlement. The estimated lower and upper limits are computed
for a 95% confidence interval. The last column reports price impact coefficient estimates
from Mancini, Ranaldo and Wrampelmeyer (2013), internet appendix, Table IA.III.
Asterisks denote British Commonwealth currency pairs.

Price impact
coefficients
(MRW)

Amihud illiquidity ratios
Estimated
Median

Lower confidence
limit

Upper confidence
limit

Estimated
Median

AUD/USD*

0.0291

0.0287

0.0297

0.870

EUR/CHF

0.0566

0.0547

0.0580

0.098

EUR/GBP

0.0998

0.0972

0.1023

0.405

EUR/JPY

0.0962

0.0945

0.0980

0.219

EUR/NOK

0.1075

0.1041

0.1114

EUR/SEK

0.0951

0.0922

0.0984

EUR/USD

0.0102

0.0100

0.0104

GBP/JPY*

0.7192

0.6990

0.7378

GBP/USD*

0.0268

0.0262

0.0273

NZD/USD

0.1536

0.1495

0.1574

USD/CAD*

0.0354

0.0345

0.0363

0.766

USD/CHF

0.1059

0.1044

0.1072

0.159

USD/JPY

0.0170

0.0167

0.0173

0.103

0.060
0.334

Page 53
Table 12. Correlations between common factors
Common liquidity factors are constructed in alternative ways and based on different
variable sets. The data underlying all calculations consists of daily means of illiquidity
ratios for all nine currency pairs examined in Mancini, Ranaldo and Wrampelmeyer (2013),
for twenty-one days in April 2013. The construction either uses all pairs (“All”) or just the
six non-Commonwealth pairs (“Non-Com”). The methods of construction are simple
arithmetic mean, the first principal component (using the correlation matrix), and the first
principal component (using the covariance matrix).
First Principal
Component
(Correlations)

Mean
All
Mean

First Principal
Component
(Correlations)
First Principal
Component
(Covariances)

First Principal
Component
(Covariances)

NonCom

All

NonCom

All

NonCom

All

1.00000

0.97727
<.0001

0.25249
0.2695

0.31683
0.1617

0.30311
0.1817

0.30846
0.1737

NonCom

0.97727
<.0001

1.00000

0.32910
0.1452

0.38771
0.0825

0.37485
0.0941

0.37893
0.0903

All

0.25249
0.2695

0.32910
0.1452

1.00000

0.96048
<.0001

0.93098
<.0001

0.92569
<.0001

NonCom

0.31683
0.1617

0.38771
0.0825

0.96048
<.0001

1.00000

0.94864
<.0001

0.94834
<.0001

All

0.30311
0.1817

0.37485
0.0941

0.93098
<.0001

0.94864
<.0001

1.00000

0.99981
<.0001

NonCom

0.30846
0.1737

0.37893
0.0903

0.92569
<.0001

0.94834
<.0001

0.99981
<.0001

1.00000

Percent
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

Panel C. EUR

8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

Sun Mar 31
Mon Apr 01
Tue Apr 02
Wed Apr 03
Thu Apr 04
Fri Apr 05
Sat Apr 06
Sun Apr 07
Mon Apr 08
Tue Apr 09
Wed Apr 10
Thu Apr 11
Fri Apr 12
Sat Apr 13
Sun Apr 14
Mon Apr 15
Tue Apr 16
Wed Apr 17
Thu Apr 18
Fri Apr 19
Sat Apr 20
Sun Apr 21
Mon Apr 22
Tue Apr 23
Wed Apr 24
Thu Apr 25
Fri Apr 26
Sat Apr 27
Sun Apr 28
Mon Apr 29
Tue Apr 30
Wed May 01

7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

Sun Mar 31
Mon Apr 01
Tue Apr 02
Wed Apr 03
Thu Apr 04
Fri Apr 05
Sat Apr 06
Sun Apr 07
Mon Apr 08
Tue Apr 09
Wed Apr 10
Thu Apr 11
Fri Apr 12
Sat Apr 13
Sun Apr 14
Mon Apr 15
Tue Apr 16
Wed Apr 17
Thu Apr 18
Fri Apr 19
Sat Apr 20
Sun Apr 21
Mon Apr 22
Tue Apr 23
Wed Apr 24
Thu Apr 25
Fri Apr 26
Sat Apr 27
Sun Apr 28
Mon Apr 29
Tue Apr 30
Wed May 01

Percent

Panel A. USD

Sun Mar 31
Mon Apr 01
Tue Apr 02
Wed Apr 03
Thu Apr 04
Fri Apr 05
Sat Apr 06
Sun Apr 07
Mon Apr 08
Tue Apr 09
Wed Apr 10
Thu Apr 11
Fri Apr 12
Sat Apr 13
Sun Apr 14
Mon Apr 15
Tue Apr 16
Wed Apr 17
Thu Apr 18
Fri Apr 19
Sat Apr 20
Sun Apr 21
Mon Apr 22
Tue Apr 23
Wed Apr 24
Thu Apr 25
Fri Apr 26
Sat Apr 27
Sun Apr 28
Mon Apr 29
Tue Apr 30
Wed May 01

Percent

Page 54

Figure 1. Distribution of trades by date

Figure 1. Distribution of trades by date
geoGroup=USD

Panel B. American, non-US (CAD,geoGroup=American(non-USD)
MXN)

Figure 1. Distribution of trades by date

Figure 1. Distribution of trades by date

geoGroup=EUR

Percent
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

Sun Mar 31
Mon Apr 01
Tue Apr 02
Wed Apr 03
Thu Apr 04
Fri Apr 05
Sat Apr 06
Sun Apr 07
Mon Apr 08
Tue Apr 09
Wed Apr 10
Thu Apr 11
Fri Apr 12
Sat Apr 13
Sun Apr 14
Mon Apr 15
Tue Apr 16
Wed Apr 17
Thu Apr 18
Fri Apr 19
Sat Apr 20
Sun Apr 21
Mon Apr 22
Tue Apr 23
Wed Apr 24
Thu Apr 25
Fri Apr 26
Sat Apr 27
Sun Apr 28
Mon Apr 29
Tue Apr 30
Wed May 01

7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

Sun Mar 31
Mon Apr 01
Tue Apr 02
Wed Apr 03
Thu Apr 04
Fri Apr 05
Sat Apr 06
Sun Apr 07
Mon Apr 08
Tue Apr 09
Wed Apr 10
Thu Apr 11
Fri Apr 12
Sat Apr 13
Sun Apr 14
Mon Apr 15
Tue Apr 16
Wed Apr 17
Thu Apr 18
Fri Apr 19
Sat Apr 20
Sun Apr 21
Mon Apr 22
Tue Apr 23
Wed Apr 24
Thu Apr 25
Fri Apr 26
Sat Apr 27
Sun Apr 28
Mon Apr 29
Tue Apr 30
Wed May 01

Percent

Page 55

Panel D. European, non-Euro (GBP,geoGroup=Eur(non-EUR)
CHF, SEK, NOK, ZAR, DKK, ILS)

Figure 1. Distribution of trades by date

Panel E. Asia-Pacific (JPY, AUD, KRW,
SGD, HKD, NZD)
geoGroup=Asia-Pacific

Figure 1. Distribution of trades by date

0

12:00
13:00
14:00
15:00
16:00
17:00
18:00
19:00
20:00
21:00
22:00
23:00

Panel C. EUR

9:00
10:00
11:00

0

Distribution of trades by time of day
12:00
13:00
14:00
15:00
16:00
17:00
18:00
19:00
20:00
21:00
22:00
23:00

9:00
10:00
11:00

12:00
13:00
14:00
15:00
16:00
17:00
18:00
19:00
20:00
21:00
22:00
23:00

9:00
10:00
11:00

0:00
1:00
2:00
3:00
4:00
5:00
6:00
7:00
8:00

0

0:00
1:00
2:00
3:00
4:00
5:00
6:00
7:00
8:00

Percent

Percent

Panel A. USD

0:00
1:00
2:00
3:00
4:00
5:00
6:00
7:00
8:00

Percent

Page 56

Figure 2. Distribution of trades by time of day

Distribution of trades by time of day

7

geoGroup=USD

6

5

4

3

2

1

Panel B. American, non-US (CAD,geoGroup=American(non-USD)
MXN)

Distribution of trades by time of day

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

7

geoGroup=EUR

6

5

4

3

2

1

Page 57

Distribution of trades by time of day

Panel D. European, non-Euro (GBP,geoGroup=Eur(non-EUR)
CHF, SEK, NOK, ZAR, DKK, ILS)
7
6

Percent

5
4
3
2

0

0:00
1:00
2:00
3:00
4:00
5:00
6:00
7:00
8:00
9:00
10:00
11:00
12:00
13:00
14:00
15:00
16:00
17:00
18:00
19:00
20:00
21:00
22:00
23:00

1

Distribution of trades by time of day

Panel E. Asia-Pacific (JPY, AUD, KRW,
SGD, HKD, NZD)
geoGroup=Asia-Pacific
6
5

3
2
1
0

0:00
1:00
2:00
3:00
4:00
5:00
6:00
7:00
8:00
9:00
10:00
11:00
12:00
13:00
14:00
15:00
16:00
17:00
18:00
19:00
20:00
21:00
22:00
23:00

Percent

4

Page 58
Figure 3. EUR/USD, April 17, 2013

EUR/USD, April 17, 2013, spot, cas, option trades

Panel A. CLS transactions (spot trades and trades flagged as option exercises)
1.44
1.42
1.40

Exchange rate

1.38
1.36
1.34
1.32
1.30
1.28
1.26
1.24
1.22
0:00

2:00

4:00

6:00

8:00 10:00 12:00 14:00 16:00 18:00 20:00 22:00 24:00

EUR/USD,
April
Panel B CLS transactions
(spot trades)

17, 2013, spot, cas trades

1.324
1.322
1.320
1.318

Exchange rate

1.316
1.314
1.312
1.310
1.308
1.306
1.304
1.302
1.300
0:00

2:00

4:00

6:00

8:00 10:00 12:00 14:00 16:00 18:00 20:00 22:00 24:00

Page 59

Panel C. CLS spot trades, Olsen bid-ask midpoint

1.324
1.322
1.320
1.318

Exchange rate

1.316
1.314
1.312
1.310
1.308
1.306
1.304
1.302
1.300
0:00

2:00

4:00

6:00

CLS trade

8:00 10:00 12:00 14:00 16:00 18:00 20:00 22:00 24:00
Olsen bid-ask midpoint

Exchange rate

Panel D. CLS spot trades, Olsen bid-ask midpoint, detail 16:00-18:00

1.319
1.318
1.317
1.316
1.315
1.314
1.313
1.312
1.311
1.310
1.309
1.308
1.307
1.306
1.305
1.304
1.303
1.302
1.301
1.300
16:00 16:10 16:20 16:30 16:40 16:50 17:00 17:10 17:20 17:30 17:40 17:50 18:00
CLS trade

Olsen bid-ask midpoint

Page 60
Figure 4. Imputation of reporting delays

Points A and B mark reported prices and times of trades. The bid-ask midpoint is indicated
as a step function. The imputation involves looking backwards in time to determine the
most recent price at which the trade could have occurred. For trade A, this implies a
reporting lag of

. For trade B, the imputed reporting lag is

(longer) reporting lag,

, but there is another

, that is also consistent with the reported price.

Ex
ch

Olsen bid-ask
A

midpoint

an
ge

B

rat
e

Time

Illiquidity (median, bps per million USD
0.001

0.001

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24

Illiquidity (median, bps per million USD

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24

0.001

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24

Illiquidity (median, bps per million USD

Figure 5.
Time of day patterns in illiquidity

AUD/USD
10

1

0.1

0.01

Hour of day

EUR/CHF

10

1

0.1

0.01

Hour of day

EUR/GBP

10

1

0.1

0.01

Hour of day

Illiquidity (median, bps per million USD
0.001

0.001

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24

Illiquidity (median, bps per million USD

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24

0.001

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24

Illiquidity (median, bps per million USD

Page 62

EUR/JPY
10

1

0.1

0.01

Hour of day

EUR/NOK

10

1

0.1

0.01

Hour of day

EUR/SEK

10

1

0.1

0.01

Hour of day

Illiquidity (median, bps per million USD
0.001

0.001

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24

Illiquidity (median, bps per million USD

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24

0.001

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24

Illiquidity (median, bps per million USD

Page 63

EUR/USD
10

1

0.1

0.01

Hour of day

GBP/JPY

10

1

0.1

0.01

Hour of day

GBP/USD

10

1

0.1

0.01

Hour of day

Illiquidity (median, bps per million USD
0.001

0.001

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24

Illiquidity (median, bps per million USD

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24

0.001

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24

Illiquidity (median, bps per million USD

Page 64

NZD/USD
10

1

0.1

0.01

Hour of day

USD/CAD

10

1

0.1

0.01

Hour of day

USD/CHF

10

1

0.1

0.01

Hour of day

Illiquidity (median, bps per million USD
0.001

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24

Page 65

USD/JPY
10

1

0.1

0.01

Hour of day

Figure 6. Alternative liquidity measures across currency pairs
Log-log scatterplot of estimated price impact coefficients (on the vertical axis) vs. illiquidity
ratios (on the horizontal axis). The price impact coefficients are the medians reported in
Mancini, Ranaldo and Wrampelmeyer (2013), internet appendix IA.III.

1.00
USD/CAD
AUD/USD

Commonwealth pairs

EUR/GBP
GBP/USD
EUR/JPY

Price impact

USD/CHF

USD/JPY
0.10

EUR/CHF

EUR/USD

0.01
0.010000

0.100000

Illiquidity (Amihud)

1.000000

