                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       THE LONDON MONETARY AND ECONOMIC CONFERENCE OF 1933 AND
                   THE END OF THE GREAT DEPRESSION:
                    A “CHANGE OF REGIME” ANALYSIS

                                       Sebastian Edwards

                                      Working Paper 23204
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23204


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2017




I thank Michael Poyker for his assistance. I thank Michael Bordo, Josh Hausman, and George
Tavlas for comments. I have benefitted from conversations with Ed Leamer. The views expressed
herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Sebastian Edwards. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
The London Monetary and Economic Conference of 1933 and the End of The Great Depression:
A “Change of Regime” Analysis
Sebastian Edwards
NBER Working Paper No. 23204
February 2017
JEL No. B21,B22,B26,E3,E31,E42,F31,N22

                                          ABSTRACT

In this paper I analyze the London Monetary and Economic Conference of 1933, an almost
forgotten episode in U.S. monetary history. I study how the Conference shaped dollar policy
during the second half of 1933 and early 1934. I use daily data to investigate the way in which the
Conference and related policies associated to the gold standard affected commodity prices, bond
prices, and the stock market. My results show that the Conference itself did not impact
commodity prices or the stock market. However, it had a small effect on bond prices. I do find
that the events associated with the abandonment of the gold standard impacted prices in a
significant way, even before the actual monetary and currency channels were at work. These
results are consistent with the “change in regime” hypothesis of Sargent (1983).


Sebastian Edwards
UCLA Anderson Graduate School of Management
110 Westwood Plaza, Suite C508
Box 951481
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and NBER
sebastian.edwards@anderson.ucla.edu
                                                         1


    1. Introduction

The London Monetary and Economic Conference of 1933 marks a major turning point in
President Franklin D. Roosevelt’s policies towards gold and exchange rates; there is a “before
London” and an “after London.” Until that time policy decisions on the currency were largely
dictated by financial and political events that were beyond government control. In fact, during
the campaign, neither Roosevelt nor his close advisers – a group known as the Brains Trust –
developed a plan on what to do about the dollar.1 During its first few months (March-June 1933),
the administration appeared to be constantly behind the curve. The gold embargo decreed on
March 6 was the result of a banking crisis that exploded during the last three weeks of the
Hoover administration; the banking holiday of March 6 through 13 was planned by departing
Treasury officials; the abandonment of the gold standard on April 19 responded to Congress’s
inflationist demands, including to the amendments proposed by Senators Wheeler and Thomas;
and the abrogation of the gold clause on June 5 was the Administration’s response to the barrage
of legal cases that loomed in the horizon. Not only that, the London Conference itself was
imposed on President Roosevelt. It had been proposed in mid-1932 by President Herbert Hoover
to the European nations, as a follow up to the Lausanne Conference on debts, and as a way of
making a concerted effort to deal with the economic problems of the day.2

The London Conference opened during the second week of June, and was supposed to last for
twelve weeks. Although the U.S. decided not to include war debts in the agenda – these were to
be treated separately, in bilateral negotiations –, the conference was to cover a broad array of
issues, including international trade, credit policies, employment, protectionism, commodity
prices, and the possible return of all nations to a “modified international standard.”3

On July 3, barely three weeks after it was inaugurated by the King, the Conference was shocked
by a message sent by President Roosevelt. In his communique the President said that he was
dismayed by the direction the discussions had taken. He stated that there was too much emphasis
on short run exchange rates stabilization and not enough on commodity prices and recovery. He
added that the U.S. would not participate in any effort to stabilize the exchanges in the
immediate run, and that the Conference’s fixation with short term stability responded to “old
fetishes of so-called international bankers.” 4 He declared that the aim of the parley ought to be
generating mechanisms for “controlled inflation.” Following Roosevelt’s message – known as
the “bombshell” – the Conference stalled, and three weeks later it adjourned without achieving
any of its goals, not even the most modest ones.



1
  On the economics views of the senior members of the “Brains Trust,” see Edwards (2017a).
2
  For an account of these events by one of FDR’s closest and most influential advisers, see Moley (1939, 1966).
3
  See Paslovsky (1933).
4
  Roosevelt (1938), Vol. 2. P. 264-265.
                                                       2


After the Conference, U.S. policy towards gold and the dollar became proactive and even
experimental. During the last week of August the administration implemented the first phase of a
“gold buying” program aimed at raising the price of gold and, in this way, increasing commodity
prices. This program, which was designed by Cornell Professor George F. Warren, was
expanded in late October when the government decided to buy gold internationally at prices
determined daily by the President himself. This active dollar policy culminated on January 30
1934, with the signing of the Gold Act into law. One day later the dollar was officially devalued
to $35 an ounce of gold, from the historical parity of $20.67. According to this legislation the
U.S. committed herself to buying and selling unlimited amounts of gold at that price.5 This
system lasted until August 1971, when Richard Nixon closed the Treasury’s “gold window.”

Starting in February 1934, and largely as a consequence of the devaluation of the dollar, the U.S.
experienced large inflows of gold. These were monetized by the Federal Reserve, with the
concomitant increase in the monetary stock. Most scholars who have studied the Great
Depression – including Friedman and Schwartz, Meltzer, Bernanke, and Romer – agree that this
change in monetary policy played a fundamental role in the U.S. recovery. According to Romer
(1992, p.781, emphasis added):6

        “Monetary developments were a crucial source of the recovery of the U.S. economy from
        the Great Depression… The money supply grew rapidly in the mid- and late 1930s
        because of a huge unsterilized gold inflow to the United States… [T]he largest inflow
        occurred immediately following the revaluation of gold mandated by the Roosevelt
        administration in 1934.”

In spite of the London Conference importance, relatively little has been written about it. To be
sure, historians and international relations scholars have taken an interest in the gathering, but
there have been very few economic analyses on the negotiations and on the economic
consequences of London.7 To date, the work by Eichengreen and Uzan (1990) continues to be
the most complete economic analysis of the Conference. In that article the authors provide a

5
  For recent analyses of the gold buying program see Sumner (2015) and Edwards (2017b).
6
  Other scholars who have emphasized the role of the devaluation include Eichengreen and Sachs (1986),
Eichengreen (1992), Bernanke (2000), Bernanke and James (1991), Temin (1991), Mundell (2000), and Irwin (2012).
It is not possible to do justice to the copious literature on the Great Depression; see, however, Bordo, Choudhri
and Scwhartz (2002), Bordo and Kydland (1995), Meltzer (2003), De Long (1990), Wigmore (1987), Obstfeld and
Taylor (1997), and Calomiris and Wheelock (1998). Friedman and Schwartz (1963) continues to be the basic study
on monetary policy during this period.
7
  The Conference attracted considerable attention from contemporary analysts, including Lindley (1933) and
Pasvolsky (1933). Schlesinger (1957) provides a detailed account, which draws on many of the participants
recollections. Nussbaum (1957) dedicates two pages to it and Eichengreen (1992), in the most complete treatise
on the gold standard, covers it in five pages. With time, however, the gathering has faded in stories on the
evolution of economic policy during the first year of the Roosevelt Administration. Ahamed (2009) devotes two
pages to it, as does Rauchway (2015). Eichengreen (2015) recently discusses the attempts to stabilize the
exchanges in London in a comparative setting.
                                                         3


summary of the Conference discussions, and contend that its inability to generate results
constituted a typical case of failed coordination. They argue that the main problem was that
political leaders in the most important countries – the U.S., the U.K., and France – viewed the
world through different conceptual lenses, and that these differences of opinion did not allow
them to come to an agreement. An important question that is not addressed in detail in the
literature is how markets reacted to the Conference and to the news emanating from London.

In this paper I present an analytical narrative of the events that transpired during the Conference
(Section 2). This discussion centers on the informal tripartite negotiations aimed at stabilizing the
exchanges in the short term, which took place in parallel to the official meeting, and which
ultimately failed. The analysis sheds light on this important but almost forgotten episode in U.S.
monetary history. I analyze how it affected dollar policy during the second half of 1933 and early
1934. In Section 3, I use daily data to investigate empirically how the Conference, and related
events and policies associated to gold and the dollar, affected key economic and financial
variables, including commodity prices, bond prices, and the stock market. Although a number of
authors have investigated the behavior of prices and financial variables during 1932-37, as far as
I know, there have not been formal empirical analyses that center on the Conference itself. The
empirical part of the paper is in the spirit of Sargent’s (1983) “change of regime” model, and
expands Temin and Wigmore (1990) pioneer work in a number of directions.8

    2. The Conference: An analytical narrative

The sixty four nations, London Monetary and Economic Conference was officially opened on
June 12 by King George. His allocution was short and to the point. Next, Prime Minister Ramsay
MacDonald delivered his welcoming speech. To the American delegation’s dismay, mid-way
through his presentation MacDonald addressed the war debts issue. He said that in addition to the
subjects in the agenda there was a key problem that needed to be solved with urgency: “I refer to
the question of war debts, which must be dealt with before every obstacle to general recovery has
been removed, and it must be taken up with no delay by the nations concerned.”9 As Ernest
Lindley (1933) pointed out a few months later, the Americans should not have been shocked. It
was unthinkable that the leader of a country besieged by debt payments would not mention his
country’s plight in the opening speech of a conference he was hosting. Two days later the British
made a $10 million partial payment on the debt. FDR issued a statement saying that he accepted
it as an indication that the U.K. was willing to pay eventually the full amount owed. Officially
the U.K. had avoided default.



8
  Since the publication of this important paper, a number of authors have investigated aspects of the change in
regime explanation. See, for example, Eggertsson (2008), for an analysis using DSGE model, Coe (2002) for a
probability switching model. See also Hausman (2013), Hausman et al (2016), and Jalil and Rua (2016).
9
  League of Nations (1933), No. 3, p. 8. See Roosevelt (1938), Vol. 2, p. 242.
                                                       4


During his first speech to the plenary, U.S. Secretary of State Cordell Hull stated that it was
necessary that as many countries as possible would adhere to a “tariff truce.” At least for the
duration of the Conference no additional protectionist measures should be put in place by any
nation. He then recited the virtues of free trade, and argued that it was important to go even
further than the truce; it was imperative to reduce tariffs and get the wheels of international
commerce moving again.10 Towards the end of his presentation the Secretary of State addressed
the question of the monetary standard. He said that the Conference had to deal officially with the
“problem of a permanent monetary standard, and determine the proper function of the metals
gold and silver in the operation of such standard.”11

In Figure 1 I present the daily dollar-pound and dollar-franc exchange rates for 1932-1935. The
figure captures some of the main currency events of the period. In particular, it is possible to see
the depreciation of the dollar on April 19, the day the country went off gold. The duration of the
Conference is indicated by a shaded area; here I consider July 3, as the de facto end of the
Conference.

As Figure 1 shows, on April 19, when the U.S. went off gold, sterling fetched $3.86 dollars. That
same day the French franc was valued at 3.93 cents of a dollar. On the day the Conference
opened the exchange rates had moved to $4.18 per pound, and $0.0486 per franc, representing a
depreciation of the dollar of 8% and 23%, with respect to sterling and the franc, respectively.
These figures should be kept in mind during the discussion that follows on the negotiations to
stabilize the exchanges in the short run.

     2.1 The French position and the currency war

In the morning of June 14, during the second plenary session, French Premier Edouard Daladier
stated that the first step to be taken, even before addressing trade, prices, credit, production, or
recovery issues, was to “put an end to the currency war.”12 For the French there was an urgent
need to stabilize currency values for at least the duration of the Conference. In their view, if that
didn’t happen it was not possible to make progress in solving the world economic crisis. A few
days before the Conference was inaugurated the dominant sentiment in France was one of
skepticism. Frederic Jenny, the financial editor of Les Temps, summarized his countrymen’s
views as follows: 13

                 “We are unhappily forced to admit the conference is going to open its labors
                 under conditions just as deceptive as possible. The fall of the dollar and the
10
   Hull knew, however, that these were empty words. At the last minute the President had informed him that he
would not request from Congress authority to negotiate lower tariffs. The Times of London, “Sweeping U.S.
measures,” June 5, 1933, p. 15.
11
   League of Nations (1933), No. 5, p. 26.
12
   League of Nations (1933), No. 4, p. 12.
13
   The New York Times, “Paris doubts help at London parley,” June 12, 1933, p. 2.
                                                           5


                    American repudiation of the gold clause has already singularly complicated its
                    task.”

With respect to trade negotiations, the influential French Deputy Paul Reynaud said that any
“attempt to revive trade between the nations will be in vain as long as it is possible to nullify any
customs agreement by manipulating their currencies. Two of the greatest currencies in the world
[the dollar and the pound] are not being stabilized, this necessary condition is not fulfilled.”14
French sentiments were aptly summarized in a New York Times article published the day the
Conference was inaugurated: “The formal opinion of France, which will be upheld by its
delegates at the conference, is that there can be no question of talking about lowering tariff walls
until an agreement is reached concerning [currency] stabilization.”15

In June 1933, France was one of the few countries still on the gold standard. The franc had been
re-pegged to gold in 1926, at a significantly depreciated rate. As a consequence, France had been
running substantial trade surpluses, and large amounts of gold had found their way to the vaults
of the Banque de France. The Daladier government was concerned with exchange rate stability
for two main reasons: First, with depreciated currencies, American and British exports were
more competitive, and were beginning to crowd out French exports in the global marketplace.
Second, in the absence of an “international standard” of some sort, there was a possibility of a
series of competitive devaluations that would force France to devalue the franc once again.
Premiere Daladier and his associates were perfectly aware of the traumatizing experience of a
major devaluation, and the last thing they wanted was to repeat the 1919-1926 experience. For
them it was essential that the Conference returned things to “normality,” and this meant fixed
exchange rates.

The French position, “stabilization first,” presented a major diplomatic and logistical problem. It
was very difficult, if not utterly impossible, to negotiate the immediate stabilization of exchange
rates in a meeting with sixty four very different nations, such as Nicaragua, Haiti, the USSR,
Switzerland, and the Netherlands. The only way to deal with France’s demands was to have
informal parallel talks, involving only the major players – the U.K., the U.S., and France. While
the official gathering dealt with longer term issues through two formal working commissions,
short term stabilization questions were discussed in an unofficial and restricted conclave. The
American negotiators in these shadow meetings were George Harrison, the Chairman of the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, James P. Warburg for the White House, and Professor
Oliver A. W. Sprague in representation of the Treasury; Sprague had been FDR’s instructor at
Harvard, and an adviser to the Bank of England. The British team was led by the Governor of the
Bank of England, Montagu Norman, and by Sir Frederic Leith-Ross for the Treasury, while the


14
     The New York Times, “Paris doubts help at London parley,” June 12, 1933, p. 2.
15
     The New York Times, “France insistent on stable money,” June 12, 1933, p. 25.
                                                        6


French contingent was directed by Minister George Bonnet and senior officials Jacques Rueff
and Jean-Jacques Bizot.

The parallel tripartite negotiations were launched on June 9, before the official opening of the
Conference, and dealt exclusively with two questions: Was it possible to stabilize the exchanges
immediately and, at least, for the duration of the Conference? And, if the exchanges were indeed
stabilized temporarily, at what level should that happen? On June 10, two days before the
Conference was officially launched, the British intimated that they would like to stabilize at
$3.75, while the Americans mentioned $4.25 “with the expectation of striking a bargain around
$4.00 to $4.10.” 16 The gap between the two positions was non trivial, but according to the U.S.
negotiators it was possible to find a middle ground.

In the weeks prior to the Conference, FDR had said that he favored stabilization, but did not state
at what rate. In his Second Fireside Chat, on May 7, the President declared that one of the goals
of the Conference was “the setting up of the stabilization of currencies, in order that trade can
make contracts ahead.”17 On May 29, two weeks before the opening of the Conference,
Roosevelt had some concrete ideas on what he considered to be an appropriate level for the
dollar. He told Henry Morgenthau Jr. and banker Bernard Baruch that he would like to see the
dollar-pound exchange rate go to $4.25; on that day it was $3.99, implying a further devaluation
of the dollar of 6%. He then said that “he would like to see the price of commodities be based on
a 75¢ dollar.” At the same time he wanted to make sure that speculative forces were kept under
check: “I do not want the stock market go up too fast.”18 In his memoirs Herbert Feis, the only
professional economist who participated in the negotiations that eventually led to the official
devaluation of the dollar in January 1934, said that “it was hard to tell what the President wanted
[regarding exchange rates]. His ideas veered and waffled. Even now, with my records open, it is
not easy to trace their gyrations.”19

For the British, stabilization was important, but not as much as for the French. A serious question
was at which rate to steady sterling. In his memoirs, Leith-Ross (1968, p 168) said the following
about the preparatory meetings held during May in Washington D.C.: “While we did not
question the desirability of the eventual return to a stabilized exchange rate, we felt that more
experience was needed before we could decide what precise rate we would be able to maintain.”
In early June, just before the Conference opened, he remarked that recent fluctuation in the
currency market made the decision very difficult. “Sterling which not long ago had been worth
less than $3.20 was now fetching over $4.20.”20


16
   Lindley (1933), p. 198.
17
   Roosevelt (1938), Vol 2. P. 166-167.
18
   Morgenthau Diaries, Volume 1, May 29, 1933. P. 37.
19
   Feis (1966), p. 144.
20
   Leith-Ross (1968), p. 168.
                                                       7


The question of at what level to stabilize the exchanges is directly related to whether the
currency is in line with its “fundamentals,” or if, on the contrary, it is misaligned (overvalued or
undervalued). Nowadays this type of analysis has become routine, and is periodically performed
by the multilateral institutions, central banks, and investment banks.21 Most of these analyses are
based on models of current account sustainability, and/or models that distinguish transitory and
permanent changes in fundamentals such as the terms of trade, global interest rates, and
openness. In the late 1920s and early 1930s, however, analyses on the appropriateness of
currency values were mostly confined to simple purchasing power parity calculations. Indeed,
this method was used by Cassel and Keynes when looking at the interwar situation in Europe.22
In the period surrounding the London Conference the economics profession did not discuss in
detail the extent to which certain currencies – including the dollar, the franc, and sterling – were
misaligned, and if so by how much. It was only in the years that followed that economists
embarked on detailed investigations of whether different currencies were close to their long-run
“equilibrium.” In early 1935 Harry Dexter White wrote a memorandum at the Treasury where he
argued that at that time the dollar was 3% undervalued; according to his calculations the pound
was undervalued by 19%, while the German mark was overvalued by 27%.23 In 1936, and after a
long and detailed study, Harris (1936, p. 20) concluded that “[i]t is clear from the large inflow of
gold into the United States in the years 1934-1935 that the dollar is undervalued.”

     2.2 Rumors and more rumors

Starting on June 10, rumors and counter rumors flooded London regarding the parallel
negotiations on exchange rates. Some reporters said that an agreement on short term stabilization
was imminent, while others believed that it would only happen once Raymond Moley, FDR’s
closest adviser and the former head of the Brains Trust, arrived with fresh instructions from the
President. On June 13 the dollar strengthened and agricultural prices dipped. The U.S. stock
market, which appeared to have found its footing during the previous weeks, faltered. While this
happened, the members of the official U.S. delegation were busy trying to deflect the growing
uproar about war debts. The next day the dollar strengthened further as a result of rumors
indicating that the parallel tripartite conference had reached an agreement and that the dollar
would be stabilized at approximately $4.00 per pound.24

On June 14 Secretary of the Treasury Will Woodin decided to put an end to the rumors, and he
released a statement in Washington stating that “any proposal concerning stabilization would
have to be submitted to the President and to the Treasury and no suggestion of such a proposal


21
   For a discussion on exchange rate misalignment see Edwards (2011) and the literature cited therein.
22
   Cassel (1922), Keynes (1924).
23
   White (1935).
24
   The rumor was started after James Cox, the former Governor of Ohio, and newly appointed chair of the
Monetary Committee of the Conference, uttered that a $4.00 per pound rate was appropriate.
                                                          8


has been received here.”25 His communique, however, had little effect on market sentiments. The
next day, June 15, the dollar strengthened further to $4.02 per pound.

Finally, on June 16, there seemed to be some light at the end of the tunnel. After long and
tortuous negotiations that went into the wee hours of the morning, the Americans reached a
tentative agreement with their British and French counterparts. James P. Warburg, who was
acting as a de facto head of the parallel U.S. delegation, immediately drafted a report which he
cabled to FDR for his comments and approval. The plan, he explained, was simple: the
exchanges of France, the U.K. and the U.S. would be pegged for at least six weeks at the level
where they stood the day the agreement was signed; that meant an exchange rate with respect to
the pound in the vicinity of $4.10, and of approximately 4.68 cents with respect to the franc; in
comparison to April 18 (the last day the U.S. was under the gold standard), this meant a dollar
devaluation of 17% relative to sterling, and 21% relative to the franc. The New York Federal
Reserve Bank and the British Exchange Equalization Account would commit themselves to
make sure that the exchanges would indeed remain at those levels. That implied, Warburg
declared, that the Treasury would have to backstop the Federal Reserve in case any losses
resulted from the stabilization effort.

The President’s reply was short and precise, and came on June 17. He would not approve any
plan that implied the possibility of gold shipments or Treasury losses. Negotiations should
continue until a better deal was obtained. Warburg took the rejection in stride; they had to go
back to the negotiating table and try something else. George Harrison, the President of the New
York Fed, was not pleased. He would not be part of a proposal that exposed the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York to losses. If the Treasury was unwilling to provide full cover for the Bank, he
had no role to play in London. The next day (June 19) he sailed back on the SS Bremen to New
York. The press and the financial markets took his departure as a bad sign. It meant that the
negotiations had gone poorly; all there was to do now was waiting for presidential envoy
Raymond Moley’s arrival. He, for sure, would come with authority to strike a deal that would
allow the Conference to proceed with its official business. On June 21, however, The Times of
London cautioned that not much should be expected of Moley’s trip. It was unlikely, the reporter
wrote, that Moley would lead the American delegation “into greater cooperation. His personal
isolationist views are too well known to require elaboration.”26

On June 20, and according to schedule, Key Pittman, U.S. Senator from Nevada, officially
introduced a U.S. draft resolution on a modified international monetary standard to the Monetary
Committee of the Conference. This was a proposal referred to the long run and was, in principle,
unrelated to the tripartite negotiations on short term stabilization that were being conducted in
parallel. The delegates took particular note of three aspects of the American longer term plan:

25
     Roosevelt (1938), Vol. 2. P. 245.
26
     Times of London, “America's Two Paths.” June 21, 1933; pg. 14.
                                                         9


First, gold would continue to be at the center of the modified system. Second, gold (and silver)
would only be used to settle international trade. That meant that “gold either in coin or bullion”
would “be withdrawn from [private] circulation.” And third, all nations would simultaneously
reduce the cover ratio to 25%, allowing for an immediate expansion in credit and liquidity; at the
time the cover ratio in the U.S. was 40%.

One of the advantages of this plan, which was the brainchild of James P. Warburg, was that by
lowering the cover ratio significantly it allowed central banks to embark on countercyclical
monetary policy.27 Although the proposal was generally well received, not everyone agreed with
every detail. The Swiss, for example, argued that an appropriate standard had to rely exclusively
on gold. The Uruguayan delegation also expressed some misgivings about allowing a high
percentage (up to 20%) of silver to back the monetary stock. And the Central European nations
were leery of committing to a regime that could result in large losses of their already low gold
reserves. During the next few days the United States introduced two additional resolutions
related to monetary and exchange rate issues to the Conference. One provided general principles
for coordinating monetary and fiscal policies, while the other advocated the removal of exchange
restrictions in all countries.28

     2.3 A waiting mode and a bombshell

On June 22 the press noted that the Conference had entered into a “waiting mode.” Speeches
were still given and meetings continued to take place, but nothing of substance happened.
Everyone seemed to be waiting for the arrival of presidential emissary, Raymond Moley. Writing
two months after the events, Ernest Lindley described the mood in London as follows:29

                 “[The] American delegation produces two resolutions… Nobody pays much
                 attention. Moley is coming with instructions from Mr. Roosevelt. The Conference
                 marks time. The French decide to wait and see if Moley is bringing authority to
                 peg the dollar. Stories that Hull is going to be displaced or resign fill London and
                 other capitals… [On June 26] the Dutch Guilder weakens. The French are in a
                 panic. American commodities and stocks skyrocket… Secretary Hull’s patience is
                 exhausted… The President seldom consults him… [and] his friends feel he is at
                 the point of resigning.”



27
   In 1932 a group of economists criticized the Fed for not undertaking counter cyclical policy. See Appendix I in
Wright (1932). In mid-1933 a smaller group of Chicago economists made a more specific proposal for reforming
the monetary system, which they sent to the Secretary of Agriculture Henry A. Wallace. This scheme received the
name of the “Chicago Plan.” See Tavlas (1997) for a detailed analysis.
28
   Warburg (1934), p. 107. The Warburg plan had some similarities to the plan unveiled by Keynes in a series of
articles in the Times, which he collected in the pamphlet The means to prosperity. Keynes (1933).
29
   Lindley (1933), p. 204-206.
                                               10


Raymond Moley arrived in London late at night on June 27. He immediately sensed that
Secretary of State Cordell Hull was unhappy with his mission, and during the next few days
made every effort to appear as a loyal subordinate, as someone who took orders from the
Secretary, as a mere messenger without any power to negotiate or make decisions. But no one
believed him. The French were convinced that he had the authority to stabilize the dollar.

It was at that point when gold bloc countries led by the French decided to issue an ultimatum:
“Stabilize or we quit.”30

After conferring with James Warburg and Professor Sprague, Moley concluded that the only way
to save the Conference was to issue a tripartite communiqué indicating that some agreement had
been reached regarding the short run stabilization of the exchanges. He was perfectly aware that
it would not be easy to satisfy the three powers. The document had to be general and specific at
the same time, both vague and detailed. He met with John Maynard Keynes and U.S. journalist
Walter Lippmann, who was covering the Conference for the Herald Tribune, to get their opinion
on the wording of the text.

Just before leaving the U.S. Moley had met with FDR to get last minute instructions. It was a
dramatic rendezvous in the middle of the ocean. The fact that Moley had taken a seaplane to get
to the President, who was on a vacation on his sailboat the Amberjack II, added to the myth that
the former head of the Brains Trust had plenipotentiary powers. As he would tell later in his
memoirs and in numerous interviews, he got precise instructions from the President: on arriving
to London he was to communicate to every delegate from every country that the U.S. would not
sacrifice domestic goals in order to address international ones. With respect to the global
monetary system, he was to emphasize that the aim of the Conference – and of the parallel mini
conclave, for that matter – was to raise commodity prices around the world, and not to merely
stabilize the exchanges. The real question, the President insisted, was how to generate
“controlled inflation.”31

During the evening of June 30 a small group met at the American Embassy in London to draft a
declaration to be submitted to FDR for approval. Raymond Moley, Professor Sprague and James
Warburg were in attendance for the U.S. and worked on the exact wording. The French Secretary
of Finance and Sir Frederick Leith-Ross were there with their staffs. The group worked on a very
general text. The draft communiqué stated that the U.S. and the U.K. (the non-gold countries)
were to make every effort to control currency speculation in the immediate run. That was as far
as Moley was willing to go; the French seemed to understand that they were not going to get a
deeper commitment, and agreed on the wording. The word “stabilization” was not in the text, nor
was there a pledge to devote resources to stop speculators.

30
     Lindley (1933), p. 206.
31
     Moley (1939), p 235.
                                                         11


Almost at midnight the new draft was sent to the President, who had just reached Campobello in
his sailboat, for his reaction and approval. In its medullar part the draft communique said: “Each
of the government signatory hereto agrees to ask its central bank to work together with the
central banks of the other governments which sign this declaration in limiting speculation and, at
the proper time, reinaugurating an international gold standard.”32

To everyone’s surprise the President rejected the text of what was now known as the “Moley
Plan.” In FDR’s view there was the danger that the statement could be interpreted as a
commitment and a moral obligation to stabilize the exchanges and ship gold in order to maintain
stability. Moley was shocked, but after a few minutes collected himself and told the American
delegates that they had to draft a new text that included the President’s main concern:
commodity prices should go up globally before a serious attempt was made at stabilizing
currency values. It was a simple principle, the old question of the horse and the cart. The French
understood that there would be no concessions by the Americans and agreed to drafting a revised
version. A new statement was prepared, and on the night of July 1 it was cabled for FDR’s
revision and, hopefully, approval. By now the President had left Campobello and was on board
the USS Indianapolis on his way back to Washington.

But instead of approving the new draft, as Moley and everyone else expected, the President
cabled his own message to the delegates. This communication written on the Indianapolis was
the bombshell that or all practical purposes sunk the Conference.

The President opened his message by stating that the Conference’s failure to address real long
term problems constituted a “catastrophe amounting to a world tragedy.” 33 He continued by
asserting that “a purely artificial and temporary experiment affecting the monetary exchange of a
few Nations only” was a fatal diversion. He then added that “the world will not long be lulled by
the spacious fallacy of achieving a temporary and probably an artificial stability on foreign
exchanges on the part of a few countries only.” From here he went on to state that the fixation
with short term stability responded to “old fetishes of so-called international bankers.” Then
came the paragraph that, in Cordell Hull’s words, “threw the conference into an uproar”:34

                 “[T]he United States seeks the kind of dollar which a generation hence will have
                 the same purchasing and debt-paying power as the dollar value we hope to attain
                 in the near future. That objective means more to the good of other nations than a
                 fix ratio for a month or two in terms of the pound or franc….Temporary exchange
                 rate fixing is not the true answer.”



32
   Warburg (1934), p. 117.
33
   All the quotes in this paragraph come from Roosevelt (1938), Vol. 2. P. 264-265.
34
   Hull (1948), Vol. 1, p. 262, emphasis added.
                                                         12


A few hours after receiving FDR’s statement, the representatives of the leading nations, with the
exception of the United States, drafted a declaration that in part read: “[T]he American statement
on stabilization rendered it entirely useless to continue the conference.”35

What made the delegates of the large nations particularly unhappy was that as recently as May
16, Roosevelt had stated in letter to world leaders that a key objective of the London Conference
should be to “establish order in place of the present chaos by a stabilization of currencies, by
freeing the flow of world trade.”36 They wondered what had happened to the President. Why did
he change his mind in the course of a few weeks? What prompted him to write such a harsh
communique? What was his ultimate goal?

But not everyone was dismayed. In fact, in some intellectual and business quarters the bombshell
was well received. John Maynard Keynes wrote in the Daily Mirror that the President’s decision
was “magnificently right,” as it opened the way for a modern international system based on
managed currencies. A few months later, however, Keynes would openly criticize the active
exchange rate policy implemented by the U.S. after London. On December 31 1933, he wrote in
The New York Times: “The recent gyrations of the dollar have looked to me more like a gold
standard on the booze than the ideal managed currency of my dreams.”37

In evaluating the London events it is important to keep in mind that on May 12, and as part of the
Agricultural Adjustment Act (AAA), Congress passed the Thomas Amendment, which gave the
President the authority to reduce the gold content of the dollar by up to 50%.38 In early July, the
official price of gold continued to be $20.67 an ounce, as established by the Gold Act of 1900;
that is, the President had not made use of the power granted to him by Congress. Stabilizing the
exchanges meant giving up an important prerogative, something that politicians are generally
reluctant to do. As we will see in the Section that follows, in the President eyes it also meant
giving up an instrument that, according to his interpretation of the facts, had effectively
contributed to his goal of generating “controlled inflation,” and returning commodity prices to
where they had been in 1926.

     3. The Conference, commodity prices, and financial markets

In this Section I use daily data to analyze the market reaction to the Conference and to other
policies related to gold, implemented during the early months of the Roosevelt administration. I
am particularly interested in the evolution of exchange rates, commodity prices, the stock


35
   Hull (1948), Vol. 1, p. 263.
36
   Roosevelt (1938), Vol. 2, p. 186, emphasis added.
37
   The New York Times (NYT), December 31, 1933, p. 2 XX. For a formal statistical analysis of dollar gyrations during
that period see Edwards (2017b).
38
   The Thomas Amendment gave the President several options for generating inflation. The devaluation of the
dollar was one of them. For details see, for example, Moley (1939).
                                                       13


market, and bond prices, in the period following the abandonment of the gold standard and
during the Conference itself.

Before proceeding, it is useful to provide some background about the administration’s main
policy objectives during its first year. Throughout the campaign Governor Roosevelt repeatedly
stated that one of the most important goals of his administration would be to raise commodity
prices, which had declined precipitously since 1920. Once elected, he continued to emphasize the
centrality of higher commodity prices in his plan for recovery. On April 19 1933, after
announcing that the U.S. was abandoning the gold standard, the President said: 39

                 “The whole problem before us is to raise commodity prices. For the last year, the
                 dollar has been shooting up [this was a reference to the depreciating pound
                 sterling] and we decided to quit competition. The general effect probably will be
                 an increase in commodity prices. It might well be called the next step in the
                 general program.”

In May, during his Second Fireside Chat, the President went further, and said that the goal of the
administration was to move prices back to where they had been in 1926. An important question,
then, is whether the evolution of commodity prices during the weeks leading to the Conference –
and during the gathering itself, for that matter – affected Roosevelt’s views regarding the
usefulness of the Conference, and influenced his decision to deliver the bombshell message on
July 3d.

The rest of the Section is organized as follows: In Subsection 3.1 I present daily data on the
evolution of exchange rates, commodity prices, bond prices, and the stock market, and I present
a preliminary analysis on the relation between exchange rate instability and prices. I make an
attempt to look at these variables from the vantage point of late June 1933, just before President
Roosevelt decided to jettison the Conference. In Subsection 3.2 I report results from a series of
“event study” type of regressions using daily data for November 1932-Decemner 1933. A key
question addressed in this Section is whether the sheer expectation that the U.S. would officially
devalue the dollar – something that happened only on June 31 1934 – had a positive effect on
prices even before the devaluation took place and the resulting inflows of gold and expansion in
the money supply were materialized. A second key question, is what was the effect, within this
this context, of the Conference on prices.40




39
  Roosevelt (1938), p. 137. Emphasis added.
40
  As pointed out below, these questions are conceptually related to the “change of regime” hypotheses of
expectations models, such as Sargent (1983). A study along these lines was undertaken with monthly data for
cotton by Temin and Wigmore (1990).
                                                        14


     3.1 Data and preliminary analysis

In Figure 2 I present daily prices for corn, cotton, rye, and wheat for January 2 through
December 31, 1933. Two vertical lines have been drawn; the first one corresponds to March 6,
the day the gold embargo was declared, and the second to April 19, the day the U.S. went off
gold. The duration of the London Conference is shown with a shaded area; as noted, I have
assumed that for all practical purposes the meeting ended on July 3, the day the delegates
received FDR’s bombshell. As may be seen, between early March and late June there was a
strong upward trend in commodity prices. For corn, prices went from $0.25 per bushel on
January 2, to $0.52 on June 30. For cotton, prices went from $0.063 per pound to $0.101, a price
that was still 20% shy of FDR’s target of $0.12. The price of rye increased from 40 to 78 cents
per bushel, and the price of wheat went from, $0.50 to $0.78 per bushel. These figures also show
that commodity prices peaked during the third week of July, merely 14 days after FDR’s
delivered the bombshell to the London delegates. From then onwards, and to the President’s
concern and disappointment, they experienced a gradual decline. This price correction triggered
Roosevelt’s decision, in late August, to embark on the gold-buying program.41

In Figure 3 I present, for the same time period, daily data on the stock market index (Dow) and
for the price of the Fourth Liberty Bond 4½s.42 As may be seen, the Dow Index follows a pattern
similar to that of commodity prices, with a change in direction starting on March 6. The stock
market also peaked on July 17. Its correction, however, was less pronounced than that of
commodity prices. The data on the Liberty Bond are particularly interesting, since these
securities – as all government debt at the time –, included a “gold clause” and was payable in
“gold coin equivalent.” Price fluctuations, then, reflect, to some extent, whether the market
believed that payment would be made in accordance with the original contract. The severe drop
in the price just before the Conference responded to Congress’s Joint Resolution of June 5,
which abrogated the gold clause for all past and future contracts.43 Once the Conference was
inaugurated, however, prices recovered and hovered at around 103.4 until the bombshell was
received, at which point they experienced a steep decline. From that point on they stayed at
around 102.3 until late October, when the second phase of the gold-buying program was
launched.

For someone sitting in late June 1933, the message summarized in Figures 1 through 3 was both
powerful and simple: Exchange rate instability increased very significantly after the gold
embargo and the abandonment of the gold standard, and prices also increased substantially after
that time.44 President Roosevelt, of course, was aware of these data. Henry Morgenthau Jr., who

41
   For details see Edwards (2017b).
42
   This bond was issued on May 8, 1918, and was redeemable between 1933 and 1938.
43
   For details on the abrogation see Edwards, Longstaff and Garcia-Marín (2015).
44
   See Lippmann (1936) for a collection of columns written during 1933 on agricultural prices and exchange rates.
                                                      15


at the time was the Governor of the Federal Farm Board, and who in late 1933 would replace
ailing Will Woodin as Secretary of the Treasury, showed the President weekly charts with
agricultural prices, exchange rates, financial variables, and the stocks of monetary gold from
around the world. By late June FDR had become convinced that a “managed currency,” a system
advocated by economists such as Irving Fisher and George F. Warren, and which effectively
meant that domestic economic considerations would take precedence over exchange-rate
stability, had some merit and could generate a permanent increase in commodity prices. 45 From
that point on the President was increasingly committed to trying it (See Moley, 1939).

     3.2 Regression results

In this Section I present the results of a series of “event study” type of regressions for commodity
prices, the stock market index, and bond prices. My interest is to investigate two related issues:
(a) Did policies relative to gold implemented during 1933 affect prices? And (b) did the London
Conference itself have an impact on prices? What makes these questions particularly interesting
is that, as noted, during 1933 the dollar was still officially pegged to gold at the historical level of
$20.67. Not only that, during that year there were no significant changes in monetary policy; the
large gold inflows and liquidity increases that scholars have singled out as the most important
force behind the recovery, only began in February 1934.46

These questions are related to Sargent’s (1983) “change in regime,” analysis of inflation.47 In
Sargent’s rational expectations model, economic agents respond to changes in expectations, and
alter their habits and decisions in anticipation to what they believe will happen. The effect of
expectations on prices is particularly pronounced if the public believes that there is an imminent
and very significant change in policy; if there is a “change in regime.” There is little doubt that
for the U.S., a country that had been under some sort of metallic standard since independence,
unhinging the dollar from gold was considered to be a Teutonic alteration in policy and tradition.
In 1792, when Alexander Hamilton founded the Mint, the price of gold was set at $19.39 an
ounce; in 1834 it was increased by 6.7% to $20.69 an ounce, and on January 18 1837 it was
lowered slightly to $20.67 an ounce. That price had prevailed until FDR announced that the
country was off gold in April 1933. Temin and Wigmore (1990) have argued that in 1933 the
public in the U.S. indeed expected a “change in regime.” They tested that hypothesis by
regressing monthly data for cotton (in levels) on changes in exchange rates and a lagged
dependent variable.



45
   Fisher (1913, 1920), Warren and Pearson (1931).
46
   During 1933 the discount rate was increased once and reduced thrice. See Federal Reserve Board of Governors
(1943). See, also, the discussion below.
47
   Temin and Wigmore (1990) proposed the “change of regime” hypothesis for explaining the recovery from the
Great Depression. See, also, Eggertson (2008) and Jalil and Rua (2016) for recent work along these lines.
                                                 16


       3.2.1   The empirical model

In order to investigate the short term dynamics of prices during the first year of the Roosevelt
administration, I estimated number of error correction models of the following type:



(1)




In each regression, is the variable of interest: the price of corn, cotton, rye and wheat, the Dow
stock market index, and the price of the 1938 Liberty Bond.               and                  are the
“event” dummies.             takes a value of one if that day (or during the event window) a policy
that affected the expectations of an (official) devaluation of the dollar and, thus, of a more
expansive monetary policy and higher prices, was undertaken.                takes a value of minus
one if that day a measure that signaled that a devaluation was less likely, or if it appeared that the
gold standard could be reinstated. An example of a positive             event is April 19, when the
President announced the implementation of a strict gold embargo and that the nation was
abandoning the gold standard. As will be seen, there are very few events with a negative values
for         . A complete list with the actual dates of the “positive” and “negative”          events
is presented in Table 1. To the extent that positive           events signaled a “change of regime”
and the adoption of a significantly more expansive monetary policy, the coefficient of this
variable should be positive in the error correction estimates. The variable                     takes
a value of one the day the London Conference was inaugurated and minus one on July 3. Since
one of the purposes of the Conference was to stabilize the exchanges, a successful Conference
would have affected negatively the expectations of further devaluation and inflation. That is, the
                    variable would be negative if the gathering affected expectations in the
direction just noted. Finally, the are other covariates that may affect the dynamic of prices and
financial variables during this period. They include the rate of change of the market exchange
rate, a political “event” variable, as well as indicators of monetary policy; see the discussion
below for details. The error term is supposed to have the standard properties. The data sources
are provided in the appendix.

       3.2.2   Results

The results from the estimation of several specifications of error correction equations of the type
of (1) are in Tables 2 through 7. Daily data were used; the estimation period was November 1
1932 through December 31, 1933. That is, it covers the period that goes from the presidential
election, which took place on November 8, through the end of 1933. The analysis, then, includes
the long “interregnum” that went from November 8 to March 4, the Hundred Days – which
                                                17


ended on June 16 and included passing key legislation, including the AAA and the NRA –, the
London Conference, and the “gold buying” program. All the series, in first differences, are
stationary.

As expected in estimations in first differences with high frequency data, the     reported in
Tables 2 through 7 are quite low. In every case the coefficient of the lagged dependent variable
is, as expected, negative and smaller than 1 in absolute terms. Point estimates of the lagged
coefficients are very small in absolute terms, indicating a slow adjustment process. This, of
course, is not surprising when daily data are used. The term             is introduced to allow the
convergence of prices to equilibrium in a nonlinear way; as may be seen, it is not significant in
most equations.

For each variable of interest, the first equation in Tables 2-7 (column 1) includes the
                  dummy only; there are no other covariates (besides the price dynamics ones).
The second specification includes the “policies towards gold”           covariate only. The third
specification includes both “event” variables; the fourth specification adds the daily market rate
of change of the dollar-pound and dollar-franc rates, and the final column in each table adds an
indicator of monetary policy. This variable captures changes in the Discount Rate by the Federal
Reserve Banks of New York, Chicago and/or Boston; it takes a value equal to the change in the
Discount Rate the day it becomes operational, and zero otherwise. These different specifications
allow us to investigate the mechanics of price changes and, in particular, assess the (possible)
role played by expectations of a “change in regime” and by market exchange rate changes in the
transmission process.

The main results in Tables 2-7 may be summarized as follows:

      There is no evidence that the London Conferences affected commodity prices or the stock
       market directly. In every equation in Tables 2-6 the coefficient of                    is
       non-significant. This is the case independently of the controls incorporated.
      There is some evidence that the Conference had a positive impact on bond prices; the
       coefficient is positive and significant at the 10% level in every specification in Table 7
       for the Liberty Bond prices. What makes this result particularly interesting is that, as
       noted, these bonds included a gold clause. It is possible that the public thought that if the
       Conference succeeded, and the exchanges were stabilized, there was a higher probability
       that the bonds would be paid in “gold-equivalent.” This is only a tentative explanation,
       since at the time the Conference opened (June 12) Congress had already passed a Joint
       Resolution abrogating the gold clauses in past and future contracts. It is also possible that
       investors thought that a successful Conference implied a return to some sort of metallic
                                                       18


         standard, and a repudiation of the abrogation of the gold clause by the Supreme Court. As
         I argue in Section 4, this is a subject that merits additional research.48
        There is broad evidence in support of the “change of regime” hypothesis. The coefficient
         of         is significantly positive in every price equation, independently of the
         specification and/or of the controls included. This suggests that the different gold-related
         measures undertaken by FDR in 1933 changed expectations about the monetary regime.
         Commodity prices went up before the dollar was officially devalued, and before liquidity
         increased through massive unsterilized gold inflows (the stock of money did not increase
         substantially until February 1934). These results confirm the findings in Temin and
         Wigmore (1990), who analyzed the price of cotton (only) using monthly data and a
         simpler equation specification.
        Specifications (4) and (5) in Tables 2-7, control for exchange rate changes and Fed
         policy. That is, in these specifications I go beyond previous analyses, including Temin
         and Wigmore’s pioneer work, and I ask whether the expectations of a change in the
         monetary regime had an impact on commodity prices through channels different from the
         depreciation of the dollar (See Figure 1) and/or changes in the Fed Discount rate. As may
         be seen, in each one of the Tables for commodity prices the coefficient of the
         variable continues to be significantly positive; this is also the case for the Liberty bond.
         This, indeed, indicates that the “change of regime” effect operated in addition to any
         influence it could have had on market exchange rates. As expected, however, the point
         estimates of the          variable are smaller when we control for exchange rate changes,
         than when we allowed exchange rates to adjust freely. As may be seen, in three out of the
         four commodity price equations, the coefficients of the exchange arte variables are
         significantly positive, indicating that the market devaluation of the dollar relative to the
         pound and the franc did have a positive effect on prices. This confirms and expands the
         results reported by Temin and Wigmore (1990) for monthly cotton prices. The exchange
         rate coefficient is not significant for corn. A possible explanation for this is that during
         this period corn was subject to limited international trade.
        The results in Table 6 indicate that during this period (November 1932-December 1933)
         the stock market was not affected by the gold policies, or by any of the other covariates.
         (See the discussion below for further details).

         3.2.3   Robustness and extensions

The results reported above were subject to a number of robustness tests. Some of the most
important ones include: (a) The estimation period was expanded to start in June 1932, just before
the Democratic party convention, and to end on January 30, 1934. (b) Two and three days “event
windows” were introduced. (c) I defined a merged “event” variable that combined            and

48
  The U.S. issued bonds without the gold clause for the first time in 16 years in mid-June 1933. Thus, it is not
possible to compare yields on gold and non-gold bonds before that time. For a thorough discussion, see Edwards,
Garcia and Longstaff (2015). The Supreme Court ruled on the abrogation on February 18, 1935.
                                                          19


                  variables. And (d) I used a dummy variable for the months when the FED
undertook open market operations, instead of the change in the Fed’s Discount Rate variable.49
In each of these cases the main conclusions reported above were maintained. The
                   variable was insignificant when included, while        was always
significantly positive.

I also considered and estimated a number of alternative specifications. The most important ones
amounted to introducing additional covariates, as a way of making sure that the results reported
above are not due to some omitted variables. In particular, the following covariates were added:
(a) A dummy variable that takes the value of one when key New Deal legislation was passed by
Congress (e.g. AAA, NRA, Glass-Steagall); and (b) a dummy variable that takes into account
key political events, such as the presidential election, the February 15 assassination attempt on
FDR, and the Inauguration of the new administration. The results obtained when these additional
covariates were included are reported in Table 8. Two aspects of these estimates are worth
commenting. First, these findings confirm those presented above: there is strong evidence that
expectations of a “change of regime” impacted on commodity prices; this is also the case for
bond prices. Second, there is no evidence that, once controlling for other factors (including gold-
related policies) either political or New Deal events affected commodity or bond prices. In only
one of the eight regressions is the coefficient for the political events marginally significant.
Third, and more important for the purpose of this paper, there is no evidence that the London
Conference itself had an effect on commodity prices or on the stock market. These estimates
continue to suggest, however, that the Conference had a marginally positive effect on
government bonds. Finally, I also estimated a number of error correction models with the
differential between the price paid for gold during the gold-buying program and the international
price of the metal (these differentials only existed after October 25). The coefficient of this
variable was not significant, while the other findings reported in above were maintained.

As reported in Figure 2, commodity prices peaked on July 17 1933. Their retreat after that date
has been interpreted as evidence that the increase from March through mid-July was solely the
result of significant speculative forces at work. Often the words “speculators” and “speculation”
have a negative connotation. In this case, however, they should be interpreted as a situation
where economic agents who believed that a “change in regime” was about to take place, tried to
take advantage of that fact. It is perfectly possible that these agents were disappointed when two
weeks after the “bombshell,” no concrete action was taken by the government. The gold buying
program initiated in late August and intensified on October 24 provided additional signals that
the monetary regime was, in fact going to go through a major reform, as it did with the Gold Act
of 1934, the official devaluation of the dollar, and the U.S. commitment to buy and sell unlimited
amounts of gold at $35 an ounce.50


49
     See Samuelson and Krooss (1969), Volume 4, p. 377.
50
     For a discussion along these lines see Sumner (2001, 2015).
                                                       20


     4. Concluding remarks

The London Monetary and Economic Conference of 1933 was an important episode in world
monetary economic history. And yet, there are only a handful of economic studies on what
actually happened during those few weeks, and on the way in which the Conference affected key
economic variables. What makes this paucity of work particularly surprising is that the failure of
the gathering marked the beginning of a truly proactive U.S. policy towards the dollar. Seven
weeks after the collapse of the Conference President Roosevelt asked Cornell Professor George
F. Warren to put together a gold-buying plan aimed at accelerating the rate of depreciation of the
dollar and, ultimately, raising commodity prices. This active exchange rate policy culminated in
late January 1934 with the official devaluation of the dollar – from $20.67 to $35 per ounce of
gold. One of the key consequences of this move was that the country received massive inflows of
gold, which according to most scholars who have studied the period resulted in the monetary
expansion that helped the country get out of the Depression.

In this paper I presented a detailed discussion of the development of the Conference and, in
particular, of the negotiations on currency stabilization that took place in parallel to the official
meeting. I presented the different country’s positions, and the difficult technical questions faced
by the negotiators, including at what level to attempt to stabilize the exchanges.

The Conference failed because FDR became convinced that stabilizing the dollar, even for a few
weeks, would bring to an end the rise in commodity prices that had taken place since the
imposition of the gold embargo on March 6. This belief was based, first and foremost, on the
actual behavior of prices between March and June. As I show in Figures 1 through 3, commodity
prices and the stock market had escalated rapidly after the abandonment of the gold standard.51
That is, in the President’s mind unpegging the dollar from gold – and, thus, allowing for dollar
“instability” – was associated with raising commodity prices. The President thought that it was
possible to eventually stabilize the exchanges at levels that were outside of the ranges considered
during the discussions in London. As it turned out, he was right. Eventually, on January 31 1934
the dollar was stabilized at $5.08 per pound, a level that was even higher than the historical
parity between the two currencies ($4.87 per pound). And second, the President was increasingly
influenced by Professor George F. Warren’s theories on the relation of the price of gold and
prices (See Edwards 2017b).

In addition to these factors, during the first few days of the Conference FDR became increasingly
annoyed with the French obsession with short term stabilization, and their neglect of other longer
term issues. His displeasure grew significantly after the French failed to make the scheduled war
debt payment on June 15. Herbert Feis, who participated in the negotiations, put it this way in his
memoirs: “[T]he default washed away any remnants of Roosevelt’s tolerance for the French
effort to cause us to return to the international gold standard at a fixed rate to the franc, and made
51
  This statement assumes that we are sitting in late June 1933; we cannot see the data that became available after
that time.
                                                21


him more determined not to let the British authorities ease him into an agreement abaout the
relative pound-dollar value which might be to Britain’s advantage.” (Feis 1966, p. 182).

The most important results from the empirical analysis in Section 3 are three: First, the
Conference itself did not impact prices in a discernible or significant way. Second, there is strong
and robust evidence that the different steps taken by the administration to unhinge the dollar
from gold impacted prices. This happened even before the traditional transmission channels were
at work. These findings support the “change of regime” hypothesis investigated by Temin and
Wigmore (1990), and others, with a more restricted data set. And third, neither pure political
events, nor the massive legislation passed during the Hundred Days affected prices directly.

The results presented in this paper present a puzzle of sorts to be solved by future research. As
shown in Table 7, there is some evidence indicating that government bonds did respond
positively to the London Conference. As noted, what makes this finding particularly interesting
is that these were gold-denominated bonds, and that the gold clause had been abrogated by
Congress one week before the opening of the Conference. Further analysis on the bond market
during this period would throw additional light on the working of financial markets during these
crucial months. Doing this, however, is not easy: until mid-June every government bond in the
U.S. included the gold clause. This was also the case for the vast majority of corporate bonds.
This means that until mid-June 1933 it is not possible to compare prices (or yields) of equivalent
bonds with and without the gold clause.
                                               22


                                   Appendix: Data Sources

   A. Commodity Prices

(Source: Daily New York Times)
Closing wholesale cash $ prices for commodities in the New York Market
Wheat #2 red, per bushel
Corn #2 yellow, per bushel
Rye #2 Western, per bushel
Cotton, middling upland, per pounds

   B. Bond Prices

(Source: Daily New York Times)
Fourth Liberty Loan: Liberty bond 4th 41/4s, 1933-38, issued May 8, 1918, interest paid on April
15, October 15; Closing cash $ prices for bonds traded in on the Stock Exchange.

   C. Exchange Rates

(Source: GFDatabase)
https://www.globalfinancialdata.com/Databases/GFDatabase.html

   D. Events related to Gold and London Conference

The New York Times, The Wall Street Journal, The Chicago Tribune, Times of London.

   E. Gold Prices

Taken from Warren and Pearson (1935), P. 168-169.
                                                23


                                           References

Ahamed, L. (2009). Lords of Finance: The bankers who broke the world. Random House.

Bernanke B. (2000). Essays on the great depression. Princeton University Press.

Bernanke, B., & James, H. (1991). “The gold standard, deflation, and financial crisis in the Great
      Depression: An international comparison.” In Financial markets and financial crises (pp.
      33-68). University of Chicago Press.

Bordo, M. D., Choudhri, E. U., & Schwartz, A. J. (2002). “Was expansionary monetary policy
       feasible during the great contraction?” An examination of the gold standard constraint.
       Explorations in Economic history, 39(1), 1-28.

Bordo, M. D., & Kydland, F. E. (1995). “The gold standard as a rule: An essay in exploration.”
       Explorations in Economic History, 32(4), 423-464.

Calomiris, C., & Wheelock, D. (1998). “Was the Great Depression a watershed for American
      monetary policy?”. In The defining moment: The great depression and the American
      economy in the twentieth century (pp. 23-66). University of Chicago Press.

Cassel, G. (1923). Money and foreign exchange after 1914. Constable.

Coe, P. J. (2002). Financial crisis and the great depression: a regime-switching approach. Journal
       of Money, Credit, and Banking, 34(1), 76-93.

De Long, J. B. (1990). " Liquidation" Cycles: Old-Fashioned Real Business Cycle Theory and
      the Great Depression (No. w3546). National Bureau of Economic Research.

Edwards, S. (2011). Exchange-rate policies in emerging countries: Eleven empirical regularities
      from Latin America and East Asia. Open Economies Review, 22(4), 533.

Edwards, S. (2107a), “Gold, the Brains Trust and Roosevelt,” History of Political Economy,
      Winter.

Edwards, S. (2107b), “Keynes and the dollar in 1933,” National Bureau of Economic Research,
      Working Paper.

Edwards, S., Longstaff, F. A., & Marin, A. G. (2015). “The US Debt Restructuring of 1933:
      Consequences and Lessons” (No. w21694). National Bureau of Economic Research.

Eggertsson, G. B. (2008). Great Expectations and the End of the Depression. The American
       Economic Review, 98(4), 1476-1516.

Eichengreen, B. (1992). Golden fetters: the gold standard and the Great Depression, 1919-1939.
      Oxford University Press.
                                                  24


Eichengreen, B. (2015). Before the Plaza: The Exchange Rate Stabilization Attempts of 1925,
      1933, 1936 and 1971.

Eichengreen, B., & Sachs, J. (1985). “Exchange rates and economic recovery in the 1930s.” The
      Journal of Economic History, 45(04), 925-946.

Eichengreen, B., & Uzan, M. (1990). “The 1933 World Economic Conference as an Instance of
      Failed International Cooperation.” Department of Economics, UCB.

Federal Reserve Board. (1943). Banking and Monetary Statistics. Board of Governors of the
       Federal Reserve System, Washington DC.

Feis, H. (1966). Characters in Crisis. Boston, Toronto: Little1, Brown, and Company.

Fisher, I. (1913). “A Compensated Dollar.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 27, 385-397.

Fisher, I. (1920). Stabilizing the dollar: A plan to stabilize the general price level without fixing
        individual prices. Macmillan.

Friedman, M., & Schwartz, A. J. (1963). A monetary history of the United States, 1867-1960.
      Princeton University Press.

Hausman, J. K. (2013). New Deal Policies and Recovery from the Great Depression.

Hausman, J., P. Rhode, and J. Wieland (2016). Recovery from the Great Depression: The farm
     channel in Spring 1933,” University of Michigan.

Harris, S. E. (1936). Exchange Depreciation: Its Theory and Its History, 1931-35, with Some
        Consideration of Related Domestic Policies (Vol. 53). Cambridge: Harvard University
        Press.

Hull, C., (1948). The Memoirs of Cordell Hull (Two volumes). Macmillan.

Irwin, D. A. (2012). “Gold sterilization and the recession of 1937–1938.” Financial History
       Review, 19(03), 249-267.

Jalil, A., & Rua, G. (2016). “Inflation expectations and recovery from the depression in 1933:
        Evidence from the narrative record.” Explorations in Economic History, 62, 26-50

Keynes, J. M. (1924). A Tract on monetary reform. McMillan.

Keynes, J. M. (1933). The means to prosperity. McMillan.

Lippman, W. (1936). Interpretations, MacMillan

Lindley, E. K. (1933). Roosevelt’s revolution, first phase. Viking.
                                                25



Leith-Ross, F. (1968). Money talks: fifty years of international finance: the autobiography of Sir
       Frederick Leith-Ross. Hutchinson.

League of Nations (1933), “Journal of the Monetary and Economic Conference,” Various issues
      London, 1933

Meltzer, A. H. (2003). A History of the Federal Reserve, Vol. 1 Chicago.

Moley, R. (1939). After seven years. Harper & Bros.

Moley, R. (1966). The First New Deal. Harcourt.

Morgenthau Jr., H. “Farm Credit Diary.” The Morgenthau Papers at the Roosevelt Presidential
      Library.

Mundell, R. A. (2000). “A reconsideration of the twentieth century.” American Economic
      Review, 327-340.

New York Times, The. (1932-1934), Several issues.

Nussbaum, A. (1957). A History of the Dollar. New York: Columbia University Press.

Obstfeld, M., & Taylor, A. M. (1997). “The great depression as a watershed: international capital
       mobility over the long run” (No. w5960). National Bureau of Economic Research.

Pasvolsky, L. (1933). Current monetary issues. Brookings Institution

Rauchway, E. (2015), The Money Makers, Basic Books

Romer, C. D. (1992). “What ended the great depression?” The Journal of Economic History,
      52(04), 757-784.

Roosevelt, F.D. (1938) The Public Papers and Addresses of Franklin Delano Roosevelt, Vols. 1
      and 2. Random House

Samuelson, P. and Kross, H. E. (Ed.). (1969). Documentary history of banking and currency in
      the United States (Vol. 4). Chelsea House Publishers.

Sargent, T. J. (1983). Stopping moderate inflations: The methods of Poincare and Thatcher.
       Inflation, debt and indexation, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 54-96.

Schlesinger, A. M. (1957). The age of Roosevelt (Vol. 1). 3 vols. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.

Sumner, S. (2001). Roosevelt, Warren, and the Gold-buying Program of 1933. Research in
      Economic History, 20, 135-172.
                                              26



Sumner, S. (2015). The Midas Paradox. Independent Institute


Tavlas, G. S. (1997). “Chicago, Harvard, and the doctrinal foundations of monetary economics.”
       Journal of Political Economy, 153-177.

Times of London, The, Several Issues

Temin, P. (1991). Lessons from the great depression. MIT Press Books, 1.

Temin, P., & Wigmore, B. A. (1990). The end of one big deflation. Explorations in Economic
       history, 27(4), 483-502.

Warburg, J. P. (1934). The money muddle. Knopf.

Warren, G. F., & Pearson, F. A. (1931). Prices. Wiley.

Warren, G. F., & Pearson, F. A. (1935). Gold and Prices. Wiley.

White, H.D. (1935), “Recovery Program: The International Monetary Aspect,” The Harry Dexter
       White Papers (MC 104), Box 13, Folder 13. Princeton University Library Archives.

Wigmore, B. A. (1987). Was the Bank Holiday of 1933 Caused by a Run on the Dollar?. The
     Journal of Economic History, 47(03), 739-755.

Wright, Q. (1932). Gold and monetary stabilization. University of Chicago Press.
                                        27


                              POUND_TO_DOLLAR
     5.5


     5.0


     4.5


     4.0


     3.5


     3.0
           I    II      III   IV    I        II      III   IV   I      II
                     1932                         1933              1934


                              FRANC_TO_DOLLAR
     7.0

     6.5

     6.0

     5.5

     5.0

     4.5

     4.0

     3.5
           I    II      III   IV    I        II      III   IV   I      II
                     1932                         1933              1934

FIGURE 1: Dollar-pound and dollar-franc exchange rates: Daily data, 1932-1934
                                                     28




                    CORN_PRICE                                               COTTON_PRICE
 .7                                                       .12

                                                          .11
 .6
                                                          .10
 .5
                                                          .09

                                                          .08
 .4
                                                          .07
 .3
                                                          .06

 .2                                                       .05
      M1 M2 M3   M4 M5   M6 M7 M8   M9 M10 M11 M12              M1 M2 M3   M4 M5   M6 M7 M8   M9 M10 M11 M12
                          1933                                                      1933


                     RYE_PRICE                                                WHEAT_PRICE
120                                                       1.2


100
                                                          1.0

 80
                                                          0.8
 60

                                                          0.6
 40


 20                                                       0.4
      M1 M2 M3   M4 M5   M6 M7 M8   M9 M10 M11 M12              M1 M2 M3   M4 M5   M6 M7 M8   M9 M10 M11 M12
                          1933                                                      1933


                    Figure 2: Daily prices of corn, cotton, rye, and wheat: Daily 1933
                                 29




                             DOW_PRICE
110

100

  90

  80

  70

  60

  50

  40
       M1   M2 M3     M4 M5      M6   M7 M8     M9 M10 M11 M12
                                   1933


                           LIBERTY_PRICE
105


104


103


102


101


100
       M1   M2 M3     M4 M5      M6   M7 M8     M9 M10 M11 M12
                                   1933

Figure 3: Stock market index and Liberty Loan bond prices: Daily, 1933
                                         30


             Table 1: Events in 1933 included in the Gold Variable

                    A. Positive Events (Value of dummy is one)

March 6:     Bank Holiday and gold embargo are declared through Presidential Proclamation
             No. 2039.

March 13:    Most banks reopen; gold embargo is maintained.

April 5:     Executive Order No. 6102: All gold holdings have to be sold to Federal Reserve.

April 17:    Thomas Amendment is introduced to Senate. Gives the President authority to
             undertake three specific policies to end deflation: reduce the gold content of the
             dollar by up to 50%; issue up to $3 billion in greenbacks; remonetize silver at a
             ratio of 16 to 1 with respect to gold.

April 19:    President Roosevelt gives 13th press conference of his Administration. Towards
             the end he announces that the U.S. if definitely off gold. Metal exports are
             forbidden.

April 20:    Executive Order No. 6111: All exports of gold are suspended indefinitely. The
             U.S. is effectively off the gold standard.

April 29:    Thomas Amendment passed by Senate 55-35. Several democrats, including
             Senator Glass vote against it.

May 12:      Agricultural Adjustment Act (AAA) is signed into law. It includes the Thomas
             Amendment. Newspapers refer to it as “Relief-Inflation legislation.” Federal
             Farm Emergency Relief Act is passed.

May 23:      New York State Supreme Court Justice Phoenix Ingraham rules that payments on
             gold clause debts may be made (and received) in paper dollars.

May 26:      The Government announced that there is a need to have a uniform legal standing
             with respect to the gold clause. The Administration asks Congress to officially
             void, through a Joint Resolution, the gold clause both for past and future
             contracts.

May 29:      The House approves Resolution abrogating gold clauses.

June 5:      Joint Resolution of Congress abrogating gold clauses is passed is signed into law.

July 27:     The London World Economic Conference comes to an official end without
             achieving any of the objectives discussed by world leaders during their early
             discussions.

August 29:   Executive Order No. 6261 authorizes the Reconstruction Finance Corporation to
             buy newly minted gold at “the best price obtainable in the free market of the
             world.” This is Phase One of the ‘gold buying” program.
                                                 31


October 24:           Second phase of gold buying program begins. Prices set by the Secretary of the
                      Treasury and the President, and may deviate from world prices. In addition to
                      buying newly minted gold in the U.S. the RFC will buy and sell gold in the world
                      markets, if needed.

                         B. Negative Events (Value of dummy is minus one)

April 24:             Secretary Woodin announced that half a billion notes in 2.875% Treasury notes
                      would be issued, with the gold clause. This suggests to many that the gold
                      embargo will be lifted soon.

May 16:               President Roosevelt sends message to international governments stating that the
                      goal of the London Conference ought to be to stabilize exchange rates.

July 21:              The House of Commons approved overwhelmingly (131 to 22) a provision that
                      cancelled payment in gold on the World War I debts. This suggests that the dollar
                      will strengthen relative to sterling.

Sources: The New York Times, The Wall Street Journal, The Chicago Tribune, Times of London.
                                                32


                   Table 2: Error correction event studies regression: Corn
                       (Daily data, November 1932-December 1934)

  Eq Name:               Eq (2.1)      Eq (2.2)      Eq. (2.3)      Eq. (2.4)     Eq. (2.5)

  C                      -0.0077        -0.0084       -0.0085        -0.0092       -0.0092
                         [-1.354]       [-1.526]      [-1.540]      [-1.684]*     [-1.674]*

  LOG_CORN(-1)            -0.0094       -0.0089       -0.0090        -0.0093       -0.0093
                         [-1.655]*     [-1.629]*     [-1.643]*      [-1.712]*     [-1.703]*

  D_LOG_CORN(-1)          0.0953        0.0753         0.0734        0.0664         0.0661
                         [1.700]*       [1.381]       [1.344]        [1.222]       [1.209]

  DUMMY_LONDON           -0.0149           --         -0.0153       -0.0122       -0.0122
                         [-0.683]                     [-0.721]      [-0.580]      [-0.579]

  DUMMY_GOLD                 --          0.0329        0.0329        0.0296        0.0296
                                       [4.466]***    [4.466]***    [3.985]***    [3.978]***

  DLOG_POUND                 --            --            --          0.4379         0.4388
                                                                     [1.527]       [1.526]

  DLOG_FRANC                 --            --            --          0.0180         0.0178
                                                                     [0.070]       [0.069]

  FED_DISCOUNT               --            --            --            --           0.0012
                                                                                   [0.062]

  Observations:            315            315           315           315           315
  R-squared:              0.019          0.077         0.079         0.099         0.099
  F-statistic:            2.033          8.644         6.603         5.623         4.805
  D.W.                    2.025          2.012         2.014         2.014         2.020

NOTE: t-statistics in parentheses. * means significant t the 10% level; ** at 5%; and *** at 1%.
                                                33


                  Table 3: Error correction event studies regression: Cotton
                       (Daily data, November 1932-December 1934)

  Eq Name:               Eq. (3.1)     Eq. (3.2)     Eq. (3.3)      Eq. (3.4)     Eq. (3.5)

  C                       0.0004        -0.0001       -0.0001       -0.0017       -0.0017
                          [0.112]       [-0.031]      [-0.030]      [-0.491]      [-0.484]

  LOG_COTTON(-1)         -0.0016        -0.0015       -0.0015       -0.0024       -0.0024
                         [-0.439]       [-0.416]      [-0.415]      [-0.717]      [-0.710]

  DLOGCOTTON(-1)         -0.0658        -0.0908       -0.0908        -0.1459       -0.1461
                         [-1.176]      [-1.635]*     [-1.632]*     [-2.685]***   [-2.682]***

  DUMMY_LONDON            0.0002           --         0.0002         0.0048        0.0048
                          [0.016]                     [0.013]        [0.356]       [0.356]

  DUMMY_GOLD                 --          0.0162        0.0162        0.0130        0.0130
                                       [3.302]***    [3.297]***    [2.746]***    [2.741]***

  D_LOG_POUND                --            --            --          0.3398        0.3407
                                                                    [1.865]*      [1.864]*

  D_LOG_FRANC                --            --            --          0.2851        0.2848
                                                                    [1.776]*      [1.771]*

  FED_DISCOUNT               --            --            --            --          0.0011
                                                                                   [0.091]

  Observations:            326            326           326           326           326
  R-squared:              0.005          0.038         0.038         0.126         0.126
  F-statistic:            0.530          4.184         3.128         7.640         6.529
  D.W.                    2.015          2.022         2.016         2.044         2.031
NOTE: t-statistics in parentheses. * means significant t the 10% level; ** at 5%; and *** at 1%.
                                                34


                   Table 4: Error correction event studies regression: Rye
                       (Daily data, November 1932-December 1934)

  Eq Name:               Eq. (4.1)     Eq. (4.2)     Eq. (4.3)      Eq. (4.4)     Eq. (4.5)


  C                       0.0286        0.0268        0.0269         0.0273        0.0271
                          [1.307]       [1.242]       [1.246]        [1.266]       [1.255]

  LOG_RYE(-1)            -0.0069        -0.0067       -0.0067       -0.0069       -0.0068
                         [-1.244]       [-1.216]      [-1.220]      [-1.259]      [-1.247]

  D_LOG_RYE(-1)           0.0958         0.0854        0.0852        0.0726        0.0716
                         [1.748]*       [1.579]*      [1.572]*       [1.331]       [1.307]

  DUMMY_LONDON           -0.0055           --         -0.0056       -0.0027       -0.0027
                         [-0.236]                     [-0.242]      [-0.118]      [-0.118]

  DUMMY_GOLD                 --          0.0243        0.0243        0.0210        0.0209
                                       [3.022]***    [3.018]***     [2.579]**     [2.572]**

  D_LOG_POUND                --            --            --          0.5004        0.5038
                                                                    [1.693]*      [1.799]*

  D_LOG_FRANC                --            --            --         -0.0638       -0.0645
                                                                    [-0.226]      [-0.227]

  FED_DISCOUNT               --            --            --            --          0.0049
                                                                                   [0.239]

  Observations:            315            315           315           315           315
  R-squared:              0.015          0.043         0.043         0.060         0.060
  F-statistic:            1.536          4.606         3.458         3.248         2.784
  D.W.                    2.015          2.032         2.049         2.072         2.035

NOTE: t-statistics in parentheses. * means significant t the 10% level; ** at 5%; and *** at 1%.
                                                35


                  Table 5: Error correction event studies regression: Wheat
                       (Daily data, November 1932-December 1934)

  Eq Name:               Eq. (5.1)     Eq. (5.2)     Eq. (5.3)      Eq. (5.4)     Eq. (5.5)

  C                      -0.0013        -0.0020       -0.0020       -0.0024       -0.0024
                         [-0.609]       [-0.908]      [-0.915]      [-1.137]      [-1.101]

  LOG_WHEAT(-1)          -0.0066        -0.0064       -0.0064       -0.0065       -0.0064
                         [-1.439]       [-1.412]      [-1.420]      [-1.465]      [-1.438]

  DLOG_WHEAT(-1)          0.1625        0.1260        0.1253         0.1098        0.1088
                        [2.904]***     [2.264]**     [2.248]**      [1.991]**     [1.971]**

  DUMMY_LONDON           -0.0058           --         -0.0061       -0.0032       -0.0032
                         [-0.342]                     [-0.368]      [-0.199]      [-0.196]

  DUMMY_GOLD                 --          0.0216        0.0216        0.0176        0.0176
                                       [3.704]***    [3.701]***    [3.047]***    [3.036]***

  D_LOG_POUND                --            --            --          0.7544        0.7622
                                                                   [3.419]***    [3.448]***

  D_LOG_FRANC                --            --            --         -0.2754       -0.2777
                                                                    [-1.386]      [-1.396]

  FED_DISCOUNT               --            --            --            --           0.0111
                                                                                   [0.765]

  Observations:            315            315           315           315           315
  R-squared:              0.033          0.074         0.074         0.121         0.123
  F-statistic:            3.575          8.264         6.214         7.094         6.156
  D.W.                    2.033          2.038         2.089         2.101         2.056

NOTE: t-statistics in parentheses. * means significant t the 10% level; ** at 5%; and *** at 1%.
                                                 36


         Table 6: Error correction event studies regression: Dow Stock Market Index
                        (Daily data, November 1932-December 1934)

  Eq Name:            Eq. (6.1)      Eq. (6.2)        Eq. (6.3)    Eq. (6.4)    Eq. (6.5)

  C                   -0.0231        -0.0236          -0.0234      -0.0227      -0.0230
                      [-2.030]**     [-2.073]**       [-2.056]**   [-1.998]**   [-2.019]**

  LOG_DOW(-1)         0.0050         0.0051           0.0050       0.0049       0.0049
                      [1.915]*       [1.949]*         [1.932]*     [1.866]*     [1.888]*

  D_LOG_DOW(-1) 0.0221               0.0193           0.0225       0.0182       0.0159
                [0.398]              [0.350]          [0.406]      [0.328]      [0.287]

  DUMMY_LONDON -0.0085               --               -0.0085      -0.0079      -0.0078
               [-1.075]                               [-1.076]     [-0.996]     [-0.991]

  DUMMY_GOLD-         --             0.0034           0.0034       0.0031       0.0031
                                     [1.217]          [1.218]      [1.092]      [1.079]

  D_LOG_POUND- --                    --               --           -0.0360      -0.0318
                                                                   [-0.320]     [-0.283]

  D_LOG_FRANC-        --             --               --           0.1011       0.0998
                                                                   [1.042]      [1.028]

  FED_DISCOUNT        --             --               --           --           0.0056
                                                                                [0.798]

  Observations:       329            329              329          329          329
  R-squared:          0.016          0.017            0.020        0.026        0.028
  F-statistic:        1.717          1.827            1.661        1.422        1.308
  D.W.                2.025          2.012            2.013        2.024        2.031

NOTE: t-statistics in parentheses. * means significant t the 10% level; ** at 5%; and *** at 1%.
                                                37




        Table 7: Error correction event studies regression: Liberty Loan Bond Prices
                        (Daily data, November 1932-December 1934)

  Eq Name:               Eq. (7.1)     Eq. (7.2)     Eq. (7.3)      Eq. (7.4)     Eq. (7.5)

  C                       0.2639        0.2728         0.2686        0.2660        0.2674
                         [2.550]**     [2.655]**     [2.621]***     [2.588]**     [2.594]**

  LOG_LIBERTY(-1)         -0.0570       -0.0590        -0.0581      -0.0575        -0.0578
                         [-2.552]**   [-2.658]***    [-2.623]***   [-2.590]**    [-2.596]***

  D_LOG_LIBERTY(-
  1)                     -0.0795        -0.0763       -0.0667       -0.0662       -0.0673
                         [-1.385]       [-1.342]      [-1.171]      [-1.156]      [-1.171]

  DUMMY_LONDON            0.0034           --          0.0034        0.0033        0.0033
                         [1.618]*                     [1.657]*      [1.619]*      [1.613]*

  DUMMY_GOLD                 --         0.0020         0.0020        0.0022        0.0022
                                       [2.581]**     [2.604]***    [2.710]***    [2.708]***

  D_LOG_POUND                --            --            --         -0.0264       -0.0266
                                                                    [-0.864]      [-0.867]

  D_LOG_FRANC                --            --            --          0.0140         0.0140
                                                                     [0.519]       [0.519]

  FED_DISCOUNT               --            --            --            --         -0.0006
                                                                                  [-0.262]

  Observations:             280           280           280           280           280
  R-squared:               0.046         0.060         0.069         0.072         0.072
  F-statistic:             4.434         5.834         5.090         3.521         3.017
  D.W.                     2.095         2.072         2.093         2.074         2.061

NOTE: t-statistics in parentheses. * means significant t the 10% level; ** at 5%; and *** at 1%.
                                                          38




                    Table 8: Error correction event studies regression: Prices, Stocks, and Bonds
                                    (Daily data, November 1932-December 1934)

       Eq Name:               Eq. (8.1)     Eq. (8.2)      Eq. (8.3)     Eq. (8.4)     Eq. (8.5)    Eq. (8.6)
       Dep. Var:               Corn          Cotton          Rye          Wheat         Dow          Liberty

       C                       -0.0093       -0.0013         0.0242      -0.0024        -0.0231       0.2793
                              [-1.683]*      [-0.375]       [1.123]      [-1.105]      [-2.008]**   [2.668]***

       LOG_DEP(-1)             -0.0091       -0.0019       -0.0062       -0.0060         0.0050       -0.0604
                               [-1.658]      [-0.546]      [-1.136]      [-1.353]       [1.884]     [-2.671]***

       D_LOG_DEP(-1)            0.0682       -0.1404         0.0757       0.1111         0.0103      -0.0756
                               [1.246]      [-2.571]**      [1.388]      [1.999]**      [0.183]      [-1.287]

       DUMMY_LONDON            -0.0121       0.0048        -0.0026       -0.0031        -0.0078       0.0033
                               [-0.573]      [0.359]       [-0.113]      [-0.192]       [-0.987]     [1.690]*

       DUMMY_GOLD               0.0288        0.0129        0.0202        0.0174         0.0034       0.0021
                              [3.838]***    [2.719]***     [2.482]**    [2.981]***      [1.169]     [2.655]***

       D_LOG_POUND              0.4449        0.3321         0.4775       0.7487        -0.0378      -0.0246
                               [1.540]       [1.814]*       [1.517]     [3.371]***      [-0.334]     [-0.797]

       D_LOG_FRANC              0.0210       0.2899        -0.0385       -0.2665         0.1020      0.0128
                               [0.081]       [1.803]       [-0.136]      [-1.336]       [1.048]      [0.472]

       FED_DISCOUNT             0.0011       0.0011          0.0047       0.0110         0.0057      -0.0007
                               [0.058]       [0.088]        [0.228]       [0.760]       [0.801]      [-0.275]

       DUMMYPOLITICS            0.0125       0.0193         0.0594        0.0250         0.0014      -0.0023
                               [0.415]       [1.427]       [1.819]*       [1.084]       [0.177]      [-0.769]

       NEW_DEAL                 0.0163       0.0022          0.0177       0.0048        -0.0046      -0.0000
                               [1.203]       [0.262]        [1.206]       [0.460]       [-0.899]     [-0.018]


       Observations:             315           326           315           315            329          280
       R-squared:               0.103         0.131         0.074         0.127          0.030        0.074
       F-statistic:             3.912         5.313         2.712         4.932          1.107        2.400
       D.W.                     2.091         2.045         2.099         2.069          2.061        2.019

NOTE: t-statistics in parentheses. * means significant t the 10% level; ** at 5%; and *** at 1%.
