                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     ARE LARGER BANKS VALUED MORE HIGHLY?

                                      Bernadette A. Minton
                                         René M. Stulz
                                       Alvaro G. Taboada

                                       Working Paper 23212
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w23212


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2017




Minton is from the Fisher College of Business at The Ohio State University, Taboada is from the
College of Business, Mississippi State University, and Stulz is from the Fisher College of
Business at The Ohio State University, NBER, and ECGI. We are grateful to Andrei Gonçalves
for valuable comments. René Stulz serves on the board of a bank and consults and provides
expert testimony for financial institutions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w23212.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Bernadette A. Minton, René M. Stulz, and Alvaro G. Taboada. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Are Larger Banks Valued More Highly?
Bernadette A. Minton, René M. Stulz, and Alvaro G. Taboada
NBER Working Paper No. 23212
March 2017
JEL No. G02,G21,G28,G3

                                         ABSTRACT

We investigate whether the value of large banks, defined as banks with assets in excess of the
Dodd-Frank threshold for enhanced supervision, increases with the size of their assets using
Tobin’s q and market-to-book as our valuation measures. Many argue that large banks receive
subsidies from the regulatory safety net, so they should be worth more and their valuation should
increase with size. Instead, using a variety of approaches, we find (1) no evidence that large
banks are valued more highly, (2) strong cross-sectional evidence that the valuation of large
banks falls with size, and (3) strong evidence of a within-bank negative relation between
valuation and size for large banks from 1987 to 2006 but not when the post-Dodd-Frank period is
included in the sample. The negative relation between bank value and bank size for large banks
cannot be systematically explained by differences in ROA or ROE, equity volatility, tail risk,
distress risk, and equity discount rates. However, we find that banks with more trading assets are
worth less. A 1% increase in trading assets is associated with a Tobin’s q lower by 0.2% in
regressions with year and bank fixed effects. This relation between bank value and trading assets
helps explain the cross-sectional negative relation between large bank valuation and size. Our
results hold when we use instrumental variables for bank size.

Bernadette A. Minton                            Alvaro G. Taboada
Finance Department                              Mississippi State University
Fisher College of Business                      P.O. Box 9580
700 Fisher Hall                                 Mississippi State, MS 39762
2100 Neil Avenue                                ataboada@business.msstate.edu
Columbus, OH 43210-1144
minton.15@fisher.osu.edu

René M. Stulz
The Ohio State University
Fisher College of Business
806A Fisher Hall
Columbus, OH 43210-1144
and NBER
stulz@cob.osu.edu
There is a widely-held view that banks gain from becoming bigger and that this gain comes from having

access to a stronger regulatory safety net. As one study puts it, “Subsidies arising from size and complexity

create incentives for banks to become even larger and more complex.”1 A number of studies reach the same

conclusion as a recent study from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, namely that the “evidence is

consistent with the idea that ‘too-big-to-fail’ status gives the largest banks a competitive edge.”2 A study

from the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia even argues that it is worth it for banks to pay to become

large enough to get a “too-big-to-fail” (TBTF) subsidy (Brewer and Jagtiani (2013)). The IMF reaches the

conclusion in 2014 that “Banks may also seek to grow faster and larger than justified by economies of scale

and scope to reap the benefits of the implicit funding subsidy granted to TBTF institutions.”3

    With this view, large banks should be valued more because they have an asset that other banks do not

have, namely a claim on public resources, and the value of this asset grows as these banks become larger.

For instance, Kane (2014) states that “Other things equal (including the threat of closure), a TBTF firm’s

price-to-book ratio increases with firm size.” This popular view ignores the possibility that large banks may

bear larger costs than other banks because they are TBTF. For example, these costs may be in the form of

greater regulatory scrutiny, political risk, or regulatory requirements that force them to pursue suboptimal

policies. With these potential higher costs, the issue of whether TBTF banks are valued more highly is an

empirical matter.

    In this paper, we examine whether the valuation of large banks increases with size. We call banks large

when the book value of their total assets exceeds $50 billion in 2010 constant dollars (the threshold for

enhanced supervision of Dodd-Frank).4 We use the consolidated bank holding company data available from

the FRY-9C report since 1986. Our main valuation measure is a proxy for Tobin’s q, namely the market

value of assets divided by the book value of assets, where the market value is estimated by the book value

of assets minus the book value of equity plus the market value of equity. We also show results using the




1
  Ueda and Weder di Mauro (2013).
2
  Santos (2014).
3
  IMF (2014).
4
  We use the Consumer Price Index (CPI, base year 2010) as the deflator.


                                                        1
ratio of the market value of equity to the book value of equity. We find no evidence that large banks are

valued more highly or that their valuations increase with size. We pay special attention to the sample period

ending before the crisis since so many observers have argued that TBTF was an important contributing

factor to the crisis.5 We find that the valuations of large banks are negatively related to their size from 1987

to 2006. The negative relation remains significant if we extend our sample to 2010, but when we add the

post-Dodd-Frank years in the sample, the relation becomes weaker in the cross-section and does not hold

within banks.

    We use a piecewise linear model that relates bank Tobin’s q to bank size and allows the relation to

differ for banks with total assets above the $50 billion threshold. Estimating this model from 1987 to 2006

and accounting for year fixed effects, we find that the Tobin’s q of large banks falls with asset size in such

a way that a bank that increases its asset size from the Dodd-Frank threshold to the mean of the assets of

the banks exceeding the threshold in 2010, $453 billion, reduces its q by 2.8% of the mean q or by 47.5%

of the standard deviation of q for large banks. We also explore the relation between bank asset size and

Tobin’s q using a non-parametric approach that allows us to extract the form of the relation between Tobin’s

q and size from the data. We find that Tobin’s q is lower for large banks than for small banks and decreases

with asset size when a bank exceeds the Dodd-Frank threshold. When we account for bank characteristics,

we find that large banks are valued less than small banks in addition to finding that the value of large banks

falls with size. Similar results hold when we use market-to-book as our valuation measure. These results

are robust to alternative estimation methods, including approaches where we instrument for bank size with

employment and lagged assets.

    In addition to the argument that the safety net gives banks incentives to become large, it is often argued

that it gives them incentives to become riskier. We investigate whether bank risk increases with bank size.

We find that both equity volatility and tail risk increase with bank size for small but not for large banks. As

a result, large banks do not, on average, have higher equity volatility and tail risk than small banks. Using

a bank z-score as a proxy for a bank’s probability of distress, we find that distress risk increases with bank


5
 See, for instance, “Lessons from the crisis: Ending too big to fail,” by Neel Kashkari, Brookings Institution, February
16, 2016.

                                                           2
size for small banks but decreases for large banks. Yet, in contrast to these results, we find that leverage is

unrelated to size for small banks but increases with bank size for large banks. Further, the systematic risk

of banks, as measured by a market model beta, increases with bank size for small banks as well as for large

banks.

    In general, one would expect that if two banks are identical except that one has higher leverage, the

bank with higher leverage has higher stock return volatility and distress risk. The fact that tail risk and

equity volatility do not increase with size for large banks and that distress risk decreases with size for large

banks is consistent with a negative relation between asset risk and bank size for these banks. However,

since tail risk and equity volatility are estimated from stock returns, these estimates could be low because

adverse shocks are dampened for large banks because of TBTF. This explanation does not hold for the

distress risk results since the z-score uses the volatility of earnings, which would not be dampened unless

bailout payments were made to banks, and is negatively related to size over the 1987-2006 period, which

does not include the various programs used to strengthen banks during the crisis.

    Our results relating Tobin’s q and market-to-book to bank size are inconsistent with the hypothesis that

large banks are valued like other banks except for a premium resulting from their enhanced access to the

safety net because of TBTF. We explore next why the value of large banks falls with size. A simple potential

explanation is that the performance of these banks is negatively related to size. This explanation does not

have support in the data when performance is measured by return on assets (ROA) or return on equity

(ROE) in regressions with year fixed effects. In regressions with year and bank fixed effects, ROE falls

with bank size for large banks, which helps explain the negative relation between valuation and bank size

for large banks in regressions with year and bank fixed effects, but not otherwise. Tobin’s q should be lower

for large banks if their cash flows are expected to grow less than those of small banks. There is no evidence

that ROA or ROE growth falls with bank size for large banks.

    In valuation formulas, cash flows are discounted at the firm’s cost of capital. Hence, if the cost of capital

were higher for large banks than for small banks, large banks would have a lower Tobin’s q. Such a result

would be surprising in light of the work of Gandhi and Lustig (2015) who find that the largest banks have

a lower cost of equity over the period from 1970 to 2013. To address this issue, we examine whether large

                                                       3
banks have different stock returns from small banks. We proceed first by simply comparing stock returns.

There is no evidence that stock returns differ between small and large banks from 1987 to 2015 in the cross-

section. We then turn to returns adjusted for risk. Over our sample period, large banks do not have

significantly different risk-adjusted returns from small banks. Using either the Fama and French (1993)

three-factor model or the Gandhi and Lustig (2015) five-factor model, we find that neither large nor small

banks have a significant intercept. In other words, there is no evidence during our sample period that banks

have a cost of equity that differs from the expected return of equity predicted by these models. A portfolio

strategy of going long small banks and short large banks earns 22 basis points per month, but that excess

return is not significant. Note that if we had a longer sample period, like Gandhi and Lustig (2015), the

excess return could be significant as our test would have more power and its magnitude would be consistent

with their work. However, if large banks have lower expected stock returns, their cash flows would be

valued more, not less, which would make the lower valuation of large banks harder to explain. For instance,

Kane (2014) argues that a benefit of TBTF is “the increase in [the bank’s] stock price that comes from

having investors discount all of the firm’s current and future cash flows at an artificially low risk-adjusted

cost of equity.”

    Large banks engage in different activities from smaller banks. In particular, non-interest income

increases with asset size. We explore whether these differences in activities can help us understand why

large banks are worth less than small banks. We find that taking into account non-interest income increases

the negative relation between bank Tobin’s q and size for large banks. Specifically, activities associated

with non-interest income appear to enhance bank value, but not as much for large banks.

    The most important balance sheet difference between large and small banks is that large banks typically

have a sizeable portfolio of trading assets. We show that bank value is negatively related to trading assets

and that the relation is economically significant. In some regression specifications, the relation between

Tobin’s q and size for large banks loses significance when trading assets are taken into account, even when

trading assets and size are orthogonalized. Importantly, trading assets help explain the relation between

Tobin’s q and bank size before the global financial crisis (GFC) and hence this relation is not the product




                                                      4
of the crisis. However, the ability of trading assets to explain the relation between Tobin’s q and size for

large banks is sensitive to regression specification.

    Following the GFC, regulations for banks changed substantially, mostly because of Basel III and Dodd-

Frank. We investigate whether the relation between bank valuation and size changes after the adoption of

Dodd-Frank. Using the period of 2011-2015, we do not find that the relation between bank Tobin’s q and

size is significantly different during that period. However, we show that Tobin’s q is related to some bank

characteristics differently during that period. Specifically, more capitalized banks are valued less and the

market appears to discount non-interest income relative to 1987-2010.

    There are almost no papers investigating the relation between bank valuation and bank size. Boyd and

Runkle (1993) pursue such an investigation. They use Compustat from 1971 to 1990 and regress Tobin’s q

on the log of bank assets, finding no significant relation between these variables. However, most of their

sample period predates the TBTF statement of the Comptroller in 1984 that is often considered the date that

the TBTF policy was formally stated (O’Hara and Shaw, 1990). When they estimate the relation for the

1981-1990 period they actually find a significant negative coefficient of -0.0028 in a panel regression.

Demirgüç-Kunt and Huizinga (2013) use an international sample of banks from 1991–2008 and find that

market-to-book is negatively related to bank absolute size (assets) and systemic size (liabilities-to-GDP);

the latter result is stronger in countries with large government deficits. Recent papers use Tobin’s q as a

valuation measure, but their focus is not on the relation between Tobin’s q and size. For instance, Huizinga

and Laeven (2012) examine how Tobin’s q relates to the composition of assets of large banks. They do not

include total assets as an explanatory variable in their regressions. Calomiris and Nissim (2014) explore

how the relation of market-to-book to bank characteristics changed after the crisis in the context of a

valuation model of banks that accounts for intangibles. They include the log of total assets in their

regressions, but their sample is very different from ours as it is dominated by bank holding companies

whose asset size is below the threshold to enter our sample and they are not focused on the relation between

size and bank value. In their paper, for banks with assets in excess of $2 billion, there is no significant

relation between market-to-book and the log of assets for subsamples starting in 2007.




                                                        5
    In contrast to the paucity of studies on the relation between bank value and bank size, there is a large

literature investigating whether bank costs are related to bank size. This literature does not rely on the

valuation of banks in public markets and, therefore, can examine bank holding companies that are not listed

on exchanges. Recent work in that literature, which studies banks shortly before the GFC, finds results that

are supportive of the existence of economies of scale. For instance, Wheelock and Wilson (2012) find that

“as recently as 2006, most U.S. banks faced increasing returns to scale.” In their study, even the largest

banks benefit from economies of scale. Hughes and Mester (2013) find important economies of scale for

banks of all sizes and conclude that the economies of scale they find for banks with assets in excess of $100

billion, which they use as a TBTF threshold, cannot be explained by possible TBTF subsidies. Kovner,

Vickery, and Zhou (2014) find “a robust inverse relationship between the size of bank holding companies

and scaled measures of operating costs.”

    A number of studies examine whether firms gain from being TBTF and some attempt to quantify these

gains. Krozner (2016) reviews the literature that evaluates the argument that the cost of funding is less for

large banks because of TBTF. Generally, this literature finds that the impact of TBTF on the cost of funding

varies across time. Instead of looking at the cost of debt, another literature looks at the cost of equity.

Gandhi and Lustig (2015) find evidence that equity of TBTF banks is less risky and as a result the return

on equity of these banks should be lower. Event studies conclude that the Comptroller of the Currency’s

announcement that some banks are TBTF led to increases in the stock price of these banks (O’Hara and

Shaw, 1990) and that banks are willing to pay a higher premium to make acquisitions that lead them to

exceed the TBTF threshold (Brewer and Jagtiani, 2013).

    Other studies examine the impact of bank size and activities on risk. For instance, Demirgüç-Kunt and

Huizinga (2010) use an international sample of banks to examine the implications of bank activity and

short-term funding strategies on bank risk. They document that expansion into non-interest income-

generating activities as well as reliance on non-deposit funding (activities typically associated with large

banks) increase risk. Further, Laeven, Ratnovski, and Tong (2014) examine the relation between bank size

and risk during the financial crisis. They find that systemic risk increases with bank size and is inversely

related to bank capital.

                                                     6
    The paper proceeds as follows. We describe our sample in Section 1. In Section 2, we show that large

banks are valued less than small banks and that their valuation falls with size, especially during the sample

period ending before the crisis. In Section 3, we investigate whether this lower valuation results from higher

risk, lower performance, or different balance sheet composition. In Section 4, we investigate whether the

valuation and risks of large banks relative to small banks are affected by Dodd-Frank. In Section 5, we

explore alternative estimation approaches using instrumental variables. We conclude in Section 6.



Section 1. The sample.

    Our initial sample consists of all large publicly traded bank holding companies (banks) filing the

Consolidated Financial Statements for Bank Holding Companies Report (FRY-9C). All banks with

consolidated assets exceeding $500 million are required to file the FRY-9C report.6 We collect financial

information from FRY9-C reports for the fourth quarter of each year from the Federal Reserve Bank of

Chicago’s website for the period from 1986 to 2015. We start in 1986 because that is the first year when

the data we use is available.7 We then merge the sample with CRSP/COMPUSTAT using the link obtained

from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to get stock price data.8 We drop banks with missing data on

total assets and restrict our sample to banks with assets greater than $10 billion in 2010 dollars and those

with a deposits-to-assets ratio as of the prior year-end of at least 10%. The $10 billion threshold insures that

we are considering banks that are economically significant and engage in activities comparable to those of

large banks at least to some extent. The requirement that deposits represent at least 10% of assets is to

insure that we are considering deposit-taking banks. Our final sample consists of 171 banks and 1,758 firm-




6
  Prior to March 2006, the threshold for filing the FRY-9C report was $150 million.
7
  Although we collect data starting from the fourth quarter of 1986, our sample period starts in 1987 because we
classify banks by size based on their prior year-end assets.
8
  The FRB New York link file covers the period January 1990- September 2013. We match RSSID numbers from the
regulatory database with PERMCOs by name for the missing periods. The linkage table can be found at:
https://www.newyorkfed.org/research/banking_research/datasets.html.

                                                       7
year observations over the period 1987-2015. The banks in our sample account for 83% of total banking

system assets as of 2015.9

    Table 1 shows descriptive statistics by year for our final sample of banks. The number of banks in our

sample varies by year and increases from 64 at the start of the sample period to 68 as of 2015, reaching a

peak of 74 in 1989. While the average size of the banks increases steadily from $49.9 billion as of 1987 to

$180.3 billion as of 2015, the median size of banks decreases slightly to $26.4 billion from $27.3 billion

during the same period. The percent of banks with assets greater than $50 billion in 2010 dollars (reported

in the last column) varies by sample year. In the early part of the sample, about 30% of banks exceed this

threshold, while about 40% do so during the period from 2005 to 2011 before declining to about 35% during

the last four years of the sample.

    We measure bank value using a proxy for Tobin’s q − the book value of assets minus the book value

of equity plus the market value of equity, scaled by the book value of assets. In robustness tests, we use the

market-to-book ratio (market value of equity divided by the book value of equity) as an additional measure.

We also use several measures of profitability and risk to assess banks’ performance during our sample

period. In particular, we use two accounting-based measures of profitability: ROA − net income plus

interest expense divided by average assets over the prior year, and ROE − net income divided by average

equity over the prior year. As an additional measure of performance we use annual buy and hold stock

returns. We use four measures of risk: 1) z-score (log) − (ROA + equity-to-assets), scaled by the standard

deviation of ROA;10 2) tail risk − the negative of the average return on a bank’s stock over the 5% worst

return days in the year, following Ellul and Yerramilli (2013), and 3) equity volatility − the annualized

standard deviation of daily stock returns. A detailed description of all variables used in the study is available

in Appendix A.




9
   Total banking system assets represents the total assets of the 6,182 FDIC-insured commercial banks and savings
institutions in the US as of December 2015 (FDIC Quarterly banking profile).
10
   The standard deviation of ROA is estimated using quarterly data using a three-year rolling window.

                                                       8
    Table 2 shows descriptive statistics of the main variables used in our analyses for the whole sample,

for small banks, and for large banks. Importantly, these descriptive statistics do not account for changes in

the composition of the sample. The statistics reported in Table 2 are obtained by averaging the variables

each year and then taking the average across years. We show first the results for our two valuation measures.

It is noteworthy that average Tobin’s q during our sample period is higher than the average Tobin’s q of

Boyd and Runkle (1993). They report the average Tobin’s q for banks holding companies from 1971 to

1990 to be 1.002. In our sample, the average Tobin’s q for banks with assets in excess of $10 billion is 1.06.

We see from Table 2 that, though large banks are valued less on average than small banks, the difference

between the averages is not statistically significant. Obviously, looking at the sample as a whole, this

comparison provides no support for the view that large banks are worth more than small banks.

    Our next two measures are tail risk and equity volatility. Though these measures are slightly larger for

large banks than for small banks, they are not significantly so. Next, we see that bank stocks earn 13.6%

per year during our sample period. The difference in returns between large and small banks is insignificant.

We find no significant differences in return on assets and return on equity. However, small banks have a

higher z-score than large banks, which means that they are farther away from the distress threshold. The

difference is economically small. As expected, large banks have significantly higher non-interest income

and fewer deposits than smaller banks. They also have more trading assets relative to assets.



Section 2. Bank valuation and bank size.

    It has been widely noticed that valuations of banks since the crisis have been much lower (e.g.,

Calomiris and Nissim (2014) and Sarin and Summers (2016)). Figure 1A shows the yearly average Tobin’s

q for large banks and for small banks. Recent averages for Tobin’s q are low compared to the ten years

before the GFC, but not compared to averages of Tobin’s q at the beginning of our sample. The figure

shows that the Tobin’s q of banks increases sharply from 1994 to 1997 and then falls steadily first and

abruptly during the crisis. Importantly, the figure shows that this pattern holds equally for large and small

banks, so that common factors appear to be driving the valuation of banks during our sample period. The

                                                      9
difference in means between large banks and small banks is typically negative and never exceeds 3.5% of

the average Tobin’s q of banks in absolute value. The highest valuation of large banks relative to small

banks is in 2000, when the difference is 3.4% of the average Tobin’s q of banks. The lowest valuation of

large banks relative to small banks is in 1997, when the average Tobin’s q of the large banks is lower than

the average q of the small banks by 3.5% of the average Tobin’s q of banks. The large banks are always

valued less than the small banks except for three periods. First, large banks are valued more from 1999 to

2002. Large banks are again valued more highly from 2011 to the end of the sample. Finally, large banks

are valued more in 2006.

    We show the results for medians in Figure 1B. The results for medians are similar to those for the

means except that the median Tobin’s q of large banks is never larger than the median q of small banks in

the last five sample years, while it is when we use means. The largest median difference is in 2008, when

the large bank median is lower than the small bank median by 3.9% of the sample median.

    To assess more precisely how Tobin’s q is related to size, we report regression estimates in Section 2.1.

In Section 2.2., we show results using a non-parametric approach. In Section 2.3., we estimate regressions

using market-to-book instead.



Section 2.1. Tobin’s q and bank size regressions.

    To assess the relation between a bank’s Tobin’s q and its size, we would like to be able to compare two

banks that are exactly the same except that one is larger than the other. Unfortunately, such comparisons

are not possible. Banks that differ in size tend to differ in other dimensions as well. Typically, a large bank

has different activities than a small bank. For instance, a large bank is more likely to be a global bank and

is more likely to be a bank with substantial trading activities. The differences in activities related to bank

size raise the concern that large banks might be valued differently not because they are larger but because

they have different activities. To address this issue, we estimate regressions with and without controlling

for a bank’s activities.



                                                      10
     The next issue we have to address is how to parametrize bank size. We use book total assets as our

measure of bank size. We have three different ways to relate Tobin’s q to bank size. The first approach is

our main focus and is based on a piecewise linear formula, where we allow for the relation between bank

size and Tobin’s q to be linear with different slopes depending on whether the respective bank crossed the

$50 billion TBTF constant dollars threshold. The second approach ignores the distinction between the large

and small banks and simply uses the logarithm of assets. The third approach is non-parametric and allows

the data to dictate the relation between q and bank size.

     In this section, we estimate first the relation between bank size and Tobin’s q for the pre-crisis period

(1987 to 2006) and for the whole sample period. In Table 3, Panel A uses the piecewise linear approach

and Panel B uses the logarithm of bank size instead. In each Panel, we have two sets of four regressions,

one set for the pre-crisis period and one set for the whole sample period. The first two regressions in each

panel have no variables describing bank characteristics. We use three different estimation approaches. First,

we use what amounts to a cross-sectional approach, in that the only fixed effects included are year fixed

effects, so that we effectively eliminate common business cycle effects across all banks. Second, we also

add bank fixed effects, so that we estimate the relation between Tobin’s q and bank size within banks. We

also implement a third approach (untabulated) in which we use both state fixed effects and year fixed

effects. This approach removes both common business cycle effects and effects due to the geographical

location of banks. The results from that approach support our conclusions. In all regressions, we cluster

standard errors by bank.11

     Regression (1) captures the cross-section relation between Tobin’s q and size. In regression (1) of Panel

A, we see that the slope of size for assets between $10 and $50 billion is insignificant, while the slope of

size for assets greater than $50 billion is significant and negative. In other words, valuations fall with size

above $50 billion, but not below $50 billion. The slope coefficient on assets in excess of $50 billion is -



11
  Including year fixed effects and clustering standard errors by firm is a common approach used to address two sources
of correlation when panel data have more firms than years (Petersen, 2009). Clustering by both firm and year yields
similar results.

                                                         11
0.0742. The average Tobin’s q for large banks in the sample is 1.058. Consequently, an increase in size

from $50 billion to $453 billion, the average size of large banks in 2010, reduces Tobin’s q by 2.8% or by

47.5% of the standard deviation of the q of large banks in the sample. Regression (2) includes bank fixed

effects as well as year fixed effects. Now, the slope for assets between $10 and $50 billion is negative and

significant, as it is -1.380. The interpretation is that an increase in assets of $10 billion reduces Tobin’s q

by 0.014. The slope for assets greater than $50 billion is negative and significant as well. The estimate is

slightly larger in absolute value than in regression (1) as it is -0.0993. When we use state and year fixed

effects, the results are similar to the regression that uses only year fixed effects.

    The next two regressions take into account two bank characteristics that differ between small and large

banks: non-interest income and equity-to-assets. As before, we use different estimation approaches. In

regression (3), we see that the coefficient on assets below $50 billion is negative and significant, so that

Tobin’s q falls as assets increase between $10 and $50 billion. The coefficient on assets above $50 billion

is significant as well and is similar to the same coefficient in regression (1). The coefficient on non-interest

income is positive and significant, so that banks that have more non-interest income have a higher Tobin’s

q. As a result of this correlation, the relation between Tobin’s q and size is steeper. The equity-to-assets

ratio is positively related to Tobin’s q. When we turn to regression (4), which is the same as regression (3)

but with the addition of bank fixed effects, we see that the coefficients on the size variables are similar to

those of regression (2), so that adding the bank characteristics does not impact the size coefficients in the

model with bank fixed effects. Neither non-interest income nor equity to assets is significant in the

regression with bank fixed effects.

    We now turn to regressions that use the whole sample period. These regressions include the crisis period

as well as the post-crisis period. Regressions (5) and (6) are estimates of regressions (1) and (2) for the

whole sample period. In regression (5), the Tobin’s q of large banks falls with asset size as in regression

(1). The estimate of the coefficient is smaller by 2/3rds in absolute value, so that the value of large banks

appears to be negatively related to size for the whole sample period but less strongly than before the crisis.

With bank fixed effects, the value of small banks falls with size as in regression (2). Now, however, the

                                                       12
value of large banks no longer falls with size. Regressions (7) and (8) control for non-interest income and

leverage. With these controls, the value of small banks falls with size. The value of large banks falls with

size in regression (7) but not in regression (8). It is important to note that with bank fixed effects, as a small

bank increases in size, its value falls. Hence, if a bank starts small and becomes large, its value is lower

when it is a large bank. However, if a bank starts large and becomes larger, its value does not fall over the

whole sample period. This result is in contrast to the results for the cross-section where there is a negative

relation between bank value and bank size through the whole sample period.

    Though we do not tabulate the results, we also estimate our regressions using the period from 1987 to

2010. With that period, the value of large banks falls significantly with size in regressions similar to

regressions (5) to (8). Consequently, the lack of significance of size for large banks in the regressions with

bank fixed effects on the whole sample is due to the addition of the years following the adoption of Dodd-

Frank.

    Panel A of Table 3 shows that before the crisis the value of large banks falls with size irrespective of

whether we control for bank characteristics. When we control for bank characteristics or when we control

for bank fixed effects, the value of small banks falls with size as well. We now re-estimate these regressions

in Panel B using the logarithm of assets instead of the piecewise linear model. For the pre-crisis period, the

coefficient on the logarithm of bank size is significantly negative for all regressions. For the whole sample

period, the coefficient on the logarithm of bank size is significantly negative for all regressions except in

the regression with only year fixed effects.

    In summary, the regressions of Table 3 consistently show that the value of large banks falls with size

before the crisis. When we include the crisis and the post-crisis period in the sample, the evidence that the

Tobin’s q of large banks falls with size no longer holds when we use bank fixed effects. However, when

we use bank fixed effects, it is clear that bank valuation falls with size for small banks, so that a bank’s

value falls as its size increases until it reaches the Dodd-Frank threshold and is unaffected by size beyond

that threshold. Though we do not report the results in a table, we also repeat the regressions of Panel A

using $100 billion as the size threshold as this threshold is used in the literature (Brewer and Jagtiani, 2013,

                                                       13
and Hughes and Mester, 2013). Doing so does not change our conclusions. No regression has a positive

significant coefficient on size for large banks, so that there is no evidence that bank value increases with

size for large banks.



Section 2.2. Non-parametric results.

    So far, the results shown depend on assumptions about the functional form of the relation between bank

size and Tobin’s q. We now provide some results about the relation between bank size and Tobin’s q

without such assumptions. First, we show scatterplots in Figure 2. We obtain these scatterplots by taking

residuals of regressions of Tobin’s q on year fixed effects. By doing so, we remove the comovement of

Tobin’s q across banks and can focus on differences in the cross-section. Panel A of Figure 2 shows the

residuals of regressions of Tobin’s q on year fixed effects plotted against asset size for the period from

1987-2006. We see that there is a large number of banks with positive residuals. However, all banks with

assets in excess of $500 billion in constant dollars have negative residuals. This is striking in that the mean

residual is zero by construction, so that all these banks are below the mean. In the range from $50 billion

to $500 billion in constant dollars, we see that there are banks with positive residuals. However, it is quite

clear that most banks over that range have negative residuals. There is no evidence here that supports the

view that large banks have higher valuations. Panel B of Figure 2 shows the residuals of the regression of

Tobin’s q on year fixed effects plotted against asset size for the sample period ending in 2015. We still see

that most residuals for large banks are negative.

    The scatter plots of Figure 2 show that large banks typically have negative residuals, so that they are

valued less than the average bank. We now use a univariate non-parametric regression to show the relation

between Tobin’s q and size after accounting for year fixed effects. The advantage of this approach is that it

makes no assumptions about the parametric relation between Tobin’s q and bank assets. The specific

approach we use involves local polynomial smoothing. Figure 3 shows the results with a 95% confidence

interval. Panel A of Figure 3 shows the local polynomial smoothing for the sample that ends in 2006. We

see that the relation is not monotone, but it is clear that 1) large banks are valued less than small banks, and

                                                      14
(2) Tobin’s q falls with bank size except for the banks in excess of $1 trillion in constant dollars. Note that

there are very few observations for banks with more than $1 trillion in constant dollars. As a result, the

confidence interval is quite large. However, the curve for banks in excess of $250 billion is always

significantly lower than the curve for banks with assets below $50 billion. In the neighborhood of $50

billion, the relation between Tobin’s q and asset size is relatively flat, but it then becomes negative.

    Panel B shows the results from the nonparametric regression using the whole sample period. The

smoothed curve has a similar shape than in Panel A, but there is a range of asset values between $1 trillion

and $1.5 trillion where the confidence interval is large enough that we cannot conclude that the Tobin’s q

is significantly different from the Tobin’s q for small banks. However, past $1.5 trillion, the curve slopes

downward and it is again clear that large banks have lower valuations.

    The bottom line from Figures 2 and 3 is that there is no evidence that large banks are systematically

valued more than small banks. When we do not impose a parametric relation between bank size and Tobin’s

q, the relation is non-linear. Further, the relation is estimated imprecisely over some range of assets when

we use the whole sample period. When we estimate the relation for the sample period ending in 2006, the

relation is estimated more precisely and the Tobin’s q of large banks along the smoothed curve is always

lower than the Tobin’s q of small banks.



Section 2.3. Results with market-to-book.

    The results so far use Tobin’s q as a valuation measure. We investigate whether the results are specific

to that measure by estimating regressions similar to those of Table 3 for the market-to-book ratio, which is

the ratio of the market value of equity to the book value of equity. These results are shown in Table 4. We

find results that are similar to those we found for Tobin’s q. In Panel A, we show first results with no

controls except for year fixed effects. We see in regression (1) that the market-to-book ratio falls with bank

size for large banks but not for small banks over the sample period ending in 2006. As in regression (2) of

Table 3, we find that the valuation ratio falls with size both for small and large banks when we have both

year and bank fixed effects. In regressions (5) and (6), we show the regression estimates for the whole

                                                      15
sample. The results are similar except that the absolute value of the slopes for large banks are smaller. In

regression (3), we repeat regression (1) but add controls for equity-to-assets and non-interest income. Now,

the coefficients on bank size are significantly negative for both small and large banks. Similar results hold

when we also use bank fixed effects in regression (4). Regressions (7) and (8) repeat the regressions for the

whole sample period. Again, both size coefficients are significantly negative but smaller in absolute value.

    Panel B of Table 4 estimates the relation between market-to-book and the logarithm of asset size.

Without controls besides fixed effects, we see that the relation is significantly negative whether we use

bank fixed effects or not for the sample period ending in 2006 and for the whole sample period. Adding

controls for equity-to-assets and non-interest income does not change inferences about the sign of the

coefficient on the logarithm of assets.



Section 3. Why are larger banks valued less?

    In an efficient market, the value of a bank for capital providers should be the present value of the cash

flows that accrue to capital providers. When capital providers are understood to include all providers of

funds to a bank, including the depositors, this value is the numerator of Tobin’s q. We would expect larger

banks to be worth less than smaller banks if they are riskier than smaller banks. In this case, larger banks

are more likely than smaller banks to incur costs of financial distress and their expected cash flows would

be discounted at a higher rate. Larger banks also should be worth less than smaller banks if their accounting

performance is worse than the accounting performance of smaller banks as they would have lower future

expected cash flows. Finally, the market may discount some activities that larger banks engage in more

than smaller banks. In this section, we explore these possible explanations for the lower valuation of larger

banks.



Section 3.1. Are larger banks riskier than smaller banks?

    With a higher probability of poor performance, a bank is more likely to experience some form of costly

financial distress. It does not follow, however, that this greater financial distress necessarily reduces bank

                                                     16
values because the present value of increased distress costs could be associated with higher cash flows in

non-distress states of the world. However, keeping expected cash flows without distress costs constant, a

greater probability of distress costs decreases bank value.

       We investigate whether larger banks have a higher probability of distress costs than smaller banks by

focusing on four variables. We are interested in variables that proxy for the risk of cash flows falling low

enough that the bank would suffer from financial distress. Our measures are first the log of a bank z-score.

The bank z-score used in the literature is ROA + equity-to-assets scaled by the standard deviation of ROA.12

The second measure is a proxy for leverage, which is the ratio of book equity-to-assets. The third measure

is tail risk, which we define as the negative of the average return on a bank’s stock over the 5% worst return

days in the year, following Ellul and Yerramilli (2013). Finally, we use an estimate of equity volatility 

the annualized standard deviation of daily stock returns.

       Table 5 estimates regressions that relate our risk variables to bank size. The regressions are the same

as regressions (1) and (2) of Panel A of Table 3, except that the dependent variables are different. Panel A

of Table 5 shows estimates of regressions where we use the piecewise linear model for the sample ending

in 2006. Regression (1) uses the z-score as the dependent variable for the sample ending in 2006 and has

only year fixed effects. We see that the z-score falls with bank size for small banks but then increases for

large banks. In other words, as large bank size increases, the probability of distress falls. When we also use

bank fixed effects in regression (2), we find that neither size coefficient is significant. The second measure

that uses accounting information is the leverage measure. We show estimates in regressions (3) and (4). In

regression (3), equity-to-assets falls in large banks as their size increases, so that large banks have more

leverage. When we include bank fixed effects, no coefficient is significant.

       We turn next to the two measures of total risk that use stock returns. The first measure is the measure

of tail risk. Tail risk increases with bank size for small banks. For large banks, tail risk decreases

significantly with bank size in regression (6) which uses bank fixed effects. In regression (5), which has



12
     The standard deviation of ROA is estimated using quarterly data using a three-year rolling window.

                                                          17
only year fixed effects, the coefficient for large banks is negative but the t-statistic is only 1.57 in absolute

value. When we turn to equity volatility in regressions (7) and (8), the results are similar.

    Though we do not show the results in the table, we also estimate the regressions using the logarithm of

size as our size measure. Perhaps not surprisingly since risk increases with size for small banks, we find

that all risk measures increase with the logarithm of assets when we have only year fixed effects. In the

regressions with bank fixed effects, the coefficient on the logarithm of assets is never significant.

    In Panel B of Table 5, we show estimates of the regressions of Panel A when we use the whole sample

period. In regressions (1) and (2), we see that the z-score falls with bank size for small banks, but then

increases for large banks. In regression (3), which includes year fixed effects, equity-to-assets falls with

bank size for large banks over the whole sample period. In regression (4), which includes bank fixed effects,

equity-to-assets has no significant coefficient. Turning to the measures that use stock returns, none of the

coefficients for large banks are significant. All coefficients for small banks are positive and significant.

Using the whole sample, it follows that tail risk and volatility increase with bank size, but not after the bank

has reached the threshold of $50 billion in constant dollars.

    Using our piecewise linear model for size, we find that leverage increases with size for large banks in

the cross-section, but all other risk metrics fall with size for large banks before 2006. There is no

inconsistency between these results as long as the risk of assets and cash flows of large banks falls with

size. In any case, these results are inconsistent with the hypothesis that valuation falls with size because

larger banks are more likely to suffer firm-specific distress events.



Section 3.2. Do larger banks perform worse than smaller banks?

    If the income of large banks falls with assets, we expect their valuation to fall with assets as well. In

Table 6, we explore the relation between size and performance. We consider three performance measures:

ROA, ROE, and common stock returns. In Panel A, we use the sample period that ends in 2006. Starting

with ROA, we see in regression (1) that performance increases with size for small banks and is unrelated

to size for large banks. There is no relation between our performance measures and bank size when we

                                                       18
include bank fixed effects in regression (2). Turning to ROE, we find in regressions (3) and (4) that

performance is unrelated to bank size when we use only year fixed effects, but it falls with size when we

use both year fixed effects and bank fixed effects. Finally, when we consider stock returns, they are

unrelated to size when we use only year fixed effects (regression (5)) but are negatively related to size with

both year and bank fixed effects (regression (6)).

    Panel B of Table 6 shows estimates for the whole sample period. Regressions (1) and (2) lead to similar

inferences as regression (1) of Panel A. When we turn to ROE, we find no significant coefficient in the

regression with only year fixed effects. ROE falls with size for small banks but not large banks in regression

(4) where we use both year and bank fixed effects. Finally, inferences about the relation between returns

and size for the whole sample are the same as for the sample ending in 2006.

    In unreported regressions, we find that, when we use the log of assets as our measure of size, ROA

increases with size when we have only year fixed effects, while ROE and returns fall with size when we

have both year and bank fixed effects. The other regressions have insignificant coefficients.

    Note that in valuation models, keeping the discount rate constant, an increase in future cash flows

increases Tobin’s q and market-to-book. By using ROA and ROE, we are not taking into account

expectations of future growth. We investigate, but do not tabulate, how growth rates of ROA, ROE and

assets differ between small and large banks. To do so, we estimate regressions similar to the ones we use

for ROA and ROE. The clearest result is that there is no relation between ROE growth and size irrespective

of the sample period and of whether a bank is small or large. With respect to ROA growth, there is no

significant relation for the 1987-2015 sample. For the 1987-2006 sample, the coefficient on size for small

banks is significantly positive in the regression with only year fixed effects and the coefficient on size for

large banks is significantly positive in the regression with bank and year fixed effects. Finally, with respect

to growth in assets, the growth in assets falls with size for small banks in all regressions and increases with

size for large banks in regressions with year fixed effects only. None of these results can help explain the

negative relation between Tobin’s q and bank size for large banks.



                                                      19
    Using only year fixed effects, we have no reason to believe that the performance worsens with size for

large banks using the sample that ends before the crisis. With year and bank fixed effects, the evidence is

that the returns to equity holders are negatively related to bank size for the 1987-2006 sample but not for

the 1987-2015 sample. This result helps us understand why the valuation of large banks falls with size for

the 1987-2006 sample but not for the 1987-2015 sample when year and bank fixed effects are included.

However, these results do not help us understand why the valuation of large banks falls with size in

regressions with only year fixed effects in both samples.



Section 3.3. Do large banks have higher risk-adjusted stock returns than small banks?

    If the risk-adjusted stock returns of large banks were higher than small banks, this would mean that the

market would discount future expected cash flows at a higher rate for large banks than small banks. In this

case, large banks would be valued less. This potential explanation for our results seems unlikely to hold

because Gandhi and Lustig (2015) show that large banks have lower (not higher) risk-adjusted stock returns

than other banks. However, it could be that in our sample the results are different. Table 7 shows results for

the sample from July 1987 to December 2006 in the first three regressions and results for the whole sample

period in the last three regressions.

    In Table 7, we estimate the risk-adjusted returns of equally-weighted bank portfolios. We show results

using the five-factor model of Gandhi and Lustig (2015). The factors are a market factor (Market), a size

factor (SMB), a value-growth factor (HML), LTG (excess returns on an index of 10-year U.S. Treasury

bonds), and CRD (excess returns on an index of investment grade corporate bonds). We see that the

intercept of regression (1), which is the regression for large banks, is -0.0027 per month and is insignificant.

We estimate the same regression for small banks, regression (2), and the intercept is insignificant as well.

Regression (3) shows a regression on a portfolio which is long large banks and short small banks. The

intercept is -0.0019 and is insignificant. These results are consistent with large banks having lower returns

than small banks, but in these regressions the intercepts are not significant. Panel B shows estimates for the

whole sample period. Since the Gandhi and Lustig (2015) factors are not available for 2015, we omit these

                                                      20
factors. The results are similar except that the intercept for large banks is larger in absolute value and is

closer to being significant as the t-statistic is -1.54. When we construct portfolios where the threshold for

large banks is $250 billion so that we include only the very large banks, the inferences are similar.

    It follows from this analysis that no case can be made that large banks are valued less because the

market requires a higher risk-adjusted discount rate for these banks.



Section 3.4. Does the market discount the contribution to shareholder wealth of some bank activities?

    Large banks engage in different activities in comparison to smaller banks. In Table 8 we explore

whether these differences in activities can help us understand why large banks are worth less. Table 8

reports the results of regressions relating Tobin’s q to balance sheet measures of bank activities: Trading

assets as a fraction of total assets, real estate (RE) loans-to-total assets, commercial and industrial (CI)

loans-to-assets as measures of lending activities, and securities as a fraction of total assets. Other variables

include non-interest income, equity-to-assets, and an indicator variable (No trading assets) that is equal to

one for banks with no trading assets, and zero otherwise. We show results using the piecewise formulation

for size as well as the logarithm of assets.

    Regressions (1) and (2) of Table 8 show estimates of the regressions for the sample period ending in

2006 using the piecewise linear function for size. In regression (1), which uses year fixed effects, neither

coefficient for the size variables is significant. The coefficient that stands out is the coefficient of -0.42 for

trading assets that is significant at the 1% level. This coefficient shows that Tobin’s q is negatively

correlated with trading assets, which is consistent with the existence of a valuation discount for these assets.

Huizinga and Laeven (2012) use similar regressions to assess how the market valued assets on bank balance

sheets during the GFC. It is important to note that the sample used here ends before the GFC, so that trading

assets were associated with lower bank values at a time when markets were more liquid than during the

GFC so that valuation of trading assets was not made more difficult by the lack of liquidity. The coefficients

on trading assets are economically large. In our regressions, there is no correlation between Tobin’s q and

securities holdings for the period 1987-2006. Hence, if over that period a bank experiences a reduction of

                                                       21
1% of securities-to-assets and an increase of 1% of trading assets as a fraction of total assets, Tobin’s q falls

by approximately 0.2% using the coefficient estimates of the regression (2) which has both year and bank

fixed effects.

     In contrast to the regression with only year fixed effects, the regression with year and bank fixed effects

has significantly negative coefficients on the size variables as well as the trading assets variable. When we

turn to the whole sample in regressions (3) and (4), we find that the size coefficients for small banks are

significant for both regressions but the coefficients for large banks are insignificant for both regressions.

The coefficients on trading assets are negative and significant in both regressions as well. Regressions (5)

to (8) are the same regressions as regressions (1) to (4) except that we use the logarithm of assets as our

size variable. In these regressions, the coefficient on size is insignificant in Regression (5) with year fixed

effects, and negative and significant in the remaining specifications (6)-(8).

     The logarithm of bank size has a correlation of 0.56 with trading assets to assets. This is not surprising

because large banks are more likely to have investment banking operations and such operations have large

amounts of trading assets. The correlation creates a concern that the coefficients on size cannot be estimated

precisely because of multicollinearity. This does not appear to be the case because the coefficients on

trading assets are generally estimated precisely. We re-estimate the regression using the residual of trading

assets on size instead of trading assets. When we do so, the Tobin’s q of large banks is also not related to

size for the sample period ending in 2006, but is negatively related to size for the sample period ending in

2015. If we estimate the regressions of Table 8 without trading assets, the Tobin’s q of large banks is always

negatively related to size.

     We also estimate regressions similar to Regression (1) of Table 3 where we add an indicator variable

for whether the bank is active in some activity. These activities are whether the bank is a derivative user,

whether it has high market risk, high R&E loans, high C&I loans, high securities portfolio, and high

compensation-to-assets.13 The only case for the sample ending in 2006 where the coefficient on size for


13
  High market risk is an indicator variable equal to one if a bank’s total trading activity (trading assets & liabilities)
as of the prior year-end exceeds 10% of total assets. High R&E (C&I) loans is an indicator variable that is equal to

                                                           22
large banks is insignificant is for the banks with high market risk, which is a result similar to the one we

find in Table 8. When we turn to the whole sample, we find the same result for the regressions with year

fixed effects. For the regressions with both year and bank fixed effects, size is not significant when we use

the derivatives usage indicator variable.14



Section 4. Banks before and after Dodd-Frank

    So far, we have shown results for the sample period ending in 2006 and for the whole sample period.

We occasionally discussed results for a sample period ending in 2010. In this section, we start by

investigating whether the relation between bank value and bank size differs in the post-Dodd-Frank period,

which we define to be 2011 to 2015, from the pre-Dodd-Frank period, which is 1987-2010. Though we call

the period the post-Dodd-Frank period, it is important to note that important changes in bank regulation

took place with Basel 2.5 immediately after the GFC and Basel III during the period. We are not making a

judgement as to which regulatory changes are relatively more important and our analysis cannot distinguish

between the various regulatory changes. We next investigate whether the relation between bank risk, bank

performance, and bank size differs between the pre- and post-Dodd-Frank periods.

    In Table 9, we re-estimate regressions (1) and (2) of Table 4 and the regressions of Table 8 with the

piecewise linear formulation for size, but now we add an indicator variable for the post-Dodd-Frank period

and interact it with all variables. Regressions (1) and (2) have only the size variables, an indicator variable

for the post-Dodd-Frank period, and the interaction between them. In both regressions, Tobin’s q falls with

size for large banks. However, none of the interactions with the post-Dodd-Frank indicator variable are

significant.

    In regressions (3) and (4) we repeat the regressions of Table 8 with the indicator variable for the Post-

Dodd-Frank period and interactions of all variables with that indicator variable. The only interactions that



one if the ratio of real estate (commercial and industrial) loans-to-loans (3-year rolling window average) is in the top
25% of distribution and 0 otherwise. We define high securities portfolio and high compensation-to-assets in a similar
manner using the ratio of securities-to-assets and compensation-to-assets, respectively.
14
   Data for derivatives is only available since 1996.

                                                          23
are significant are the interactions for non-interest income and equity-to-assets in regression (3). In

regression (4), none of the interactions are significant. In regression (3), we find that the coefficients on

non-interest income and on equity to assets are sharply lower in the post-Dodd-Frank period. The change

in the relation between bank value and leverage from before to after the crisis is shown by Calomiris and

Nissin (2014) as well.

    These results mean that the relation between bank Tobin’s q and size is not different between the pre-

and post-Dodd-Frank periods. These results are surprising in that the relation between Tobin’s q and size

is weaker for large banks when we include the post-Dodd-Frank period. Apparently, the relation between

Tobin’s q and size weakens, but not enough for the change in the coefficient on size for large banks to be

significantly different in the post-Dodd-Frank period. Note that the coefficient on size for large banks in

Table 4 is insignificant over the whole sample only when we have bank fixed effects. Regression (2) in

Table 9 has bank fixed effects. There, the coefficient on size is -0.0286 for large banks and the coefficient

is significant at the 1% level. The interaction of the post-Dodd-Frank indicator variable with size for large

banks has a coefficient of 0.0148 with a t-statistic of 1.5. Consequently, the coefficient on the size variable

effectively drops by half in the post-Dodd-Frank period, but the drop is not statistically significant at the

10% level.

    To examine whether bank risk and performance characteristics change with Dodd-Frank, we estimate

regressions like those in Table 5, but allowing for size to be related to bank risk and performance differently

after Dodd-Frank. We do not tabulate the results. We find no evidence that the relation between bank size

and tail risk or equity volatility changes after Dodd-Frank for large banks, but we find evidence that after

Dodd-Frank, the coefficient on bank size in the regressions for tail risk and equity volatility falls sharply

for smaller banks. As a result of these changes, bank size seems largely unrelated to tail risk and equity

volatility after Dodd-Frank.




                                                      24
Section 5. Is it reverse causation?

    Two important concerns may affect the interpretation of our results. First, it could be that we are not

capturing a relation between Tobin’s q and size, but a relation between Tobin’s q and some variable for

which bank size is a proxy. To mitigate this concern, we show that our results hold with bank fixed effects

and when we use a variety of control variables used in the literature. Second, it could be that there is reverse

causation, so that q affects size rather than the opposite. The reverse causation concern is that assets depend

on market values for large banks, so that a shock to market values that increases Tobin’s q also increases

the value of assets, but by less than Tobin’s q because not all assets are marked to market. To address this

concern, we estimate regressions using the number of employees and lagged assets as instrumental

variables.

    In Table 10, we estimate the regressions of Panel A of Table 3 using instrumental variables for size.

We do not reproduce the first-stage regressions, but for regressions (1), (2), (5), and (6), the first-stage

regression regresses large bank assets in t on assets in t-1 and the log of the number of employees in t-1 and

does the same for small bank assets. The first stage assets have extremely high R-squared and highly

significant coefficients. Regression (1) shows estimates when assets are instrumented for the sample period

from 1987 to 2006. We find that the coefficient for large banks is significantly negative. The coefficient for

small banks is significantly positive at the 10% level. When we turn to Regression (2) which also has bank

fixed effects, both coefficients are significantly negative. The next two regressions also include equity-to-

assets and non-interest income both in the first and second stages. In Regression (3), the coefficient on

small banks is negative and insignificant. The other coefficients on size variables in Regressions (3) and

(4) are similar to the coefficients in Regressions (1) and (2). Regressions (5) to (8) re-estimate the

coefficients for the whole sample period. The estimates are consistent with the OLS results.



Section 6. Conclusion

    In this study, we examine whether larger banks are worth more than smaller banks. We find no evidence

pointing in that direction. Most of our evidence actually supports the opposite conclusion, namely that the

                                                      25
Tobin’s q and the market-to-book ratio of large banks fall with assets, and we find no evidence that supports

the conclusion that larger banks are worth more than smaller banks. An important caveat is that while we

show that TBTF banks are not worth more than small banks because of TBTF, we do not demonstrate that

TBTF does not add value to large banks, since we cannot exclude that large banks would be valued even

less without TBTF. However, similarly, we cannot exclude that TBTF decreases bank value through

regulatory and political costs.

    We explore potential explanations for why the value of large banks falls with size. The negative relation

between bank value and bank size for large banks could be explained if (i) bank performance falls with size

for large banks so that the present value of cash flows as a fraction of assets falls with size for these banks,

(ii) the riskiness of bank income increases with size for larger banks, so that banks become more likely to

incur costs of financial distress as they grow larger, or (iii) the discount rate for cash flows falls with bank

size for large banks. None of these potential explanations are consistently supported by the data across

regression specifications. Bank risk does not increase with size for large banks. While ROE falls with size

for large banks in regressions with bank fixed effects, it does not in the cross-section. Large bank stocks do

not have higher expected returns than small bank stocks. We find, however, strong evidence that the value

of banks is negatively related to trading assets in that a bank that increases trading assets by 1% of assets

and reduces its holding of securities by 1% (in other words, reduces securities held for investment and

increases securities held for trading) is associated with a decrease in Tobin’s q of 0.19% in regressions

where we control for bank characteristics and account for year and bank fixed effects. While Laeven and

Huizinga (2012) find evidence that some bank assets are discounted by the market as a result of the crisis,

our result holds for the sample period starting in 1987 that ends before the crisis. Hence, our result is more

consistent with the view that the market discounts trading activities generally.




                                                      26
References


Boyd, J.H. and D.E. Runkle, 1993. Size and performance of banking firms: Testing the predictions of
   theory. Journal of Monetary Economics, 31(1), 47-67.

Brewer III, E. and J. Jagtiani, 2013. How much did banks pay to become Too-Big-To-Fail and to become
   systemically Important? Journal of Financial Services Research, 43 (1), 1-35.

Calomiris, C.W. and D. Nissim, 2014. Crisis-related shifts in the market valuation of banking activities.
   Journal of Financial Intermediation, 23, 400-435.

Demirgüç-Kunt, A. and H. Huizinga, 2010. Bank activity and funding strategies: The impact on risk and
   returns. Journal of Financial Economics 98(3), 626-650.

Demirgüç-Kunt, A. and H. Huizinga, 2013. Are banks too big to fail or too big to save? International
   evidence from equity prices and CDS spreads. Journal of Banking & Finance, 37(3), 875-894.

Ellul, A. and V. Yerramilli, 2013. Stronger risk controls, lower risk: Evidence from U.S. bank holding
    companies. The Journal of Finance, 68 (5), 1757-1803.

Erel, I., T. Nadauld, and R.M. Stulz, 2013. Why did holdings of highly rated securitization tranches differ
    so much across banks? Review of Financial Studies, 27(2), 404-453.

Fama, E.F. and K.R. French, 1993. Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds, Journal of
   Financial Economics, 33, 3–56.

Gandhi, P. and H. Lustig, 2015. Size Anomalies in U.S. Bank Stock Returns. Journal of Finance, 70, 733-
   768.

Hughes, J.P. and L.J. Mester, 2013. Who said large banks don’t experience scale economies? Evidence
   from a risk-return-driven cost function. Journal of Financial Intermediation, 22 (4), 559-585.

Huizinga, H. and L. Laeven, 2012. Bank valuation and accounting discretion during a financial
   crisis. Journal of Financial Economics, 106 (3), 614-634.

International Monetary Fund, 2014. Global Financial Stability Report (April), Chapter 3, “How big is the
    implicit subsidy for banks seen as too-important-to-fail?” (Washington: International Monetary Fund).

Kane, E.J., 2014. “Statement on measuring the funding advantages enjoyed by large, complex, and
   politically powerful bank holding companies.” Hearing on Debt Financing in the Domestic Financial
   Sector, U.S. Senate, July 31, 2014.

Kovner, A., J. Vickery, and L. Zhou, 2014. “Do big banks have lower operating costs?” Economic Policy
   Review 20 (2), 1-23.

Kroszner, R., 2016. A review of bank funding cost differentials. Journal of Financial Services Research, 49
   (2-3), 151-174.

Laeven, L., L. Ratnovski, and H. Tong, 2014. Bank size, capital, and systemic risk: Some international
   evidence.” Working paper, IMF, Washington D.C.

                                                    27
O'Hara, M. and W. Shaw, 1990. Deposit insurance and wealth effects: the value of being “too big to
   fail”. The Journal of Finance, 45(5), 1587-1600.

Petersen, M.A., 2009. Estimating standard errors in finance panel data sets: Comparing approaches. Review
        of Financial Studies 22, 435-480.

Santos, J.A.C., 2014. “Evidence from the bond market on banks’ ‘too-big-to-fail’ subsidy,” Economic
   Policy Review 20 (2), 29-39.

Sarin, N., and L. H. Summers, 2016. “Have big banks gotten safer?” Brookings Papers on Economic
    Activity, forthcoming.

Ueda, K., and B. Weder di Mauro, 2013. Quantifying structural subsidy values for systemically important
   financial institutions. Journal of Banking & Finance, 37(10), 3830-3842.

Wheelock, D.C. and P.W. Wilson, 2012. Do large banks have lower costs? New estimates of returns to
  scale for US banks. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 44(1), 171-199.




                                                   28
Table 1.
Table reports selected descriptive statistics for the publicly traded bank holding companies (banks)
in our sample period from 1987 to 2015. A bank is included in the sample if its assets are greater
than $10 billion in 2010 constant dollars and its deposits-to-assets ratio as of the prior year-end is
least 10%. The last column reports the percentage of banks with total assets greater than $50
billion in 2010 constant dollars.

                                     Sample Description of banks by year
                                      Total Assets (constant US$ billion)
                       Full sample                    $10-$50B                   >$50B          % of banks
  Year    # of banks       Mean      Median        Mean      Median          Mean     Median      >$50B
 1987         64          $49.93     $27.25        $23.38    $18.28         $117.76   $91.23      28%
 1988         65          $51.31     $30.37        $25.43    $19.80         $109.55   $83.94      31%
 1989         74          $49.21     $28.13        $23.04    $19.76         $107.26   $85.73      31%
 1990         73          $46.06     $23.43        $23.48    $19.26         $101.98   $84.75      29%
 1991         71          $46.97     $26.83        $23.04    $18.22         $112.48   $78.33      27%
 1992         65          $51.71     $32.28        $24.45    $19.76         $113.03   $79.40      31%
 1993         67          $54.63     $32.05        $25.19    $19.53         $119.12   $79.27      31%
 1994         67          $58.08     $27.31        $22.37    $19.07         $122.05   $84.68      36%
 1995         64          $61.98     $29.15        $24.62    $20.79         $133.28   $99.08      34%
 1996         59          $69.26     $30.04        $25.04    $22.23         $149.28   $101.73     36%
 1997         58          $79.31     $40.21        $25.72    $24.60         $160.85   $102.02     40%
 1998         52          $88.04     $40.54        $28.92    $27.09         $199.71   $112.51     35%
 1999         55          $84.73     $37.96        $26.78    $21.84         $203.85   $107.91     33%
 2000         59          $87.34     $36.17        $23.13    $18.88         $195.31   $97.95      37%
 2001         58          $89.36     $32.46        $24.50    $20.51         $222.50   $99.79      33%
 2002         62          $109.73    $30.64        $24.25    $19.57         $289.25   $123.12     32%
 2003         61          $119.59    $33.85        $25.75    $21.14         $298.34   $109.58     34%
 2004         55          $141.86    $34.37        $23.91    $16.65         $348.28   $109.11     36%
 2005         59          $143.26    $40.85        $21.00    $16.35         $298.43   $106.54     44%
 2006         55          $167.76    $38.22        $22.13    $17.74         $370.38   $131.26     42%
 2007         52          $186.93    $29.75        $19.73    $16.72         $433.76   $148.33     40%
 2008         50          $203.05    $25.33        $18.24    $15.40         $480.26   $161.00     40%
 2009         50          $204.27    $23.58        $17.97    $15.57         $483.73   $163.90     40%
 2010         54          $194.95    $22.84        $17.41    $14.87         $453.18   $151.37     41%
 2011         51          $204.84    $24.71        $18.56    $17.00         $470.95   $169.24     41%
 2012         56          $195.89    $26.96        $20.40    $17.95         $467.11   $155.28     39%
 2013         67          $178.33    $24.53        $20.43    $17.38         $480.38   $164.16     34%
 2014         67          $182.97    $26.85        $22.11    $19.87         $490.70   $172.07     34%
 2015         68          $180.34    $26.43        $22.86    $21.05         $488.45   $175.92     34%




                                                      29
   Table 2.
   Table 2 reports descriptive statistics of the main variables used in our analyses. For each variable, we first obtain the cross-sectional
   average and report the time-series descriptive statistics. The last two columns report p-values from t-tests (Wilcoxon signed rank tests)
   of differences in mean (median) between large banks (total assets greater than $50 billion) and small banks (assets between $10 and $50
   billion). All variables are defined in Appendix A.

                                                                                                                                     Test of differences
                                             Full sample                 Small banks ($10-$50B)           Large banks (>$50B)             (p-value)
                                    Mean       Median      Std. dev.   Mean     Median    Std. dev.   Mean     Median    Std. dev.   Mean       Median
Tobin's q                           1.061       1.039       0.062       1.063    1.043     0.062      1.058    1.036      0.063      (0.770)    (0.822)
Market-to-Book                      1.724       1.463       0.736       1.748    1.462     0.737      1.678    1.466      0.765      (0.726)    (0.624)
Tail risk (%)                       4.377       3.478       2.406       4.257    3.402     2.256      4.645    4.184      2.693      (0.554)    (0.451)
Equity volatility (%)               31.172     26.575       14.674     30.076   25.929     13.716     33.672   29.413     17.130     (0.381)    (0.397)
Returns                             0.136       0.093       0.278       0.135    0.112     0.279      0.136    0.091      0.298      (0.990)    (0.920)
Beta                                1.076       1.071       0.314       1.003    1.020     0.299      1.218    1.225      0.362      (0.017)    (0.013)
ROA                                 0.036       0.039       0.016       0.035    0.039     0.016      0.037    0.041      0.018      (0.567)    (0.519)
ROE                                 0.110       0.136       0.060       0.108    0.132     0.063      0.112    0.139      0.070      (0.787)    (0.273)
Z-Score                             3.147       3.147       0.157       3.182    3.174     0.170      3.080    3.055      0.186      (0.033)    (0.030)
Equity-to-assets (%)                8.694       8.610       1.755       8.750    8.623     1.675      8.544    8.252      1.978      (0.669)    (0.581)
Log (assets)                        17.222     17.215       0.370      16.515   16.571     0.194      18.488   18.501     0.552      (0.000)    (0.000)
Non-interest income-to-income       0.357       0.353       0.032       0.314    0.310     0.029      0.433    0.448      0.053      (0.000)    (0.000)
Deposits-to-assets                  0.652       0.653       0.036       0.708    0.710     0.032      0.549    0.541      0.040      (0.000)    (0.000)
Trading assets-to-assets (%)        0.017       0.017       0.004       0.005    0.004     0.002      0.038    0.041      0.010      (0.000)    (0.000)
Trading assets- residuals (%)       0.000       0.000       0.006       0.002    0.000     0.005      -0.005   0.006      0.010      (0.003)    (0.005)
RE loans-to-assets                  0.316       0.336       0.061       0.353    0.377     0.079      0.253    0.255      0.045      (0.000)    (0.000)
CI loans-to-assets                  0.151       0.146       0.029       0.144    0.137     0.024      0.164    0.165      0.044      (0.034)    (0.150)
Securities-to-assets                0.202       0.208       0.025       0.223    0.226     0.031      0.163    0.168      0.023      (0.000)    (0.000)




                                                                        30
Table 3. Bank size and Tobin’s q.
Table shows results from OLS regressions of Tobin’s q on proxies for bank size. In Panel A, we use two piecewise linear size
specifications, while Panel B uses the logarithm of assets. The “$10-$50 billion” captures the first $50 billion in assets and takes the value:
min (bank asset size, $50 billion). The “>$50 billion” variable captures asset size in excess of $50 billion, taking the value: max (bank asset size-
$50 billion, 0). The units of the piecewise linear variables are in $ trillions. Control variables include non-interest income-to-income, and equity-
to-assets. Heteroskedascticity-robust t-statistics with standard errors clustered at the bank level are shown in parentheses. *, **, *** indicate
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

                                                               Panel A – Piecewise linear specifications
                                                                               Dependent variable: Tobin’s q
                                                    1987-2006                                                   1987-2015
                                   (1)          (2)            (3)          (4)             (5)             (6)             (7)          (8)
        $10-$50B                0.0254     -1.3798***      -0.5197*   -1.2126***         0.0020       -1.5041***       -0.6021**   -1.3339***
                                 (0.11)       (-3.76)       (-1.92)      (-3.71)          (0.01)          (-3.34)        (-2.40)      (-3.05)
        >$50B                 -0.0742**    -0.0993*** -0.0689**       -0.0975***       -0.0247***        -0.0227      -0.0257***     -0.0214
                                (-2.58)       (-3.24)       (-2.35)      (-3.28)         (-3.46)          (-1.53)        (-3.29)      (-1.41)
        Non-interest income                               0.2190***      0.0793                                        0.1586***      0.1136
                                                             (4.09)       (1.14)                                          (3.33)       (1.62)
        Equity-to-assets                                  1.4093***     -0.0576                                          0.4871      -0.1494
                                                             (3.70)      (-0.20)                                          (1.47)      (-0.71)
        Constant              1.0023***     1.0274***     0.8618***    1.0073***        1.0025***      1.0256***       0.9363***    1.0045***
                               (185.50)      (171.02)       (27.26)      (32.66)         (190.49)       (139.00)         (31.80)      (42.63)

        Fixed effects           Year       Bank, Year      Year       Bank, Year          Year        Bank, Year       Year        Bank, Year
        Observations            1,243        1,243         1,243        1,243             1,758         1,758          1,758         1,758
        R-squared               0.448        0.820         0.591        0.822             0.451         0.787          0.530         0.792
        Adjusted R2             0.438        0.795         0.583        0.796             0.442         0.759          0.522         0.765
        # Banks                  136          136           136          136               171           171            171           171




                                                                         31
Table 3. Bank size and Tobin’s q. Continued.

                                                              Panel B – Logarithm of Assets
                                                                         Dependent variable: Tobin’s q
                                                   1987-2006                                                    1987-2015
                               (1)            (2)             (3)             (4)              (5)           (6)            (7)          (8)
      Log (assets)          -0.0066*    -0.0441***      -0.0139***      -0.0424***          -0.0047      -0.0381***   -0.0130***   -0.0361***
                             (-1.74)       (-3.90)         (-3.24)         (-4.17)           (-1.52)       (-3.63)       (-3.57)      (-3.51)
      Non-interest income                                0.2230***         0.0556                                      0.1634***      0.1127
                                                            (4.26)          (0.93)                                        (3.42)       (1.56)
      Equity-to-assets                                   1.3957***        -0.1419                                        0.4773      -0.1846
                                                            (3.68)         (-0.53)                                        (1.48)      (-0.92)
      Constant              1.1112***    1.7204***       1.0810***       1.6875***        1.0796***      1.6170***     1.1383***    1.5681***
                              (17.70)       (9.54)         (16.59)         (10.67)          (21.22)        (9.71)        (21.70)       (9.39)

      Fixed effects           Year      Bank, Year        Year        Bank, Year            Year         Bank, Year     Year       Bank, Year
      Observations            1,243       1,243           1,243         1,243               1,758          1,758        1,758        1,758
      R-squared               0.444       0.827           0.592         0.828               0.449          0.793        0.534        0.799
      Adjusted R2             0.435       0.802           0.584         0.803               0.440          0.767        0.526        0.773
      # Banks                  136         136             136           136                 171            171          171          171




                                                                         32
Table 4. Bank size and market-to-book value.
Table shows results from OLS regressions of the market-to-book ratio on proxies for bank size. In Panel A, we use two piecewise linear
size specifications, while Panel B uses the logarithm of assets. The “$10-$50 billion” captures the first $50 billion in assets and takes the
value: min (bank asset size, $50 billion). The “>$50 billion” variable captures asset size in excess of $50 billion, taking the value: max (bank asset
size- $50 billion, 0). The units of the piecewise linear variables are in $ trillions. Control variables include non-interest income-to-income, and
equity-to-assets. Heteroskedascticity-robust t-statistics with standard errors clustered at the bank level are shown in parentheses. *, **, *** indicate
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

                                                               Panel A – Piecewise linear specifications
                                                                 Dependent variable: Market-to-book
                                                     1987-2006                                                      1987-2015
                                  (1)           (2)             (3)           (4)              (5)              (6)             (7)          (8)
       $10-$50B                -1.1190    -20.0508*** -8.0974***       -18.7616***          -1.0202        -20.4223*** -7.5435***      -19.0030***
                                (-0.39)       (-3.18)        (-2.67)       (-3.46)           (-0.39)          (-3.34)        (-2.90)       (-3.40)
       >$50B                  -0.6643**    -1.1703***      -0.7589**    -1.1464***        -0.2366***         -0.3104*     -0.3147***     -0.2930*
                                (-2.07)       (-3.22)        (-2.10)       (-3.21)           (-3.32)          (-1.77)        (-4.12)       (-1.77)
       Non-interest income                                 2.3725***       0.7289                                          1.6869***      1.1234*
                                                              (5.23)        (1.07)                                            (4.20)       (1.73)
       Equity-to-assets                                      2.8643       -8.9515*                                          -2.1237     -7.4127**
                                                              (0.89)       (-1.97)                                           (-0.87)       (-2.59)
       Constant              1.0355***      1.3191***        0.2672      1.6628***        1.0314***         1.2843***      0.7609***    1.4594***
                               (15.11)        (12.74)         (1.13)        (3.91)          (15.83)           (13.83)         (3.54)       (5.27)

       Fixed effects            Year       Bank, Year       Year       Bank, Year            Year          Bank, Year       Year       Bank, Year
       Observations             1,243        1,243          1,243        1,243               1,758           1,758          1,758        1,758
       R-squared                0.488        0.778          0.573        0.786               0.501           0.760          0.566        0.770
       Adjusted R2              0.479        0.746          0.564        0.754               0.493           0.730          0.558        0.741
       # Banks                   136          136            136          136                 171             171            171          171




                                                                          33
Table 4. Bank size and market-to-book value. Continued

                                                             Panel B – Logarithm of Assets
                                                                     Dependent variable: Market-to-book
                                                  1987-2006                                                      1987-2015
                               (1)           (2)             (3)            (4)                (5)           (6)             (7)          (8)
      Log (assets)          -0.0812*    -0.5928***     -0.1920***      -0.6031***          -0.0584*    -0.4999***      -0.1602***   -0.4923***
                             (-1.93)      (-4.44)         (-3.92)        (-4.70)            (-1.82)       (-3.94)         (-4.23)      (-4.01)
      Non-interest income                               2.4132***        0.4631                                         1.7423***      1.1215
                                                           (5.43)         (0.80)                                           (4.32)       (1.64)
      Equity-to-assets                                    2.5926       -10.0936**                                        -2.2480    -7.8852***
                                                           (0.80)        (-2.34)                                          (-0.94)      (-2.80)
      Constant              2.3546***   10.6234***      3.2870***      11.2900***        1.9761***      9.0333***       3.2547***    9.1299***
                              (3.39)       (4.98)          (4.00)         (5.37)             (3.73)        (4.50)          (5.48)       (4.52)

      Fixed effects           Year      Bank, Year       Year         Bank, Year          Year         Bank, Year       Year        Bank, Year
      Observations            1,243       1,243          1,243          1,243             1,758          1,758          1,758         1,758
      R-squared               0.487       0.787          0.576          0.795             0.501          0.768          0.570         0.779
      Adjusted R2             0.479       0.756          0.568          0.766             0.492          0.738          0.562         0.750
      # Banks                  136         136            136            136               171            171            171           171




                                                                        34
Table 5. Bank size and risk.
Table shows results from OLS regressions of various proxies for bank risk on bank size. In Panel A, we show results for the period 1987-2006,
while Panel B shows results for the full sample period: 1987-2015. As dependent variables, we use four proxies for bank risk: 1) z-score – the log
of z-score, measured as (ROA+equity/assets) /σ(ROA); 2) Equity-to-assets; 3) Tail risk the negative of the average return on a bank’s stock over
the 5% worst return days in a given year; 4) Equity volatility the annualized standard deviation of daily stock returns. We use two piecewise linear
size specifications: 1) “$10-$50 billion”, which captures the first $50 billion in assets and takes the value: min (bank asset size, $50 billion); 2)
“>$50 billion”, which captures asset size in excess of $50 billion, taking the value: max (bank asset size- $50 billion, 0). The units of the piecewise
linear variables are in $ trillions. Heteroskedascticity-robust t-statistics with standard errors clustered at the bank level are shown in parentheses. *,
**, *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

                                                                           Panel A – 1987-2006
      Dependent variable:               z-score                  Equity-to-assets                     Tail risk                Equity volatility
                                   (1)              (2)         (3)             (4)              (5)               (6)        (7)             (8)
      $10-$50B               -4.2719***         -2.7825      -5.6520         -3.1994        19.1390**        23.6880***   203.2419** 172.3610**
                                (-3.87)          (-1.27)      (-0.85)         (-0.17)          (2.58)            (3.06)     (2.31)             *
                                                                                                                                            (3.10)
      >$50B                    0.1895*           0.1126    -1.4771***        -0.0331         -0.5585          -1.0948**     -5.2287    -14.4788**
                                 (1.87)           (0.34)      (-3.06)         (-0.08)         (-1.57)           (-1.96)      (-1.32)     (-2.14)
      Constant                3.3161***       3.3528***     5.9325***      6.1944***        4.8019***         4.6504***   31.2334***   30.3511***
                                (58.25)         (56.12)       (35.35)        (20.67)          (23.31)           (19.30)     (16.63)      (13.77)

      Fixed effects             Year        Bank, Year       Year         Bank, Year           Year        Bank, Year       Year       Bank, Year
      Observations              1,243         1,243          1,243          1,243              1,243         1,243          1,243        1,243
      R-squared                 0.139         0.506          0.361          0.768              0.366         0.675          0.309        0.683
      Adjusted R2               0.124         0.435          0.350          0.735              0.355         0.628          0.297        0.638
      # Banks                    136           136            136            136                136           136            136          136




                                                                           35
Table 5. Bank size and risk. Continued.

                                                                       Panel B – 1987-2015
     Dependent variable:             z-score                 Equity-to-assets                     Tail risk                 Equity volatility
                                 (1)           (2)          (3)              (4)             (5)               (6)         (7)              (8)
     $10-$50B              -4.4807***      -2.6784       -1.4672         -5.3341        13.2851**        29.3180***    131.3974*     217.4759**
                              (-4.18)       (-1.09)       (-0.22)         (-0.29)          (2.15)            (4.21)      (1.96)              *
                                                                                                                                          (3.78)
     >$50B                  0.1730***     0.1986***    -0.8088***         0.2048         -0.0003           -0.1433      -0.1651         -3.1781
                               (2.78)        (3.94)       (-3.04)          (0.59)         (-0.00)           (-0.29)      (-0.07)         (-0.62)
     Constant               3.3202***     3.3755***     5.8483***      6.3908***        4.9119***         4.6620***   32.5936*** 30.4860***
                              (55.69)       (51.26)       (34.48)        (26.64)          (25.65)           (19.58)     (21.35)         (14.03)

     Fixed effects           Year         Bank, Year     Year         Bank, Year           Year        Year, Bank       Year           Bank
     Observations            1,757          1,757        1,758          1,758              1,758         1,758          1,758          1,758
     R-squared               0.160          0.464        0.499          0.812              0.627         0.791          0.476          0.733
     Adjusted R2             0.146          0.396        0.491          0.788              0.621         0.764          0.467          0.698
     # Banks                  171            171          171            171                171           171            171            171




                                                                       36
Table 6. Bank size and performance.
Table shows results from OLS regressions of various performance measures on bank size. In Panel A, we show results for the period 1987-2006,
while Panel B shows results for the full sample period: 1987-2015. As dependent variables, we use three performance measures: 1) ROA – net
income plus interest expense divided by average assets over the prior year, 2) ROE – net income divided by average equity; 3) Returns
annual buy and hold stock returns. We use two piecewise linear size specifications: 1) “$10-$50 billion”, which captures the first $50 billion in
assets and takes the value: min (bank asset size, $50 billion); 2) “>$50 billion”, which captures asset size in excess of $50 billion, taking the value:
max (bank asset size- $50 billion, 0). The units of the piecewise linear variables are in $ trillions. Heteroskedascticity-robust t-statistics with
standard errors clustered at the bank level are shown in parentheses. *, **, *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

                                                                 Panel A. 1987-2006
                      Dependent variable:              ROA                          ROE                           Returns
                                                  (1)          (2)             (3)           (4)             (5)            (6)
                      $10-$50B               0.0979**       0.0645         -0.1010     -2.0323***        -0.2941       -6.5191***
                                                (2.51)       (1.44)         (-0.49)       (-4.47)         (-0.51)         (-4.12)
                      >$50B                   -0.0011      -0.0006         -0.0026      -0.0613**         0.0163       -0.2705***
                                               (-0.33)      (-0.25)         (-0.12)       (-2.35)          (0.63)         (-2.78)
                      Constant               0.0478***    0.0491***      0.0466***      0.0820***      -0.1212***       -0.0631*
                                               (53.25)      (46.54)          (2.69)        (4.56)         (-4.42)         (-1.92)

                      Fixed effects             Year       Bank, Year        Year       Bank, Year        Year       Bank, Year
                      Observations              1,243        1,243           1,243        1,243           1,243        1,243
                      R-squared                 0.616        0.858           0.203        0.438           0.421        0.472
                      Adjusted R2               0.609        0.837           0.189        0.358           0.411        0.396
                      # Banks                    136          136             136          136             136          136




                                                                          37
Table 6. Bank size and performance. Continued.

                                                            Panel B. 1987-2015
                  Dependent variable:             ROA                         ROE                        Returns
                                             (1)         (2)             (3)           (4)          (5)            (6)
                  $10-$50B              0.0847**      0.0128          0.0407     -2.1837***      0.1634       -5.4197***
                                           (2.43)      (0.29)          (0.18)       (-5.22)       (0.37)         (-4.58)
                  >$50B                  -0.0010      0.0008          0.0036       -0.0136      -0.0001       -0.0912***
                                          (-1.16)      (0.70)          (0.40)       (-0.64)      (-0.00)         (-4.59)
                  Constant              0.0481***   0.0498***        0.0438**     0.0777***   -0.1300***      -0.0975***
                                          (53.23)     (50.09)          (2.44)        (4.05)      (-5.05)         (-3.41)

                  Fixed effects           Year      Bank, Year      Year        Bank, Year      Year        Bank, Year
                  Observations            1,758       1,758         1,758         1,758         1,758         1,758
                  R-squared               0.753       0.891         0.279         0.512         0.453         0.508
                  Adjusted R2             0.749       0.877         0.266         0.450         0.443         0.445
                  # Banks                  171         171           171           171           171           171




                                                                  38
Table 7. Risk-Adjusted Returns.
This table presents estimates from OLS regressions of monthly equally-weighted excess returns of
portfolios of large (total assets greater than $50 billion) and small banks (assets between $10-$50 billion)
on a five-factor model that includes: the market factor (Market), a size (SMB) factor, a value-growth (HML)
factor, and two bond factors: LTG (excess return on an index of long-term government bonds), and CRD
(excess returns on an index of investment-grade corporate bonds). Banks are sorted based on asset size as
of December t-1, and portfolios are formed starting in July of year t. ∗, ∗∗, and ∗∗∗ indicate statistical
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. Standard errors are adjusted for heteroskedasticity
and autocorrelation using Newey-West (1987) with three lags.


                                    Panel A – July 1987 – December 2006
                                            (1)      (1)           (2)                (3)
                                      Large banks (2)       Small banks           Difference
                                       -0.0027      (3)       -0.0008             -0.0019
                                         (-0.94)                (-0.35)             (-0.84)
          Market                       1.4132***             1.1857***            0.2275***
                                         (18.63)               (19.09)              (4.90)
          SMB                          -0.2197**              -0.1352*             -0.0845
                                         (-2.15)                (-1.72)             (-1.16)
          HML                          0.8712***             0.7815***              0.0897
                                          (7.06)                 (9.22)             (1.04)
          LTG                           -0.0330                -0.0484              0.0154
                                         (-0.16)                (-0.36)             (0.10)
          CRD                            0.1858                 0.2086             -0.0228
                                          (0.66)                 (1.13)             (-0.10)

          Observations                      234                  234                  234
          R-squared                        0.640                0.690                0.085
                                    Panel B – July 1987 – December 2015
                                             (1)                  (2)                  (3)
                                      Large banks           Small banks           Difference
                                        -0.0036              -0.0015               -0.0022
                                          (-1.54)              (-0.72)               (-1.06)
          Market                       1.4400***             1.0841***            0.3558***
                                         (18.17)               (14.34)               (5.68)
          SMB                           -0.1567*              -0.0203              -0.1364*
                                          (-1.72)              (-0.26)               (-1.75)
          HML                          1.0633***             0.8154***            0.2479***
                                           (8.88)               (9.26)               (2.80)

          Observations                     340                  340                   340
          R-squared                       0.655                0.633                 0.162




                                                     39
Table 8. Bank size, Tobin’s q and bank activities.
Table shows results from OLS regressions of Tobin’s q on proxies for bank size. We show results for two periods: 1987-2006 and 1987-2015.
Trading-to-assets is the ratio of trading assets-to-assets. The “$10-$50 billion” captures the first $50 billion in assets and takes the value: min (bank
asset size, $50 billion). The “>$50 billion” variable captures asset size in excess of $50 billion, taking the value: max (bank asset size- $50 billion,
0). The units of the piecewise linear variables are in $ trillions. Log(assets) is the natural log of total assets (in US$000s). Control variables include
non-interest income-to-income, real estate (RE) loans-to-total assets, commercial and industrial (CI) loans-to-assets, securities-to-assets, equity-to-
assets, and an indicator variable (No trading assets) that is equal to one for banks with no trading assets, and zero otherwise. Heteroskedascticity-
robust t-statistics with standard errors clustered at the bank level are shown in parentheses. *, **, *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%
level, respectively.


                                            1987-2006                      1987-2015                     1987-2006                     1987-2015
                                        (1)              (2)           (3)              (4)          (5)             (6)           (7)             (8)
 Trading-to-assets                -0.4254***        -0.2088*     -0.4853***       -0.2928***   -0.4232***        -0.1691     -0.4521***       -0.1750*
                                     (-3.61)          (-1.81)       (-4.21)          (-3.10)      (-3.81)         (-1.61)       (-4.23)         (-1.85)
 RE loans-to-assets                 -0.0688          -0.0222      -0.1518**         -0.0344      -0.0689         -0.0218      -0.1538**        -0.0425
                                     (-0.95)          (-0.46)       (-2.35)          (-0.77)      (-0.96)         (-0.46)       (-2.42)         (-0.98)
 CI loans-to-assets                 -0.1382         -0.1876*      -0.1774**         -0.1653      -0.1366        -0.1790**     -0.1835**       -0.1797*
                                     (-1.62)          (-1.95)       (-2.23)          (-1.63)      (-1.62)         (-2.06)       (-2.36)         (-1.87)
 Securities-to-assets               -0.0212           0.0417       -0.1053           0.0598      -0.0247          0.0312       -0.1080*         0.0558
                                     (-0.27)           (0.66)       (-1.60)           (1.08)      (-0.32)          (0.48)       (-1.68)          (1.08)
 Non-interest income               0.2145***          0.0671      0.1114**          0.1075*     0.2156***         0.0476       0.1097**         0.1005
                                      (4.18)           (1.17)        (2.48)           (1.73)       (4.39)          (0.90)        (2.52)          (1.54)
 No trading assets                 1.1171***         -0.0226        0.1944          -0.0929       0.0172         -0.0111        0.0144          0.0121
                                      (3.19)          (-0.08)        (0.73)          (-0.41)       (1.39)         (-0.86)        (1.32)          (0.95)
 Equity-to-assets                    0.0180          -0.0097        0.0151           0.0116     1.1102***        -0.0978        0.1889         -0.1142
                                      (1.48)          (-0.75)        (1.42)           (0.95)       (3.16)         (-0.34)        (0.72)         (-0.52)
 $10-$50B                           -0.1420       -1.1589***      -0.4449**       -1.2726***
                                     (-0.61)          (-3.57)       (-2.10)          (-3.55)
 >$50B                              -0.0145        -0.0732**       -0.0071          -0.0185
                                     (-0.58)          (-2.31)       (-0.60)          (-1.24)
 Log(assets)                                                                                     -0.0042      -0.0381***     -0.0083**      -0.0337***
                                                                                                  (-1.08)        (-4.03)       (-2.30)         (-3.79)
 Constant                         0.9214***      1.0436***       1.0503***      1.0259***       0.9876***      1.6542***     1.1818***       1.5573***
                                    (15.57)        (24.07)         (21.62)        (27.63)         (10.26)        (10.75)       (14.15)         (10.31)
 Fixed effects                       Year        Bank, Year         Year        Bank, Year         Year       Bank, Year        Year        Bank, Year
 Observations                        1,243          1,243           1,758          1,758           1,243          1,243         1,758           1,758
 R-squared                           0.623          0.828           0.581          0.802           0.623          0.833         0.582           0.807
 Adjusted R2                         0.614          0.802           0.572          0.776           0.615          0.808         0.573           0.781
 # Banks                              136            136             171            171             136            136           171             171


                                                                           40
Table 9. The Impact of Dodd-Frank
Table shows results from OLS regressions of Tobin’s q on proxies for bank size for the sample period 1987-
2015. Post-Dodd Frank is an indicator variable that is equal to one for years after 2010 and zero otherwise.
We interact all independent variables with the Post-Dodd Frank indicator. Trading-to-assets is the ratio of
trading assets-to-assets. The “$10-$50 billion” captures the first $50 billion in assets and takes the value:
min (bank asset size, $50 billion). The “>$50 billion” variable captures asset size in excess of $50 billion,
taking the value: max (bank asset size- $50 billion, 0). The units of the piecewise linear variables are in $
trillions. Control variables (not shown to conserve space) include non-interest income-to-income, real
estate (RE) loans-to-total assets, commercial and industrial (CI) loans-to-assets, securities-to-assets, equity-
to-assets, and an indicator variable (No trading assets) that is equal to one for banks with no trading assets,
and zero otherwise. Heteroskedascticity-robust t-statistics with standard errors clustered at the bank level
are shown in parentheses. *, **, *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.


       Dependent variable:                                                   Tobin’s q
                                                        (1)              (2)            (3)           (4)
      Post-Dodd Frank x $10-$50B                      0.4886         -0.7100         -0.4599      -0.5344
                                                      (0.81)          (-1.58)         (-1.00)      (-1.17)
      Post-Dodd Frank x >$50B                         0.0032          0.0148         -0.0148      -0.0017
                                                      (0.24)           (1.50)         (-0.90)      (-0.08)
      Post-Dodd Frank x Trading-to-assets                                            -0.2443      -0.0379
                                                                                      (-0.86)      (-0.13)
      Trading-to-assets                                                           -0.4476***    -0.2993***
                                                                                      (-3.75)      (-2.89)
      Post-Dodd Frank x RE loans-to-assets                                           -0.1598      -0.0960
                                                                                      (-1.52)      (-1.09)
      Post-Dodd Frank x CI loans-to-assets                                           -0.0900       0.0253
                                                                                      (-0.61)       (0.27)
      Post-Dodd Frank x Securities-to-assets                                         -0.1625      -0.0690
                                                                                      (-1.18)      (-0.82)
      Post-Dodd Frank x Non-interest income                                       -0.1767***      -0.0826
                                                                                      (-3.16)      (-1.52)
      Post-Dodd Frank x Equity-to-assets                                          -1.2972***      -0.0699
                                                                                      (-3.85)      (-0.25)
      Post-Dodd Frank x No trading assets                                            -0.0076       0.0236
                                                                                      (-0.45)       (1.50)
      $10-$50B                                         -0.0660    -1.4534***        -0.4015*    -1.1840***
                                                        (-0.30)       (-3.38)         (-1.75)      (-3.36)
      >$50B                                         -0.0287***      -0.0286*          0.0080      -0.0113
                                                        (-3.14)       (-1.85)         (0.47)       (-0.55)
      Post Dodd-Frank                                  -0.0207     0.0790***       0.2898***      0.1327*
                                                        (-1.46)        (2.67)         (2.74)        (1.90)
      Constant                                       1.0038***     1.0241***       0.9681***     1.0048***
                                                      (197.06)      (137.25)         (17.81)       (24.26)

      Controls                                          No            No             Yes           Yes
      Fixed effects                                     No           Bank            No           Bank
      Observations                                     1,758         1,758          1,758         1,758
      R-squared                                        0.452         0.788          0.607         0.806
      Adj. R2                                          0.442         0.761          0.596         0.779
      # Banks                                           171           171            171           171




                                                      41
      Table 10. Regressions with size instrumented
      Estimates from 2LS regressions of Tobin’s q on proxies for bank size. We use two instruments: 1)
      Employees – the natural logarithm of the number of employees, and 2) Lagged assets- the lagged value of
      the natural log of total assets. The “$10-$50 billion” captures the first $50 billion in assets and takes the
      value: min (bank asset size, $50 billion). The “>$50 billion” variable captures asset size in excess of $50
      billion, taking the value: max (bank asset size- $50 billion, 0). The units of the piecewise linear variables
      are in $ trillions. Control variables include non-interest income-to-income, and equity-to-assets. We report
      p-values from the 1st-stage partial F-tests of the null hypothesis that the instruments are jointly zero.
      Heteroskedascticity-robust t-statistics with standard errors clustered at the bank level are shown in
      parentheses. *, **, *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

                                                1987-2006                                           1987-2015
                              (1)         (2)               (3)         (4)       (5)         (6)               (7)      (8)


$10-$50B - IV               0.695*      -1.977**       -0.181      -1.906**     0.583       -2.191*        -0.292      -2.258**
                            (1.86)       (-2.56)       (-0.65)     (-2.45)      (1.55)      (-1.82)        (-0.86)     (-2.05)
>$50B - IV                 -0.084***   -0.099***      -0.067***   -0.099***    -0.037***     -0.029       -0.032***     -0.030
                            (-2.72)      (-3.28)       (-2.68)     (-3.31)      (-3.95)     (-1.45)        (-3.91)     (-1.64)
Equity-to-assets                                      1.383***      -0.086                                  0.486       -0.186
                                                       (3.68)      (-0.33)                                 (1.46)      (-0.92)
Non-interest income                                   0.204***         0.057                              0.148***      0.109
                                                       (4.05)       (0.93)                                 (3.20)       (1.49)


Fixed effects                Year      Bank, Year       Year      Bank, Year     Year      Bank, Year       Year      Bank, Year
Observations                1,230        1,230          1,230          1,230    1,728        1,728          1,728       1,728
R-squared                   0.455        0.573          0.590          0.575    0.455        0.593          0.531       0.602
Partial   R2                0.652        0.177          0.624          0.176    0.658        0.178          0.619       0.187
1st stage F-stat p-value    0.000        0.000          0.000          0.000    0.000        0.000          0.000       0.000




                                                                  42
Figure 1.
Figure 1A (1B) shows the yearly average (median) Tobin’s q for the full sample of banks, and for large
banks (total assets greater than $50 billion) and small banks (assets between $10 and $50 billion).

Figure 1A.

                                    Tobin's q by Size
 1.250

 1.200

 1.150

 1.100

 1.050

 1.000

 0.950

 0.900

 0.850

 0.800
         1987
         1988
         1989
         1990
         1991
         1992
         1993
         1994
         1995
         1996
         1997
         1998
         1999
         2000
         2001
         2002
         2003
         2004
         2005
         2006
         2007
         2008
         2009
         2010
         2011
         2012
         2013
         2014
         2015
                           Full sample        Small banks        Large banks


Figure 1B.

                             Median Tobin's q by Size
 1.250
 1.200
 1.150
 1.100
 1.050
 1.000
 0.950
 0.900
 0.850
 0.800
         1987
         1988
         1989
         1990
         1991
         1992
         1993
         1994
         1995
         1996
         1997
         1998
         1999
         2000
         2001
         2002
         2003
         2004
         2005
         2006
         2007
         2008
         2009
         2010
         2011
         2012
         2013
         2014
         2015




                           Full sample        Small banks        Large banks




                                                   43
Figure 2. Scatter Plots. The graphs show scatter plots of residuals from regressions of Tobin’s q on year
fixed effects on asset size (in constant US$ trillion). Panel A shows scatter plots for the period 1987-2006,
while Panel B shows graphs for the full sample period (1987-2015).

Panel A.

                 .6
                 .4
                                           Scatter Plot - 1987-2006
  Residuals q




                 .2
                      0
                -.2




                          0                   .5                          1                 1.5
                                               Assets (constant $ trillion)



Panel B. Full sample period.

                                           Scatter Plot - 1987-2015
                 .6
                 .4
  Residuals q




                 .2
                      0
                -.2




                          0         .5           1             1.5            2           2.5
                                              Assets (constant $ trillion)



                                                     44
Figure 3. Tobin’s q and Size.

The figure shows the relation between Tobin’s q and size implied by nonparametric regressions. We first obtain residuals
by estimating OLS regressions of Tobin's q on year fixed effects. The solid lines in the figures are obtained from local
polynomial regressions of these residuals on asset size using an Epanechnikov kernel function with a “rule-of-thumb”
bandwidth estimator and local-mean smoothing. The shaded area shows the 95% confidence interval. Panel A shows
graphs for the period 1987-2006, while Panel B shows graphs for the full sample period, 1987-2015.

Panel A. 1987-2006.

                                                  Local polynomial smooth 1987-2006
                                      $50B
                              0



                                              $250B
                 -.05
  Residuals q




                    -.1
                 -.15




                                  0                       .5                1                         1.5        2
                                                                 Assets (constant $ trillion)

                                                                   95% CI                     lpoly smooth
                                  kernel = epan2, degree = 0, bandwidth = .22, pwidth = .33




Panel B. Full sample period (1987-2015).

                                                   Local polynomial smooth 1987-2015
                                    $50B $250B
                              0
   Residuals q




                 -.05
                        -.1




                                  0                  .5              1             1.5                       2   2.5
                                                                 Assets (constant $ trillion)

                                                                   95% CI                     lpoly smooth
                                  kernel = epan2, degree = 0, bandwidth = .24, pwidth = .36




                                                                          45
Appendix A. Variable definitions

Variable name                      Definition
$0-$50 billion; >$50 billion       Piecewise linear specification breaking up asset size into two variables,
                                   following Erel, Nadauld, and Stulz (2013). “$10-$50 billion” captures the first
                                   $50 billion in assets and takes the value: min (BHC asset size, $50 billion). The
                                   “>$50 billion” captures the asset size in excess of $50 billion, taking the value:
                                   max (BHC asset size- $50 billion, 0).

CI loans-to-assets                 Commercial and industrial loans divided by total assets.
                                   Source: FRY9C: (BHCK1763+BHCK1764)

CRD                                The excess returns (raw return minus the one-month Treasury bill rate) on an
                                   index of investment grade corporate bonds.
                                   Source: The Dow Jones Corporate Bond Return Index from Global Financial
                                   Data. One-month T-bill rate (Rf) obtained from Kenneth French’s website.

Equity-to-assets                   Total book value of equity divided by total assets.
                                   Source: FRY9-C: BHCK3210.

Equity volatility                  The annualized standard deviation of daily stock returns.
                                   Source: CRSP.

HML                                HML is the Fama French High minus low factor. It is the average return on
                                   the two value portfolios minus the average return on the two growth portfolios.
                                   Source: Kenneth French’s website.

Log (assets)                       The natural logarithm of total assets (in US $000s).
                                   Source: FRY9C: BHCK2170.

LTG                                The excess returns (raw return minus the one-month Treasury bill rate) on an
                                   index of 10-year bonds issued by the U.S. Treasury.
                                   Source: U.S. 10-year Government Bond Total Return Index from Global
                                   Financial Data. One-month T-bill rate (Rf) obtained from Kenneth French’s
                                   website.

Market                             Market is the excess return on the market, Rm-Rf, where Rm is the value-
                                   weighted return on all CRSP firms incorporated in the US and Rf is the one-
                                   month Treasury bill rate.
                                   Source: Kenneth French’s website.

Market-to-book                     Market value of equity divided by the book value of equity.
                                   Source: CompuStat: PRCC_C x CSHO ; FRY9C: BHCK3210.

Non-interest income                Noninterest income divided by the sum of noninterest income and interest
                                   income.
                                   Source: FRY9C: BHCK4079; BHCK4107.

No trading assets                  Indicator variable that is equal to one if the bank reports no trading assets and
                                   zero otherwise.




                                                           46
Appendix A. Variable definitions. Continued.

Variable name                  Definition
RE loans-to-assets             Loans secured by real estate divided by total assets.
                               Source: FRY9C: BHCK1410; BHCK2170

Returns                        Annual buy and hold returns computed from monthly stock prices.
                               Source: CRSP.

ROA                            Net income plus interest expense divided by average assets over the prior year.
                               Average assets are computed from the quarterly FRY-9C reports.

                               Source: FRY9C: (BHCK4340+ BHCK4073)/BHCK2170.

ROE                            Net income divided by average equity over the year. Average equity is computed
                               from the quarterly FRY-9C reports.
                               Source: FRY9C: BHCK4340/BHCK3210.

Securities-to-assets           Total securities.
                               Source: FRY9C: BHCK0390 (1986-1993); (BHCK1754+BHCK1773) beginning
                               March 994

SMB                            SMB is the Fama French Small minus big factor. It is the average return on the
                               three small portfolios minus the average return on the three big portfolios.
                               Source: Kenneth French’s website.

S-T funding                    Short-term debt (as defined above) scaled by total liabilities.
                               Source: FRY9-C: (BHCK3409 + BHCK2332+ BHCK3298)/ BHCK2948.

Tail Risk                      Following Ellul and Yerramilli (2013), tail risk is the negative of the average
                               return on BHC’s stock over the 5% worst return days in a given year.
                               Source: CRSP.

Tobin’s q                      The market value of assets scaled by book value of assets. Market value of assets
                               is the sum of book value of assets minus the book value of equity plus market
                               value equity.

Total trading                  The sum of trading assets and trading liabilities.
                               Source: FRY9-C: BHCK2146 (1986-1994); BHCK3545 (since March 1995);
                               BHCK3548

Trading assets                 Total trading assets.
                               Source: FRY9-C: BHCK2146 (1986-1994); BHCK3545 (since March 1995).

Trading-to-assets              Total trading assets as defined above divided by total assets.

Trading liabilities            Total trading liabilities.
                               Source: FRY9-C: BHCK3548 (available only since March 1995).

Z-score                        The log of Z-score. Z-score is estimated as: (ROA+equity/assets) /σ(ROA); the
                               standard deviation of ROA, σ(ROA), is estimated as a 3-year moving average using
                               quarterly data from the FRY9-C reports.
                               Source: FRY9C: BHCK4340; BHCK4073; BHCK2170; BHCK3210.


                                                          47
