                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   FINANCIAL FRICTIONS AND EMPLOYMENT DURING THE GREAT DEPRESSION

                                     Efraim Benmelech
                                      Carola Frydman
                                    Dimitris Papanikolaou

                                      Working Paper 23216
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23216


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 2017




We thank Andrew Ellul, Joseph Ferrie, Jose Liberti, Joel Mokyr, Paige Ouimet (discussant),
Marco Pagano, Giorgio Primiceri, Fabiano Schivardi (discussant), Amit Seru, Andrei Shleifer,
Jeremy Stein, Toni Whited (discussant) and seminar participants at the CSEF-EIEF-SITE
Conference on Finance and Labor, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, NBER Corporate
Finance Summer Institute (2016), Kellogg School of Management, Northwestern's Economic
History workshop, 2016 Tsinghua Finance Workshop, and Wharton for very helpful comments.
Eileen Driscoll, Jenna Fleischer, Sam Houskeeper, Ari Kaissar, Daniel Trubnick, and Yupeng
Wang provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Efraim Benmelech, Carola Frydman, and Dimitris Papanikolaou. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Financial Frictions and Employment during the Great Depression
Efraim Benmelech, Carola Frydman, and Dimitris Papanikolaou
NBER Working Paper No. 23216
March 2017
JEL No. E24,E5,G01,G21,G31,J6,N42

                                          ABSTRACT

We provide new evidence that a disruption in credit supply played a quantitatively significant
role in the unprecedented contraction of employment during the Great Depression. To analyze the
role of financing frictions in firms' employment decisions, we use a novel, hand-collected dataset
of large industrial firms. Our identification strategy exploits preexisting variation in the need to
raise external funds at a time when public bond markets essentially froze. Local bank failures
inhibited firms' ability to substitute public debt for private debt, which exacerbated financial
constraints. We estimate a large and negative causal effect of financing frictions on firm
employment. Interpreting the estimated elasticities through the lens of a simple structural model,
we find that the lack of access to credit may have accounted for 10% to 33% of the aggregate
decline in employment of large firms between 1928 and 1933.

Efraim Benmelech                                 Dimitris Papanikolaou
Kellogg School of Management                     Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University                          Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road                               2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208                               Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER                                         and NBER
e-benmelech@kellogg.northwestern.edu             d-papanikolaou@kellogg.northwestern.edu

Carola Frydman
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
c-frydman@kellogg.northwestern.edu
   The Great Depression was the most severe and prolonged economic downturn of the
modern industrialized world. From 1929 to 1933, real output in the United States contracted
by 26%, and the unemployment rate increased from 3.2% to 25%, reaching its highest recorded
level in American history (Margo, 1993). Despite the severity of the Depression and its
undoubted influence on macroeconomic thinking, the causes of the rise in unemployment
during the 1930s are still not well understood and remain important today, almost 90 years
after the world entered its worst economic crisis. This paper provides new evidence that
financial frictions were responsible for much of the decline in employment of large American
firms during this period.
   Financial frictions are one of several factors that may have played an important role in
the Great Depression. In a seminal paper, Bernanke (1983) argues that an increase in the
real costs of intermediation reduced the ability of some borrowers to obtain credit, which in
turn contracted aggregate demand and exacerbated the downturn. Although this view has
often been used to explain the protracted contraction in output, financial imperfections also
offer a potential explanation for the staggering rise in unemployment during the Depression.
When there is a lag between the payments to labor and the realization of revenues, firms
need to finance their labor activity throughout the production process (see, e.g., Greenwald
and Stiglitz, 1988). Moreover, unlike physical capital, labor cannot serve as collateral, which
makes it harder to finance to some extent. Thus, any difficulties in obtaining external finance
may have severe effects on firms’ employment decisions. Despite the potential appeal of this
explanation, the lack of firm-level data for the 1930s has posed an obstacle for understanding
the effect of finance on employment during the Great Depression. In this paper we aim to fill
this void.
   Using newly collected data, we estimate the effects of financial frictions on the contraction
in employment of large industrial firms during the Great Depression. Our identification
strategy uses the preexisting variation in the value of long-term debt that became due during
the crisis. We find that firms more burdened by maturing debts cut their employment levels
more. These effects were particularly severe for firms located in areas where local banks were
in distress and that could therefore not easily substitute public debt for bank financing. Our
analysis suggests that financial frictions can explain between 10% and 33% of the overall
drop in employment in our sample from 1928 to 1933.
   Our understanding of unemployment during the 1930s is heavily based on either aggregate
or establishment-level data (see Margo, 1993, for a review). Establishment-level data contain
no financial information, however, and cannot therefore adequately measure the needs for
external finance. Our analysis, by contrast, is based on a novel, hand-collected dataset from



                                               1
the Moody’s Manual of Investments, which includes approximately one thousand of the largest
industrial firms in the economy, a group of businesses that have received limited attention
in quantitative research on the Depression. Perhaps surprisingly, our data reveal that large
enterprises suffered greatly during the crisis: the average firm in the sample experienced a
24% decline in employment from 1928, the year before the onset of the crisis, to 1933, when
unemployment peaked. The profitability of large firms also collapsed over this period, from
an average return on assets (ROA) of 9% to merely 1%.1 By using firm-level data we can link
information on employment to the firms’ operating characteristics and financing needs. Most
important, we collect detailed information on the value and maturity structure of the firms’
outstanding bonds, allowing us to measure the variation in the needs for external finance
across firms.
       To identify the effect of financial frictions on firm employment changes, we employ two
main strategies. First, similar to Almeida, Campello, Laranjeira, and Weisbenner (2011), we
exploit variation across firms in the maturity of corporate bonds, the primary source of debt
financing of large firms at that time (Jacoby and Saulnier, 1947). The economic downturn
led to a collapse of the public bond markets from 1930 to 1934 (Hickman, 1960). Firms that
happened to have bonds that matured during this time could not easily refinance them, and
were therefore more likely to be constrained in allocating cash between servicing their debt
and paying their workers. We find that a firm in the 90th percentile of the value of maturing
debt (scaled by assets) contracted its employment between 1928 and 1933 by about 5% more
than the median firm in the sample, which had no bonds maturing. Since our specifications
control for leverage, among other observable characteristics, the estimated effects are not
driven by differences in total indebtedness across firms. Moreover, the corporate bonds that
matured during the crisis were primarily issued well in advance of the onset of the Depression.
Our findings are unlikely to be influenced by changes in the firms’ investment opportunities,
and in their demand for external finance, in response to the negative economic shock. Our
second identification strategy exploits spatial variation by interacting the variation in the
firms’ maturing debt with the conditions of the local banking system where these firms
operated.
       From 1929 to 1933, thousands of commercial banks experienced financial distress and
suspended operations. These bank “failures” likely resulted in a contraction of credit supply
   1
    These facts are consisted with the evidence reported in Graham, Hazarika, and Narasimhan (2011), who
also study the outcomes of large industrial firms using data collected from the Moody’s Manuals. (Graham
et al., 2011) show that firms’ pre-crisis leverage ratios were positively associated with the likelihood of
becoming distressed during the Great Depression. Our study differs from Graham et al. (2011) in that
we focus on a different outcome—employment—and use a different identification strategy, based on the
preexisting variation in the need to refinance maturing debt.



                                                    2
for their borrowers. We assume that firms found it easier to borrow from banks in their area,
and we measure the reduction in bank credit for each firm in the sample with an indicator for
whether at least one national bank was suspended in the county where the firm operated.2
We do not find strong evidence that disruptions in the local banking systems had a direct
effect on the employment decisions for the firms in our sample. Firms located in counties
where national banks failed had larger declines in employment than similar firms located in
areas with no such disruptions, but the differential effects become smaller and statistically
insignificant when we control for firm profitability.3
       However, the constraints on firms imposed by having bonds mature during the crisis
should have been particularly salient for those firms that could not easily substitute bond
financing for bank loans. Thus, our second empirical strategy analyzes the interaction between
maturing debt and the disruptions in local bank systems. We find that firms in the 90th
percentile of the value of maturing debt contracted their employment levels by about 12%
to 18% more when they were located in counties that experienced bank failures than those
firms with similar levels of maturing debt that operated in areas with no bank disruptions.
These estimated effects suggest that the impact of financial frictions on employment during
the Great Depression was sizable.
       Our estimation strategy, which is based on the substitution between private and public
debt, also alleviates some identification concerns. For example, estimates of the role of
financial frictions identified solely from variation in local bank failures, common in the
existing literature on the Great Depression, may instead reflect shocks to local economic
conditions that simultaneously affect bank health and firm investment opportunities. Our
strategy instead effectively controls for the variation induced by these shocks by comparing
firms that were located in areas with similar disruptions to the banking system, but that
differed in their preexisting levels of maturing debt. In further analysis, we also show that
our results are robust to different measures of maturing debt and bank failures and do not
appear to be driven by preexisting trends in observable characteristics.
   2
     As we discuss in Section 1.2, we focus on national banks, instead of state banks, since these institutions
were arguably more likely to lend to large industrial concerns during our period of analysis.
   3
     In contemporaneous work, Lee and Mezzanotti (2015) find a contraction in the city-industry employment
levels of manufacturing establishments in response to local bank failures. Ziebarth (2013) finds that tight
monetary policy, which contributed to the intensity of bank failures, led to lower employment at the county
level but had no differential effects at the establishment level. These studies use establishment data obtained
from the Census of Manufactures, and therefore lack direct information on firms’ (or the establishments’)
financial health. By contrast, our data include a full set of firm financial variables and, most important,
direct measures for the degree to which firms needed to refinance maturing debt. Our different findings on
the direct effect of local bank failures may be driven by the possibility that the large industrial firms in our
sample were less dependent on bank credit than the typical (much smaller) establishment in the economy.




                                                       3
       Our difference-in-differences strategy provides an estimate of the elasticity of firm employ-
ment to a plausibly exogenous financing shock. We use this estimate to assess the importance
of financial frictions for the aggregate contraction in employment. First, we calculate the
counterfactual aggregate employment level in our sample under the assumption that the
“treated” firms did not experience financial frictions. We find that employment would have
been 0.9 to 1.4 percentage points higher in this case. This direct treatment effect accounts
for between 10% and 17% of the overall drop in employment in our sample, but it is likely a
conservative estimate for two main reasons.
       First, our baseline estimates do not include whether firms may have also needed to
refinance maturing bank debt, since our data contain detailed information only on maturing
bonds. We incorporate these firms to our estimation of aggregate effects by applying our
estimated elasticity to firm’s level of outstanding bank debt. Depending on our assumptions
regarding the fraction of a firm’s bank debt in 1928 that matured during the crisis, we find
that employment would have been 1.0 to 2.4 percentage points higher in the absence of
frictions for both public and private debt. These estimates suggest that the disruption in
credit supply may explain about one-third of the overall drop in employment in our sample.
       Second, it is possible that firms with no maturing bonds would have liked to access
external funds to finance operations but could not do so because of the high cost of external
finance during the Depression. To gauge the magnitude of the effect of financial frictions
on all firms in the sample, we estimate a simple structural model that relates the cost of
financial intermediation to aggregate employment outcomes. The estimated elasticity of
employment to maturing debt allows us to calibrate the model parameter that captures
the cost of external finance. We then use the model to compute the counterfactual level of
employment for each firm in the sample if external finance was costless. We find that the
aggregate level of employment would have been between 1.6 and 2.8 percentage points higher
in the absence of financing frictions, which accounts for about 20% to 33% of the decline in
employment in our sample.
       In sum, we provide direct, firm-level evidence that a disruption in credit supply played a
quantitatively significant role in the contraction in employment in the early 1930s. Our work
thus contributes to the debate on the role that the financial system played in instigating
the Great Depression.4 Our evidence is consistent with Bernanke (1983), who argues that
   4
    Economists continue to debate on the relative importance of several (not mutually exclusive) forces,
with some favoring aggregate-demand explanations (e.g., Temin, 1976) and others emphasizing the role of
monetary forces (e.g., Friedman and Schwartz, 1963; Richardson and Troost, 2009). Alternative prominent
explanations include, among others, the breakdown of international financial relations (Eichengreen, 1992),
the contraction in consumer spending following the collapse in the stock market (Romer, 1993), and shocks
to productivity (Cole and Ohanian, 2007).



                                                    4
the difficulties banks experienced likely contributed to the severity and persistence of the
recession by increasing the real cost of intermediation. Recent work has revisited this question
empirically with the aim of providing causal evidence for the effects of bank failures on a
variety of outcomes, including income growth (Calomiris and Mason, 2003), industrial output
(Mladjan, 2016), business revenues (Ziebarth, 2013), and employment (Ziebarth, 2013; Lee
and Mezzanotti, 2015).5 These studies obtain identification primarily from variation in the
health of banks across space, but they lack information on the firms’ financial conditions.
They cannot therefore measure directly the firms’ need to access external finance, nor can
they control for firm characteristics that may be correlated with the severity of local bank
distress and with firm outcomes. By contrast, our data allow us to more convincingly isolate
the effects of a contraction in the supply of credit by instead constructing a firm-level measure
of the preexisting needs for external finance that is unlikely to be driven by changes in the
firms’ investment opportunities during the crisis. In this manner, our paper is closely related
to the modern literature in corporate finance that studies the effect of financial constraints on
firms’ employment decisions.6 We take a further step by combining the estimated elasticity
of employment to maturing debt with a structural model, which allows us to quantify the
effects of financial constraints on the aggregate contraction in employment in our sample.
       Our work provides a set of novel stylized facts on the experiences of large firms during
the Depression with important implications for macroeconomic interpretations of the crisis.
The contraction in credit intermediation is considered to have been especially harmful for
households and small firms; by contrast, large firms are typically thought to have been
relatively unconstrained (Bernanke, 1983).7 Under this view, the credit squeeze likely
exacerbated the downturn by contracting aggregate demand—otherwise, the unconstrained
large firms would have filled in any reductions in production experienced by the small
constrained businesses, and the impact of the crisis on aggregate output would have been
minimal. By contrast, we show that financial frictions had large, negative effects even
   5
      An alternative, but not mutually exclusive, channel by which disruptions in the banking sector may have
affected economic activity is through a contraction in the money supply, as emphasized by Friedman and
Schwartz (1963). Richardson and Troost (2009) provide convincing causal evidence for the importance of
monetary policy by contrasting the level of commercial activity in areas of Mississippi exposed to different
Federal Reserve policy regimes.
    6
      Studies in this area include, among others, Almeida et al. (2011); Benmelech, Bergman, and Seru (2011);
Chodorow-Reich (2014); Duygan-Bump, Levkov, and Montoriol-Garriga (2015); Michaels, Page, and Whited
(2014); Pagano and Pica (2012).
    7
      Bernanke’s argument is based on the evidence of Lutz (1945), who finds that the cash balances of 45
large manufacturing firms remained relatively unchanged during the early 1930s, while those of small and
medium firms exhibited a marked decline. Hunter (1982) validates this finding using aggregate data for all
tax filers. These studies, however, consider neither the financing needs of large firms nor the heterogeneity of
experiences among these firms. Our results suggest that financial frictions had important consequences, even
after taking into account the firms’ holdings of liquid assets.



                                                       5
among the largest firms in the economy. Our findings therefore suggest that a contraction in
aggregate supply may also have played an important role in the severity and long duration of
the Great Depression.
       The Great Recession of 2008–2009 has renewed the interest of academics and policy
makers in the Great Depression. Although there are certainly many parallels between these
events, the magnitudes of the economic shocks were very different. Figure 1 contrasts the
evolution of real GNP and unemployment rates for these two periods. Panel A shows that
the magnitude of the economic contraction was an order of magnitude larger in the 1930s
than in the recent crisis; output fell by 26% in the 1929–1933 period, whereas it contracted
by only 3.3% from 2007 to 2009. As displayed in Panel B, the U.S. economy entered both
crises with relatively low unemployment rates. During the Great Recession, however, the
unemployment rate never surpassed 10%, and it almost regained its pre-crisis level after “only”
eight years. By contrast, 25% of workers were out of a job at the peak of the Depression, and
the unemployment rate remained above 10% for more than a decade. That the real effects of
the financial crisis were much more severe in the 1930s is perhaps all the more surprising
given that the financial sector doubled in importance (as a fraction of total output) from
1929 to 2007 (Philippon, 2015).
       These differences in economic outcomes motivate a quantitative comparison of the im-
portance of disruptions to financial intermediation across the two crises. The contrast of
our estimated elasticity of employment to maturing debt to a similar estimate calculated by
Benmelech et al. (2011) for the 2008–2009 crisis reveals that the effect of financial frictions
on unemployment was about two to five times larger in the Great Depression than in the
Great Recession.8 Although this comparison should certainly be interpreted with caution,
the smaller impact of financial disruptions during the recent crisis may provide some insights
on the influence of the financial sector on the economy over time. In the 2000s, policy makers
had the hindsight of history and labored to avoid past mistakes, expanding the money supply
and arresting banking panics (see, e.g., Eichengreen, 2014). The contrast in the estimated
effects of financial frictions on unemployment during the Great Depression and the Great
Recession suggests that regulatory frameworks and policy decisions may have an important
role in ameliorating the impact of financial shocks on the real economy.
   8
    Our work also complements Chodorow-Reich (2014), who shows that the withdrawal of bank lending
accounted for between one-third and one-half of the drop in employment in small and medium-sized firms
during the recent crisis. He finds no statistically significant effects among large firms, perhaps because these
firms could issue bonds as an additional source of financing. By contrast, we find sizable effects of the total
amount of maturing debt even among the largest firms in the economy, suggesting that the substitution
between public and private debt is often impaired during financial crises.




                                                       6
        The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 1 discusses the financial frictions we
use as part of our identification strategy. Section 2 presents the data sources and the variables
used in the analysis. Section 3 explores the effects of financial constraints on employment.
Section 4 presents the analysis of the aggregate impact of our results. Section 5 concludes.



1         Identifying Financial Frictions in the 1930s
        Our goal is to present convincing evidence that financial frictions had an important effect
on firm employment levels during the Great Depression. In this section, we discuss the
historical and economic underpinnings that provide a rationale for our empirical strategy.


1.1         The Long-Term Debt Approach
        Credible identification of the role of financial frictions requires a shock to the firms’ access
to external finance, and therefore to their cost of credit intermediation, that is unrelated to
their investment opportunities. We follow Almeida et al. (2011), who exploit the variation
across firms in preexisting levels of long-term debt maturing during the 2008–2009 credit
crisis. Since there is no information available on the maturity structure of bank loans for our
sample period, we adapt their methodology and focus exclusively on corporate bonds. Thus,
we measure the “financial shock” experienced by each firm using the value of bonds becoming
due from 1930 to 1934 as a fraction of the firm’s assets. Our baseline strategy relates this
continuous “treatment” measure to the firms’ change in employment between 1928 and 1933.
        Our focus on corporate bonds is pertinent and helpful for identification. First, bonds
were the primary source of debt financing for the large firms in our sample. Second, public
debt markets essentially shut down during the Great Depression.9 Figure 2 presents the total
value of new bond offerings by industrial firms from 1920 to 1940. The issuance of bonds
declined somewhat at the onset of the crisis, but it collapsed almost completely from 1931 to
1934, when the value of new offerings accounted for only 10% to 30% of its pre-crisis level in
1928.10 Firms that happened to have bonds maturing in this period would have experienced
    9
     Importantly, issuing new equity was not an alternative source of external finance during this period.
First, equity markets “dried up” following the stock market crash of 1929, even before the freeze-up of public
debt markets (see, e.g., Benmelech and Bergman, 2016). Second, less than 20% of the firms in our sample
were listed in the NYSE, suggesting that equity issuance was not their main source of new external finance.
  10
     Since the freeze-up of bond markets was particularly severe in 1934, we include the bonds that matured
in this year in our baseline definition of the treatment variable. This treatment allows us to account for any
precautionary reductions in employment that firms may have done in 1933, in anticipation of experiencing
difficulties in funding their maturing debts in the following year. In robustness checks, we show that our
results are largely unchanged when we exclude those bonds maturing in 1934 from the analysis.




                                                      7
extreme difficulties in refinancing those debts and likely faced (exogenously) higher costs of
intermediation.
       A key assumption of our empirical strategy is therefore that the value of long-term
bonds maturing from 1930 to 1934 was exogenous to any changes in the firms’ investment
opportunities that may have affected their employment decisions during the crisis. Since
corporate bonds typically had long maturities, those debts becoming due during this period
were primarily issued well before the stock market crash on October 29, 1929. Yet a potential
concern is that firms with maturing long-term debt may have anticipated the recession,
optimizing both their leverage and their employment levels accordingly before the crisis. If
this were the case, our findings could be driven by unobserved differences in firm quality
that may be correlated with the level of maturing bonds and changes in employment. But
there is plenty of evidence to suggest that the Great Depression was largely unexpected.
The earliest macroeconomic signs of impending economic troubles did not occur until the
summer of 1929, when the Federal Reserve’s index of industrial production began to decline
(Atack and Passell, 1994, pp. 587-588). Moreover, credit spreads of corporate bonds remained
largely unchanged until then (Calomiris, 1993, p. 69). Although some may have expected an
economic slowdown or even a financial crisis, there is perhaps no greater consensus among
economic historians on any other issue about the Great Depression than the exact timing of
the market crash, the collapse of credit and bond markets, and the unprecedented severity of
the protracted recession that ensued could not have been accurately anticipated.11


1.2       Substitutability of Public and Private Debt
       The American banking system experienced a major collapse during the Great Depression.
From 1929 to 1933, more than 40% of depository institutions suspended operations (see,
among others, Alston, Grove, and Wheelock (1994), Wheelock (1995), and Richardson
(2007)).12 Much of the work on the Great Depression has used the variation in these bank
failures over time and space to analyze their effects on real economic activity. We add to this
literature by studying the implications of disruptions in local credit markets on firm-level
employment decisions.
  11
     See, among others, Atack and Passell (1994, p. 597), (Temin, 2000, pp. 304, 311), and Hughes and Cain
(2011, pp. 468-469). Furthermore, Klug, Landon-Lane, and White (2005) use unique survey data on the
forecasts of railroad shippers to show that American businesses were surprised by the depth and duration of
the Great Depression.
  12
     We follow the economic history literature and use the terms “suspensions” and “failures” interchangeably,
although many banks that suspended operations did not ultimately fail. Richardson (2007) provides the
definition of a bank suspension employed by the Federal Reserve.




                                                      8
       Economic theory and modern empirical evidence support the view that bank failures
may have exacerbated the contraction in economic activity during the Great Depression.
In modern economies, as well as in the past, firms typically establish long-lasting relation
with financial intermediaries. Banks may use these relation to obtain soft information about
their borrowers, and thus reduce frictions arising from asymmetries of information. When
a financial intermediary fails, the bank’s nonfinancial clients typically struggle to obtain
external funds from other institutions and experience negative outcomes, including decreases
in borrowing levels and employment, higher probability of distress, and lower firm survival
(Khwaja and Mian, 2008; Schnabl, 2012; Chodorow-Reich, 2014). To credibly establish the
effects of this “lending channel,” as proposed by Bernanke and Gertler (1995), these studies
use within-firm variation in the exposure to bank shocks to control for the firms’ investment
opportunities that may affect their demand for credit.
       Determining the causal effects of bank failures on firm outcomes during the Great
Depression is particularly challenging since there are no data that identify specific firm-bank
borrowing relations. Thus, we simply relate the suspension of banks in the county in which
firms operate to their change in employment. The implicit assumption is that firms likely
found it easier to borrow from banks located in their area, perhaps due to asymmetric
information problems (Agarwal and Hauswald (2010), Petersen and Rajan (2002)). If so, we
would expect firms to be disproportionately affected by suspensions of banks in the counties
in which they operated. Yet there are reasons to expect that this direct effect of bank failures
may have been small for the firms in our sample. The United States had a unit banking
system at that time, which severely restricted the ability of commercial banks to branch
(Calomiris, 2000).13 Thus, most commercial banks were small and undiversified. Perhaps due
to these restrictions, large firms did not use much bank credit at that time—for example,
corporate bonds accounted for about two-thirds of the value of total debt outstanding for the
average firm in the sample in 1928.
       It is also important to note that any evidence based solely on a measure of local bank
failures not only may reflect a contraction in credit supply, but also may be the result of a
reduction in credit demand. Moreover, local bank failures and firms’ employment decisions
may also be driven by negative (unobserved) shocks to local economic conditions. Because
of these important considerations, an association between local bank failures and economic
outcomes—which has been the primary identification strategy for financial frictions used thus
  13
    In 1865, a ruling of the Comptroller of the Currency limited national banks to only one office, and most
states imposed similar restrictions for state-chartered banks. The McFadden Act of 1927 granted limited
branching rights to those national banks operating in states that conferred state banks the ability to branch.
At the onset of the Great Depression, the United States was still characterized by an extremely large number
of small, undiversified institutions.


                                                      9
far in the literature on the Great Depression—cannot conclusively establish the effect of the
contraction in credit supply on economic activity. Instead, our main identification strategy
relies on the substitutability between public and private debt.
       We conjecture that financial frictions were particularly salient for those firms that had
high levels of maturing debt and that were located in areas that suffered disruptions to their
banking systems. Firms that had long-term bonds (exogenously) becoming due during the
crisis likely needed to refinance those debts but could not use public bond markets to do so,
since these markets had frozen. These firms may have been more likely to try to secure loans
from local banks instead.14 Under the assumption that firms were more likely to borrow from
local banks, their ability to substitute maturing bonds with bank loans should have been
more impaired when firms with bonds becoming due were located in areas that experienced
bank failures.
       To find evidence for such an indirect effect of bank distress, it is important to focus on
those financial institutions that may have been likely to provide loans of an appropriate
size for the large industrial concerns in our sample. Unfortunately, there is no available
information to identify conclusively which types of institutions were more likely to lend
to large manufacturing businesses. But the two main types of commercial banks, state
and national, operated under different regulatory constraints, and consequently differed
substantially in their characteristics.15 Most important, national banks were typically larger
than state banks, and this pattern is evidenced in our data. For example, the average national
bank in the counties in our sample, weighted by the number of banks in each area, had $43.9
million in deposits in 1928, whereas the average state bank in these counties had only $21.7
million.16 National banks were thus better positioned to lend to the firms in our sample,
  14
      It is possible that firms that typically relied on bank borrowing were different from those firms that
financed their operations through the bond markets. Our identification strategy, however, depends solely on
some degree of substitutability between bank lending and public debt as sources of financing. Rauh and Sufi
(2010) and Becker and Ivashina (2014) suggest that, at least in recent decades, private and public debt have
been partial substitutes.
   15
      State-chartered banks were primarily subject to state regulation and supervision that varied substantially
across states, whereas the federally chartered national banks operated under uniform federal banking regulation.
Whereas national banks provided annual reports and other financial information to the Comptroller of the
Currency, no similar information is consistently available for state-chartered banks. Though crude, the
available evidence on the location and loan composition suggests that national banks were likely more salient
for the firms in our sample. National banks were subject to greater lending restrictions, particularly on
real estate loans. State banks were therefore more likely to service agricultural borrowers, and they were
disproportionately located in agricultural states. By contrast, national banks were more likely to be situated
in manufacturing areas. Moreover, White (1984) shows that state banks were more likely to hold commercial
bonds, whereas national banks focused their portfolios on U.S. government bonds, which performed better
during the crisis. Any declines in the price of the bonds issued by the firms in our sample may have
disproportionately hurt state banks. Thus, evidence based on the failures of these institutions may also be
subject to reverse causality concerns.
   16
      The difference in size between the average national and state bank is similar if we focus instead on
equal-weighted averages, about $7.6 million and $4.3 million, respectively.


                                                      10
which were among the largest industrial companies in the economy, and likely had credit
demands that could not be easily fulfilled by small financial institutions. We therefore base
our analysis exclusively on national bank failures.
    To exploit the substitution between private and public debt markets as a source of
identification, our main empirical strategy compares the changes in employment for the
firms located in counties in which at least one national bank failed that needed to refinance
some portion of their debt outstanding during the crisis, relative to other similar firms. By
comparing firms with different levels of preexisting maturing debt that happen to be located
in areas with similar disruptions to local banking systems, this strategy helps address concerns
that local economic conditions drive the results.17 In this manner, our paper improves on
existing findings that are based solely on local banks failures. Moreover, our specification
allows us to compare firms with similar levels of maturing debt that were located in areas
with different disruptions to credit markets. Since unobserved firm characteristics correlated
with maturing debt are unlikely to vary by the firms’ location before the crisis, the strong
effects of financial frictions on firm-level employment decisions that we document here are
unlikely to be the result of omitted variable bias.



2      Data
    We begin by describing the main features of our novel dataset. In Section 2.1 we describe
the sources used to construct the data, and in Section 2.2 we present summary statistics.
Section 2.3 compares our dataset to existing data on the Great Depression. Last, Section 2.4
presents new stylized facts that relate the characteristics of firms to their reductions in
employment during the 1928-1933 period.


2.1     Sources
    We hand-collect the majority of the data from primary sources. In this section we briefly
describe these sources and define the main variables in our analysis; we provide additional
details in the Appendix. We construct a panel dataset containing firm-level information on
accounting variables and employment for 1928 and 1933 for all American industrial firms
listed in the 1929 and 1934 volumes of the Moody’s Manual of Investments for Industrial
Securities. We select these two specific years to contrast the change in employment from
the peak in economic activity in 1928, before the outset of the crisis, to the trough of the
   17
      Our empirical strategy therefore relies on the assumption that similar (unobserved) economic shocks
affected areas with similar bank failures. As in our previous identification strategy, we continue to rely on the
exogeneity of preexisting maturing bonds to changes in firms’ investment opportunities due to the crisis.


                                                       11
Depression in 1933.18 For each firm, we obtain information on the number of employees,
firm size (measured by the book value of assets), leverage (defined as the ratio of short-term
and long-term debt to the book value of assets), and profitability (measured by ROA). Each
manual year contains about five thousand firms, but only a fraction of them (39% in 1928
and 53% in 1933) report employment figures.19 To match firms across the two years, we use
information on the firm’s name, year of incorporation, and, when necessary, description of
activities. We restrict the analysis to a balanced panel of 1,010 firms that report non-missing
information on employment and assets in both years.
       Our sample is composed primarily of firms operating in manufacturing and retail. The
Great Depression, however, did not affect all industries equally. Romer (1990), for example,
shows that the contraction in consumer consumption of durable goods was particularly large.
Our empirical specifications therefore control for industry effects. In order to use an industry
definition that is meaningful but that nevertheless contains a sizable number of firms within
each sector, we use the 30 industry classification of Fama and French (1997).
       Our main identification strategy uses preexisting variation in the value of corporate bonds
that became due during the crisis. Starting in 1931, the Moody’s manuals provided a list of all
bonds maturing in the period following the manual’s publication. The prominent display of
this information suggests that having debt maturing during the crisis was corporate hardship,
and therefore valuable information for potential investors. From these lists, we obtain the
bond name, amount due, and maturing date for all bonds that were due for each sample
firm from mid-June 1931 through December 1934.20 To construct similar information from
January 1930 to early June 1931, when the lists of maturing bonds were not provided, we
use the detailed descriptions of all bonds outstanding for each firm in our sample from the
1930 manual. We then use similar detailed descriptions for the corresponding manuals to
obtain the date of issuance for all bonds maturing in the 1930-1934 period.
       Last, we obtain information on national bank suspensions from the Federal Deposit
Insurance Corporation (FDIC) Data on Banks in the United States.21 The FDIC data allow
us to measure the suspension of national banks between 1929 and 1933 at the county level.
To match our firm-level data to the bank information, we collect the firm’s primary address
  18
     According to the NBER’s Business Cycle Reference Dates, the peak of the cycle was in August 1929
and the trough was in March 1933. The unemployment rate reached its highest level in 1932 or in 1933,
depending on whether persons with “work-relief” jobs are counted as employed or unemployed, respectively
(Margo, 1993).
  19
     Conditional on observing assets in both years, we are more likely to have non-missing information on
employment change for those firms that were more profitable or older in 1928.
  20
     When the bond name does not match a company listed in the corresponding manual, we manually search
for the parent company that has assumed the debt to allocate bonds to firms correctly.
  21
     These data were reported in the Federal Reserve Bulletin in 1937 and are available at ICPSR.



                                                   12
(city and state) from the Moody’s manuals. The address reported in the manuals typically
identifies the main location in which the firm operated. We then match the firm’s location to
its corresponding county based on the city-county-state definitions from the 1930 Population
Census. This procedure allows us to link the financial information of firms to the financial
conditions of the local banking system.


2.2        Summary Statistics
       Table 1 presents summary statistics for the main variables in our analysis. We focus on a
sample of 1,010 firms with non-missing employment and balance sheet information in both
1928 and 1933; information on some measures, such as profitability and firm age, is missing
for some firms. By construction, our data are based on firms that survived at least until 1933.
To minimize the impact of outliers in our analysis, we winsorize all observations at the 2%
and 98% level.22
       The Moody’s manuals were designed for the use of investors in stocks and bonds, and
therefore typically provided information for those firms that had listed securities—all “corpo-
rate enterprises of importance” (Moody’s Manual of Investments, 1929, p. v). Our sample
is therefore composed mostly of large, established firms. As shown in Table 1, the average
firm was 18 years old in 1928, and about 75% of the firms in the sample were incorporated
before 1923. Moreover, the median firm employed approximately 842 workers in 1928. The
size employment distribution is actually fairly skewed; the average firm in the sample had
instead 1,780 employees in that year. To address the skewness of the data, we use the log
number of employees in our analysis.
       The existing consensus is that large firms suffered disproportionately less than smaller
firms during the Depression (Bernanke, 1983). However, large firms did not emerge from
the crisis unscathed. Table 1 shows that the average firm in our sample experienced a 0.24
log-point reduction in employment between 1928 and 1933. The contraction in employment
was quite heterogeneous across firms; the standard deviation of employment changes is 0.58
log points. When we aggregate across firms, we find that the total reduction in employment
in our sample was sizable, about -0.095 log points, suggesting that larger firms reduced
employment by a proportionally smaller amount than smaller firms.
       Another indication that large firms did suffer during the Depression is the decline in
profitability evidenced in our sample: the average ROA declined from 9% in 1928 to 1% in
1933. To give a sense of the severity of this collapse, it is useful to note that the cross-sectional
standard deviation of profitability was merely 7% in 1928 or in 1933. Further, approximately
  22
       Using a winsorization threshold of 1% and 99% has no material impact on the analysis.


                                                     13
41% of the firms in our sample experienced negative profits in 1933, but less than 7% had
losses before to the onset of the crisis. Since profitable firms may have been less financially
constrained, we control for profitability in some of our specifications.
       We also find that the average (book) leverage ratio was 0.13 in 1928, although there was
substantial heterogeneity across the firms in our sample (the standard deviation was 0.14 in
that year). To be sure, this level is small compared to the book leverage ratios exhibited by
publicly traded American firms today. However, it is consistent with the evidence reported
in Graham, Leary, and Roberts (2015) for our time period, which is also based on the
Moody’s manuals, and with aggregate evidence for corporations in relevant sectors filing tax
returns.23 Moreover, a sizable fraction of firms had no debt outstanding in 1928. In our
empirical analysis, we perform several robustness checks to address concerns related to the
low leverage ratios. Last, it is important to note that public debt was salient for our sample
firms: corporate bonds accounted for about 60% of the debt outstanding for the average firm
in 1928.
       Our main identification strategy relies on the shock imposed by long-term bonds that
become due during the crisis. We construct this measure, which we refer to as BondsDue,
by the dollar amount of bonds due from 1930 to 1934 as a fraction of the mean value of
the firm’s assets in 1928 and 1933. Table 1 presents summary statistics for this variable.
Although most firms did not have bonds mature in such a short time span, this measure was
positive for 148 firms and there was substantial variation in this ratio within the affected firms.
Conditional on having bonds that become due during the 1930-1934 period, the average firm
had to refinance debt that was about 9.0% of its assets, and the cross-sectional standard
deviation around this number was 11%. The level of the financial constraints imposed by
debt becoming due was likely more severe for higher levels of that ratio. Thus, we use the
BondsDue variable primarily as a continuous treatment. However, our main results are
robust to using a discrete treatment that identifies as treated firms those that had any bonds
due during this period.
       The last three rows of Table 1 report summary statistics that describe the conditions of the
local banking systems in the areas in which our firms operated during the crisis. Specifically,
we employ variation in the suspensions by national banks in the counties in which the firms
were located. The failure of national banks from 1929 to 1933 was fairly widespread. Only
  23
    For example, the ratio of total debt—measured by the value of notes, accounts payable, bonded debt, and
mortgages—to total assets for all corporations in mining, manufacturing, construction, trade, and services
reporting non-negative net income (as most of our firms did) in 1928 was 19.9% (Statistics of Income for
1928, 1930: Table 19). This statistic is 15.5% for the firms in our sample in 1928. The limitations imposed by
the unit banking system likely contributed to the low leverage levels of industrial corporations during the
early decades of the twentieth century.



                                                     14
324 firms in our sample were located in counties in which no national bank suspended during
this period. For the remaining firms, there was considerable variation in the intensity of the
disruption to their local banking systems: 337 were located in counties where at most five
national banks failed, 238 were located in counties with six to ten suspended national banks,
and the remaining 115 operated in counties with more than ten such suspensions.
   The variation in the number of suspended banks partly reflects differences in the number
of national banks that existed in the region. Thus, we also calculate the fraction of suspended
national banks in a county as a fraction of the number of national banks in that area in 1928.
The average firm was located in a county where 22% of the national banks failed from 1929
to 1933, and the cross-sectional dispersion in this measure was sizable, also about 22%. The
disruptions to local banking systems may have been affected not only by the failure rates
of banks, but also by the relative size of those banks that failed. To take this possibility
into account, we calculate the total value of deposits of suspended national banks for the
1929-1933 period as a fraction of the value of deposits in the banks that operated in the
county in 1928, which is essentially the deposit-weighted measure of the fraction of banks
that suspended. The mean of this deposit-weighted measure is 16%, a bit lower than the
unweighted measure, reflecting that smaller national banks were more likely to fail. But the
dispersion in the deposit-weighted measure of bank failures is more than twice its average
value, indicating that even some of the largest banks suspended in some areas. In our baseline
specifications we simply compare firms located in counties in which at least one national
bank suspended to those firms located in places in which no such institution failed, since this
already signals an important disruption in the firms’ local banking systems. However, our
conclusions are robust to using instead a continuous treatment based on the number or the
size of the national banks that suspended.


2.3    Validity
   As with any novel dataset, it is important to assess the validity of the data. In this section,
we discuss two main issues. First, our results are based on a sample of about one thousand
large firms. Thus, a valid concern is the broader representativeness of our evidence. The
manuals obtained the employment numbers either from the firms’ annual reports or directly
from them. The quality of the employment data might therefore be questioned. We address
each concern in turn.
   Although our sample contains a few fairly small firms, the majority (about 95%) employed
more than one hundred employees. The focus on large employers may raise concerns about
the external validity of our estimates, as the typical firm in the economy was likely much


                                               15
smaller. Owing to the lack of appropriate data, it is difficult to compare the size of our firms
to other industrial companies operating in the United States at that time. The Census of
Manufactures of 1929, for example, reported that the average establishment in manufacturing
had approximately 49 employees. However, this estimate is likely much lower than the
employment level of the average firm in the economy, since large firms are typically composed
of multiple establishments. An alternative way to assess the relevance of the firms in our
sample is to compare their total employment—a bit more than two million workers in 1928—
to the relevant portion of the U.S. labor force. Given the variety of industries covered by
our sample, there is no perfect comparison. We instead provide a range of estimates: our
firms accounted for 20.8% of the total employment in manufacturing as reported in the 1929
Census of Manufactures (Vol. 1, chapter 2, Table 1), and for 6.9% of the total civilian private
non-farm labor force in 1928 (Historical Statistics of the United States, Table Ba470–477).
       Another indication of the relevance of our sample for the economy overall is that our
relatively small number of firms accounted for 19.1% of the total assets of all corporations in
the relevant sectors reporting this information in their income-tax returns—more than 250
thousand firms.24 Combined with the statistics for aggregate employment presented above,
this measure suggests that our firms represented a central part of the American economy.
       Much of our analysis hinges on the importance of financial frictions. Our identification
strategy relies on the existence of (long-term) corporate bonds that matured during the
worst years of the crisis. Although the summary statistics in Table 1 show that these sources
of debt financing were important for the firms in our sample, one concern might be that
smaller firms in the economy may not have made use of these instruments. We find that
bonds and mortgages accounted for about 8% of all assets of corporations with income-tax
returns, exactly the same fraction that was evidenced for the average firm in our sample.
Thus, access to public debt markets was arguably important for business enterprises more
generally. However, total debt was a bit higher relative to assets for all corporations in the
relevant sectors. This suggests that short-term debt (measured by notes payable) and/or
trade credit (measured by accounts payable) were more important sources of financing for
smaller firms in comparable industrial sectors.
       Next, we use data sources other than the Moody’s manuals to validate the accuracy of the
employment data. Since the firms in our sample were among the largest in the economy, we
do not necessarily expect them to suffer equally as others. But the severity of the recession
  24
    To obtain a reasonable comparison for the firms in our sample, we focus on all corporations submitting a
tax return in the following sectors: mining and quarrying, manufacturing, construction, trade, and services.
About 89.2% of the firms with a filed return in these sectors reported balance sheet information, as reported
in Table 19, p. 380, of the 1929 Statistics of Income.



                                                    16
varied greatly across regions and sectors. We would thus expect the geographic and industrial
distribution of employment changes in our sample to be relatively similar to those experienced
by other industrial firms.
   Panel A of Figure 3 compares the geographic variation in the changes in employment
across U.S. regions in our sample (displayed in the vertical axis) to the drop in employment
in manufacturing establishments as reported in the Census of Manufactures (presented in
the horizontal axis). The census data are based on information at the region level for 20
manufacturing industries constructed by Rosenbloom and Sundstrom (1999). The Figure
shows a clear positive association across the two data sources, with the largest percentage
declines in employment occurring in the East South Central states and the smallest ones taking
place in the South Atlantic and the North East. Not surprisingly, the decline in employment
was smaller among the firms in our sample: estimating a simple regression line in Panel A
results in a slope coefficient of 0.46, which suggests that the contraction in employment in
our sample was about half of the overall employment drop among the establishments in the
Rosenbloom and Sundstrom (1999) data. The smaller decline in employment evidenced by
the firms in our sample is not driven by differences in the geographic location of our large
firms and the manufacturing establishments. Panel B of Figure 3 presents the (log) number
of firms located in each region in our sample (in the vertical axis) and the (log) number of
establishments in the Census of Manufactures (in the horizontal axis). Although there are
fewer business units in our sample, the geographic distribution of firms and establishments
is positively correlated. Still, our specifications control for state fixed effects to address
differences in the magnitude of the economic shocks across the country.
   What factors, then, may account for the differences in the magnitude of the shocks between
these two data sources? First, the typical firm in our data is much larger than the average
establishment in the census and may therefore have been more resilient to the financial
crisis. Second, our sample includes industrial firms, whereas the Census data covers only
establishments operating in manufacturing. The manufacturing sector is in general more
procyclical than the other industries included in our sample. Moreover, the Great Depression
did not affect all industries equally. To provide further validating evidence for our data, in
Table A.3 we present the variation in employment decline across industries. Reassuringly, we
find that firms in manufacturing—especially those producing durable goods—were among
the hardest hit by the Great Depression. For example, firms in electrical equipment, mining
and construction collectively shed more than 50% of their employees. By contrast, firms in
services and agriculture were generally less affected. These estimates are consistent with
the well-documented large decline in consumer demand for durable goods early in the crisis



                                             17
(Romer, 1993). To ensure that our effects are not driven by cross-sectional differences across
industries, we include industry effects in our specifications.


2.4    Employment and Firm Characteristics
   A unique feature of our data is that we observe detailed information on employment
and firm financial characteristics. We are thus able to present new facts on the correlation
between firm employment changes and their financial leverage during the Great Depression.
To do so, we estimate variants of the following regression:

      log(Ei,1933 ) − log(Ei,1928 ) = α + β Leveragei,1928 + λ Xi,1928 + γ ki + ψ si + i ,    (1)

where the dependent variable is the log difference in the number of employees E in firm i
between 1928 and 1933, Leverage is the firm’s debt to assets ratio in 1928, and Xi includes
controls such as the logarithm of employment in 1928, firm size (measured by the logarithm
of total assets in 1928), profitability in 1928, and the logarithm of firm age. Since we are
interested in isolating the correlation of these characteristics holding factors such as the firm’s
location constant, we include state s fixed effects. We also control for either industry k or
industry-region fixed effects because the crisis did not affect all industries equally and because
industry-specific shocks may have varied across areas. All regressions are estimated with
heteroscedasticity-robust standard errors clustered by industry.
   Table 2 presents the results. We find a negative and statistically significant correlation
between the employment change between 1928 and 1933 and the level of the firm’s leverage in
1928. This correlation is robust across specifications. Focusing on specifications that control
for industry or state fixed effects, the coefficients in Columns (2) through (5) imply that
a firm in the 90th percentile of leverage in 1928 experienced a decline in employment from
1928 to 1933 of about 0.13 to 0.15 log points larger than the change in employment of a
firm with median leverage. The magnitude of this association becomes a bit smaller at 0.09
to 0.10 log points, but remains significant when we also control for the firm’s profitability
(in Column (7)), and for firm age (in Column (8)). These results are consistent with the
idea that entering a crisis with high levels of debt may constrain a firm’s ability to grow
or preserve its workforce during adverse economic conditions. The documented correlation
between leverage and the contraction of employment during the Great Depression is also
consistent with modern evidence based on the large firms included in Compustat (see, e.g.,
Sharpe, 1994; Calomiris, Orphanides, and Sharpe, 1994; Benmelech et al., 2011).




                                                 18
       Table 2 reveals other interesting patterns in the data. Firms that entered the recession
with a larger number of employees relative to similarly sized peers in the same industry
and region had larger declines in employment levels, especially when the firms’ book value
of assets is included as a control. For example, firms in the 90th percentile of employment
in 1928 reduced employment between 0.07 and 0.3 log points more than the median firm,
suggesting that perhaps these firms employed more labor than they should have before the
onset of the crisis. By contrast, firms that were larger (as measured by total assets) in 1928
did not reduce their employment as much as smaller firms. For example, firms in the 90th
percentile of book assets in 1928 contracted employment between 0.21 and 0.28 log points less
than the median-sized firm. Our data therefore corroborate the perception that large firms
did indeed suffer less during the Great Depression, but outcomes still varied significantly
even among some of the largest enterprises in the economy. The fact that the coefficients on
log employment and log assets are very similar in terms of magnitude (and have opposite
signs) implies that these patterns can be summarized by the employment-to-assets ratio and
suggests that firms with excess labor (relative to their size) may have shed more employees
during the crisis.
       The estimated effects in Columns (7) and (8) also show that firms that entered the
recession with higher profitability reduced their labor force by relatively less, compared to
otherwise similar firms. For example, the median firm in the 1928 distribution of ROA
reduced employment by approximately 0.20 log points more than those firms in the 90th
percentile. Last, in Column (8) we find no statistical differences in employment changes
among young and old firms.
       Although the results presented in Table 2 suggest that profitability and leverage potentially
affected firm-level employment during the Great Depression, these variables are clearly
endogenous. These associations thus cannot be interpreted as evidence of a causal effect of
financing on employment decisions.25 Next, we present an identification strategy to more
credibly estimate the effect of financial frictions on firm employment.
  25
     That high leverage levels likely had negative consequences during the crisis is further suggested by
Graham et al. (2011), who show that the leverage ratio was positively associated with financial distress among
publicly traded industrial firms during the Depression. Our study documents a sizable effect of financial
frictions on the employment of surviving firms. To the extent that financial frictions contributed to the failure
of industrial enterprises, as suggested by Graham et al. (2011), our study may underestimate the overall
impact of frictions on the aggregate contraction in employment.




                                                       19
3     The Effect of Financial Constraints on Employment
    To assess the role of financial constraints on employment, we first apply the long-term debt
approach in Section 3.1. In Section 3.2 we study the direct effects of local bank failures. We
discuss our main results based on the substitutability of public and private debt in Section 3.3
and present a battery of robustness checks for this analysis in Section 3.4.


3.1    Maturing Long-term Debt
    To identify the effect of financial constraints on employment decisions, we start by
exploiting the variation in preexisting amounts of “maturing bonds” across the firms in the
sample. Since these bonds were primarily issued before the crisis, their amounts becoming
due from 1930 to 1934 are likely exogenous to market conditions and firms’ investment
opportunities during this period. We conjecture that firms with greater refinancing needs
(due to higher levels of bonds maturing relative to their assets) would have had to reduce their
labor force by more than those firms not facing the need to refinance maturing long-term
debt. The difficulties in rolling over corporate bonds were likely acute during the period of
our study, since external capital markets were essentially frozen. Firms with a higher fraction
of maturing debt likely experienced difficulties in borrowing to pay financial liabilities and
wages, resulting in larger reductions in firm employment and, ultimately, in a contraction in
aggregate economic activity.


Comparison across Treatment and Control Groups

    In our main specification, we consider a continuous treatment effect, under the assumption
that those firms that had a higher value of bonds maturing during the crisis relative to
their assets experienced a worse shock to financing frictions. But it is possible that firms
with more bonds becoming due were different from other firms in ways that may confound
our analysis. Before we proceed to the regression results, we present simple comparisons of
observable characteristics for ‘treated’ firms—defined as those that had any positive level of
bonds maturing from 1930 to 1934—and for “control” firms, which had no bonds becoming
due in this period.
    Panel A of Table 3 presents differences in means and medians for these two groups of
firms. We find no statistically significant differences in employment levels or firm size before
the crisis. However, treated firms were less profitable, had higher leverage, and were a bit
older. Some of these differences are perhaps not surprising—firms with higher leverage overall
should be also more likely to have bonds due in any given year. Therefore, in Panel B


                                              20
we present similar comparisons but restrict the sample to those firms that had some debt
outstanding in 1928. The two groups of firms are more balanced in this case. Although
treated firms continue to have higher leverage ratios, the absolute differences with those
firms with non-zero leverage in 1928 that had no bonds due from 1930 to 1934 are much
smaller. Given these differences, we include these characteristics in our regression analysis,
and perform various robustness checks to address differences in initial indebtedness levels
across firms.


Regression Analysis

   Our main specification to estimate the effects of “maturing debt” on employment is as
follows:

  log(Ei,1933 ) − log(Ei,1928 ) = α + β BondsDuei,1930−1934 + λ Xi,1928 + γ ki + ψ si + i ,   (2)


where the dependent variable is the log difference in the number of employees E for firm
i between 1928 and 1933. The continuous treatment variable BondsDue is measured by
the total value of corporate bonds that become due from 1930 to 1934, as a fraction of the
firm’s average level of assets between 1928 and 1933. (The results are quantitatively similar
when we instead scale the value of maturing debt by the firm’s book assets in 1928 or in
1933.) Given the documented differences in characteristics across treated and control firms,
we include a rich set of controls and fixed effects to address concerns about selection and
omitted variables, similar to those used in (1) above.
   Table 4 presents the results. Column (1) shows that the univariate relation between
BondsDue and the change in the number of employees is negative and statistically significant.
This effect is not driven by state-specific characteristics or shocks (Column (2)) or by
differences across sectors (Column (3)). As shown in Table 3, highly levered firms were also
more likely to have bonds maturing during the crisis. Thus, the results presented thus far
may simply reflect that highly levered firms fared worse during the Depression, regardless
of their need to refinance. In Column (4), we control for the firms’ leverage in 1928; the
coefficient β then captures the effect of needing to refinance maturing bonds during the crisis
on a firm’s employment, relative to a similarly levered firm with no such debt maturing. The
estimated effect of BondsDue does diminish slightly, but it remains sizable and statistically
significant.
   It is also possible that some firms used debt to overexpand during the roaring 1920s.
If this were the case, firms with higher levels of maturing debt would simultaneously have
excess labor that perhaps could be more easily reduced. Yet in Column (5) we show that

                                               21
the effects of bonds maturing is robust to controlling for the firms’ log employment level in
1928. The estimated effect of maturing debt on employment changes is also unaffected by
controlling for firm size (in Column (6)) or by allowing industry shocks to vary by region
(in Column (7)). It is also likely that more profitable firms may have needed less access to
external finance and suffered less during the crisis. To address this concern, in Column (8)
we control for the firm’s ROA in 1928. As expected, firms that were more profitable before
the Depression experienced smaller reductions in the number of employees. But importantly,
the estimated effect of BondsDue on firm employment remains unaffected.26 In Column (9)
we include a measure of profitability in 1933, to take into account that firms that performed
better during the crisis may have suffered less from financial constraints. To be sure, ROA
in 1933 is endogenous to financing frictions, and these results should be interpreted with
caution since we are likely overcontrolling. Yet the estimated coefficient on maturing debt is
robust in this specification as well. Last, Column (10) shows that these effects are not driven
by differences in firm age.
    The estimated coefficient on maturing debt, β, ranges between -1.1 and -1.5 across
specifications. These estimated effects imply that a one standard deviation increase in
BondsDue is associated with a decline in the number of employees that is between 3.9%
and 5.3%, representing about 16% to 22% of the average log change in employment between
1928 and 1933. A firm in the 90th percentile of the distribution of maturing debt, which was
faced with the need to refinance debt for about 4% of its assets, experienced a contraction in
employment that was 4.4% to 5.6% larger than the decline in the number of employees of the
median firm, which had no bonds maturing from 1930 to 1934.
    In the Supplementary Appendix (Section 2.1), we perform a number of robustness checks
to address, among other concerns, the possibility that these results are driven by endogenous
responses to the crisis or by omitted characteristics correlated with the level and structure of
the firms’ leverage. But one remaining potential source of concern is that unobserved firm
characteristics that become salient during the crisis may be responsible for our findings. In
particular, the period before the Great Depression saw a rapid expansion of new industrial
enterprises, perhaps aided by easy credit, a boom in innovation, and a bullish stock market. It
is possible then that the most treated firms “overexpanded” more during the 1920s than other
firms, and therefore experienced a more severe contraction. To study whether treated and
control firms were on differential trends before the crisis, we collect information for the firms
in our sample in earlier years from various Moody’s manuals. Panel A of Table 5 presents the
  26
     Interestingly, the effect of leverage becomes smaller and statistically insignificant when we control for
ROA. This finding highlights the importance of properly controlling for a variety of firm or establishment
characteristics, and cautions against interpreting associations between leverage ratios and firm outcomes as a
causal effect of financing frictions on the economy.


                                                     22
change in employment, profitability, firm size, and leverage for firms in the treated and control
groups between 1927 and 1928. Reassuringly, we find no statistically significant differences
for any of these variables between these two groups of firms (p-values shown in Columns (7)
and (8)). To study pretrends over a longer time span, Panel B of Table 5 presents similar
changes from 1925 to 1928. It is important to note that our ability to obtain information
in 1925 is limited; many of the firms in our baseline sample did not appear in Moody’s and,
those that did were less likely to report employment. Treated and control firms differed only
in their profitability, but these differences go in the opposite direction—firms with bonds
maturing during the Depression saw larger increases in profits during the late 1920s than
those firms in the control group.
   In sum, our results show that firms that needed to refinance large amounts of debt relative
to their size reduced their employment by more than their peers. This fact is similar to the
effects found during the financial crisis of 2008-2009 by Almeida et al. (2011) and Benmelech
et al. (2011). Although we have made strides within the constraints of the available data to
ensure that unobserved firm characteristics are not driving the results, our strategies thus far
can address this concern only in part. Next, we exploit the collapse of the banking system
and the widespread suspension of banks across many areas of the country in the early 1930s
as an additional source of variation to further validate the importance of access to finance on
firm employment.


3.2    Local Banking Conditions and Firm Employment
   As we discussed in Section 1.2, our second empirical strategy is based on the substitution
between private and public debt markets. Before we proceed with that analysis, we briefly
study the direct effects of disruptions to the local banking systems on firm employment.
Suspensions of national banks were fairly widespread—about 687 firms were located in counties
in which at least one national bank suspended from 1929 to 1933, while the remaining 323
firms had their primary location in counties with no such failures. Appendix Table A.5
presents a simple comparison in means and medians for all variables of interest between these
two groups of firms. Firms in counties with suspended national banks tended to be somewhat
larger and had slightly higher leverage (mean leverage of 13.5% versus 11.2%) before the crisis.
However, there were no distinguishable differences across most characteristics, including their
employment level and profitability. Importantly, these two groups of firms did not differ
in the value of bonds becoming due between 1930 and 1934, suggesting that the level of
maturing debt was uncorrelated with the health of the local banking system.



                                               23
   To estimate the direct effects of disruptions of the local bank systems more formally, we
compare the response of employment growth of firms located in counties that experienced
the failure of at least one national bank relative to firms that were located in counties with
no such bank failures. Specifically, we estimate a variant of equation (2), above:

          log(Ei,1933 ) − log(Ei,1928 ) = α + β BankF aili + λ Xi,1928 + γ ki + ψ si + i ,   (3)

where we replace the value of maturing debt by a discrete treatment, BankF aili , a dummy
variable that takes a value of one if at least one national bank suspended from 1929 to 1933
in the county in which firm i was located in 1928, and zero otherwise. We use the firm’s
location in 1928 to avoid contaminating the estimation by any endogenous firm reallocations
due to geographic variation in industry shocks or in local bank conditions during the crisis.
The main coefficient of interest, β, captures the sensitivity of firm-level employment to local
bank failures.
   Table 6 presents the results. We find a negative relation between national bank suspensions
and employment changes, but the estimated effects are not always statistically different from
zero. The magnitude of the statistically significant estimates in Columns (3) to (8) imply that
firms located in counties where national banks failed experienced a contraction in employment
that was 8.9% to 11.3% larger than the declines exhibited by similar firms located in counties
with no such suspensions. However, the estimated effects become smaller (3.9% to 5.8%) and
are no longer significant when we control for the firms’ profitability in 1933 in Columns (9)
and (10). This suggests that firms located in areas where banks failed were also more likely to
be less profitable during the crisis, suggesting that local economic shocks that impaired both
banks and firms may partly drive the association between credit disruptions and employment.
The association between bank failures and employment changes is also sensitive to different
ways of measuring the disruptions in local banking conditions. For example, the estimated
effects are negative but quite imprecisely estimated when we use a continuous treatment of
BankF ail, defined as the amount of deposits in national banks that failed in the county
between 1929 and 1933, scaled by the amount of deposits in these banks in 1928 (results not
shown).
   In sum, we find some evidence that failures of local banks had a direct effect on the
employment decisions of the large firms in our sample, though the effects are not robust
to controlling for profitability during the crisis or to alternative measures of bank shocks.
Next, we study whether disruptions in local credit markets instead had an indirect effect, by
impeding the substitution between public and private sources of debt financing.



                                                 24
3.3    Interaction of Local Credit Conditions and Firm Financing
       Needs
   To better identify the effects of financial constraints on employment, we focus on the
interaction between the variation in the firms’ maturing debt and the geographic differences
in bank failures. We conjecture that firms that had high levels of bonds maturing when
the public bond markets stopped functioning would have found it particularly difficult to
refinance those debts when they were located in areas that experienced bank failures. This
strategy effectively compares the employment decisions of firms that had similar amounts
of maturing bonds but varied in their ability to access bank credit simply because they
happened to be located in areas where banks were in distress. It is unlikely that unobserved
firm characteristics that were correlated with both the amount of debt maturing and changes
in employment differed by firm location. Thus, this strategy partly helps address concerns
that our findings may be driven by unobserved firm characteristics.
   To describe the data, we split the sample into four groups, depending on whether firms
had any bonds maturing from 1930 to 1934 and whether they were located in counties where
at least one national bank failed. Panel A of Table 7 presents summary statistics for the
variables of interest for these four groups of firms. Because our empirical strategy focuses on
the interaction between maturing debt and bank failures, the most interesting comparisons
are those between firms with maturing bonds located in areas with no bank failures (Columns
(3) and (4)) relative to firms that also had maturing bonds but that happened to be exposed
to bank failures (Columns (7) and (8)). Although a majority of firms (68%) were located
in counties where banks failed, the fraction of firms with maturing debt was similar across
areas with and without failures: 15.1% of firms located in counties where BankF ail = 1 had
maturing bonds (BondsDue > 0), whereas this ratio was 13.6% for firms operating in places
with no failures (BankF ail = 0). The similarity in the distribution of firms with maturing
debt suggests that a reverse causality story in which a contraction in the balance sheet of
the firms in our sample caused the collapse of local national banks is not very plausible.
Moreover, these two groups of firms were also similar on observables. Table 7 presents the
p-values for the differences in means (in Column (9)) and medians (in Column (10)) for the
“treated” firms (BankF ail = 1 and BondsDue > 0) and the firms in the “control” group
(BankF ail = 0 and BondsDue > 0). We do not find any statistically significant differences.
Importantly, the value of bonds maturing as a fraction of total assets were remarkably similar
for these two groups of firms.
   Panel B of Table 7 presents summary statistics for the changes in the firms’ observable
characteristics from 1927 and 1928 for all four groups of firms. The last two columns show

                                              25
that the changes in employment, profitability, size, and leverage were essentially the same for
those firms with maturing bonds regardless of location. Thus, differences in pre-crisis trends
between treated and control firms are unlikely to drive our results.
   Our regression model is essentially a “triple-difference” specification, in which we compare
employment between 1928 and 1933, across firms located in counties that experienced national
bank suspensions relative to those that did not, interacted with the firms’ level of bonds
maturing during the crisis. Specifically, we estimate:

       log(Ei,1933 ) − log(Ei,1928 ) =α + β1 BankF aili + β2 BondsDuei +
                                     + β3 BankF aili × BondsDuei + λ Xi,1928 + γ ki +
                                     + ψ si + i .                                            (4)


   The main difference from our earlier specifications is that we now include BankF aili ,
BondsDue, and their interaction. The main coefficient of interest is β3 , which allows us to
compare the effects of having similar levels of maturing debt for firms facing different levels
of disruption in their local banking systems. We expect this coefficient to be negative: firms
that had larger amounts of preexisting bonds maturing should have had more difficulties in
obtaining bank financing (and therefore been less likely to keep their workforce) when their
local banks were under distress.
   Table 8 presents the results. The estimated coefficient β3 is negative and statistically
significant across all specifications, and its magnitude ranges from -2.7 to -3.2. These estimates
imply that a firm in the 90th percentile of maturing bonds outstanding (as a fraction of total
assets) experienced a 12% to 18% larger drop in employment when it was located in a county
where at least one national bank failed, relative to a firm with similar characteristics and
refinancing needs that was located in an area with no such bank failures. Similarly, when
we compare the treatment group to firms with similar characteristics that were located in a
region with bank failures, but had no bonds due during this period, we find that the treated
firms experienced a 7–9% larger drop in employment.
   In sum, we find that financial frictions had a sizable impact on the employment decisions
of large firms during the Great Depression. Our results suggest that the ability to substitute
public debt for private debt may have helped firms to ease financial shocks, and conserve
employment.




                                                26
3.4    Robustness
   In this section we perform a number of robustness checks to further validate our results.
Thus far, we have primarily exploited the continuous treatment given by the value of maturing
debt relative to the firm’s assets for identification. Since a small fraction of the firms in
our sample had bonds becoming due, a potential concern is that our results are driven by
a few outliers. Instead, we split the treated firms with maturing bonds into three groups.
Specifically, we define a dummy variable Dx that takes the value one if the dollar value of
maturing debt exceeds x% of their average level of assets between 1928 and 1933. We consider
values of x equal to 0, 5, and 10, and interact each dummy with the indicator variable
BankF aili . As before, the excluded category are those firms with no maturing bonds.
   Table 9 presents the estimated effects for these interactions. The coefficients presented in
the first row imply that the economic magnitudes are substantial: firms located in cities with
national bank suspensions that had a positive value of debt due during the crisis experienced
a 21% to 25% greater drop in employment relative to firms also located in counties that
experienced bank distress but had no bonds due from 1930 to 1934. The magnitude of this
effect is comparable to the mean drop in employment across all firms in the sample. Further,
the estimated effects are more pronounced for higher values of maturing debt. Firms that
were located in counties with failed national banks experienced an additional contraction
in employment of 24& to 34% (or 43% to 57%), depending on the specification, when they
had to refinance more than 5% (or 10%) of their assets, relative to similar firms. These
magnitudes are quite large, most likely because the estimates are based on a small number
of firms on the end tail of the distribution of BondsDue. Indeed, only 62 firms located in
cities with suspended national banks had to refinance more than 5% of their assets, and
31 firms had bonds maturing for more than 10% of their assets. With this caveat in mind,
the positive gradient in the effects of maturing bonds on employment presented in Table 9
minimizes concerns related to the low leverage levels that characterized corporations during
our sample period. In Appendix Table A.6 we also show that our baseline results are robust
to excluding from the analysis those firms that had no leverage in 1928. Since leverage ratios
were overall low (relative to modern firms), the typical value of maturing bonds was not
exceedingly high. Yet our results suggest that even modest amounts of bonds becoming due
represented a significant financial burden for large firms during the Great Depression, and
that those burdens were particularly severe when the needs for debt refinancing were large
(that is, more than 10% of assets). Given the restrictions imposed by our sample size, for
other robustness checks we return to our baseline specification using the continuous treatment
variable to measure BondsDue.


                                              27
   Table 10 presents additional results from a series of robustness checks. We include the
same controls as in earlier tables, but in each panel we alter the definition of the treatment or
the sample to address a different concern. To conserve space, we present only the estimated
effects for the interaction term β3 .
   We begin by studying the robustness of our results to alternative measures of maturing
debt. Thus far, we have used the value of bonds becoming due from 1930 to 1934 as
reported in Moody’s, regardless of when these bonds were issued. Yet a small fraction of these
securities were actually issued after the onset of the crisis, which may raise concerns that our
estimated effects reflect an endogenous response of firms to the downturn. In Panel A we
instead construct BondsDue using only those bonds that were issued before January 1, 1929.
Reassuringly, our estimates are robust to this change. Our baseline definition of BondsDue
includes those bonds that matured in 1934 to capture the possibility that firms acted in
precautionary ways, reducing employment levels before bonds matured and conserving cash
to repay their debts. Our baseline measure therefore captures any reductions in employment
by the end of 1933 that may occur in anticipation of these cash outflows in 1934. In Panel B
we instead measure BondsDue using only those bonds that became due from 1930 to 1933.
Our estimated effects become somewhat larger, ranging from -2.9 to -3.6. This suggests that
the effect from financing needs on employment was particularly severe from 1930 to 1933,
when the banking system experienced the most strain. In Panel B of Appendix Table A.6, we
show that our results are also robust to netting out the firms’ available cash and marketable
securities in 1928, which could have been used to pay down maturing liabilities, from the
value of bonds becoming due. This finding refutes the current view that the financial turmoil
mostly affected small firms, since large firms were unconstrained due to their abundant liquid
assets (see, e.g., Lutz, 1945; Hunter, 1982; Calomiris, 1993).
   Unobserved firm characteristics are an important threat to identification in a difference-
in-difference design. Our empirical strategy based on the substitution between private and
public debt partly appeases these concerns; next, we perform two additional exercises to
address them further. First, we perform a placebo experiment by relating the changes in
employment from 1928 to 1933 to the value of bonds that the firms in our sample had due
in 1928, as a fraction of their assets in that year. Since these bonds matured well before
there were any indications of an impending crisis, we would expect them to be unrelated to
the changes in employment during the Depression. Panel C of Table 10 indeed shows no
such correlation, although the estimates are noisy due to the small number of firms that had
bonds maturing in 1928. These results provide at least suggestive evidence that our main
findings are unlikely to be solely the result of having maturing debt in any period. Instead,



                                               28
financial constraints appear to matter only during the crisis. Yet it is still possible that our
results are driven by unobserved firm characteristics that become salient during the crisis.
For example, firms that typically issued short-term bonds would have been more likely to
have bonds mature from 1930 to 1934 (as well as in any other period). If these firms were
also riskier, they may have also been more likely to suffer and lay off more workers during an
economic downturn. To address this possibility, in Panel D we construct BondsDue using
only those bonds that were issued with a maturity of five or more years. The estimated
effects are very similar to the baseline estimates presented in Table 8, ranging from -2.5 to
-3.2 across specifications, and all but one are statistically significant at conventional levels.
    Finally, our baseline estimates use a discrete definition of bank failures. However, it is
possible that the disruption in local banking conditions would be more severe when the
national banks that failed accounted for a larger share of deposits. To address this concern,
we instead measure BankF ail using the amount of deposits in national banks that failed
between 1929 and 1933 in the county in which the firm was located in 1928, scaled by the
total amount of deposits in national banks in that county in 1928. Panel E of Table 10 shows
that the estimates of β3 remain sizable and statistically significant across our specifications.



4     Aggregate Impact of Financial Frictions
    Our results indicate that having a substantial amount of bonds due in the period 1930–34
caused firms to cut employment sharply during the Depression. These estimated effects
are substantially stronger when these firms also happened to be located in counties that
experienced suspensions of national banks. Under the assumption that our identification
strategy is valid, our analysis in the previous section provides an estimate of the elasticity of
firm employment to maturing debt. However, evaluating the implications of this estimated
elasticity for the aggregate change in employment is challenging. For instance, the treated
firms account for a small fraction of the firms in our sample (approximately 9% to 15%
depending on the treatment definition). Hence even if the elasticity is well identified, the
direct causal effect could perhaps account for only a small share of the overall contraction in
employment in our sample.
    We evaluate the aggregate impact of finance on employment during the Great Depression
in several ways. In Section 4.1 we use the estimated elasticities to compute a counterfactual
level of aggregate employment within the firms in our sample, assuming that the estimated
treatment effect was equal to zero. In Section 4.2 we use the same estimated elasticity, but
expand the definition of treatment to include other types of short-term leverage, even if they


                                               29
are potentially endogenous. In Section 4.3 we use a structural model to identify the impact
of financial frictions on firms that needed to access the external markets for reasons that
were not limited to refinancing their maturing debt. Finally, in Section 4.4 we compare these
estimates to those obtained from the recent financial crisis using the empirical strategy in
Benmelech et al. (2011).


4.1     Evaluating the direct effect
   Here, we compute the counterfactual level of employment within our sample under the
scenario in which the treatment effect we estimate in equations (2) and (4) were uniformly
equal to zero. We provide a range of estimates depending on our different definitions of the
treatment.
   We first examine the definition of treated firms as those having maturing debt in the
1930-1934 period, which corresponds to equation (2). We compute the portion of the change
in the number of employees Ei of firm i between 1928 and 1933 that can be attributed to the
term β1 BDU Ei , as
                               h                                 i
                     A
                  ∆Êi,1933   = exp β̂1 BDU Ei + ĉ Zit − exp ĉ Zit Ei,1928 ,                    (5)

where ĉ Zit includes all the other variables in equation (2). All the estimates (the main
coefficient of interest β̂1 plus the coefficients on the remaining variables and fixed effects ĉ) are
computed using the specification in Column (10) of Table 4, which includes all controls and
fixed effects. The sum is computed over the 785 firms that are included in this specification.
   We repeat the same calculation with our second definition of treatment – using the
estimates from equation (4) – as
                   h                                               i
           B
        ∆Êi,1933 = exp β̂3 BAN KF AILi × BDU Ei + ĉ Zit − exp ĉ Zit Ei,1928 .                  (6)

As before, we use the point estimates corresponding to the specification in Column (10) of
Table 8, which includes all controls and fixed effects.
   Next, we aggregate these estimates across all firms in the sample to obtain the component
of aggregate employment growth that can be directly attributed to financial constraints as

                                                        r
                                                P
                                                  f ∆Êi,1933
                                        ĜrE   = P            .                                   (7)
                                                   f Ei,1928


   Panel A.i of Table 11 summarizes our results. Our estimates of the aggregate magnitude of
the direct treatment effect range from 0.8 to 1.4 percentage points depending on the definition

                                                   30
of treatment. To evaluate these magnitudes, note that the total drop in employment among
all the firms in our sample that are included in the specification of Column (10) of Tables 4
and 8 is equal to 8.6%. Using the estimates from equation (2), we find that the direct
treatment effect is equal to 0.8 percentage points, or approximately 10% of the overall drop
in employment. If we instead define the set of treated firms as those that had maturing debt
and were located in counties with failed national banks – equation (4) – the magnitude of
the direct treatment effect implies an aggregate drop of 1.4 percentage points in employment
– or approximately 17% of the overall drop.


4.2    Extrapolating to firms with endogenous short-term leverage
   Our identification strategy focuses on corporate bonds because we can observe when these
bonds were due and because their long maturities allow us to argue that the preexisting
variation in maturing debt was exogenous to the firms’ investment opportunities. Our analysis
therefore ignores other forms of debt that may have also matured during the crisis. Next, we
assume that our estimated elasticity also applies to short-term interest-bearing debt that
needed to be refinanced during the crisis.
   We measure “short-term” sources of debt financing by the value of notes, bills, and
loans payable in 1928 as a fraction of the firms’ assets in that year. This item typically
included bank loans and was often (but not always) listed as a short-term liability in firms’
balance sheets. Since we do not have information on their exact maturity, we make different
assumptions on the fraction of these loans that were due in the 1929–33 period. Our most
conservative estimate assumes that 20% of them matured during the crisis, which is equal to
the average fraction of bonds in the firms’ balance sheets in 1928 that were due during the
crisis. This is a conservative estimate because bank loans typically had shorter maturities
than bonds (Jacoby and Saulnier, 1947). We therefore also consider the case in which 50% of
the existing notes payable in 1928 matured during the crisis. Since firms could use some of
their cash (or marketable securities) to finance these liabilities, in both cases we calculate net
short-term debt due by subtracting the value of cash and marketable securities in 1928. We
then recalculate our estimate of the aggregate contraction in employment due to financial
constraints given by equation (7).
   Panel A.i of Table 11 reports the results. If we use the estimates from equation (2), where
treatment is defined solely by maturing debt, then the direct effect of financial frictions on
employment is about 1 to 1.5 percentage points. Focusing on the estimates from our preferred
specification that exploits the interaction of bank failures and firm financing needs (now
defined by maturing bonds and short-term debt), the aggregate drop in employment due to


                                               31
financing frictions increases to between 1.5 and 2.4 percentage points. These are substantial
magnitudes, accounting for approximately 17% to 28% of the overall drop in employment in
our sample.
   The analysis in this section is predicated on the assumption that the causal estimates
of equations (2) and (4) are also valid for maturing bank loans. In effect, we are assuming
that public debt and bank loans were perfect substitutes. This is a big assumption, and
these results should hence be interpreted with caution. If loans are easier to renegotiate
than public debt, then the elasticity of employment to maturing bank debt would arguably
be lower, and we would thus be overestimating the effect of financial frictions. For these
reasons, we choose to exclude trade credit from these calculations. Trade credit was typically
short-term, and firms would have had to refinance it during the crisis. But firms may more
easily have extended the terms under which they would borrow from their suppliers than roll
over their maturing bonds.


4.3    Interpreting the estimates through a structural model
   The analysis in the previous sections abstracts from the possibility that firms without
maturing debt could also have been adversely affected by the collapse of the financial sector
during the Great Depression. In particular, firms may have reduced their labor demand if
their current cashflows were insufficient to cover their hiring costs, even if they did not have
any debt maturing during the financial crisis.
   We present a a simple structural model of firm employment with financial frictions. Our
model allows us to examine the impact of financial frictions on all firms in the sample,
regardless of whether they had maturing debts. Specifically, firms in our model produce
output using labor and are subject to a productivity shock. The two key assumptions in
our model are, first, that labor needs to be paid before profits are realized and, second, that
the firm faces convex costs of external finance. We calibrate the model to match the data
along several dimensions and, most important, to deliver similar elasticities of employment
to maturing debt in the simulated data as the estimates that we obtained in our empirical
analysis. Matching this elasticity essentially identifies the parameter governing the severity
of the financing friction in the model—the costs of external finance. To conserve space, we
relegate the description of the model and details on its calibration to the Appendix.
   We use the model to examine how much employment in 1933 would have been in the
absence of financial frictions. Panel A.ii of Table 11 summarizes our findings. Our calibration
implies that eliminating the financing friction would result in a 1.6 to 2.8 percentage-point
increase in the overall level of employment, depending on whether we target an elasticity of


                                              32
employment to debt equal to -1.16 or -3.1, corresponding to the estimates from equations (2)
and (4), respectively. Thus, the estimates using our main specification imply that financing
frictions accounted for approximately one-third of the overall drop in employment. These
estimated effects are larger relative to those in Section 4.1 because the nature of the experiment
is now different. Note that, the set of firms affected by the financing constraints does not
consist simply of firms that need to refinance their maturing debt. Firms with no maturing
debt are also affected, in particular those whose current current level of profitability is
insufficient to achieve their desired level of employment and must therefore access external
funds. These estimates are based on fairly strong assumptions, and several caveats are in
order. In the Appendix, we argue that these assumptions are in fact conservative and would
likely lead us to underestimate the importance of financial frictions.


4.4    Comparison to the Great Recession
   The results so far indicate that financing frictions played an important role in the
contraction of employment during the Great Depression. Our framework can also be used to
provide a comparative analysis of the Great Recession. We start by estimating the elasticity
of employment to maturing debt as defined in equation (2). We follow closely the empirical
design proposed by Benmelech et al. (2011). Thus, we define the outcome variable as the
change in log employment between 2008 and 2009 among the publicly traded firms that
appear in the Compustat dataset. The treatment variable is the amount of long-term debt
that was issued in 2004 and that matured in 2009 (Compustat variable dd5 lagged four years)
scaled by the book value of assets in 2008. To the extent possible, we include the same set of
controls as the specification presented in Column (10) of Table 4. (We are forced to omit
firm age because Compustat does not have information on the year of incorporation.) We
do caution readers to be careful in the interpretation of our analysis, since our ability to
construct a close comparison is limited.
   Our estimate of the coefficient β in equation (2) during the Great Recession is -0.22 with
a standard error of 0.08. A firm in the 90th percentile of the distribution of maturing debt,
which was faced with the need to refinance debt for about 3.9% of its assets, experienced a
contraction in employment that was 0.9% larger than the decline in the number of employees
of the median firm, which had no long-term debt maturing during that period. Relative to
our estimates from the Great Depression presented in Table 4, we find that the elasticity of
employment to maturing debt was about four to five times larger in the 1928–1933 crisis
than in the Great Recession.



                                               33
    We next repeat the analysis in Section 4.1 to compute the aggregate direct effect in the
2008-09 crisis using equations (5) and (7). Panel B.i of Table 11 summarizes the results. The
overall drop in employment between 2008 and 2009 among the 2,449 firms in the Compustat
sample is 4.9%. The direct effect of maturing debt accounts for a drop of 0.4 percentage
points in employment among the firms in the sample, or approximately 9% of the overall drop.
Thus, direct effect accounts for approximately the same fraction of the overall contraction
in employment in both crises (9% versus 10%), even though the size of the shock was two
times larger in the Great Depression. One significant difference in the definition of treatment
across the two crises is that the Compustat variable dd5 includes the amount of all maturing
long-term debt, whereas the baseline treatment for the Depression includes only maturing
bonds. Hence, perhaps a closer point of comparison would be the analysis in Section 4.2,
which evaluates the direct effect by extrapolating our estimates to other forms of short-term
leverage. In this case, we find that the magnitude of the direct effect was two to six times
larger in the 1930s.
    Last, we use the structural model to compute the overall impact of financial frictions
during the recent crisis. As we see in Panel B.ii of Table 11, our parameter estimates for
the 2008–2009 crisis imply that financing frictions led to a 0.5 percentage-point reduction in
overall employment, explaining about 10% of the total decline in the sample. By contrast,
our model implies much larger effects during the Great Depression (1.6 percentage points
and 19% of total, respectively).



5     Conclusion
    This paper presents new evidence on the important effects that financial frictions had
on the high levels of unemployment evidenced during the Great Depression. Firms that
needed to refinance maturing bonds during the crisis contracted their workforce more than
other similar businesses, particularly if their local banks were in distress and firms could
not easily provide alternative sources of external finance. Our aggregation exercises suggest
that the aggregate level of employment in our sample would have been about 10% to 33%
higher in the absence of financial frictions. Thus, disruptions to financial intermediation were
likely an important contributor to the unparalleled severity and persistence of the economic
contraction during the 1930s.
    Our empirical design allows us to credibly identify the effects of financial constraints
only for the firms in our sample. Although it is difficult to extrapolate our findings to other
firms, it is important to note that our sample is composed of some of the largest industrial


                                              34
enterprises in the economy. We show that these large businesses were less dependent on bank
financing than other corporations. Thus, the widespread failures of commercial banks in
the early 1930s may have had a larger direct effect on other firms than what we find in our
sample. Large firms may have also suffered less from asymmetries of information than smaller
firms. Thus, the increase in the cost of credit intermediation during the Great Depression
may have been even larger for other firms in the economy. These two reasons suggest that
our findings may therefore provide a conservative estimate of the role of financing frictions
on employment among all American firms during the Great Depression.
   We also take a first step in producing a comparative analysis of the quantitative impact
of financial frictions during the Great Depression and the Great Recession. Large firms
with higher levels of maturing debts contracted employment more than their peers in both
crises, but the magnitude of the adverse financing shock was about two to five times larger
during the 1930s than it was in the 2008–2009 recession. Both financial crises started with a
collapse in asset prices—the stock market crash of 1929 and the market for securitized debt
in 2008. But the disruption to financial markets was arguably more severe during the Great
Depression, at least measured by the number of failed banks and the degree of freeze-up of
public capital markets. Ultimately, the economic contraction was far deeper and persistent in
the earlier crisis. Whether this difference is due to the size of the initial shock, the differences
in regulatory frameworks, or the subsequent policy responses is open to debate and presents
a fruitful avenue for future research.




Appendix: Model
    Here, we present a simple structural model that allows us to quantify our empirical
estimates for the importance of financial frictions.

Model Setup

   In the model, firms produce output yi,t with labor L using a decreasing-returns to scale
technology,
                                     yi,t = ezi,t Lβi,t .                               (8)

In addition to labor, each firm is endowed with one unit of a fixed factor of production
(land), which serves the role of collateral and enables firms to issue risk-free debt. Land has
a liquidation value that is equal to D̄.
   Importantly, there is a mismatch in the time at which labor is hired and the time at
which output is produced. That is, the labor that participates in production at time t in


                                                35
equation (8) is decided at t − 1. In deciding how many workers to hire, managers take into
account their expectations about the firm’s productivity at time t, which follows an AR(1)
process,
                                    zi,t = κ zi,t−1 + σz εi,t ,                        (9)

where εi,t ∼ N (0, 1) is i.i.d.
    For simplicity we assume that firms can issue only one-period bonds. Next, we model the
financing friction with quadratic costs of debt issuance: if the firm wants to issue bonds with
present value Dt , then it must also incur a cost equal to

                                                 φt 2
                                      c(Dt ) =     D 1Dt >0 ,                                  (10)
                                                 2 t

where φt parameterizes the costs of external finance. Since our focus is not in the endogenous
dynamics of leverage – we will take the distribution of leverage across firms as given – we
will assume that there are no taxes or costs of financial distress. Firms are endowed with one
unit of land that serves as collateral for their bonds. The firm owners can choose to walk
away from the firm; in that case, bond holders seize the land. We restrict attention to riskless
debt, which imposes the constraint Dt ≤ D̄ always.
    As our baseline, we examine the case where the financing friction is purely transitory
– it lasts for one period. Our focus is then on the actions of firms during the crisis t = t0 ,
which inherit a stock of maturing debt D from the previous period and need to make a labor
decision given a transitory shock to the costs of external finance φ. Our assumption that
firms believe that the crisis is transitory, that is, φ = 0 for t > t0 , rules out any precautionary
savings motive on the part of the firms. This is a conservative assumption that facilitates
analytic tractability, which we relax as part of our robustness checks.
    The firm’s optimization problem can be written as,
                    n                                         h                io
                               z β     0          0     0            0   0 0
 V (D, L, z) = max
                0 0
                     (1 − τ ) e L − w L − R̂ D + D − c(D ) + ρ E V (D , L , z )|z , (11)
                L ,D


where ρ = 1/(1 + r) is the firm’s discount factor and R̂ = 1 + (1 − τ )r is the cost of debt net
of the tax shield. The firm’s problem is subject to the constraint of no equity issuance,
                                                             +
                             D0 = (1 − τ ) w L0 − ez Lβ + R̂ D ,
                                                       
                                                                                               (12)

and the restriction that debt should be riskless, D0 ≤ D̄.
   Equation (12) implies that firms issue debt to finance any shortfalls. If after the labor
decision there are surplus funds, these are paid out to equity owners. Since firms believe that
there are no credit market distortions (φ = 0) for t > t0 , and assuming that D̄ is sufficiently
high, firms have no incentive to save. When solving the version of the model with permanent
shocks, we relax this assumption and allow D to be negative.

                                                 36
       Given our assumptions, the firm’s optimal labor choice L0 satisfies the first order condition,
                  h                                      + i           0
                 w ρ R̂ + φ R̂ D + (1 − τ ) (wL0 − ez Lβ )     = β ρ E[ez |z] L0β−1 .                    (13)

    The first order condition reveals that the presence of financial frictions increases the
marginal cost of hiring workers. Since the costs of issuance are quadratic, the marginal cost
of issuance is increasing with the amount of external finance needed. Having an analytic
solution allows us to compute the elasticity of labor to the financing friction. Focusing on
the region where the financing constraint is binding – firms want to issue new debt D0 > 0 –
an implicit differentiation of equation (13) with respect to the financing friction φ yields

                                        R̂D + (1 − τ ) w L0 − ez Lβ
                                                                      
                   ∂ log L0
                            = −w                                                < 0.                     (14)
                      ∂φ         βρ (1 − β) L0 β−1 E[ez0 |z] + φ (1 − τ ) w2 L0

    The elasticity that is presented in equation (14) is what we would ideally like to estimate:
it summarizes the impact of the financial friction on the firm’s overall employment. However,
estimating this elasticity directly from the data is not feasible. Instead, our analysis allows us
to obtain an estimate of the elasticity of labor with respect to maturing debt F = R̂ D. To
obtain an expression for this elasticity, we implicitly differentiate equation (13) with respect
to the face value of maturing debt F , which yields the following expression:

                     ∂ log L0                         wφ
                              =−                β−1
                                                                                 < 0.                    (15)
                       ∂F        βρ (1 − β) L 0     E[ez0 |z] + φ (1 − τ ) w2 L0

    This elasticity, which corresponds to our empirical estimates, is negative. More important,
this elasticity is informative about the parameter governing the financial friction: the
magnitude of equation (15) is monotonically increasing with φ. This fact is important,
because it allows us to recover the severity of the financial friction φ in the model from the
empirical estimates of equation (15).27

Model Simulation and Calibration

   We use the model to examine how much employment in 1933 would have been in the
absence of financial frictions (φ = 0). We first fix a set of parameters Θ = [κ, R, β, w, φ]. We
simulate a panel of firms that make a hiring decision during the crisis. We simulate firms for
  27
    The result that equation (15) is unambiguously increasing in φ may appear to be in contrast to the
result in Kaplan and Zingales (1997) and Hennessy and Whited (2007), which show that the relation between
the sensitivity of investment to cash flow and the parameters affecting the costs of external finance are
ambiguous. However, the difference results from the fact that we are focusing on the elasticity with respect
to maturing debt – as opposed to cash flows. In standard models, operating cash flows are correlated with
firm’s investment opportunities, which makes the sensitivity of investment to cashflows a non-monotone –
and in many cases decreasing – function of the severity of financial constraints. By contrast, maturing debt is
independent of the firm’s investment opportunities.



                                                     37
two periods, t = 0 and t = 1. Since the model has no capital, we scale the dollar amount
of bonds due and the number of employees in the data by book assets. We treat these as
equivalent to D and L in the model. We use the empirical joint distribution of bonds due D
and labor L to simulate N=50,000 firms. Hence, firms start with an exogenous level of D0
and L0 .
    We next use the observed cross-sectional dispersion in employment-to-assets in 1928 (L)
to infer an initial value of idiosyncratic productivity zi,−1 . Specifically, we assume that labor
was chosen before 1928 using equation (13) without any financial frictions, φ = 0. After
taking logs of equation (13), we obtain

                                                     β           1
                           (1 − β) log Li,0 = log      + κzi,−1 + σz2 .                      (16)
                                                    wR           2

Since N1 f zf,−1 = 0, we can obtain an estimate of implied productivity z under the null of
        P

the model using                                                   !
                                 1−β                1 X
                         zi,−1 =        log Li,0 −        log Li,0 .                     (17)
                                  κ                N i
                                                                     √
We use the empirical standard deviation of zf,−1 to set σ = σ(zf,−1 ) 1 − κ2 . We then obtain
z0 and z1 by simulating according to equation (9).
    We next simulate the firm’s labor choice during the crisis period taking the variables z0 ,
L0 , and D0 as given. Given the level of φ, we obtain the firm’s labor choice in the second
period L1 using equation (13). Given the firm’s labor choice, we then estimate the equivalent
of equation (2) in simulated data,

                     log Li,1 − log Li,0 = a + βDi,0 + ρ log Li,0 + c πi,0 + εi ,            (18)

where π0 is accounting profits in period 0, i.e., π0 = yi,0 − wLi,0 .




                                                 38
                                Table M.1: Calibration targets

                                                                     Model
         Moment                                    Data                       Great
                                                             A      AxB
                                                                             Recession

         Elasticity of labor to maturing debt
           Treatment A                        -1.164 -1.164    -                 -
           Treatment AxB                      -3.072    -   -3.072               -
           Great Recession                     -0.22    -      -               -0.22
         Median ROA, 1928                      0.071 0.070 0.071                 -
         IQR ROA, 1928                         0.085 0.087 0.086                 -
         Persistence in employment 1928–933    0.877 0.877 0.877                 -
         Median ROA, 2008                      0.065    -      -               0.055
         IQR ROA, 2008                         0.065    -      -               0.075
         Persistence in employment 2008–2009 0.945      -      -               0.945



    The last step involves calibrating the remaining parameters of the model. We choose a
real interest rate of 5%, which is equal to the average real interest rate during the 1929-1934
period. We set the corporate tax rate τ at 12 %, which is equal to the federal tax rate on
corporate income in 1928. We choose D̄ = 1, which ensures that the constraint is almost
never binding in our simulations. We choose the remaining parameters [κ, β, w, φ] to match
the following four moments in the data: (a) the estimated elasticity of employment change
to bonds due – the estimated coefficients β1 and β3 in equations (2)-(4) that includes the
full set of controls (corresponding to Column (10) in Tables 4-8); (b) the correlation in log
employment (scaled by assets) between 1928 and 1933; (c) the median level of profitability
(scaled by assets) in 1928; and (d) the interquartile dispersion in profitability in 1928; last,
we clear the labor market under the assumption φ = 0. The last assumption ensures that
aggregate employment would have remained constant between t = 0 and t = 1 in the absence
of financial frictions (φ = 0). This last condition determines the wage w so that it would
clear the market in the absence of frictions. Effectively, we are assuming that wages remained
constant in their pre-crisis, market clearing level. The estimated costs of external finance φ
imply that firms which choose to issue debt in 1928–1933 incurred additional costs that were
on average equal to 5.5% to 17% of their profits. The remaining parameters are largely in
line with typical parametrizations in the literature. To conserve space, we refer the reader to
Tables M.1 and M.2 show the calibration targets and parameters, respectively.




                                              39
                                   Table M.2: Parameters

                                                                 Value
              Parameter                      Symbol                     Great
                                                         A     AxB
                                                                       Recession

              Persistence of Firm Shock         κ      0.864   0.867     0.945
              Volatility of Firm Shock          σ      0.122   0.122     0.098
              Decreasing returns to scale       β      0.740   0.740     0.740
              Real interest rate                r      0.050   0.050     0.010
              Wage                              w      1.182   1.182     1.312
              Financing friction                φ      0.621   2.675     0.081
              Corporate tax rate                τ      0.120   0.120     0.350



Discussion and Caveats

    The estimates in Panel A.ii of Table 11 are based on fairly strong assumptions, so several
caveats are in order. In the interest of simplicity, our simple model abstracts from many
relevant features. An incomplete list includes: (a) there is no capital; (b) there are no fixed
costs of production; (c) our production function delivers a very tight link between current
cash flows – which depends on Z = exp(z) – and the return to hiring employees – which is
proportional to Z κ ; (d) there are no adjustment costs to labor; (e) wages in the model are
constant; and (f) the financing friction is transitory and lasts for only one period.
    Our intuition is that omitting some of these features likely leads us to obtain conservative
estimates. Specifically, allowing for investment in capital (a) may have an ambiguous impact
depending on the elasticity of substitution between capital and labor, but it could also
lead to larger magnitudes if investment in capital also needs to be financed externally. The
assumption of lack of fixed costs (b) is rather conservative; if firms needed to also finance
a fixed operating cost, then many of them would exit, which would magnify the drop in
employment in the model. Assumption (c) ameliorates the impact of the financing friction,
since it introduces a fairly strong correlation between cash flows from operations and hiring
needs. In alternative models in which firms received shocks to their investment opportunities
that were uncorrelated with their operating cash flows (e.g., Kogan and Papanikolaou, 2014),
the impact of financial frictions would likely be greater. Assumption (d) implies that hiring
in the model is fairly sensitive to both productivity and the financing cost. If adjusting labor
is costly, the model would need both a larger financing cost and a less persistent productivity
process to match the elasticity of labor to debt due and the persistence of employment; both
changes would likely lead to larger magnitudes. Our assumption of constant wages (e) may
appear especially strong, since it precludes general equilibrium effects that could dampen


                                              40
the fall in employment in the model. However, this assumption is consistent with the data:
between 1929 and 1933, wages actually increased in real terms by approximately 4%.
    Last, the assumption that the financing shock is transitory (f) also leads to conservative
estimates and is perhaps the most unrealistic. To evaluate the importance of this assumption,
we numerically solve and calibrate an extended version of the model where we allow firms to
borrow and save at a constant rate R; external borrowing is subject to a constant financing
cost φ; firms can borrow up to the value of their collateral (equal to D̄); if equity holders
default, debt holders seize the collateral. In this version of the model, firms anticipate that
the financing friction will exist permanently, which leads to more conservative hiring decisions.
We perform the same calibration exercise using the extended model. Depending on the
value of the elasticity of labor to maturing debt that we target, our estimates indicate that
removing the financing friction would increase the overall level of employment by 2.1% to
3.5%, depending on the value of the estimated elasticity that we target.

Comparison to the 2008–09 crisis

   When calibrating our model to the recent crisis, we choose a corporate tax rate of 35%
and a real interest rate of 1%. The remaining parameters are calibrated using the same
procedure as in Section 4.3 and are displayed in Table M.2.




                                               41
References
Agarwal, Sumit and Robert Hauswald. “Distance and Private Information in Lending.” Review of
  Financial Studies, 23(2010), 2757–2788.

Almeida, Heitor, Murillo Campello, Bruno Laranjeira, and Scott Weisbenner. “Corporate Debt
  Maturity and the Real Effects of the 2007 Credit Crisis.” Critical Finance Review, 1(2011), 3–58.

Alston, Lee J., Wayne A. Grove, and David C. Wheelock. “Why Do Banks Fail? Evidence from the
  1920s.” Explorations in Economic History, 31(1994), 409 – 431.

Atack, J. and P. Passell. A New Economic View of American History: From Colonial Times to
  1940. Norton (1994).

Becker, Bo and Victoria Ivashina. “Cyclicality of credit supply: Firm level evidence.” Journal of
  Monetary Economics, 62(2014), 76–93.

Benmelech, Efraim and Nittai K. Bergman. “Financial Market Freezes.” Working paper, Northwes-
  tern University (2016).

Benmelech, Efraim, Nittai K. Bergman, and Amit Seru. “Financing Labor.” Working Paper 17144,
  National Bureau of Economic Research (2011).

Bernanke, Ben S. “Nonmonetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in the Propagation of the Great
  Depression.” The American Economic Review, 73(1983), 257–276.

Bernanke, Ben S. and Mark Gertler. “Inside the Black Box: The Credit Channel of Monetary Policy
  Transmission.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 9(1995), 27–48.

Calomiris, Charles W. “Financial factors in the Great Depression.” Journal of Economic Perspectives,
  7(1993), 61–85.

———. U.S. Bank Deregulation in Historical Perspective. Cambridge Books. Cambridge University
 Press (2000).

Calomiris, Charles W. and Joseph R. Mason. “Fundamentals, Panics, and Bank Distress During
  the Depression.” American Economic Review, 93(2003), 1615–1647.

Calomiris, Charles W., Athanasios Orphanides, and Steven A. Sharpe. “Leverage as a State Variable
  for Employment, Inventory Accumulation, andFixed Investment.” NBER Working Papers 4800,
  National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc (1994).

Chodorow-Reich, Gabriel. “The Employment Effects of Credit Market Disruptions: Firm-level
  Evidence from the 2008-09 Financial Crisis.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(2014), 1–59.
  Lead article.

Cole, Harold L. and Lee E. Ohanian. “A second look at the U.S. Great Depression from a neoclassical
  perspective.” In “Great depressions of the twentieth century. Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis,”
  21–58.

Duygan-Bump, Burcu, Alexey Levkov, and Judit Montoriol-Garriga. “Financing constraints and
  unemployment: Evidence from the Great Recession.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 75(2015),
  89–105.

Eichengreen, B. Hall of Mirrors: The Great Depression, the Great Recession, and the Uses-and
  Misuses-of History. Oxford University Press (2014).

                                                42
Eichengreen, Barry. “The Origins and Nature of the Great Slump Revisited.” Economic History
  Review, XLV(1992), 213–239.

Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French. “Industry costs of equity.” Journal of Financial Economics,
  43(1997), 153 – 193.

Fishback, Price V., Werner Troesken, Trevor Kollmann, Michael Haines, Paul W. Rhode, and
  Melissa Thomasson. Information and the Impact of Climate and Weather on Mortality Rates
  During the Great Depression. University of Chicago Press (2011). 131–167.

Friedman, M. and A.J. Schwartz. A Monetary History of the United States, 1867-1960. National
  Bureau of Economic Research Publications. Princeton University Press (1963).

Graham, John R., Sonali Hazarika, and Krishnamoorthy Narasimhan. “Financial Distress in the
  Great Depression.” Financial Management, 40(2011), 821–844.

Graham, John R., Mark T. Leary, and Michael R. Roberts. “A century of capital structure: The
  leveraging of corporate America.” Journal of Financial Economics, 118(2015), 658 – 683. NBER
  Symposium on New perspectives on corporate capital structures.

Greenwald, Bruce and Joseph E. Stiglitz. “Pareto Inefficiency of Market Economies: Search and
  Efficiency Wage Models.” The American Economic Review, 78(1988), 351–355.

Hennessy, Christopher A. and Toni M. Whited. “How Costly Is External Financing? Evidence from
  a Structural Estimation.” The Journal of Finance, 62(2007), 1705–1745.

Hickman, W. Braddock. Statistical Measures of Corporate Bond Financing Since 1900. Number
  hick60-1 in NBER Books. National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc (1960).

Hughes, J.R.T. and L.P. Cain. American Economic History. Addison-Wesley series in economics.
  Pearson Addison-Wesley (2011).

Hunter, Helen M. “The Role of Business Liquidity During the Great Depression and Afterwards:
  Differences Between Large and Small Firms.” The Journal of Economic History, 42(1982),
  883–902.

Jacoby, Neil H. and Raymond J. Saulnier. Business Finance and Banking. NBER (1947).

Kaplan, Steven N. and Luigi Zingales. “Do Investment-Cash Flow Sensitivities Provide Useful
  Measures of Financing Constraints?” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(1997), 169–215.

Khwaja, Asim Ijaz and Atif Mian. “Tracing the Impact of Bank Liquidity Shocks: Evidence from
  an Emerging Market.” American Economic Review, 98(2008), 1413–42.

Klug, Adam, John S. Landon-Lane, and Eugene N. White. “How could everyone have been so
  wrong? Forecasting the Great Depression with the railroads.” Explorations in Economic History,
  42(2005), 27–55.

Kogan, Leonid and Dimitris Papanikolaou. “Growth Opportunities, Technology Shocks, and Asset
  Prices.” Journal of Finance, 69(2014).

Lee, James and Filippo Mezzanotti. “Bank Distress and Manufacturing: Evidence from the Great
  Depression.” Working paper, Harvard University (2015).

Lutz, F.A. Corporate cash balances, 1914-43: manufacturing and trade. Studies in business financing.
  National Bureau of Economic Research (1945).

                                                43
Margo, Robert A. “Employment and Unemployment in the 1930s.” Journal of Economic Perspectives,
 7(1993), 41–59.

Michaels, Ryan, Beau Page, and Toni Whited. “Labor and Capital Dynamics under Financing
 Frictions,.” Working paper, University of Michigan (2014).

Mladjan, Mrdjan M. “Accelerating into the Abyss: Financial Dependence and the Great Depression.”
 Working paper, EBS Business School (2016).

Pagano, Marco and Giovanni Pica. “Finance and Employment.” Economic Policy, 27(2012), 5–55.

Petersen, Mitchell A. and Raghuram G. Rajan. “Does Distance Still Matter? The Information
  Revolution in Small Business Lending.” Journal of Finance, 57(2002), 2533–2570.

Philippon, Thomas. “Has the US Finance Industry Become Less Efficient? On the Theory and
  Measurement of Financial Intermediation.” American Economic Review, 105(2015), 1408–38.

Rauh, Joshua D. and Amir Sufi. “Capital Structure and Debt Structure.” Review of Financial
  Studies, 23(2010), 4242–4280.

Richardson, Gary. “Categories and causes of bank distress during the great depression, 1929-1933:
  The illiquidity versus insolvency debate revisited.” Explorations in Economic History, 44(2007),
  588–607.

Richardson, Gary and William Troost. “Monetary Intervention Mitigated Banking Panics during
  the Great Depression: Quasi-Experimental Evidence from a Federal Reserve District Border,
  1929–1933.” Journal of Political Economy, 117(2009), 1031–1073.

Romer, Christina D. “The Great Crash and the Onset of the Great Depression.” The Quarterly
 Journal of Economics, 105(1990), 597–624.

Romer, Christina D. “The Nation in Depression.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 7(1993),
  19–39.

Rosenbloom, Joshua L. and William A. Sundstrom. “The Sources of Regional Variation in the
  Severity of the Great Depression: Evidence from U.S. Manufacturing, 19191937.” The Journal of
  Economic History, 59(1999), 714–747.

Schnabl, Philipp. “The International Transmission of Bank Liquidity Shocks: Evidence from an
  Emerging Market.” The Journal of Finance, 67(2012), 897–932.

Sharpe, Steven A. “Financial Market Imperfections, Firm Leverage, and the Cyclicality of Employ-
  ment.” American Economic Review, 84(1994), 1060–74.

Temin, Peter. Did Monetary Forces Cause the Great Depression? W. W. Norton (1976).

———. The Cambridge Economic History of the United States, chapter The Great Depression.
 Cambridge University Press (2000). 301–328.

Wheelock, David C. “Regulation, market structure and the bank failures of the Great Depression.”
 Federal Reserve Bank of St Louis Review, 77(1995).

White, Eugene Nelson. “A Reinterpretation of the Banking Crisis of 1930.” The Journal of Economic
 History, 44(1984), 119–138.

Ziebarth, Nicolas L. “Identifying the Effects of Bank Failures from a Natural Experiment in
  Mississippi during the Great Depression.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 5(2013),
  81–101.

                                               44
Tables and Figures

                                                          Figure 1: Comparison of the Great Depression and the Great Recession

                                                                    A. Output                                                                         B. Employment
                                                Great Depression (solid) vs Great Recession (dotted)                                Great Depression (solid) vs Great Recession (dotted)

                                                0.2                                                                                 25
  Real Output (Log deviation from pre-crisis)




                                                0.1
                                                                                                                                    20




                                                                                                            Unemployment Rate (%)
                                                 0
                                                                                                                                    15

                                       −0.1

                                                                                                                                    10
                                       −0.2

                                                                                                                                     5
                                       −0.3


                                       −0.4                                                                                          0
                                                      0    2        4       6        8       10        12                                0     2        4       6        8       10        12
                                                                          years                                                                               years


Source: Output is real GDP in chained dollars, obtained from NIPA Table 1.1.6, row 1. The modern series
for unemployment is from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. The historical unemployment data are obtained
from Margo (1993) and are based on Lebergott’s series, which counts persons on work relief as unemployed.
To compare across both events, we define the pre-crisis period, or year zero, as 1929 for the Great Depression
and 2007 for the Great Recession. In each figure, the dotted line presents data for the Great Recession, and
the solid line presents data for the Great Depression.




                                                                                                       45
                              Figure 2: Value of new offerings of industrial bonds

                   1,400


                   1,200


                   1,000


                        800
                 USDm




                        600


                        400


                        200


                         0
                              1920 1922 1924 1926 1928 1930 1932 1934 1936 1938 1940
                                                       year

The figure plots the par value of new offerings of corporate bonds of all industrial firms from 1920 to 1940 (in
millions of current dollars), as reported in Table 52 (Hickman, 1960).




                                                      46
Figure 3: Employment change across regions: comparing Moody’s with the Census of Manufacturers

                                          A. Drop in employment                                                                B. Number of firms/establishments
                          0.1                                                                                     6
                                                                                                                                                                         MA
                                                                                                                                                                   ENC
                         0.05                                             SA
                                                                                                                 5.5

                           0                                                                                                                           NE




                                                                                    firms in sample, 1933, log
                                                                                                                  5
 our sample, 1928-1933




                                                                         NE
        −0.05
                                                                                                                 4.5                              SA
                                                            WSC
                   −0.1                                                                                                                           WNC
                                                           MA
                                       MT                                                                         4                               PA
        −0.15                                               ENC WNC

                                                                                                                 3.5
                   −0.2                                  PA
                                                                                                                                    ESC WSC
        −0.25                                                                                                     3       MT
                                   ESC
                   −0.3                                                                                          2.5
                      −0.8      −0.7    −0.6    −0.5     −0.4     −0.3   −0.2                                       7.5   8    8.5      9       9.5    10      10.5       11
                                       manufacturing, 1929-1933, log                                                      manufacturing establishments, 1933, log


Panel A relates the aggregate change in employment from 1928 to 1933 in our sample of 1,010 firms (displayed
on the y-axis) to the aggregate change in employment observed in data from the Census of Manufactures from
1929 to 1933 (displayed on the x-axis), across census regions. The contraction in employment in manufacturing
is obtained from Table 7 of Rosenbloom and Sundstrom (1999), and it is based on all establishments for 20
selected manufacturing industries. Panel B compares the geographic distribution of the firms in our sample
(displayed on the y-axis) with the location of manufacturing establishments in 1933 (displayed on the x-axis).
The location in our data is based on the state for the primary address of the firm. Data on the number
of manufacturing establishments in each region is constructed from the variable “mfgest” available in the
dataset created by Fishback, Troesken, Kollmann, Haines, Rhode, and Thomasson (2011).




                                                                               47
                                                                      Table 1: Summary statistics

                                                                                           N   Mean      SD      p5     p10     p25     p50    p75     p90     p95
            Employment, log, change (1928-1933)                                         1010   -0.24 0.60 -1.32 -0.98 -0.52 -0.18 0.12 0.44 0.66
            Employment, log, 1928                                                       1010    6.72 1.33 4.58 5.14 5.91 6.74 7.60 8.39 8.88
            Employment, log, 1933                                                       1010    6.48 1.46 4.09 4.64 5.54 6.55 7.39 8.28 8.84
            Profitability, 1928                                                          824    0.09 0.07 -0.01 0.01 0.04 0.07 0.12 0.19 0.26
            Profitability, 1933                                                          843    0.01 0.07 -0.13 -0.08 -0.03 0.01 0.05 0.09 0.12
            Book assets, log, 1928                                                      1010   15.57 1.19 13.79 14.12 14.70 15.50 16.34 17.15 17.78
            Book assets, log, 1933                                                      1010   15.35 1.26 13.46 13.78 14.42 15.23 16.10 17.03 17.76
            Leverage, 1928                                                              1010    0.13 0.14 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.07 0.22 0.35 0.41
            Leverage, bonds only, 1928                                                  1010    0.08 0.13 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.16 0.29 0.35
            Leverage, 1933                                                              1010    0.12 0.15 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.05 0.19 0.34 0.45
            Leverage, bonds only, 1933                                                  1010    0.08 0.14 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.14 0.29 0.40
            Firm age, 1933                                                              1007   21.91 14.69    5     6     9    19    31    42    51




48
            Bonds due (1930-34)                                                         1010    0.01 0.04     0     0     0     0     0 0.04 0.09
            Number of suspended national banks (1929–1933)                              1010    5.83 9.12     0     0     0     2     8    20    34
            Fraction of suspended national banks (1929–1933)                            1010    0.22 0.22     0     0     0 0.14 0.33 0.55 0.67
            Fraction of suspended national banks, deposit-weighted (1929–1933)          1010    0.16 0.44     0     0     0 0.02 0.09 0.43 0.63


     Employment is number of employees in either 1928 or 1933; profitability is the ratio of net income to the book value of assets in each year; leverage is the ratio of
     the book value of interest-bearing debt to the book value of assets in each year; bonds-only leverage considers only the value of long-term debt, typically listed as
     bonded and funded debt, and mortgages; firm age is the years since the firm’s year of incorporation; bonds due is the total value of bonds that matured between
     January 1930 and December 1934, scaled by the average of book assets between 1928 and 1933. The data on suspended national banks comes from ICPSR. The
     fraction of suspended national banks between 1929 and 1933 in each city uses the number of national banks in 1928 as the denominator; similarly, the fraction of
     deposits in national banks that failed in 1929-1933 uses the total amount of deposits in national banks as of 1928 as the denominator. The sample is based on the
     1,010 firms that matched across years, and that have non-missing information on employment and book assets in 1928 and 1933.
                         Table 2: Employment change and firm characteristics

 log E1933 − log E1928     (1)        (2)         (3)           (4)        (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)

 Leverage1928            -0.356∗∗   -0.440∗∗∗   -0.454∗∗∗   -0.466∗∗∗    -0.521∗∗∗   -0.515∗∗    -0.315∗     -0.350∗∗
                         (0.170)     (0.151)     (0.162)     (0.158)      (0.174)    (0.192)     (0.167)     (0.161)
 log E1928                                                    -0.038∗∗   -0.145∗∗∗   -0.146∗∗∗   -0.190∗∗∗   -0.187∗∗∗
                                                              (0.016)     (0.037)     (0.041)     (0.048)     (0.046)
 log Assets1928                                                          0.137∗∗∗    0.131∗∗∗    0.177∗∗∗    0.174∗∗∗
                                                                         (0.037)     (0.040)     (0.048)     (0.048)
 Profitability1928                                                                               1.835∗∗∗    1.729∗∗∗
                                                                                                 (0.461)     (0.415)
 log Age                                                                                                      -0.041
                                                                                                             (0.041)

 Observations             1010       1010        1010          1010       1010        1010         824         821
 R2                       0.007      0.136       0.175         0.180      0.201       0.250       0.317       0.317

 Fixed effects              -          S          S, I          S, I       S, I       S, IxR      S, IxR      S, IxR


The table reports the coefficients from regressions relating of the change in log employment (measured by the
number of employees reported in Moody’s) between 1928 and 1933 on the firm’s leverage ratio in 1928. Across
the columns, controls include the log level of employment in 1928, log book assets in 1928, firm profitability
in 1928 and 1933, and log firm age. Columns (2) to (8) include state fixed effects, Columns (3) to (5) include
industry fixed effects, and Columns (6) to (8) include industry-region fixed effects, where regions are classified
according the US Census definition (4 regions). Firms are classified into 30 industries following Fama and
French (1997). Robust standard errors clustered at the industry level are presented in parentheses; ***,**,
and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.




                                                         49
                                         Table 3: Comparison on observables for firms with and without maturing debt

                                                                                Bonds due = 0           Bonds due > 0          Difference (p-value)
                                                                                Mean Median             Mean     Median        Mean           Median
                                                                                  (1)   (2)              (3)        (4)         (5)              (6)
                   Panel A. All firms
                   Employment, log, 1928                                          6.73       6.80        6.67        6.54        0.59             0.09
                   Profitability, 1928                                            0.09       0.08        0.07        0.06        0.01             0.05
                   Book assets, log, 1928                                        15.56      15.50       15.63       15.50        0.55             0.91
                   Leverage,1928                                                  0.11       0.05        0.22        0.22        0.01             0.01
                   Firm age, log                                                  2.83       2.94        2.93        3.00        0.09             0.63
                   Firms                                                           862                    148




50
                   Panel B. Firms with non-zero leverage in 1928
                   Employment, log, 1928                                          6.79       6.86        6.63        6.51        0.19             0.09
                   Profitability, 1928                                            0.07       0.06        0.07        0.06        0.93             0.34
                   Book assets, log, 1928                                        15.64      15.59       15.62       15.44        0.83             0.27
                   Leverage,1928                                                  0.17       0.13        0.23        0.22        0.00             0.00
                   Firm age, log                                                  2.83       2.94        2.91        2.89        0.22             0.62
                   Number of firms                                                 559                    139

     Panel A is based on the baseline sample of firms that can be matched across years and that report employment and book assets in both 1928 and 1933. In Panel
     B, we further restrict the sample to firms with non-zero leverage in 1928. Columns (1) and (2) present the mean and median values of the observable variables for
     those firms that had no bonds mature from 1930 to 1934. Columns (3) and (4) present the mean and median values for the firms that had bonds mature over that
     period. Column (5) reports the p-value for the difference the means presented in Columns (1) and (3). The p-values for the difference in the medians reported
     in Columns (2) and (4) are obtained from a quantile regression on a treatment dummy for a positive amount of bonds due, and are presented in Column (6).
     Number of firms is based on those with information on assets.
                             Table 4: The effect of maturing debt on employment

 log E1933 − log E1928     (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)        (5)        (6)         (7)         (8)         (9)         (10)

 BondsDue1930−34         -1.418∗∗   -1.235∗∗   -1.496∗∗∗   -1.114∗∗   -1.156∗∗   -1.193∗∗    -1.175∗∗    -1.175∗     -1.256∗     -1.164∗
                         (0.587)    (0.510)     (0.447)    (0.429)    (0.445)    (0.430)     (0.490)     (0.611)     (0.614)     (0.586)
 Leverage1928                                              -0.386∗∗   -0.396∗∗   -0.449∗∗    -0.446∗∗     -0.265      -0.154      -0.200
                                                           (0.157)    (0.153)    (0.171)     (0.189)     (0.174)     (0.174)     (0.167)
 log E1928                                                            -0.039∗∗   -0.146∗∗∗   -0.149∗∗∗   -0.194∗∗∗   -0.166∗∗∗   -0.162∗∗∗
                                                                      (0.017)     (0.037)     (0.041)     (0.047)     (0.049)     (0.048)
 log Assets1928                                                                  0.138∗∗∗    0.133∗∗∗    0.180∗∗∗    0.136∗∗     0.132∗∗
                                                                                 (0.037)     (0.041)     (0.048)     (0.051)     (0.051)
 Profitability1928                                                                                       1.793∗∗∗    1.140∗∗     1.019∗∗
                                                                                                         (0.452)     (0.463)     (0.425)
 Profitability1933                                                                                                   2.696∗∗∗    2.700∗∗∗
                                                                                                                     (0.431)     (0.431)
 log Age                                                                                                                          -0.052
                                                                                                                                 (0.031)

 Observations             1010       1010       1010        1010       1010       1010        1010         824         788         785
 R2                       0.007      0.131      0.171       0.178      0.184      0.205       0.254       0.320       0.400       0.402
 Fixed effects              -          S         S, I        S, I       S, I       S, I       S, IxR      S, IxR      S, IxR      S, IxR


The table reports the coefficients regressions of the change in log employment (number of employees) between
1928 to 1933, on BondsDue, measured by the total dollar amount of bonds that became due from 1930
to 1934 scaled by the average of the firm’s book assets between 1928 and 1933. As indicated, different
specifications control for leverage in 1928, log employment in 1928 (log E1928 ), log book assets in 1928, firm
profitability in 1928 and in 1933, and log firm age (measured in 1933). Columns (2) to (10) include state fixed
effects, Columns (3) to (6) include industry fixed effects, and Columns (7) to (10) include industry-region
fixed effects, where regions are classified according the US Census definition (4 regions). Firms are classified
into 30 industries following Fama and French (1997). Robust standard errors clustered at the industry level
are presented in parentheses; ***,**, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.




                                                                51
                                             Table 5: Pre-crisis changes in observables, by the level of maturing debt

                                                                 Bonds due = 0                  Bonds due > 0              Difference (p-value)
                                                              N     Mean     Median          N Mean         Median         Mean          Median
                                                             (1)     (2)        (3)         (4) (5)            (6)           (7)            (8)
                         A. Change, 1927–1928
                         Employment, log, change             536    0.061       0.000       102    0.069       0.000        0.70             1.00
                         Profitability, change               615    0.009       0.002       110    0.011       0.006        0.70             0.22
                         Book assets, log, change            763    0.053       0.025       136    0.059       0.025        0.68             0.97
                         Leverage, change                    763    0.005       0.000       136    0.005      -0.007        0.97             0.15
                         B. Change, 1925–1928
                         Employment, log, change             138 0.090          0.000        20    0.073       0.000        0.87             1.00




52
                         Profitability, change               409 -0.006         0.000        81    0.009       0.008        0.05             0.13
                         Book assets, log, change            555 0.095          0.056        99    0.105       0.068        0.74             0.69
                         Leverage, change                    522 0.000          0.000        97    0.007      -0.011        0.63             0.54

     Based on the sample of firms with non-missing observations for employment and book assets in both 1928 and 1933 that match across years. Panel A presents
     the change in observable characteristics between 1927 and 1928 for the set of these firms that also report information in 1927. Panel B presents the change in
     observable characteristics between 1925 and 1928 for the set of these firms that report similar information in 1925. For each variable, Columns (1) to (3) present
     the number of observations, mean, and median values for those firms that had no bonds mature from 1930 to 1934, and Columns (4) to (6) present the number
     of observations, mean, and median values for the firms that had bonds mature over that period. Column (7) reports the p-value for the difference the means
     presented in Columns (2) and (5). The p-values for the difference in the medians reported in Columns (3) and (6) are obtained from a quantile regression on a
     treatment dummy for a positive amount of bonds due, and are presented in Column (8).
                                Table 6: The effect of bank failures on employment

 log E1933 − log E1928     (1)       (2)      (3)       (4)           (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)         (9)         (10)

 BankFail                 -0.055    -0.060 -0.091∗∗   -0.088∗∗      -0.088∗∗    -0.086∗     -0.107∗∗    -0.116∗      -0.044      -0.052
                         (0.049)   (0.037) (0.040)    (0.042)       (0.043)     (0.042)     (0.039)     (0.061)     (0.052)     (0.053)
 Leverage1928                                         -0.441∗∗∗     -0.452∗∗∗   -0.506∗∗∗   -0.501∗∗    -0.298∗      -0.200      -0.239
                                                       (0.158)       (0.155)     (0.170)    (0.187)     (0.163)     (0.164)     (0.160)
 log E1928                                                          -0.036∗∗    -0.141∗∗∗   -0.142∗∗∗   -0.185∗∗∗   -0.159∗∗∗   -0.155∗∗∗
                                                                    (0.016)      (0.037)     (0.041)     (0.047)     (0.048)     (0.047)
 log Assets1928                                                                 0.135∗∗∗    0.129∗∗∗    0.173∗∗∗    0.131∗∗     0.127∗∗
                                                                                (0.037)     (0.041)     (0.048)     (0.050)     (0.050)
 Profitability1928                                                                                      1.794∗∗∗    1.120∗∗     1.014∗∗
                                                                                                        (0.437)     (0.449)     (0.412)
 Profitability1933                                                                                                  2.710∗∗∗    2.707∗∗∗
                                                                                                                    (0.434)     (0.434)
 log Age                                                                                                                         -0.047
                                                                                                                                (0.032)

 Observations            1010       1010    1010       1010          1010        1010        1010         824         788         785
 R2                      0.002      0.129   0.168      0.178         0.183       0.203       0.253       0.321       0.398       0.400

 Fixed effects              -        S       S, I       S, I          S, I        S, I       S, IxR      S, IxR      S, IxR      S, IxR


The table reports the coefficients from regressions of the change in log employment (number of employees)
from 1928 to 1933 on BankF ail, an indicator variable that takes the value of one if at least one national
bank suspended between 1929 and 1933 in the county in which the firm was located, and zero otherwise.
As indicated, different specifications control for leverage in 1928, log employment in 1928 (log E1928 ) , log
book assets in 1928, firm profitability in 1928 and in 1933, and log firm age (measured in 1933). Columns
(2) to (10) include state fixed effects, Columns (3) to (6) include industry fixed effects, and Columns (7) to
(10) include industry-region fixed effects, where regions are classified according the US Census definition (4
regions). Firms are classified into 30 industries following Fama and French (1997). Robust standard errors
clustered at the industry level are presented in parentheses; ***,**, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%,
and 10% levels, respectively.




                                                               53
                                            Table 7: Comparison of observables, by maturing debt and bank failures

                                                                            No banks failed                           Banks failed
                                                                                                                                                    Difference
                                                                  Bonds due = 0       Bonds due > 0       Bonds due = 0       Bonds due > 0         (p-value)
                                                                  Mean     Median     Mean     Median      Mean Median         Mean Median         Mean Median
                                                                   (1)        (2)      (3)        (4)       (5)    (6)           (7)   (8)           (9)  (10)
         Panel A. Firm characteristics in 1928
         Employment, log, 1928                                     6.659    6.685      6.548    6.501      6.768    6.802      6.725       6.569    0.43     0.83
         Profitability, 1928                                       0.084    0.066      0.083    0.071      0.093    0.080      0.065       0.062    0.15     0.22
         Book Assets, log, 1928                                   15.434   15.354     15.568   15.307     15.619   15.579     15.652      15.550    0.71     0.47
         Leverage,1928                                             0.095    0.035      0.216    0.210      0.120    0.059      0.218       0.218    0.95     0.97
         Firm Age, log                                             2.888    3.045      2.867    2.740      2.790    2.890      2.955       3.091    0.46     0.11
         Bonds Due, 1930-34                                            -        -      0.078    0.058          -        -      0.075       0.062    0.83     0.73
         Number of firms                                            279                   44                 583                 104




54
         Panel B. Pre-crisis trends: change from 1927 to 1928
         Employment, log                                           0.064    0.000      0.042     0.000     0.059    0.000      0.078       0.000    0.32        -
         Profitability                                             0.004    0.001      0.007     0.013     0.011    0.004      0.013       0.006    0.62     0.42
         Book Assets, log                                          0.043    0.020      0.064     0.030     0.058    0.028      0.057       0.024    0.79     0.78
         Leverage                                                  0.001    0.000     -0.009    -0.007     0.006    0.000      0.010      -0.008    0.12     0.87

         Number of firms                                            246                   41                 517                     96


     Based on the sample of firms with non-missing observations for employment and book assets in both 1928 and 1933 that match across years. Panel A presents
     summary statistics in 1928. Panel B shows the change in observable characteristics between 1927 and 1928 for the set of these firms that also report information
     in 1927. Columns (1) and (2) are based on the firms located in areas where no national bank suspended from 1929 to 1933, and that had no bonds maturing from
     1930 to 1934; Columns (3) and (4) are based on the firms located in areas where no national bank suspended from 1929 to 1933, and that had bonds maturing
     from 1930 to 1934; Columns (5) and (6) are based on the firms located in areas where at least one national bank suspended from 1929 to 1933, and that had no
     bonds maturing from 1930 to 1934; Columns (7) and (8) are based on the firms located in areas where at least national bank suspended from 1929 to 1933, and
     that had bonds maturing from 1930 to 1934. For each variable, Columns (1), (3), (5) and (7) report mean values in each respective sample, and Columns (2), (4),
     (6) and (8) report median values. Column (9) reports the p-value for the difference the means presented in Columns (3) and (7). The p-values for the difference
     in the medians reported in Columns (4) and (8) are obtained from a quantile regression on a treatment dummy for a positive amount of bonds due, and are
     presented in Column (10). Number of firms is based on those with information on assets.
                  Table 8: The effects of maturing debt and bank failures on employment

 log E1933 − log E1928          (1)         (2)         (3)            (4)      (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)         (9)         (10)

 BankFail                      -0.021      -0.028      -0.057       -0.053     -0.053      -0.051      -0.068      -0.081      -0.006      -0.015
                              (0.054)     (0.039)     (0.044)      (0.046)    (0.046)     (0.046)     (0.044)     (0.070)     (0.054)     (0.054)
 BondsDue1930−34               0.642       0.749       0.434        0.897      0.873       0.898       1.034       0.741       0.956       0.972
                              (0.889)     (0.699)     (0.711)      (0.714)    (0.710)     (0.643)     (0.749)     (0.842)     (0.815)     (0.780)
 BankFail × BondsDue1930−34   -3.001∗∗∗   -2.895∗∗∗   -2.783∗∗∗   -2.897∗∗∗   -2.921∗∗∗   -3.011∗∗∗   -3.126∗∗∗   -2.673∗∗    -3.158∗∗∗   -3.072∗∗∗
                               (0.959)     (0.824)     (0.849)     (0.815)     (0.787)     (0.731)     (0.826)    (0.995)      (1.026)     (0.983)
 Leverage1928                                                     -0.386∗∗    -0.395∗∗    -0.448∗∗    -0.449∗∗     -0.262      -0.163      -0.200
                                                                  (0.160)     (0.157)     (0.175)     (0.191)     (0.175)     (0.176)     (0.171)
 log E1928                                                                    -0.038∗∗    -0.144∗∗∗   -0.147∗∗∗   -0.189∗∗∗   -0.162∗∗∗   -0.159∗∗∗
                                                                              (0.017)      (0.037)     (0.041)     (0.046)     (0.047)     (0.046)
 log Assets1928                                                                           0.137∗∗∗    0.132∗∗∗    0.175∗∗∗    0.134∗∗∗    0.129∗∗
                                                                                          (0.036)     (0.039)     (0.047)     (0.048)     (0.048)
 Profitability1928                                                                                                1.704∗∗∗    1.023∗∗     0.938∗∗
                                                                                                                  (0.433)     (0.442)     (0.404)
 Profitability1933                                                                                                            2.713∗∗∗    2.712∗∗∗
                                                                                                                              (0.420)     (0.421)
 log Age                                                                                                                                   -0.037
                                                                                                                                          (0.033)

 Observations                  1010        1010        1010        1010        1010        1010         1010        824         788         785
 R2                            0.016       0.140       0.180       0.187       0.193       0.213       0.263       0.328       0.407       0.408
 Fixed effects                   -           S          S, I        S, I        S, I        S, I       S, IxR      S, IxR      S, IxR      S, IxR


This table reports the coefficients from regressions of the change in log employment (number of employees)
from 1928 to 1933 on BankF ail, BondsDue, and their interaction. BankF ail is an indicator variable that
takes the value of one if at least one national bank suspended between 1929 and 1933 in the county in which
the firm was located, and zero otherwise. BondsDue is the total dollar amount of bonds that became due
from 1930 to 1934, measured as a fraction of the firm’s average of book assets between 1928 and 1933. As
indicated in the table, different specifications control for leverage in 1928, log employment in 1928 (log E1928 ) ,
log book assets in 1928, firm profitability in 1928 and in 1933, and log firm age (measured in 1933). Columns
(2) to (10) include state fixed effects, Columns (3) to (6) include industry fixed effects, and Columns (7) to
(10) include industry-region fixed effects, where regions are classified according the US Census definition (4
regions). Firms are classified into 30 industries following Fama and French (1997). Robust standard errors
clustered at the industry level are presented in parentheses; ***,**, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%,
and 10% levels, respectively.




                                                                  55
                                        Table 9: Robustness: discrete treatment (maturing debt greater than x% of assets)

                log E1933 − log E1928                      (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)        (9)       (10)

                BankFail × 1(BondsDue1930−34 ≥ 0)       -0.249∗∗∗   -0.218∗∗∗   -0.208∗∗∗   -0.217∗∗∗   -0.212∗∗∗   -0.203∗∗∗   -0.243∗∗∗   -0.195∗∗   -0.220∗∗   -0.222∗∗
                                                         (0.087)     (0.070)     (0.070)     (0.071)     (0.069)     (0.070)     (0.072)    (0.095)    (0.096)    (0.093)
                R2                                        0.011      0.135       0.174       0.182       0.187       0.207       0.258       0.325      0.403      0.404

                BankFail × 1(BondsDue1930−34 ≥ 5%)       -0.268∗∗   -0.264∗∗∗   -0.237∗∗    -0.253∗∗∗   -0.260∗∗∗   -0.275∗∗∗   -0.291∗∗∗   -0.261∗    -0.329∗∗   -0.322∗∗
                                                         (0.110)     (0.093)    (0.090)      (0.091)     (0.088)     (0.083)     (0.091)    (0.133)    (0.134)    (0.122)
                R2                                        0.010      0.135       0.174       0.182       0.188       0.208       0.258       0.325      0.403      0.404

                BankFail × 1(BondsDue1930−34 ≥ 10%)     -0.496∗∗∗   -0.436∗∗∗   -0.432∗∗    -0.457∗∗    -0.458∗∗    -0.496∗∗∗   -0.508∗∗∗   -0.449∗∗   -0.574∗∗   -0.549∗∗
                                                         (0.154)     (0.155)    (0.183)     (0.175)     (0.173)      (0.156)     (0.179)    (0.195)    (0.213)    (0.208)
                R2                                        0.012      0.136       0.176       0.185       0.190       0.212       0.261       0.327      0.406      0.408

                Observations                              1010        1010        1010        1010        1010        1010        1010        824        788        785

                Leverage, 1928                                                                 Y           Y           Y           Y           Y          Y          Y




56
                Employment, 1928                                                                           Y           Y           Y           Y          Y          Y
                Book assets, 1928                                                                                      Y           Y           Y          Y          Y
                Profitability, 1928                                                                                                            Y          Y          Y
                Profitability, 1933                                                                                                                       Y          Y
                Firm age                                                                                                                                             Y
                Fixed effects                               -          S          S, I        S, I        S, I        S, I       S, IxR     S, IxR     S, IxR     S, IxR


     This table reports robustness checks to the baseline results presented in Table 8, which evaluates the effect of bonds maturing in areas that experienced bank
     failures on the change in employment between 1928 and 1933, by using discrete treatment definitions of maturing bonds. To facilitate comparisons, the controls
     included in each column are the same as in Table 8. BankF ail is an indicator variable that takes the value of one if at least one national bank suspended between
     1929 and 1933 in the county in which the firm was located, and zero otherwise. BondsDue is an indicator variable that takes the value of 1 if the total dollar
     amount of bonds that became due from 1930 to 1934 (as a fraction of the firm’s average book assets between 1928 and 1933) exceeds a threshold x%, where
     x = 0, 5, 10]. Separate regressions are estimated for each threshold. As indicated, different specifications control for leverage in 1928, log employment in 1928
     (log E1928 ) , log book assets in 1928, firm profitability in 1928 and in 1933, and log firm age (measured in 1933). Columns (2) to (10) include state fixed effects,
     Columns (3) to (6) include industry fixed effects, and Columns (7) to (10) include industry-region fixed effects, where regions are classified according the US
     Census definition (4 regions). Firms are classified into 30 industries following Fama and French (1997). Robust standard errors clustered at the industry level are
     presented in parentheses; ***,**, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
                                                  Table 10: Robustness: alternative measures of maturing debt and bank failures

                     log E1933 − log E1928                                            (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)        (9)         (10)

                     A. Only include bonds issued before January 1, 1929
                     BankFail × BondsDue1930−34                                     -2.964∗∗    -2.825∗∗    -2.330∗    -2.562∗∗    -2.488∗∗    -2.774∗∗    -2.901∗∗    -2.647∗    -2.952∗     -2.955∗
                                                                                    (1.230)     (1.176)     (1.220)    (1.174)     (1.134)     (1.036)     (1.204)     (1.427)    (1.498)     (1.476)

                     B. Exclude bonds maturing in 1934
                     BankFail × BondsDue1930−33                                     -3.289∗∗∗   -3.180∗∗∗   -2.908∗∗   -3.048∗∗∗   -3.142∗∗∗   -3.238∗∗∗   -3.303∗∗∗   -3.042∗∗   -3.489∗∗∗   -3.369∗∗∗
                                                                                     (1.152)     (1.053)    (1.047)     (1.003)     (0.965)     (0.915)     (0.990)    (1.113)     (1.199)     (1.162)

                     C. Placebo (bonds maturing in 1928)
                     BankFail × BondsDue1928                                         -4.881      -6.940      -8.885     -9.831     -10.146     -10.813      -5.857       6.787     -4.053      -2.981
                                                                                    (7.560)     (6.262)     (8.031)    (8.381)     (8.310)     (8.419)     (9.336)     (13.559)   (9.433)     (9.967)

                     D. Exclude bonds with maturity less than 5 years when issued
                     BankFail × BondsDue1930−34                                     -3.166∗∗    -2.921∗∗    -2.367∗    -2.630∗     -2.551∗     -2.817∗∗    -2.915∗∗     -2.534     -2.847     -2.879∗
                                                                                    (1.397)     (1.300)     (1.361)    (1.328)     (1.285)     (1.173)     (1.383)     (1.525)    (1.678)     (1.657)

                     E. Continuous Treatment for bank failures




57
                     BankFail × BondsDue1930−34                                      -1.296     -1.689∗∗    -1.546∗∗   -1.642∗∗    -1.620∗∗    -1.348∗     -1.430∗∗    -1.261∗    -1.528∗     -1.641∗∗
                                                                                    (0.953)     (0.651)     (0.650)    (0.659)     (0.660)     (0.684)     (0.678)     (0.651)    (0.771)     (0.741)

                     Observations                                                     1010        1010       1010        1010        1010        1010        1010        824        788         785

                     Leverage, 1928                                                                                       Y           Y           Y           Y           Y          Y            Y
                     Employment, 1928                                                                                                 Y           Y           Y           Y          Y            Y
                     Book assets, 1928                                                                                                            Y           Y           Y          Y            Y
                     Profitability, 1928                                                                                                                                  Y          Y            Y
                     Profitability, 1933                                                                                                                                             Y            Y
                     Firm age                                                                                                                                                                     Y
                     Fixed effects                                                      -          S          S, I       S, I        S, I        S, I       S, IxR     S, IxR      S, IxR      S, IxR


     This table reports several robustness checks to the baseline results presented in Table 8, which evaluates the effect of bonds maturing in areas that experienced bank failures on the change
     in employment between 1928 and 1933. To facilitate comparisons, the controls included in each column are the same as in Table 8. In panel A, the treatment variable includes only bonds
     issued before January 1, 1929; in panel B, bonds maturing in 1934 are excluded; panel C presents a placebo in which the treatment variable is based on the value of bonds maturing in
     1928 (as a fraction of 1928 assets); panel D includes only bonds issued with a maturity of five or more years years; panel E measures the BankF ail variable by value of deposits in national
     banks that suspended between 1929 and 1933 in the county in which the firm was located, scaled by the amount of deposits in all national banks in that area in 1928. As indicated, different
     specifications control for leverage in 1928, log employment in 1928 (log E1928 ) , log book assets in 1928, firm profitability in 1928 and in 1933, and log firm age (measured in 1933). Columns
     (2) to (10) include state fixed effects, Columns (3) to (6) include industry fixed effects, and Columns (7) to (10) include industry-region fixed effects, where regions are classified according
     the US Census definition (4 regions). Firms are classified into 30 industries following Fama and French (1997). Robust standard errors clustered at the industry level are presented in
     parentheses; ***,** and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
                                                           Table 11: Estimating aggregate effects of financing frictions

                  A. Great Depression: Overall drop in employment in firms included in Column (10) of Tables 4 or 8                                    -8.6%

                  i. Direct effect                                                                                                                  Estimate   Percentage of Total
                  using coefficient estimates from Table 4
                    BondsDue                                                                                                                           -0.8%                   10%
                    BondsDue, applied to endogenous short term leverage: 20 % bank loans minus cash and marketable securities                          -1.0%                   12%
                    BondsDue, applied to endogenous short term leverage: 50 % bank loans minus cash and marketable securities                          -1.5%                   17%
                  using coefficient estimates from Table 8
                    BankFail X BondsDue                                                                                                                -1.4%                   17%
                    BankFail X BondsDue, applied to endogenous short term leverage: 20 % bank loans minus cash and marketable securities               -1.5%                   17%
                    BankFail X BondsDue, applied to endogenous short term leverage: 50 % bank loans minus cash and marketable securities               -2.4%                   28%

                  ii. Indirect effect (model-implied)                                                                                               Estimate   Percentage of Total
                  using coefficient estimate from
                    treatment = BondsDue (Table 4)                                                                                                     -1.6%                   19%
                    treatment = BankFail X BondsDue (Table 8)                                                                                          -2.8%                   33%




58
                  B. Comparison to the Great Recession: overall drop in employment in Compustat firms, 2008-09                                         -4.9%

                  i. Direct effect                                                                                                                  Estimate   Percent of Total
                  using coefficient estimate from effect of maturing debt
                    treatment = BondsDue                                                                                                               -0.4%                      9%

                  ii. Indirect effect (model-implied)                                                                                               Estimate   Percentage of Total
                  using coefficient estimate from effect of maturing debt
                    treatment = BondsDue                                                                                                               -0.5%                   10%


     This table presents various aggregation exercises to determine the effect of financial frictions on the aggregate drop in employment among large firms during the Great Depression and the
     Great Recession. Panel A is based on the baseline data for firms that report assets and employment in 1928 and 1933, and that can be matched across years. Panel B is based on all firms in
     the Compustat database with non-missing employment and assets in 2008 and 2009. In Panel A.i, the effects are estimated from the BondsDue treatment, as reported in Table 4, and from
     the BondsDue X BankF ailed treatment, as reported in Table 8. The estimates including short-term debt are done by applying these effects to the value of notes and bills payables, net of
     cash and marketable securities, held by the firm in 1928. In Panel B.i, BondsDue are calculated as the amount of long-term debt that was issued in 2004 that matured in 2009 (Compustat
     variable dd5 lagged four years), scaled by the firm’s book value of assets in 2008. Because Compustat does not provide information on the firm’s year of incorporation, we do not include
     firm age in the regressions that estimate the elasticity of employment change from 2008 to 2009 to the value of long-term debt maturing in 2009. The values under “Estimate” calculate the
     effects from equation 7; the percent of total is calculated as the ratio of Column (1) to the aggregate contraction in employment of 8.6% in Panel A and of 4.9% in Panel B.
