                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           THE MUNDELL-FLEMING MODEL:
                             A QUARTER CENTURY LATER




                                Jacob A. Frenkel

                                  Assaf Razin




                             Working Paper No. 2321




                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 1987




We are indebted to Thomas Krueger for helpful comments. The research reported
here is part of the NBER's research programs in Economic Fluctuations and
International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                              NBER Working Paper #2321
                                              July 1987

           The Mundell—Fleming Model: A Quarter Century Later



                                 ABSTRACT



     The Mundell—Fleming model of international macroeconomics originated
in the writings of Robert A. Mundell and J. Marcus Fleming in the early
1960s. The key contribution of the model has been a systematic analysis
of the role played by international capital mobility In determining the
effectiveness of macroeconomic policies under alternative exchange rate
regimes. During the ensuing quarter century, the model was extended in
various directions and is still the main "work horse" of traditional
open—economy macroeconomics.

     This paper develops an exposition that integrates the various facets
of the model and incorporates its extensions into a unified analytical
framework. Attention is given to the distinction between short—run and
long—run effects of policies, the implication of debt and tax financing
of government expenditures, the role of the exchange rate regime In this
regard, and debt revaluation and trade—balance revaluation effects
associated with exchange rate changes. The resulting integration
clarifies the key economic mechanisms operating in the Mundell—Fleming
model and helps to identify Its limitations. Among these Is the neglect
of intertemporal budget constraints and of the consequences of forward—
looking behavior consistent with this constraint. The formulation in the
paper casts the model In a manner that facilitates comparisons with more
modern approaches. In so doing, the exposition provides a bridge between
the traditional and the more modern approaches to international
macroeconomics.




Jacob A. Frenkel                                Assaf Razin
International Monetary Fund                     Tel—Aviv University
700 19th Street, N.W.                           Rainat—Aviv
Washington, D.C. 20431                          Rel—Aviv, ISRAEL

(202) 623—8977                                  972—03—420—733
                           I. Introduction

     This paper is an exposition of the Mundell—Fleming model of

international macroeconomics. The foundations of the model were laid a

quarter century ago in the classic writings of Robert A. Mundell (1960,

1961a, 1961b, 1963, 1964, collected in 1968) and J. Marcus Fleming (1962).

The key contribution of this model has been a systematic analysis of the

role played by international capital mobility in determining the

effectiveness of macroeconomic policies under alternative exchange rate

regimes. The analysis extended the simple version of the Keynesian

income—expenditure model developed by Machiup (1943) and Metzler (1942)

as well as the policy—oriented model developed by Meade (1951) to

economies open to international trade In both goods and financial assets.

Over the years the model has been extended in various directions and is

still the main "work horse" of traditional open—economy macroeconomics.

Noteworthy among such extensions are: a stock (portfolio) specification

of capital mobility by McKinnon (1969), Branson (1970), Floyd (1969) and

Frenkel and Rodriguez (1975); an analysis of debt—revaluation effects

induced by exchange rate changes by Boyer (1977) and Rodriguez (1979);

a long—run analysis by Rodriguez (1979); and an analysis of expectations

and exchange rate dynamics by Kouri (1976) and Dornbusch (1976). A

recent critical evaluation of the model is provided by Purvis (1985). 1/


  1/ Expositions of the model for alternative exchange rate regimes and
for different degrees of international capital mobility are presented in
Swoboda and Dornbusch (1973) and Mussa (1979). The diagrammatic analysis
used in this paper builds in part on these two expositions. Recent
surveys of various open—economy—macroeconomic issues, discussed in the
context of this model, are contained in Frenkel and Mussa (1985) and
Kenen (1985). In addition, Marston (1985) surveys applications of the
model to the analysis of stabilization policies, and Obstfeld and Stockman
(1985) contains a survey of exchange rate dynamics in this and other
models. The most comprehensive treatment of the Mundell—Fletning model to
date is provided by Dornbusch (1980).
                                  —2—

     The purpose of the present paper is to provide an exposition which

integrates the various facets of the model into a unified analytical

framework. Our specification of the model incorporates the various

extensions. Special focus is given to the distinction between short—run

and long—run consequences of policies, the implications of debt and tax

finance of government budget, and the role of the exchange rate regime in

this regard. The resulting integration clarifies the key economic

mechanisms operating in the Mundell—Fleming model and helps identify its

limitations. Our formulation casts the model in a way which facilitates

possible comparisons with more modern approaches. In so doing the

exposition provides a bridge between the traditional and the more modern

approaches to international macroeconomics.

     The specification of the model is sufficiently general to permit

an analysis of a wide variety of macroeconomic policies. To conserve

on space, however, we choose to illustrate the working of the model by

focusing on the instrument of fiscal policy.

     The organization of the paper is as follows. Section II outlines

the analytical framework. Section III deals with the operation of the

economic system under a fixed exchange rate regime. In this context we

first analyse the small—country case and then proceed to analyse the

two—country model of the interdependent world economy. Section IV

contains a parallel analysis appropriate for the flexible exchange rate

regime. Section V is an integrative summary and an overview of the

Mundell—Fleming model. To facilitate the exposition, the main analysis

is carried out diagrammatically. The Appendices that follow the text

contain algebraic derivations and a formal treatment of exchange—rate

expectations.
                                     —3—

                       II. The Analytical Framework

      Consider a two—country model of the world economy. The two

countries are referred to as the home (domestic) country and the foreign

country. Each country produces a distinct commodity: the domestic

economy produces good x and the foreign economy produces good m. The

domestic level of output is denoted by Y and the foreign level of output

by Y. In specifying the behavioral functions It is convenient to focus

on the domestic economy. Accordingly the budget constraint is


                       =
(1)     Z + Mt —   B       Pt(Yt—Tt) + Mtl —   Rt_iB_l

where B denotes the domestic—currency value of private sector's

one—period debt issued in period t, and Rt denotes one plus the rate of

interest. The right—hand side of equation (1) states that in each period,

t, the resources available to individuals are composed of disposable

income, Pt(Yt—Tt)——where the GDP deflator is          domestic output Is

and taxes are Tt——and the net value of assets carried over from period t—l.

The latter consist of money, Mt_i, net of debt commitment Rt_iB_l (where

the latter includes principal plus interest payments). For subsequent use

we denote these assets by At_i where


(2)     At_i = Mt_i —      Rt_iB_i

The left—hand side of equation (1) indicates the uses of these resources

including nominal spending, Z, money holding, M, and bond holding, -Br.

      In conformity with the original Mundell—Fleming formulation the GDP

deflator, P, is assumed to be fixed and is normalized to unity. In that

case nominal spending also equals real spending Et. Due to the absence
                                       —4—

of changes in prices we identify the real rate of interest, rt = Rt—1,

with the corresponding nominal rate of interest (we return to this issue

later where we analyze the implications of exchange rate changes).

      Assuming that the various demand functions depend on the available

resources and on the rate of interest, we express the spending and the

money—demand function as


         Et = E(Yt   —
(3)                      Tt   + At_i, rt)


         Mt = M(Yt   —
(4)                      Tt   + At_i, rt)


In specifying these functions we assume for simplicity that the marginal

propensities to spend and to hoard out of disposable income are the same

as the corresponding propensities to spend and hoard out of assets. A

similar specification underlies the demand for bonds which is omitted due

to the budget constraint. We assume that desired spending and money

holdings depend positively on available resources and negatively on the

rate of interest.

      The domestic private sector is assumed to allocate its spending

between domestic goods, C,, and foreign goods, Cmt• The real value of

domestic spending, Et, is         ÷ PmtCmt, where Pmt denotes the relative

price of good in in terms of good x. This relative price Is assumed to be

equalized across countries through international trade. The relative

share of domestic spending on good m (the foreign good) is denoted by
  =
      PmtSnt/Et
      The level of real government spending In period t, measured in terms

of own GDP, is denoted by Gt. Analogously to the private sector, the
                                    —5—

Government also allocates its spending between the two goods. Domestic

government spending on Importables (good m) is

       A similar set of demand functions and government spending patterns

characterize the foreign economy whose variables are denoted by an

asterisk and its fixed GDP deflator, P*, is normalized to unity.

Analogously to the domestic economy the relative share of foreign private

spending on good x (the good produced by the home country) is denoted by
   =
       Ct/pmtE;   correspondingly, the foreign government spending share

on good x is 13r.

       The relative price of good m in terms of good x, pt, which is

assumed to be equal across countries, can be written as mt =    etP/Pt
where et is the nominal exchange rate expressing the price of the

foreign currency in terms of the domestic currency. The specification

of the equilibrium in the world economy depends on the exchange rate

regime. We start with the analysis of equilibrium under a fixed exchange

rate regime.


             III. Capital Mobility with Fixed Exchange Rates

       Equilibrium in the world economy necessitates that the markets for

goods, money and bonds clear. Under a fixed exchange rate, domestic and

foreign money (in their role as assets) are perfect substitutes. There-

fore, money—market equilibrium can be specified by a single equilibrium

relation stating that the world demand for money equals the world supply.

Likewise, the assumptions that bonds are internationally tradable assets

and that domestic and foreign bonds are perfect substitutes imply that in

equilibrium the rate of return on domestic bonds, rt, equals the
                                             —6—

corresponding rate on foreign bonds, rft, and that bond—market equilibrium

can also be specified by a single equation pertaining to the unified world

bond market. These considerations imply that the world economy can be

characterized by four markets: the markets for domestic output, foreign

output, world money, and world bonds. By Wairas's Law the bond market

can be omitted from the equilibrium specification of the two—county model

of the world economy. Accordingly, the equilibrium conditions are


(5)        (im)E(Yt —    Tt   +   At_i,   rt) +    (1—)G   +            + A_1, r) =

(6)        mEt — Tt     +   At_i,    rt) +   1G + (l—)e?(Y + A_1, r) =              eY

(7)        M(Yt —   Tt + At_i, rt) ÷ eM*(Y + A_1, rt) =             M



where e denotes the fixed exchange rate expressing the price of foreign

currency in terms of domestic currency. To focus on the effects of the

domestic government policy, we assume in what follows that foreign

government spending and taxes are zero. The (predetermined) value of

foreign assets is measured in foreign—currency units so that

      =
          Mt_i + Rt_1BPt_i/e.       Due to the assumed fixity of the GDP

deflators, e also measures the relative price of importables in terms of

exportables. The world supply of money, measured in terms of domestic

goods (whose domestic—currency price is unity) is denoted by M. In

specifying equation (7) we assume that the government does not finance

its spending through money creation. This permits a focus on the pure

effects of fiscal policies.

      The specification of the equilibrium system (5) —             (7)   embodies the

arbitrage condition by which rt =            rft   so that the yields on domestic and
                                            —7


 foreign bonds are equal. This equality justifies the use of the same rate

 of interest in the behavioral functions of the domestic and the foreign

 economies. The system (5) —         (7)   determines the short—run equilibrium

 values of domestic output, '          foreign   output, Y, and the world rate

 of interest, rt, for given (predetermined) values of domestic and foreign

 net assets, At_i and A_1, and for given levels of government spending,

 Gt, and taxes, Tt.

       The international distribution of the given world money supply

 associated with the short—run equilibrium is determined endogenously

 according to the demands. Thus


                      —
 (8)     Mt = M(Yt        Tt   +   At_i,   rt)


 (9)
           *
         Mt =
                  **
                M (Yt +
                           *
                          A....i,    rt)


 This equilibrium distribution of the world money supply obtains through

 international asset swaps.

       This formulation of the short—run equilibrium system reveals the

 significant role played by international capital mobility. In the absence

 of such mobility, the short—run equilibrium would have determined the

 levels of domestic and foreign output from the goods—market equilibrium

 conditions. Associated with these levels of outputs there would be

equilibrium monetary flows. These flows cease in the long run in which a

stationary equilibrium distribution of the world money supply obtains.

 In contrast, the equilibrium system (5) —         (7)   shows that with perfect

• capital mobility equilibrium in the world money—market obtains through

instantaneous asset swaps involving exchanges of money for bonds. These

instantaneous stock adjustments are reflected in equation (7).
                                              —8—

1.     Fiscal policies in a small country

       To illustrate the effects of fiscal policies under a regime of

fixed exchange rates with perfect capital mobility, it is convenient to

begin with an analysis of a small country facing a given world rate of

interest, rf, and a given world demand for its goods,             =
                                                                      E*.   Under

these circumstances the equilibrium condition for the small economy

reduces to


(5')         m(X7t — Tt + At_i,              rf) + (1—&)G +   =


This equilibrium condition determines the short—run value of output for

the given (predetermined) value of assets and for given levels of govern-

ment spending and taxes. The money supply, Mt, associated with this

equilibrium is obtained from the money—market equilibrium condition (8').

Accordingly,


(8')      M(Yt —    Tt +   At.....i, rf) =    Mt


This quantity of money is endogenously determined through instantaneous

asset swaps at the prevailing world rate of interest.

       To analyze the effects of fiscal policies we differentiate

equation (5'). Thus


          dYt       ____
(10)            =                       for dTt = 0
                    s+a


and

          dYt
(11)            =   1 —                 for    dTt = dG
                                     —9—

where s and a denote, respectively, the domestic marginal propensities to

save and to import out of income (or assets) and where a =                  is   the

government marginal propensity to import, and 1/(s+a) is the small—country

foreign—trade multiplier. Equations (10) and (11) correspond,

respectively, to a bond—financed and to a tax—financed rise in government

spending. As is evident if all of government spending falls on domestic

goods (so that a =   0),   then the fiscal expansion which is financed by

government borrowing raises output by the full extent of the foreign

trade—multiplier, while the balanced—budget fiscal expansion yields the

closed—economy balanced—budget multiplier of unity. If, on the other

hand, all of government spending falls on imported goods (so that 3g =                 1),
then the bond—financed multiplier is zero whereas the balanced—budget

multiplier is negative and equal to (s+a—1)/(s+a).

     The changes in output induce changes in the demand for money. The

induced changes in money holding can be found by differentiating

equation (8') and using (10) and (11). Accordingly, the debt—financed

unit rise in government spending raises money holdings by (1—a8)M/(s+a)

units where    denotes the effect of a rise in income on money demand

(the inverse of the marginal income velocity). Likewise, the balanced—

budget rise in government spending lowers money holdings by aM/(s+a).

     This analysis is summarized by Figure 1 in which the IS schedule

portrays the goods market equilibrium condition (5').          It Is negatively

sloped since both a rise in the rate of interest and a rise in output

create an excess supply of goods. The initial equilibrium obtains at

point A at which the rate of interest equals the exogenously given world

rate, r, and the level of output Is Y0.     As indicated, the schedule IS
                  — 9a —




Figure 1: The Short-Run Effects of Fiscal
  Policy Under Fixed Exchange Rates:
          The Small-Country Case

r
                            LM(M0)
                                       LM(M1)
                                      , ,
                                ,   ,
r


                                \
                                IS(G1, T1)


             Yo            vi                   Yt
                                            — 10 —




is   drawn for given levels of government spending and taxes, G0 and T0.

The LM schedule passing through point A portrays the money—market

equilibrium condition (8'). It is positively sloped since a rise in

income raises the demand for money while a rise in the rate of interest

lowers money demand. As indicated, the LM schedule is drawn for a given

level of (the endogenously determined) money stock, M0.

         A unit rise in government spending creates an excess demand for

domestic product (at the prevailing level of output). If it is bond

financed then the excess demand is 1—ag units, and if it is tax financed

then the excess demand is of s+a—ag units (which, depending on the

relative magnitudes of the parameters, may be negative). The excess

demand is reflected by a horizontal shift of the IS schedule from IS(G0)

to IS(G1). As drawn, the IS schedule shifts to the right, reflecting the

positive excess demand at the prevailing level of output. The new

equilibrium obtains at point B at which the level of output rises to Yj.

This higher level of output raises the demand for money which is met

instantaneously through an international swap of bonds for money that is

effected through the world capital markets. The endogenous rise in the

quantity of money from M to N1 is reflected in the corresponding

rightwards displacement of the LM schedule from LN(M0) to LM(M1).

         The foregoing analysis determined the short—run consequences of an

expansionary fiscal policy. The instantaneous asset swap induced by the

requirement of asset—market equilibrium alters the size of the economy's

external debt. Specifically, if initially the economy was in a long—run

equilibrium (so that B =          B_1
                                        =   B,   Mt =   Mt_i
                                                               = M, At =
                                                                           At_i
                                                                                  = A and

     =
         Yti   =   Y),   then the fiscal expansion which raises short—run money
                                      — 11 —




holdings   as well as the size of the external debt, raises the debt—service

requirement and (in view of the positive rate of interest) lowers the

value of net assets Mt—(1+rf)B carried over to the subsequent period.

This change sets In motion a dynamic process that is completed only when

the economy reaches its new long—run equilibrium. We turn next to

determine the long—run consequences of government spending.

       The long—run equilibrium conditions can be summarized by the system

(12) —   (14):

          E(Y — T + M —                       Y —          — T
(12)                      (l+rf)B,   rf) =          rfBP

           (1_)E(Y — T ÷ M —                 rf) + (1—8)G + e    =   Y
(13)                           (l+rf)B,
(14)     M(Y — T + M —    (l+rf)B,   rf) =    M



where the omission of the time subscripts Indicates that in the long run

the various variables do not vary over time. Equation (12) is obtained

from the budget constraint (1) by using the spending function from

equation (3) and by imposing the requirement that in the long run

Mt = Mt_i and B =    B_1.    This equation states that in the long run

private—sector spending equals disposable income, so that private—sector

savings are zero. Equation (13) is obtained from (5') and (8') together

with the long—run stationarity requirement. This equation is the long—run

market clearing condition for domestic output. Finally, equation (14),

which is the long—run counterpart to equation (8'), is the condition for

long—run money—market equilibrium.

       Up to this point we have not incorporated explicitly the government

budget constraint. In the absence of money creation the long—run
                                          — 12 —




government budget constraint states that government outlays on purchases,

C, and debt service, rfB (where B denotes government debt), must equal

taxes, T. Accordingly,


(15) G+fB =                T


Substituting this constraint into equation (12) yields


            E(Y — G + M — BP —                                =   Y —
(12')                                 rf(BP+B),   rf) +   G
                                                                        rf(BP+B)

Equation (12') states that in the long run the sum of private—sector and

government spending equals GNP. This equality implies that in the long

run the current account of the balance of payments is balanced.

        Using equations (12), (14) and (15) we obtain the combinations of

output and debt that satisfy the long—run requirement of current account

balance as well as money—market equilibrium. These combinations are

portrayed along the CA = 0 schedule in Figure 2. Likewise, using

equations (13) —    (15)   we obtain the combinations of output and debt that

incorporate the requirements of goods and money—market equilibrium.

These combinations are portrayed along the YY schedule in Figure 2. The

slopes of these schedules are


           dB   =              (s_Mr)
(16)                —
                                  —                along the CA = 0 schedule
                        (l—s) —
                                  rf(s—M)

           dB = —         (s—M )+a
(17)
           -—              —                       along the YY schedule
                        (l+rf)(l—s—a)
               — 12a —




      Figure 2: The Long-Run Effects of
        A Unit Debt-Financed Rise in
        Government Spending Under
           Fixed Exchange Rates:
          The Small-Country Case

B"




r,P
00             ---''C
                             B
01

                YY
                         I'
                         I
                                 CA=O
                         I YY'

          Yo             Yl               Y
                                      — 13 —




     In   these equations, the term      is the marginal propensity to hoard

(the inverse of the marginal income velocity) and s—Mr represents the

marginal propensity to save in the form of bonds. As is evident the

numerators in equations (16) — (17) are positive. The denominator of

equation (17) is positive since 1—s—a > 0 and the denominator of

equation (16) is positive on the assumption that (l—s) > i                  The
                                                               (s—My).
latter assumption is a stability condition ensuring that the perpetual

rise in consumption (l—s) made possible by a unit rise in debt exceeds

the perpetual return on the saving in bonds rf(s—M) made possible by the

initial unit rise in debt. If this inequality does not hold then

consumption and debt rise over time and do not converge to a long—run

stationary equilibrium. The foregoing discussion Implies that the slopes

of both the CA =   0 and the YY schedules are negative. Further, since the

numerator of (17) exceeds the one in (16) and the denominator of (17) is

smaller than the one in (16), the YY schedule in Figure 2 is steeper than

the CA = 0 schedule. The initial long—run equilibrium Is indicated by

point A in Figure 2 in which the levels of output and private—sector debt

are Y0 and B6.

     Consider the long—run effects of a debt—financed rise in government

spending. As is evident by inspection of the system (12) —     (14),   as

long as taxes remain unchanged, the CA = 0 (which is derived from

equations (12) and (14)) remains intact. On the other hand the rise in

government spending influences the YY schedule which is derived from

equations (13) —   (14).   Specifically, to maintain goods—market equilibrium

(for any given value of private—sector debt, BP) a unit rise in government

spending must be offset by (1—a)/(s+a) units rise in output. Thus, as
                                    — 14 —




long as some portion of government spending falls on domestic goods so
that ag < 1, the YY schedule in Figure 2 shifts to the right. The new

equilibrium is indicated by point B at which the level of output rises

from      to Y1 and private—sector debt falls to B. The new equilibrium

is associated with a rise in money holdings, representing the cumulative

surpluses in the balance of payments during the transition period.

       A comparison between the short—run multiplier shown in equation (10)

and the corresponding long—run multiplier (shown in equation (A—7) of the

Appendix) reveals that the latter exceeds the former. In terms of

Figure 2, in the short run the output—effect of the debt—financed rise in

government spending is indicated by the point C whereas the corresponding

long—run equilibrium is indicated by point B.

       Consider next the effects of a tax—financed rise in government

spending. Such a balanced—budget rise in spending alters the positions

of both the CA = 0 and the YY schedules. Using equations (12) and (14)

together with the balanced—budget assumption that dG = dT it can be shown

that a unit rise in government spending induces a unit rightward shift of

the CA = 0 schedule. By keeping the value of Y—T Intact and holding BP

constant, such a shift maintains the equality between private—sector

spending and disposable income and it also satisfies the money—market

equilibrium condition. Likewise using equations (13) and (14) together

with the balanced—budget assumption, it is shown in the Appendix that as

long as the government import propensity, a, Is positive, the U schedule

shifts to the right by less than one unit. The resulting new long—run

equilibrium is Indicated by point B In Figure 3. For the case drawn, the

long—run level of output falls from Y0 to Yj and private—sector debt rises
                 — 14a —




     Figure 3: The Long-Run Effects of a
        Unit Balanced-Budget Rise in
     Government Spending Under Fixed
              Exchange Rates:
          The Small-Country Case

B
           \\
             \
          '" \
op



                           \       S.'




                               \
                                    \
                   1-                    \
                                         YYI
                                               CA' =0

                    I      I

                    vi y0                          Y
                                     — 15 —


from B to B?. Since government debt remains unchanged, the rise in
private—sector debt corresponds to an equal rise in the economy's

external—debt position. In general, however, depending on the parameters,

domestic output may either rise or fall in the long run.

    The size of the long—run multiplier of the balanced—budget rise in

government spending depends on the government import propensity. At the

limit, if all government spending falls on domestic output so that a = 0,

the long—run balanced—budget multiplier is unity. In this case the YY

schedule in Figure 3 shifts to the right by one unit, the long—run level

of output rises by one unit, and private—sector debt (and the economy's

external debt) remains unchanged. At the other limit, if all government

spending falls on foreign goods so that a = 1, the long—run balanced

budget multiplier is negative. In that case the rise in the economy's

external debt is maximized.

     The comparison between the short—run balanced—budget multiplier

shown in equation (11) with the corresponding long—run multiplier (shown

in equation (A—b) of the Appendix) highlights the contrasts between the

two. If the government propensity to spend on domestic goods (1—ag)

equals the corresponding private—sector propensity (1—s—a), then the

short—run multiplier is zero while the long—run multiplier is negative.

On the other hand, if the government propensity (1—ag) exceeds the

private—sector propensity (1—s—a), both the short and the long—run

balanced budgets are negative, but the absolute value of the long—run

multiplier exceeds the corresponding short—run multiplier. Finally, if

government spending falls entirely on domestically produced goods (so

that ag =   0),   then the short—run and the long—run multipliers are equal

to each other and both are unity.
                                              — 16 —




2.     Fiscal policies in a two—country world

       In this section we return to the two—country model outlined in

equations (5) —      (7)   and analyze the short—run effects of a debt and

tax—financed rise in government spending on the equilibrium levels of

domestic and foreign outputs as well as on the equilibrium world rate of

interest. The endogeneity of the last two variables distinguishes this

analysis from the one conducted for the small country case. To conserve

on space we do not analyze here the long—run effects; the formal system

applicable to the long—run equilibrium of the two—country world is

presented in Appendix 1.3.

       The analysis is carried out diagrammatically with the aid of

Figures 4 and 5. In these figures the YY schedule portrays combinations

of domestic and foreign levels of output which yield equality between the

levels of production of domestic output and the world demand for it.

Likewise, the ** schedule portrays combinations of output that yield

equality between the level of production of foreign output and the world

demand for it. The two schedules incorporate the requirement of

equilibrium in the world money market. It is shown in the Appendix that

the slopes of these schedules are


           dY*
                 =               r        r
                           (s+a)(M ÷ eM*) + M H
                                                  Y r     along the YY schedule
(18)                                 —
           dYt        e a*(Mr ÷      4)   —
                                               M;*Hr

           dY*               a(M
                               r
                                 +eN*)_MF
                                   r    Y r
(19)                                                      along the Y*Y* schedule
                                          eM) ÷ M;*Fr
           dYt        e (s*+a*)(Mr ÷
                  — 16a —




         Figure 4: A Unit Debt-Financed Rise
           in Government Spending Under
                Fixed Exchange Rates:
               The Two-Country Case

1*
                                                YYI
                                                /
                                                             I
                                                    — y*Y*
Ii   —
                                                      Y*Y*



                                       /
'0                                /
                                   /
                             //
                            /

                  Yo                       Yl            V




     Data: a* (Mr + e M*r) — M*. Hr < 0
          a (Mr + e M*r) — M Fr < 0
                       - 16b -




       Figure 5: A Unit Debt-Financed Rise
         in Government Spending Under
              Fixed Exchange Rates:
             The Two-Country Case



                                                              YYI
                              \                               //
                                                        / /
                                                  /   /
                                              / /
Jo
Ii
1*
                                    ,/
                              / /               \\
                            ,



                       V0                Vi                   V




     Data: a* (Mr +j M*,)
           a (Mr + e
                      M*r) — M*. Hr < 0
                           M Fr > 0
                                  — 17 —




where Hr and Fr denote the partial (negative) effect of the rate of

Interest on the world demand for domestic and foreign outputs,

respectively, and where Er Mr E and M denote the partial (negative)

effects of the rate of Interest on domestic and foreign spending and money

demand. As may be seen the slopes of the two schedules may be positive

or negative. To gain intuition we note that in the special case for which

                                                                      =   0)
spending does not depend on the rate of interest (so that Hr =   Fr
both schedules must be positively sloped. If on the other hand the rate

of interest exerts a strong negative effect on world spending then the

excess supply induced by a rise in one country's output may have to be

eliminated by a fall in the other country's output. Even though this

fall in foreign output lowers directly the foreign demand for the first

country's exports, it also induces a decline In the world rate of interest

which indirectly stimulates spending and may more than offset the direct

reduction In demand. In that case market clearance for each country's

output Implies that domestic and foreign outputs are negatively related.

     Even though the two schedules may be positively or negatively

sloped, it may be verified (and Is shown In the Appendix) that the YY

schedule must be steeper than the Y*Y* schedule. This restriction leaves

four possible configurations of the schedules. The common characteristic

of these configurations is that starting from an Initial equilibrium, if

there is a rightwards shift of the YY schedule which exceeds the

rIghtwards shift of the Y*Y* schedule, then the new equilibrium must be

associated with a higher level of domestic output.

     Two cases capturing the general pattern of world—output allocations

are shown in Figures 4 and 5. The other possible configurations which
                                  — 18 —



are omitted do not yield different qualitative results concerning the
effects of fiscal policies. In both figures the initial equilibrium is

indicated by point A at which the domestic level of output Is Y0 and the

foreign level is Y.

     A debt—financed rise in government spending raises the demand for

domestic output and induces a rightwards shift of the TI schedule from YY

to YY'. On the other hand the direction of the change in the position of

the ** schedule   depends on the relative magnitudes of the two

conflicting effects influencing world demand for foreign output. On the

one hand the rise in the domestic government spending raises the demand

for foreign goods but on the other hand the induced rise in the world

rate of interest lowers the demand. If the Y*Y* schedule is positively

sloped, as in Figure 4, then the rise in the domestic government spending

induces a leftwards (upwards) shift of the Y*Y* schedule. The opposite

holds if the Y*Y* schedule is negatively sloped as in Figure 5. The

formal expressions indicating the magnitudes of the displacements of the

schedules are provided in the Appendix.

    The new equilibrium obtains at point B at which domestic output

rises from Y0 to Yj. In the case shown in Figure 4 (for which the

interest—rate effect on the world demand for foreign output is relatively

weak) foreign output rises. On the other hand in the case shown in

Figure 5 (for which the interest—rate effect on the world demand for

foreign output is relatively strong) foreign output may rise or fall

depending on the magnitude of the parameters, especially the composition

of government spending. For example, if government spending falls

entirely on domestic output (so that ag =   0), the ** schedule   does not
                                   — 19 —




shift   and the new equilibrium obtains at a point like point C in Figure 5

at which foreign output falls. In the other extreme, if government

spending falls entirely on foreign goods (so that ag =   1) then the YY
schedule does not shift and the new equilibrium obtains at a point like

point D at which foreign output rises.

     It is shown in the Appendix that, independent of the direction of

output changes, the debt—financed rise In government spending must raise

the world rate of interest. The expressions reported in the Appendix

also reveal that if the (negative) Interest—rate effect on the world

demand for domestic output is relatively strong, then domestic output

might fall. The balance of payments effects of the debt—financed rise

in government spending are not clear cut, reflecting "transfer—problem

criteria" familiar from the theory of international transfers. But, if

the behavioral parameters of the domestic and foreign private sectors are

equal to each other, then the balance of payments must improve and the

domestic money holdings are raised.

     A tax—financed rise in government spending also alters the positions

of the various schedules as shown in the Appendix where we also provide

the formal expressions for the various multipliers. In general, in

addition to the considerations highlighted in the debt—financed case, the

effect of a tax—financed fiscal spending also reflects the effects of the

reduction in domestic disposable income on aggregate demand. This effect

may more than offset the influence of government spending on domestic

output. The effect on foreign output is also modified. [f the interest—

rate effect on world demand for foreign output is relatively weak (the

case underlying Figure 4), then the shift from a debt to a tax—finance
                                   — 20 —




mitigates   the expansion in foreign output. If on the other hand the

interest—rate effect on the demand for foreign output is relatively

strong (the case underlying Figure 5) then the shift from debt to tax

finance exerts expansionary effects on foreign output.

     It is shown in the Appendix that the direction of the change in the

rate of interest induced by the tax—financed rise in government spending

depends on a "transfer—problem criterion" indicating whether the

redistribution of world disposable income consequent on the fiscal policy

raises or lowers the world demand for money. Accordingly, the rate of

interest rises if the domestic—country ratio, S/My, exceeds the

corresponding foreign—country ratio, s*/M*, and vice versa. Independent,

however, of the change in the rate of interest, the tax—financed rise in

government spending must deteriorate the domestic—country balance of

payments and reduce its money holdings.


            IV. Capital Mobility with Flexible Exchange Rates

     In this section we assume that the world economy operates under a

flexible exchange—rate regime. With this assumption national moneys

become nontradable assets whose relative price (the exchange rate,e) is

assumed to be determined freely in the world market for foreign exchange.

We continue to assume that in each country, the GDP deflators, P and *,

are fixed and equal to unity. Under such circumstances the nominal
exchange rates represent the terms of trade and the nominal rates of

interest in each country equal the corresponding (GDP—based) real rates.

Further, as was traditionally postulated in the early literature on

modeling macroeconomic policies in the world economy, we start the

analysis by assuming that exchange rate expectations are static. Under
                                           — 21 —




such circumstances the international mobility of capital brings about
equality among national (GDP—based) real rates of interest. We return

to the issue of exchange rate expectations in a subsequent section.

       Equilibrium in the world economy requires that world demand for each

country's ouput equals the corresponding supply and that in each country

the demand for cash balances equals the supply. Accordingly, the system

characterizing the equilibrium in the two—country world economy is:


(20)       (18m)E(Yt —      Tt + At_i,     rt)

                 +
                     (1—)G     +
                                   etE*(Y + A_1,         rt) =


(21)                 Tt +    At_i,   rt)

                 ÷ 1G +       et(1_)E*(Y + A_1,           rt) =   etY

(22)       M(Yt —     + At_i, rt) =         M



(23)       M*(Y +    At_i, rt) =      M*


Equations (20) —     (21)    are the goods—market equilibrium conditions

(analogous to equations (5) —         (6)),      and equations (22) —   (23)   are the

domestic and foreign money—market equilibrium conditions where M and

M* denote the supplies of domestic and foreign money. In contrast with

the fixed exchange rate system in which each country's money supply was

determined endogenously, here it is determined exogenously by the

monetary authorities. We also note that by Walras's Law the world

market equilibrium condition for bonds has been left out.

       Finally, it is noteworthy that the value of securities may be

expressed in terms of domestic or foreign currency units. Accordingly,
                                          —22 —

the domestic—currency value of private—sector debt, B, can be expressed
in units of foreign currency to yield Bt = BPt/et.        Arbitrage ensures

that the expected rates of return on securities of different currency

denomination are equalized. Accordingly, if rt and rft are, respectively,

the rates of interest on domestic and foreign—currency denominated bonds

then l+rt =    (at+l/et)O.÷rft)   where        denotes the expected future

exchange rate. By equating rt to rft the system (20) —         (22) embodies the
assumption of static exchange rate expectations and perfect capital

mobility. In Appendix 11.3 we return to the issue of exchange rate

expectations.

1.      Fiscal pclicies in a small country

        Analogously with our procedure in the analysis of fiscal policies

under fixed exchange rates we start the analysis of flexible exchange

rates with an examination of the effects of fiscal policies in a small

country facing a given world rate of interest, r, and a given foreign

demand for its goods, D*. The equilibrium conditions for the small

country state that world demand for Its output equals domestic GDP and

that the domestic demand for money equals the supply. In contrast with

the situation prevailing under a fixed exchange rate regime where the

monetary authorities, committed to peg the exchange rate, do not control

the domestic money supply, under a flexible exchange rate regime the

supply of money is a policy instrument controlled by the monetary

authorities.

        The goods and money—markets equilibrium conditions are


(20')           mt — Tt        ÷ As_i, rf) ÷ (1—)G +    et     =
                                                                   Yt

(22')       M(Yt —   Tt   ÷ At_i, rf) =    M
                                   — 23 —




where     At_i = Mt_i —    (l+rf)etB,_l.
As indicated, the valuation of the foreign—currency denominated debt

commitment, (l+rf)B,t_l, employs the current exchange rate, et. These

equilibrium conditions determine the short—run values of output and the

exchange rate and for comparison we recall that under the fixed exchange

rate regime the money supply rather than the exchange rate was

endogenously determined.

     The equilibrium of the system is exhibited in Figure 6. The

downwards sloping IS schedule shows the goods—market equilibrium

condition (2O). It is drawn for given values of government spending,

taxes, and the exchange rate (representing the terms of trade). The

upwards sloping LM schedule portrays the money—market equilibrium

condition (22'). It is drawn for given values of the money supply, the

exchange rate and taxes. The initial equilibrium obtains at point A at

which the rate of interest equals the world rate, r, and the level of

output is Y0. The endogenously—determined exchange rate associated with

this equilibrium is eo. It is relevant to note that In this system If

the Initial debt B,t....i is zero, the LM schedule does not depend on the

exchange rate and the level of output is determined exclusively by the

money—market equilibrium condition whereas (given the equilibrium level

of output) the equilibrium exchange rate is determined by the goods—market

equilibrium condition. This case underlies Figure 6. Again a comparison

with the fixed exchange—rate system is relevant. There, the equilibrium

money stock is determined by the money—market equilibrium condition

whereas the equilibrium level of output is determined by the goods—market

equilibrium condition.
                    — 23a —




       Figure 6: The Short-Run Effects of
          A Unit Debt-Financed Rise in
          Government Spending Under
            Flexible Exchange Rates:
            The Small-Country Case

r
                           \                     LM ( M0, T0)
                               \



rt




                                                  IS(G1,T0, e0)


                       I
                               IS(G0,T0,e0) = IS(G1,T0,e,)

                    Yo=Y1                                Yt


     Data: B1 = 0
                                  — 24 —




     Consider the effects of a debt—financed unit rise in government

spending from G0 to G1 and suppose that the initial debt commitment is

zero. At the prevailing levels of output and the exchange rate, this

rise in spending creates an excess demand for domestic output and induces

a rightwards shift of the IS schedule by (1—a)/(s+a) units. This shift

is shown In Figure 6 by the displacement of the IS schedule from the

initial position indicated by IS(G0, T0, e0) to the position indicated

by IS(G1, T0, e0). Since with zero initial debt the LM schedule is

unaffected by the rise in government spending, it is clear that given the

world rate of interest the level of output that clears the money market

must remain at Y0 corresponding to the initial equilibrium indicated by

point A. To restore the initial equilibrium in the goods market the

exchange rate must fall (that is, the domestic currency must appreciate).

The induced improvement in the ternis of trade lowers the world demand for

domestic output and induces a leftwards shift of the IS schedule. The

goods market clears when the exchange rate falls to e1 so that the IS

schedule indicated by IS(G1, T0, ei) also goes through point A. We

conclude that under flexible exchange rates with zero initial debt a

debt—financed fiscal policy loses its potency to alter the level of

economic activity; its full effects are absorbed by changes in the

exchange rate (the terms of trade).

     Consider next the effects of a tax—financed unit rise in government

spending from G0 to C1, shown in Figure 7. In that case, at the

prevailing levels of output and the exchange rate, the excess demand for

domestic output induces a rightwards displacement of the IS schedule by

1_a/(s+a) units to the position indicated by IS(G1, T1, e0). In addition,
                   — 24a —




      Figure 7: The Short-Run Effects of
         A Unit Tax-Financed Rise in
        Government Spending Under
           Flexible Exchange Rates:
           The Small-Country Case

r                                      LM (M0, T0)
                                                            LM(M0,T1)

                                                             , ,
                                                           ,
                                                      ,/
                                            \ B,'


                                  /,
                                ,                           IS(G11T1, e,)

                       /   ,,                          IS(G1,T1, e0)
                   1                               IS(G0,T0, e0)

                    Yo                        Yl                   'it

    Data: B1 = 0
                                  — 25 —



the unit rise in taxes lowers disposable income by one unit and reduces.

the demand for money. To maintain money—market equilibrium at the given

world rate of interest the level of output must rise by one unit so as to

restore the initial level of disposable income. Thus, the LM schedule

shifts to the right from its initial position indicated by LM(M0, To) to

the position indicated by LM(M0, T1). With a zero level of initial debt

(the case assumed in the figure), the LM schedule does not depend on the

value of the exchange rate and the new equilibrium obtains at point B

where the level of output rises by one unit from Y0 to Y1. Since at the

initial exchange rate the horizontal displacement of the IS schedule Is

less than unity (as long as government spending falls in part on imported

goods) it follows that at the level of output which clears the money—market

there is an excess supply of goods. This excess supply Is eliminated

through a rise In the exchange rate (that is, a depreciation of the

domestic currency) from e0 to e1. This deterioration in the terms of

trade raises the world demand for domestic output and induces a rightwards

shift of the IS schedule to the position indicated by IS(G1, T1, e1). We

conclude that under flexible exchange rates with zero initial debt the

tax—financed rise in government spending regains its full potency in

effecting the level of economic activity.

     Up to this point we have assumed that the initial debt position was

zero. As a result, the only channel through which the exchange rate

influenced the system was through altering the domestic—currency value of

the exogenously given foreign demand, D*. In general, however, with a

non—zero level of initial debt,        (denominated in units of foreign

currency), the change in the exchange rate also alters the domestic
                                    — 26 —




currency value of the initial debt and, thereby, of the initial assets,
At_i. The revaluation of the debt commitment constitutes an additional

channel through which the exchange rate influences the economic system.

As a result, the demand for money and thereby the LM schedule also depend

on the exchange rate.

     To appreciate the role played by debt—revaluation effects we examine

in Figure 8 the implications of a non—zero level of initial debt. The

various IS and 114 schedules shown in the Figure correspond to alternative

assumptions concerning the level of initial debt           and the rest of

the arguments governing the position of the schedules are suppressed for

simplicity. The initial equilibrium is shown by point A and the solid

schedules along which B,t....l = 0 corresponds to the cases analyzed in

Figures 6 and 7. With a positive value of initial debt a rise in the

exchange rate lowers the value of assets and lowers the demand for money.

Restoration of money—market equilibrium requires a compensating rise in

output. As a result the LM in that case is positively sloped. By a

similar reasoning a negative value of initial debt corresponds to a

negatively sloped LM schedule. The level of initial debt also influences

the slope of the IS schedule. As shown in the Figure, using similar

considerations, the IS schedule is steeper than the benchmark schedule

(around point A) if          > 0, and vice versa.

     We can now use this Figure to illustrate the possible implications

of the initial debt position. For example, a debt—financed fiscal

expansion induces a rightward shift of the IS schedule and leaves the

LM schedule intact.     The short—run equilibrium of the system is changed

from point A to point B if the level of initial debt is zero, to point C
               — 26a —




    Figure 8: The Short-Run Effects of
      A Unit Debt-Financed Rise in
      Government Spending Under
         Flexible Exchange Rates:
       The Debt-Revaluation Effect

e                  LM(B,.., = 0)
                             LM(B,..1 > 0)

                                 /
                                   /   IS(Bf1 > 0)
               \
                   \         /               IS(,, <0)
                    \
                        \                    IS(B, < 0)


                            B\
                   /
                       IC    \\
               /                              0)
                                             — 27 —




if    the level of initial debt is positive, and to point D if this level is

negative. Thus, the debt revaluation effects critically determine

whether a debt—financed rise in government spending is contractionary or

expansionary.

       Using the system (20') and (22'), the changes in the level of output

are



(24) dYt
      —                  (l_a)(l+f)Bp_1
                                                            for   dTt = 0
                         (l+rf)B,_l —


(25) dY
      —
     dG
                         1 —
                               a(l+rf)Bp ' t—l
                                                            for   dTt = dG
                               (l+rf)B,_l —


       Likewise,       the induced changes in the exchange rates are



(26)       —
           de      =    __________________
                         (l+rf)BP,t_l — D*
                                                      for   dTt = 0



and



(27)       —
           de
           dG
                   =       —
                        (l+rf)B,_l - D*
                                                      for   dTt = dG




       These results highlight the role played by the debt—revaluation

effect of exchange rate changes. Specifically, as is evident from

equations (24) —        (25)   a rise in government spending may be contractionary

if the initial debt commitment is positive. If, however, the private
sector is initially a net creditor then, independent of its means of

finance, government spending must be expansionary. In the benchmark case
                                      — 28 —



shown in Figures 6 and 7, the initial debt position is zero, a tax finance

is expansionary (yielding the conventional balanced—budget multiplier of

unity), and a debt finance is not. The key mechanism responsible for this

result is the high degree of capital mobility underlying the fixity of the

rate of interest faced by the small country. With the given rate of

interest and with a given money supply, there is in the short run a unique

value of disposable Income that clears the money market as long as the

initial debt commitment is zero. Hence, in this case, a rise in taxes is

expansionary and a rise in government spending is neutral.

       A comparison between the exchange rate effects of government spending

also reveals the critical importance of the means of finance and of the

debt—revaluation effect. In general, for the given money supply, the

direction of the change in the exchange rate induced by a rise in govern-

ment spending depends on whether the government finances Its spending

through taxes or through debt issue. If the initial debt commitment

falls short of the (exogenously given) foreign demand for domestic output,

then a debt—financed rise in government spending appreciates the currency

while a tax—financed rise in government spending depreciates the currency.

The opposite holds if the initial debt commitment exceeds exports.

       The foregoing analysis determined the short—run effects of government

spending. We proceed to analyze the long—run effects of these policies.

The long—run equilibrium conditions are shown in equations (28) —    (30)
below. These equations are the counterpart to the long—run fixed

exchange rate system (12) —   (14).   Accordingly,


          E(Y — T + M —                                       — T
(28)                      (l+f)eB,    rf) =    Y   —
                                                       ifeB
                                      — 29 —




(29)      (l—)E(Y — T ÷ M —    (l+f)eB,       rf) +   (1—)G   +   ei5* =

(30)      M(Y — T ÷ M —   (l+rf)eB,   rf) =    M



To set the stage for the analysis, consider first the bench—mark case for

which the initial equilibrium was associated with a zero private—sector

debt. For this case the long run is analyzed in Figure 9. The CA = 0

schedule portrays combinations of private—sector debt and output which

yield equality between spending and income, and thereby satisfying

equation (28). In view of the government budget constraint shown in

equation (15), this equality between private—sector income and spending

also implies current account balance. The MM schedule portrays

combinations of debt and output which yield money market equilibrium, and

thereby satisfy equation (30). Around zero private—sector debt, both of

these schedules are independent of the exchange rate. The slope of the

CA = 0 schedule is —s/e(1—s(l+rf)). Analogously to the previous

discussion of the long—run equilibrium under fixed exchange rates, this

slope is assumed negative for stability. The slope of the MM schedule is

l/(l+rf)e. It indicates that a unit rise in long—run private sector debt

raises debt commitment (principal plus debt service) by (l+f)e and lowers

the demand for money. To offset the reduction in disposable resources and

restore the demand for money to its initial level, output must be

raised by (l+rf)e units.

       The initial long—run equilibrium is shown by point A at which the

level of private—sector debt is assumed to be zero and the level of

output is Yo. As is evident from equations (28) and (30), changes in the

levels of government spending and government debt do not alter the CA = 0
               — 29a —




      Figure 9: The Long-Run Effects of
     A Unit Rise in Government Spending
       Under Flexible Exchange Rates:
           The Small-Country Case

rP
0

                 \         MM(T0)                             MM(T1)
                                                                              /
                                                                          /
                     \                                                /
                                                                  /
                                                              /
                                                          /
                                                      /
                                                      /
                                                     /
                                                 /
                                          \B/
                                                                      Y
                                              /Y1\
                                          /          \\
              /Y\    CA(T0) =0
                                 I
                                     /
                                         /
                                                      CA(T1)=0
                                                              \
                                 — 30 —




schedule and the MM schedule. It follows that with zero private—sector

debt a debt—financed rise in government spending does not alter the

long—run equilibrium value of private sector debt indicated by point A in

Figure 9. In this long—run equilibrium the level of output remains

unchanged and the currency appreciates to the level shown in the short—run

analysis of Figure 6.

    A rise in taxes alters both the CA = 0 and the NM schedules. As is

evident from equations (28) and (30) a rise in output which keeps dispos-

able income unchanged (at the given zero level of private—sector debt)

maintains the initial current account balance as well as money—market

equilibrium intact. Thus, a tax—financed unit rise in government spending

induces a unit rightwards displacement of both the CA = 0 and the MM

schedules and yields a new long—run equilibrium at point B. At this

point private—sector debt remains at its initial zero level. Also, the

level of output rises to Y1 and the currency depreciates to e1 as shown

in the short—run analysis of Figure 7.

     The above discussion shows that under flexible exchange rates with

zero initial private—sector debt the long—run and the short—run effects

of fiscal policies coincide. This characteristic is in contrast to the

one obtained for fixed exchange rates where the long—run effects of fiscal

policies differ from the corresponding short—run effects. In interpreting

these results we note that due to the non—tradability of national monies

under a flexible exchange rate regime, the mechanism of adjustment to

fiscal policies does not permit instantaneous changes in the composition

of assets through swaps of interest bearing assets for national money in

the world capital markets. As a result the only mechanism by which
                                    — 31 —




private—sector debt can change is through savings. Since with zero initial
private—sector debt both debt—financed and tax—financed government spending

do not alter disposable income (as seen from equations (24) —     (25)),    it

follows that these policies do not affect private—sector saving.      Hence,

if the initial position was that of a long—run equilibrium with zero

savings and zero debt, the instantaneous short—run equilibrium following

the rise in government spending is also characterized by zero savings.

This implies that the economy converges immediately to its new long—run

equilibrium.

       The foregoing analysis of the long—run consequences of government

spending abstracted from the debt—revaluation effect arising from exchange

rate changes. In general, if in the initial equilibrium the level of

private—sector debt differs from zero, then the debt—revaluation effect

breaks the coincidence between the short and the long—run fiscal policy

multipliers. Using the system (28) —    (30),   the long—run effects of a

debt—financed rise in government spending are

          dY   =
(31)                0            for dT = 0



          dB
(32)            =   ________
                       —         for dT=0
                      eD*



          de            (1—a )
(33)           =    —
                         —       fordT=0
                         D*


Likewise, the long—run effects of a balanced—budget rise in government

spending are
                                            — 32 —




(34)            =       1             for dT = dG



           dB       =       —____
                               _      for
(35)                                        dT = dG
                                eD*


           d                g
(36)            =       ----          fordT=dG


       These results show that, independent of the debt—revaluation effects,

a rise in government spending does not alter the long—run level of output

if it is debt—financed while the same rise in government spending raises

the long—run level of output by a unit multiplier if it is tax financed.

Thus, in both cases the long—run level of disposable income, Y—T, is

independent of government spending. The results also show that if

government spending is debt financed then, in the long run, if initial

private sector debt was positive, then it rises while the currency

appreciates. The opposite holds for the case in which government spending

are tax financed.

       In comparing the extent of the long—run changes in private—sector

debt with the corresponding changes in the exchange rate we note that the

value of debt, eB (measured in units of domestic output) remains

unchanged. This invariance facilitates the interpretation of the long—run

multipliers. Accordingly, consider the long—run equilibrium system

(28) —   (30) and suppose that government spending is debt financed. In
that case as is evident from the money—market equilibrium condition (30),

the equilibrium level of output does not change as long as the money

supply, taxes, and the value of the debt commitment are given. Since,

however, the rise in government spending creates an excess demand for
                                  — 33 —



domestic output, it is seen from equation (29) that the currency must

appreciate (that is, e must fall) so as to lower the value of foreign

demand, e, and thereby maintain equilibrium output unchanged. Obviously,

since e falls, (the absolute value of) private sector debt, B, must rise

by the same proportion so as to maintain the product eB unchanged.

Finally, these changes ensure that the zero saving condition (28) is also

satisfied. A similar interpretation can be given to the effects of a

tax—financed rise in government spending except that in this case the

level of output rises in line with the rise in taxes so as to keep

disposable income unchanged.

     A comparison between these long—run effects and the corresponding

short—run effects shown in equations (24) —   (25) reveals that the relative
magnitudes of these multipliers depend on the initial debt position. For

example, if the Initial debt commitment is positive but smaller than

export earnings, then the short—run multiplier of tax—finance is positive

and larger than unity. In this case the long—run multipliers are more

moderate than the corresponding short—run multipliers. If, however, the

initial debt commitment exceeds export earnings, then the short—run debt—

finance multiplier is positive (in contrast with the long—run multiplier)

and the short—run tax—finance multiplier is smaller than unity, and could

even be negative (in contrast with the unitary long—run balanced—budget

multiplier).

2.   Fiscal policies in a two—country world

     In this section we extend the analysis of the small—country case to

the two—country model outlined in equations (20) —   (23).   To develop a

diagrammatic apparatus useful for the- analysis of fiscal policies we
                                        — 34 —




proceed in three steps. First, we trace the combinations of domestic
and foreign output levels which clear each country's goods market,

incorporating the conditions of market clearing in the two national money

markets (which under flexible exchange rates are the two non—tradable

assets). Second, we trace the combinations of domestic and foreign output

levels which bring about money—market equilibrium in each country and, at

the same time, yield equality between the domestic and the foreign rates

of interest, thereby conforming with the assumption of perfect capital

mobility. Finally, in the third step, we find the unique combination of

domestic and foreign levels of output which satisfy simultaneously the

considerations underlying the first two steps.

       Using the domestic money—market equilibrium condition (22) we can

express the domestic money—market clearing rate of interest, rt, as a posi-

tive function of disposable resources, t —                  + At_i,   and as a negative

function of the domestic money stock, M, that is, rt =                r(Yt—Tt+At_i,   M).

Applying a similar procedure to the foreign country, we can express

the foreign money—market clearing rate of interest, r, as a

function of foreign disposable resources and money stock that is,

r =    r*(Y   +   A1,   M*), where           =
                                                 M1   +
                                                          Rt_iB_i/et.    By substituting

these money—market clearing rates of interest into the goods market

equilibrium conditions (20) —        (21),   we obtain the reduced—form equilibrium

conditions (37) —       (38).


(37)     (l_m)E(Yt_Tt+At.....i M) + (1—ag) G +         et E*(Y+A_1, M*) = y


(38)      mYt_Ttt_1 M) +                + e(1_)E*(Y+A1,               M*) =   eY
                                       — 35 —



where a tilde (--)   indicates   a reduced—form function incorporating the

money—market equilibrium conditions. For each and every value of the

exchange rate, et, equations (37) —      (38) yield the equilibrium combination
of domestic and foreign output which clear the world markets for both

goods. The schedule ee in Figure 10 traces these equilibrium output

levels for alternative values of the exchange rate. The detailed

derivation of this schedule is provided In the Appendix where it is shown

that around balanced—trade equilibria with a zero initial private—sector

debt (so that exchange rate changes do not exert revaluation effects) this

schedule is negatively sloped. In general the ee schedule Is negatively

sloped if a rise In the exchange rate (a deterioration in the terms of

trade) raises the world demand for domestic output and lowers the world

demand for foreign output, allowing for the proper adjustments In each

country's rate of interest so as to clear the national money market.

       So far we have not yet incorporated the constraints imposed by the

perfect international mobility of capital. To incorporate this constraint

the two national money—market clearing rates of interest, rt and r, must

equal each other. This equally implies that


(39)      r(Yt —   Tt + At_i, M) =    r*(Y   +      M*).

The combinations of domestic and foreign output levels conforming with

the perfect capital—mobility requirement are portrayed by the rr* schedule

in Figure 10. With a zero level of initial debt (so that the debt

revaluation effects induced by exchange rate changes are absent) this

schedule Is positively sloped since a rise in domestic output raises the

demand for domestic money and raises the domestic rate of interest;
                         - 35a   —




        Figure 10: A Debt-Financed Unit
      Rise in Government Spending Under
            Flexible Exchange Rates:
             The Two-Country Case




                 e                         r*


         e           \
                          \
Ii   —

                                      ——
     —
                                           — —e1
Jo
                                           e
             r



                     Yo          V1                Yt



     Data: 1M0 = IM0*
          B1 = 0
                                   — 36 —




international   interest rate equalization is restored through a rise in

foreign output which raises the foreign demand for money and the foreign

rate of interest.

     The short—run equilibrium is indicated by point A in Figure 10. At

this point both goods markets clear, both national money markets clear

and the rates of interest are equalized internationally. The levels of

output corresponding to this equilibrium are     and Y.
     A debt—financed unit rise in government spending alters the position

of the goods market equilibrium schedule ee but does not impact on the

capital—market equilibrium schedule, rr*. It is shown in the Appendix

that for an initial trade—balance equilibrium with zero debt the

ee schedule shifts to the right by 1/ units. The new equilibrium is

indicated by point B in Figure 10. Thus (in the absence of revaluation

effects), in the new short—run equilibrium both the domestic and the

foreign levels of output rise from Y0 and Y to Y1 and Y, respectively.

     For the given supply of money and for the higher level of output

(which raises the demand for money), money—market equilibrium obtains at

a higher rate of interest (which restores money demand to its initial

level). Finally, it is shown in the Appendix that the exchange rate

effects of the debt—financed rise in government spending are not clear

cut, reflecting "transfer—problem criteria." These criteria reflect the

relative pressures on the rates of interest in the domestic and foreign

money markets induced by the changes in world demand for domestic and

foreign outputs. If these pressures tend to raise the domestic rate of

interest above the foreign rate, then the domestic currency must

appreciate so as to lower the demand for domestic output and reduce the
                                   — 37 —



upward pressure on the domestic rate of interest. The opposite follows

in the converse circumstances. But, if the behavioral parameters of the

two private sectors are equal to each other, then the domestic currency

must appreciate.

     A tax—financed unit rise in government spending alters the position

of both the ee and the rr* schedules. As is evident by inspection of

equations (37) —   (39) both schedules shift to the right by one unit.
This case is illustrated in Figure 11 where the initial equilibrium is

indicated by point A and the new short—run equilibrium by point B. At

the new equilibrium the domestic level of output rises by one unit so

that disposable income remains unchanged. With unchanged levels of

disposable income the demand for money is not altered and the initial

equilibrium rate of interest remains intact. As a result the initial

equilibrium in the foreign economy is not disturbed and the foreign

level of output remains unchanged. Finally, in order to eliminate the

excess supply in the domestic—goods market arising from the rise in

domestic output and the unchanged level of disposable income, the currency

must depreciate so as to raise the domestic—currency value of the given

foreign demand. It follows that in the absence of revaluation effects

the flexible exchange rate regime permits a full insulation of the foreign

economy from the consequences of the domestic tax—financed fiscal policies.

The more general results allowing for revaluation effects are provided in

the Appendix. Analogously to the procedure adopted in the fixed exchange

rate case, we do not analyze explicitly the long—run equilibrium of the

two—country world under the flexible exchange rate regime. The formal

equilibrium system applicable for such an analysis is presented in

Appendix 11.2.
                           — 37a —




      Figure 11: A Tax-Financed Unit Rise
        in   Government Spending Under
             Flexible Exchange Rates:
              The Two-Country Case

It
                                               r*


             &
                 \\
                                                         /r* I
                                                    ,/
                                             / /
                                          B,
                                                    e'


         r
                                      ,         e

                      I          r'
                      -L
                      V0                  Yl                     Yt


     Data: 1M0 = IM0*
                  =0
                                   — 38 —




                        V.   Summary and Overview

     In this paper we analyzed the effects of government spending under

fixed and flexible exchange rate regimes in an exposition of the Mundell—

Fleming model. Throughout we have assumed that the world capital markets

are highly integrated so that capital is perfectly mobile internationally.

To conserve on space we have focused on the pure effects of fiscal

policies and assumed that there is no active monetary policy. In

particular we abstracted from money—financed government spending.

Accordingly, we analyzed the predictions of the Mundell—Fleming model

concerning short— and long—run consequences of debt—financed and of

tax—financed changes in government spending. In this context we focused

on the effects of fiscal policies on the levels of output, debt and the

rate of interest under the two alternative exchange rate regimes. In

addition, for the fixed exchange rate regime we examined the induced

changes in the money supply and, for the flexible exchange rate regime we

determined the induced change in the exchange rate.

     The short— and long—run effects of a unit debt—financed and tax—

financed rise in government spending for a small country facing a fixed

world rate of interest are summarized in Table 1. This table shows the

various multipliers applicable to the fixed as well as to the flexible

exchange—rate regimes. The output multipliers under the fixed exchange

rate regime are the typical simple text—book version of the foreign trade

multipliers. These results are of course expected since the rate of

interest is exogenously given to the small country. The fixity of the

rate of interest implies that the typical crowding—out mechanism induced

by changes in the rate of interest are not present.
                                                              — 39 —




            Table 1. The Short— and Long—Run Effects of a Unit Rise in Government Spending
                  Under Fixed and Flexible Exchange Rates: The Small—Country Case


Fixed                           Debt—Financed                                            Tax—Financed
Exchange Rates           Short—Run         Long—Run                              Short—Run          Long—Run

Effects On:

                                                                                                          g
   Y                                                                                              1 — -
                             s+a            A        (1—s—f(sM))                            s+a               (l—S—rf(S—My))


                                                    1—
                              0                 —                                       0
 BF,t...i                                            A            (s—Mr)                                  •K (s_Mr)



   M
                         (l_a)M                      1_
                             s+a                         L




Flexible
Exchange Rates

Effects On:


   Y                   (l_a)RfB,_1                            0            1 —
                                                                                  aRfB1                          1
                         RfB                                                     Rf B       ,—1



                               0
                                                    (1_)B
 B,t_l                                                       —*                         0
                                                             eD                                                 —*
                                                                                                                eD



   e
                            Cl_ag)                  — ______
                        RfB          _3•*               D*                                                     D*
                                                                             RfB, t_l_D*


Note: D* denotes export earnings measured in units of foreign currency, Rf =                                  l+rf   and
         A =                 A > 0 under the assumption that a rise in income worsens the current
               a—rf(s—M).
         account of the balance of payments. The term l—s—rf(s—M) > 0 for stability.
                                  — 40 —




    Under flexible exchange rates the short—run output multipliers of

fiscal policies depend crucially on the debt—revaluation effect induced

by exchange rate changes. Indeed, in the absence of such an effect

(as would be the case if the initial debt position is zero), fiscal

policies lose their capacity to alter disposable income. Accordingly,

with debt finance the output multiplier is zero and with tax finance

the corresponding multiplier is unity. In general, however, the signs

and magnitudes of the short—run output multipliers depend on the size of

the initial debt. In contrast, these considerations do not influence the

long—run output multipliers. As seen in the table, with perfect capital

mobility and flexible exchange rates, the long—run value of disposable

income cannot be affected by fiscal policies.

    One of the important points underscored by the results reported in

Table 1 is the critical dependence of the direction of change in the key

variables on the means of fiscal finance. Specifically, a shift from a

debt finance to a tax finance reverses the signs of the multipliers of

B, M and e.

    For example, a tax—financed rise in government spending under a

fixed exchange rate regime induces a balance of payments deficit and

reduces both the short— and the long—run money holdings. On the other

hand a similar rise in government spending which is debt—financed induces

a surplus in the balance of payments and raises money holdings in the

short run as well as in the long run. Likewise, under a flexible

exchange rate regime the tax—financed rise in government spending

depreciates the long—run value of the currency whereas the debt—financed

rise in government spending appreciates the long—run value of the currency.
                                  — 41 —



As indicated earlier, a similar reversal in the direction of the change

in the exchange rate also pertains to the short run but whether the

currency depreciates or appreciates in the short run depends on the size

of the debt which in turn governs the debt—revaluation effect.

     To study the characteristics of the international transmission

mechanism our exposition of the Mundell—Fleming model was extended to a

two—country model of the world economy. The new channel of transmission

is the world rate of interest which is determined in the unified world

capital market. Table 2 summarizes the short—run effects of fiscal

policies under the two alternative exchange rate regimes. To avoid a

tedious taxonomy the summary results for the flexible exchange rates

reported in the table are confined to the case in which the twin

revaluation effects—debt revaluation and trade balance revaluation——

induced by exchange rate changes are absent; accordingly it is assumed

that the initial debt is zero and that the initial equilibrium obtains

with a balanced trade.

    As shown, independent of the exchange rate regime, a debt—financed

rise in government spending raises the world rate of interest. Under

the flexible exchange rate regime the debt—financed rise in government

spending stimulates demand for both domestic and foreign goods and

results in an expansion of both outputs. Thus, in this case, the inter-

national transmission of the rise in goververnment spending, measured by

co—movements of domestic and foreign outputs, is positive. On the other

hand, under a fixed exchange rate regime the rise in the world rate of

interst may offset the direct effect of government spending on aggregate

demand and may result in lower levels of output. But, if the (negative)
                                                — 42 —




                Table 2. The Direction of the Short—Run Effects
                of a Rise in Government Spending Under Fixed and
                 Flexible Exchange Rates: The Two—Country World



Fixed Exchange Rates              Debt—Financed                   Tax—Financed

Effects On:

         Y                       +       (for   small Hr)          +   (for a a)
                                 +       (for   small Fr)          +

         r                       +                                 + (for   A > 0)
                                                                   — (for   A < 0)

         M                       ÷ (for B+C < 0)
                                 —
                                   (for B+C > 0)


Flexible Exchange Rates

Effects On:

         Y                       +                                 +

                                 ÷                                 0

         r                       +                                 0

         e                       +(for>O)                          +
                                 — (for           < 0)




Note: The signs indicated in the flexible exchange—rate part of the Table are
       applicable to the case of an initial equilibrium with balanced trade and
       zero initial debt. Hr and Fr denote, respectively, the negative effect
       of the rate of interest on the world demand for domestic and foreign
       goods, A =                    B =                                             and
                    s/M_s*/M*,             e(My/M)[a*+s*(l_a)]_(M*/M)(a+sa),
         =                                 —                correspond, respectively
       to the fixed and flexible exchange rate regimes, and where
       C = H M* N M*[F (l—ag)—H ag].
              yy*rr r                r
                                   — 43 —


interest—rate   effect on aggregate demand is relatively weak, then both

domestic and foreign outputs rise, thereby resulting in a positive

international transmission. Finally, we note that there is no presumption

about the direction of change in money holdings (under fixed exchange

rates) and in the exchange rate (under flexible exchange rates) in

response to the debt—financed fiscal expansion. As indicated, depending

on the relative magnitudes of the domestic and foreign saving and import

propensities and the domestic and foreign sensitivities of money demand

with respect to changes in the rate of interest and income, the balance

of payments may be in a deficit or in a surplus and the currency may

depreciate or appreciate.

     The results in Table 2 also highlight the significant implication of

alternative means of budgetary finance. Indeed, in contrast with debt

finance, a tax—financed rise in government spending under a flexible

exchange rate regime leaves the world rate of interest unchanged, raises

domestic output, and depreciates the currency. The reduction in the

domestic private—sector demand for foreign output, induced by the

depreciation of the currency, precisely offsets the increased demand

induced by the rise in government spending. As a result, foreign output

remains intact and the flexible exchange rate regime fully insulates the

foreign economy from the domestic tax—financed fiscal policy. In this

case the analysis of the two—country world economy reduces to the one

carried out for the small—country case. Therefore, the long—run

multipliers for the two countries operating under flexible exchange rates

coincide with the short—run multipliers, the domestic short— and long—run

output multipliers are unity and the corresponding foreign output

multipliers are zero.
                                  — 44 —



    In   contrast with the flexible exchange rate regime in which the

currency depreciates to the extent needed to maintain world demand for

(and thereby the equilibrium level of) foreign output unchanged, the

fixed exchange rate regime does not contain this insulating mechanism.

As a result, the tax—financed rise in the domestic government spending

raises the world demand for (and thereby the equilibrium level of)

foreign output. On the other hand, depending on the relative magnitude

of the domestic—government import propensity, the domestic level of

ou.r'ut may rise or fall. If, however, the government import propensity

:ioes uut exceqd the corresponding private—sector propensity, then

domestic output rises and the international transmission, measured by

co—movements of domestic and foreign outputs, is positive. Finally,

since at the prevailing rate of interest domestic disposable income

falls and foreign disposable income rises, these changes in disposable

incomes alter the world demand for money and necessitate equilibrating

changes in the world rate of interest. As shown in Table 2, the change

in the world demand for money (at the prevailing rate of interest)

reflects a "transfer—problem criterion.' If the ratio of the domestic

saving to hoarding propensities, s/Mg, exceeds the corresponding foreign

ratio, s*IM** then the international redistribution of disposable income

raises the world demand for money and necessitates a rise in the world

rate of interest. The opposite holds if s/Mr falls short of s*/M**.

Independent, however, of the direction of the change in the interest rate,

the tax—financed rise in government spending must worsen the balance of

payments and lower the short—run equilibrium money holdings.
                                   — 45 —




      Throughout the exposition of the model it was assumed that

 expectations are static. Since under a flexible exchange rate the actual

 exchange rates do change, the assumption that exchange rate expectations

 are static result in expectational errors during the period of transition

 towards the long—run equilibrium. The incorporation of a consistent

expectations scheme into the Mundell—Fleming model introduces an

additional mechanism governing the short—run behavior. Aspects of this

mechanism are examined in the Appendix.

     We conclude this summary with an overview of the Mundell—Flenting

model. A key characteristic of the formulation of the income—expenditure

framework underlying the Mundell—Fleming model is the lack of solid

inicroeconomic foundations underlying the behavior of the private and

public sectors, and the absence of an explicit rationale for the holdings

of zero interest—bearing money in the presence of safe interest—bearing

bonds. The latter issue is of relevance in view of the central role

played by monetary flows in the international adjustment mechanism.

Furthermore, no attention was given to the intertemporal budget

constraints and the behavior of both the private and the public sectors

was not forward—looking in a consistent manner. As a result, there is

no mechanism ensuring that the patterns of spending, debt accumulation

and money hoarding, which are the key elements governing the equilibrium

dynamics of the economic system, are consistent with the relevant economic

constraints. The implication of this shortcoming is that in determining

the level and composition of spending, saving and asset holdings, the

private sector does not incorporate explicitly the intertemporal

consequences of government policies.
                                  — 46 —




    To illustrate the significance of this issue consider a debt—

financed rise in current government spending. A proper formulation of

the government's intertemporal budget constraint must recognize that to

service the debt and maintain its solvency the government must accompany

this current fiscal expansion by either cutting down future spending or

by raising future (ordinary or inflationary) taxes. Furthermore, a proper

specification of the private sector's behavior must allow for the fact

that the forward—looking individuals may recognize the future consequences

of current government policies and incorporate these expected consequences

into their current as well as planned future spending, saving and asset

holdings.

     The Mundell—Fleming model presented in this paper assumes that

producer prices are given and outputs are demand—determined. In this

framework nominal exchange rate changes amount to changes in the terms

of trade. As a result, the key characteristics of the economic system

are drastically different across alternative exchange rate regimes. More

recent theoretical research has relaxed the fixed—price assumption and

has allowed for complete price flexibility. With this flexibility prices

are always at their market clearing equilibrium levels. Accordingly,

changes in the terms of trade induced by equilibrium changes in prices

trigger an adjustment mechanism that is analogous to the one triggered by

nominal exchange rate changes in the Mundell—Fleming model.

     The neglect of the intertemporal budget constraints and of the

consequences of forward—looking behavior consistent with these constraints

are among the main limitations of the model. Recognition of these

limitations provide both, the rationale for and the bridge to the growing
                                             — 47




body of newer theoretical developments aiming to rectify these

shortcomings. This newer literature develops models that are derived

from optimizing behavior consistent with the relevant temporal and

Intertemporal economic constraints. The resulting macroeconomic model

which is grounded upon solid microeconomic foundations is capable of

dealing with new issues in a consistent manner. Among these issues are

the effects of various time patterns of government spending and taxes.

The newer literature thus distinguishes between temporary and permanent

as well as between current and future policies. Likewise, it is capable

of analyzing the macroeconomic consequences of alternative specifications

of the tax structure. It can, therefore, distinguish between the effects

of different types of taxes (such as income taxes, value—added taxes and

international capital flow taxes) used to finance the budget. An

illustration of this literature is contained in Frenkel and Razin (1987).

An important feature of the modern approach is that, being grounded on

microeconomic foundations, it is capable of dealing explicitly with the

welfare consequences of economic policies. This feature reflects the

basic attribute of the macroeconomic model: the economic behavior under-

lying this model is derived from, and is consistent with, the principles

of individual utility maximization. Therefore, in contrast with the

traditional approach, the intertemporal optimizing approach provides for

a framework suitable for the normative evaluation of international

macroeconomic policies.
                                         — 48
                                                                                APPENDIX I




                       Appendix I.      Fixed Exchange Rates

1.      Long—run equilibrium: the small—country case

        The long—run equilibrium conditions are specified by equations (12) —

(15)    of the text. Substituting the government budget constraint (15) into

equations (12) —      (14) yields

                                                          =    Y —
(A—i)       E(Y—G+M—B —     rf(B'   +   Be), rf) +   G
                                                                     rf(BP4B)

                                                                      +            Y
(A—2)        (i_m)E(Y_G+M_BP        rf(BP+B), rf) +           (i—)G

(A—3)       N(Y—G+M—B —     rf(BI)IB),       rf) =   M



Equations (A—i) and (A—3) yield the combinations of output and private

sector debt underlying the CA = 0 schedule, and equations (A—2) and (A—3)

yield the combinations of these variables underlying the YY schedule.

To obtain the slope of the CA = 0 schedule we differentiate equations

(A—i) and (A—3) and obtain



                [—s       s(1+rf)—ll            1        r—(l—s)1
                                        II  I=I
                L -l÷ij
(A—4)           I                                  1dM

                                         [dBPJ [i-J
where s = 1_Er and a =              Solving     (A—4) for dY/dM and dividing the

resultant solutions by each other yields the expression for dBP/dY along

the CA = 0 schedule. This expression is reported in equation (16) of the

text.
                                     —     -
                                                                         APPENDIX I




        Likewise differentiating equations (A—2) — (A—3) yields



                                                               [isa1
(A—5)




Following
                [
                [_(s+a)




        a similar
                               —(1+f)(l—s—a)1 [dY 1


                                _(l+rf)M
                                                II
                                                ]
                                                          11
                                                    [Pj [ l•My          ]
                                                                         lcM


                          procedure we obtain the expression for dBP/dY along

the YY schedule. This expression is reported in equation (17) of the

text.

        To obtain the horizontal displacements of the CA = 0 schedule

following a balanced—budget rise in government spending we differentiate

equations (Ai) and (A—3) holding B and BP constant. Accordingly,

equation (A—i) implies that (l—s)(dY—dG+dM) = dY—dc and equation (A—3)

implies that dM =                          Substituting the latter expression
                     My(dYdG)/(1My).
into the former reveals that dy/dc =       1.       Thus, a unit balanced—budget

rise in government spending induces a unit rightwards shift of the CA = 0

schedule.

       Analogously, to obtain the horizontal shift of the YY schedule we

differentiate equations (A—2) — (A—3) holding Bg and BP constant.

Equation (A—2) implies that (i—s—a)(dY—dG+dM) + (i_a)dG = dY where
   =    , and   equation (A—3) implies that dM =
                                                        My(dY••dG)/(1My).
Substituting the latter into the former shows that the horizontal shift

of the YY schedule Is


                   (l—M
              1— s+a —
                           M

Thus, in contrast with the unit rightwards displacement of the CA = 0
                                              — 50 —
                                                                                         APPENDIX I




schedule, the unit balanced—budget rise in government spending shifts the

YY schedule to the right by less than one unit. These results underly

the diagrammatic analysis in Figures 2 and 3.

        The long—run effects of fiscal policies are obtained by

differentiating the system (12) —                (14) of the text and solving for the
endogenous variables. Accordingly,


                   —s                s(l+rf)—l                1—s             dY

(A—6)           —(s+a)         —(l+f)(l—s—a)              1—s—a               dB
                   M                 —(l+rf)M                                 dM


                                         0                            —s

                                     —(l—a) dG ÷                    1—s—a      dT

                                         0
                                                                     M
Using this system the long—run effects of a debt—financed rise in

government spending (that is, dT =               0) are

(A—7)              =                                  )   0                for dTt = 0
                               [1—s—rf(s—M)]


              dB             _____
(A8)                =    —
                                     (s—Mr)       0                        for dTt = 0




(A—9)              =                 )   0                                 for dTt = 0
                               My



where     =
              a—rf(s—M) > 0 under the assumption that a rise in income
worsens the current account of the balance of payments. Correspondingly,

the long—run effects of a balanced—budget rise in government spending

(that is, dG =     dT)   are
                                               — 51 —
                                                                                  APPENDIX I




(A—la)          =       1 —                                      0       for dG    dTt
                                 ((1—s—f(s—M))


           dB       =                           0                        for dG = dTt
(A—li)                        (s—Mr)



           dM   =
(A—12)                  — - M,             0                             for dG = dTt



2.   Short—run equilibrium: the two—country world

     In this part of the Appendix we analyze the short—run equilibrium of

the system (5) —     (7)   in the text. This system determines the short—run

equilibrium values of Y, Y and rt. The YY and YY schedules in

Figure 4 show combinations of                   and         which clear the markets for

domestic and foreign output, respectively. Both of these schedules

incorporate the world money—market equilibrium condition (7) of the text.

To derive the slope of the YY schedule we differentiate equations (5) and

(7) of the text. This yields



          [-(s-I-a)            a*1 [dYti
                                                        =
                                                             [ Hr 1
(A—13)                            I    I            I        1     Idrt
          [ M,                M;] LdYi                       [(Mr+M)]

where 11r denotes the partial (negative) effect a change in the rate of

interest on the world demand for domestic output, that is,

Hr = (l_13m)Er +eE, and where Er Mr E and M denote the partial

(negative) effects of the rate of interest on domestic and foreign

spending and money demand. To eliminate rt from the goods—market

equilibrium schedule we solve (A—13) for dYt/dr and for dY/drt, and

divide the solutions by each other. This yields
                                           — 52 —
                                                                       APPENDIX I




             dY       =
                          i (s+a)(Mr+eM) + MyHr
(A14)
             d t                                        along the YY schedule
                          e    a*(Mr+eM) — M;*Hr


     Analogously, differentiating equations (13) —         (14) of the text yields


             [a           _(s*+a*)1 [dYti
(A—15)                             I   I                    drt
             [M               eM* j    [dYj
where Fr =   niEr + e(1—3)E         denotes the partial (negative) effect of the

rate of interest on the world demand for foreign output. Applying a

similar procedure as before, the slope of the YY schedule is

                  *                —*
             dY
                          —
                                a(M+eM)—MF
                                  r r    Y r
(A—16)                =                                  along the YY schedule
             d
                          e (s*+a*)(Mr+eM) ÷ M**F


A comparison of the slopes in (A—14) and (A—16) shows that there are

various possible configurations of the relative slopes of the YY and YY

schedules. However, two configurations are ruled out: if both schedules

are positively sloped then the slope of the YY cannot exceed the slope

of the YY schedule. This can be verified by noting that in the numerator

of (A—14) the negative quantity a(Mr+eM) is augmented by additional

negative quantities whereas the same negative quantity in the numerator

of (A—16) is augmented by an additional positive quantity. A similar

comparison of the denominators of (A—14) and (A—if,) shows that the

negative quantity a*(Mr+eM) is augmented by additional negative quantities

in (A—16) and by a positive quantity in (A—14). Likewise, if both

schedules are negatively sloped then, by subtracting one slope from the

other it can be verified that the Y*Y* schedule cannot be steeper than
                                        —        —
                                                                           APPENDIX I



 the YY schedule. These considerations imply that for all situations in.

which there is a rightwards shift of the YY schedule exceeding the

rightwards shift of the YY' schedule, the new equilibrium must be

associated with a higher level of domestic output.

      A rise in the domestic government spending alters the position of

both schedules. To determine the horizontal shift of the YY schedule we

use equations (5) and (7) of the text; holding Y constant and solving

for dY/dG after eliminating the expression for dr/dG. A similar procedure

is applied to determine the horizontal shift of the Y*Y* schedule from

equations (6) and (7). Accordingly, the horizontal shifts of the

schedules induced by a debt—financed rise in government spending are


           dY       _____________
(A—17)          =                                    for the YY schedule
                           M H
                    s+a   +  yr
                            Mr+M

                           g
(A—l8)          =                       0            for the y*y* schedule
                          aM F
                    a—      yr
                             —*
                          Mr+eMr


The corresponding shifts for the tax—financed rise in government spending

are



           dY             _____________
(A—19)          =     —
                                                        for the YY schedule
                                 M H
                          s+a +    yr
                                    —*
                                  Mr+eMr



(A—20)
           dY
                =   1 —   ______         >   0          for the   YCY schedule
                              F
                          a— yr
                               1 +eM*
                                r   r
                                         -      —
                                                                                     APPENDIX I



Comparisons of (A—17) with (A—18) and of (A—19) with (A—20) reveal the

difference between the shifts of the YY and the YY schedules.

     To compute the short—run multipliers of fiscal policies we

differentiate the system (5) —          (7) of the text. Thus

            —(s+a)        ea*           Hr           dY                               1—s—a

(A—21)        a       —(s*+a*)          Fr           dY =       —
                                                                            dG   +     a      dTt

         L M              eM        Mr+eM            drt              0




With a debt—financed rise in government spending dTt = 0 and thus the

short—run effects are



(A—22)
              t
                  =   !                                    +   M(F   (1_as) — aSH))        for dTt = 0


            dY*
                  =                              —                   —
(A—23)                    ((sa+a)(M+M)               My(F(l_a)            aH))             for dTt = 0




(A—24)
              t
                  =   _ ((s*(l_a)÷a*)M              +   (sa+a)M) > 0                       for dTt = 0


where A =   s((s*+a*)(Mr+M)         +   M**F)   +
                                                     a(s*(Mr+M) + M**(F+H))
                                + My(s*Hr + a*(Fr+Hr))           <0
     Differentiating      the domestic demand for money function (equation (8)

of the text) and using (A—22) and (A—24) yields the short—run change in

the domestic money holdings, that is, the balance of payments:
                                             —     —
                                                                                        APPENDIX I



                                                                    *
          dM                         eM                         M
                           1
(A—25)
          dG
                   =
                       Mrr
                         M*
                                     (J
                                     Mr
                                           [a*+s*(a_ag)]    —
                                                                M*
                                                                        (a+sa)
                                                                    r



                                                                                   for dTt = 0
                               +
                                   MM* MM[F(l_a) —              Ha])

     With a balanced—budget rise in government spending dG = dTt = dT.

Accordingly, the solutions of (A—21) are



               t
                   =                                   +   M**F)
(A-26)                     fs((s*+a*)(Mr+eM)

                                ÷                          +


                                   + My(s*Hr +   a*(Fr+Hr)j                      for dG =     dTt


           dY*
(A—27)             =
                               (My(F+H.)
                                             +
                                                  s(Mr+M)) > 0                   for dG =     dTt
                       e

               t
(A—28)             =                      — sM)                                  for   dG =
                                                                                              dTt


     Differentiating the domestic money demand function and using (A—26)

and (A—28) yields


           dM                  g
(A—29)             =   —
                                    ((SMrM* ÷ s*eMM) + MyM*(FrlHr))                    < 0

                                                                                  for dG = dTt
                                      — 56
                                                                          APPENDIX I



3.   Long—run equilibrium: the two—country world

     The long—run equilibrium of the system is specified by

equations (A—30) — (A—36) where the first five equations are the long—run

counterpart to the short—run conditions (5) —            (9)   of the text and the

last two equations are the zero—savings requirements for each country

implying (once the government budget constraint is incorporated) current

account balances. By employing a common rate of interest, this long—run

system embodies the assumption of perfect capital mobility.


(A30)      (lBm) E(Y—T-f-M —    (l+r)B1',    r) +   (l)G
               +
                   BE*     (y*j4*   + (l+r)B/,      r)         Y


(A—31 )    mT+M        —   (l+r)BP,   r) +


               + (1—)      eE*(Y*+M* +       (l+r)BP/,   r) =      Y

(A—32)     M(Y—T+M —   (l+r)BP,     r) + eM*(Y*lM* ÷ (l+r)BP/, r) =


(A—33)    M(Y—T+M —    (l+r)BP, r) =         M



(A—34)    M*(Y*+M* +   (l+r)BP/, r) =

(A35)     E(Y—T+M —    (l+r)BP, r) =         Y — rBP —   T


(A—36)    E*(Y*+M* +   (l+r)BP/, r) =               ÷ rBP/


By Wairas's Law one of the seven equations can be omitted and the

remaining six equations can be used to solve for the long—run equilibrium

values of Y, Y, BP, M, M* and r as functions of the policy variables.
                                           - 57   —
                                                               APPENDIX II



                    Appendix II. Flexible Exchange Rates

1.   Short—run equilibrium: the two—country world

     In this part of the Appendix we analyze the short—run equilibrium of

the two—country model under flexible exchange rates. Using the domestic

money market equilibrium condition (22) of the text the domestic market

clearing rate of interest is


                            —
(A—37)       rt =   r(Yt        Tt   + At...i,   M)


where a rise in disposable resources raises the equilibrium rate of

interest while a rise in the money supply lowers the rate of interest.

Similarly, using the foreign money—market clearing condition (23) of the

text but not imposing yet an equality between the foreign rate of

interest, r, and the domestic rate, r, yields


(A—38)       r* = r*    * + At_i,
                             *     *
                                  M )


Substituting   (A—37) into the domestic expenditure function (3) of the

text and substituting (A—38) Into the corresponding foreign expenditure

function yields


            Et = E(Y    —
(A—39)                      Tt   + At_i, M)


(A—40) E = ? (Y            +    A1,     M*)


Equations   (A—39) — (A—40) are the reduced—form expenditure functions

which incorporate the conditions of money—market equilibrium. A rise in

disposable resources exerts two conflicting influences on the reduced—form

expenditure function. On the one hand it stimulates spending directly hut
                                      — 58 —
                                                                             APPENDIX II



n the ether hand, by raising the equilibrium rate of interest, it

discourages spending. ForTnally, 5 =           5—   (Er/Mr)My•       In what follows we

assume that the direct effect ominates so that 5 > 0. For subsequent

use we note that the reduced—form gying propensity               =         exceeds
                                                                     1—5
MyIl+(Er/Mr)]. This follows from the assumption that bonds are normal

goods (so that l5My > 0) together with the former expression linking

   with 5.

     Substituting the reduced—form expenditure functions (A—39) — (A—40)

into the good—markets clearing conditions yields


(A—41)     (l_m)E(Yt_Tt +     At_i,   M) +   (l—)G   +   etE*(Y       +
                                                                          A_1,   M*)



(A—42)     mEtTt +       At.....i, M) +      + et(l_)E*(Y + A_1,           4*) =       eY
where we recall that Ar_i =               (i+rt_i)_i and
                                 Mt_i
     =         +
         M_1       (i+ri)BP1/e.       Thus, while Ar_i is predetermined, the

value of A_1 depends on the prevailing exchange rate. Equations

(A—41) — (A—42) are the reduced—form good—markets clearing conditions.

These conditions link the equilibrium values of domestic output, foreign

output, and the exchange rate. In the first step of the analysis we

derive the ee schedule of the text which portrays alternative combinations

of Y and Y satisfying equations (A—41) — (A—42)           for alternative values

of the exchange rate (which is treated as a parameter). The slope of

this schedule is obtained by differentiating equations (A—41) — (A—42)

and solving for dY/dYt. Accordingly,
                                                -               —
                                                                                                        APPENDIX II




          r-s(÷)               et*       1[dYtl
                                                            =
                                                                r _IN+aH              1
                                                                                                  —
                                                                                                      ri_as]
                                                                                                                +
                                                                                                                  r'--n
(A—43)
                                                    I                                                      dG         JdTt
          L           _et(*+*)jl_dYJ [IMt+(l_*_*)Hj                                                   ag]             J

where H =     (l+rt_i)B_i/et             denotes the debt commitment of the home

country, the reduced—form saving and import propensities are designated

by a tilde ('-), and           where IM =       E* and fl1 = y* — (i_)E* are,
respectively, the foreign arid the domestic values of imports expressed

in units of foreign goods. For given fiscal policies we obtain


               dYt
                           *IM*t +                      —
                                                                    t
                                                                IM ) —
(A—44)         —.z—   =
               det

                               'IM —
                                     t    (IM*          —       IM ) +
                                                                    t         [(l_.*_'*)      +   (l—'*)]H
(A—45) dY
        —             =—
               det                                                      etL


where          =   * + * + '*               >       0.



To obtain the slope of the ee schedule we divide (A45) by (A—44) yielding



               dY          —
                               IM —       (IM — IMt)                    +     [(l—*—*)        +
(A—46)         d                                         *
                                          et[*mi + *(IM*                        —
                                                                                    IM)
                                                                                          —   *H]

                                                                                      along the ee schedule.


Around a trade—balance equilibrium with zero initial debt (that is,

IMt =    IM   and H =     0)   this slope is negative arid is equal to _/et*.

With the negatively sloped ee schedule a downwards movement along the

schedule (that is a rise in Y and a fall in Y) is associated with

higher values of et.
                                       — 60 —                                   APPENDIX II



     To determine the effects of changes in government spending we

compute the horizontal shift of the ee schedule by setting dY = dTt = 0

in the system (A—43) and solving for dYt/dG. This yields



(A—47)
           —
           dY
           dC
                   =
                        IM + g(IM* —

                       IM —        *
                                         IM)
                                       — IM) +
                                                ÷ [(i_*)(l_ag) —

                                                  [(l_*—*)         +


                                                                   for   the ee schedule.


Thus, around trade—balance equilibrium and zero initial debt the schedule

shifts to the right by l/.

     By setting dY = dG       0 and following a similar procedure, the

horizontal shift of the ee schedule induced by a unit rise in taxes is



           dYt          (IM — IMt) + (l—)IM ÷ [(l_)(l_s*_*(l4*)]H
(A—48)             =—
           d                  *
           —i---
              t
                         _a(IM
                                  — 114) +
                                             IM          +   [(l_*_*)    ÷ a(l—'*)J'd



                                                                   for the ee schedule.


Thus, around trade—balance equilibrium and zero initial debt schedule

shifts to the left by (l—s)/s units.

     By combining the results in (A—47) — (A—48) we obtain the effect of

a balanced budget unit rise in government spending. Accordingly,


           dY          IMt + (g_)(IM*      — IM          +   ['(1—*_*)   +
(A—49)     —
           d
                   =
                           IM —    (IM — IM)
                                                 t
                                                     )


                                                         ÷ [(l—'*—*) +


                                                for      the ee schedule with dG        dTt.
                                         — 61 —
                                                                               APPENDIX II



 Thus, around trade—balance equilibrium with zero initial debt, a

 balanced—budget unit rise in government spending shifts the ee schedule

 to the right by one unit.

         In the second step of the diagramatic analysis we assume that Fl = 0

 and we derive the rr* schedule portraying combinations of Y and                   along

 which the money—market clearing rates of interest (under the assumption

 of static exchange rate expectations) are equal across countries so that


 (A—50)        r(Yt —   Tt + At_i, M) = r*(Y*        +
                                                         A1,    M*).


 The slope of this schedule is r/r which can also be expressed in terms

 of the characteristics of the demands for money according to


              dY*       M M*
 (A—5l)
              —s- =              >   0            along the rr* schedule.
              dYt       M* Mr
                         y*


Obviously, around r =      r*,        M. As is evident, the level of

government spending does not influence the rr* schedule whereas a unit

rise in taxes shifts the schedule to the right by one unit.

     Formally, the effects of fiscal policies can be obtained by

differentiating the system (A—41) — (A—42) and (A—50). Thus,


           (+)                       IM_*H                dYt

(A—52)                                                                 —       dG ÷     a
                    _et(*+a*) _IMt(l_**)ll                dY                                  dT
                                                                           0
           My/Mr —M*/M               */et                 de                          My/Mr


     Solving (A—52) the short—run effects of a debt—financed rise in

government spending are:
                                                    — 62
                                                                                              APPENDIX II



           dY                M*
(A—53)                   =
                             — (IM(1—a)               +             + (l_a)H)                   for dTt = 0




                             j ('t
            dY*              M
(A—54)                   =                    +    a(IM    —
                                                               IMt))
                                           M*                       M
                                  +   - (—c- ( + a)             +        [(i_a)(i_*)      —


                                                                                                for    dTt   0


                                      *
                    t                                       etM
(A-55)                   =   f (37* ( ÷ a) -                            [* +   *(l_a)J)         for dTt =



                    )T                                     eM ((*+*)IM* —
where    t =
                         ((÷)IM                       +                   a*IMt)

                                              M*
                             +   (C+)              - e*

Thus, with an initial balanced trade and with zero initial debt,                                      < 0.

     Differentiating the money—market equilibrium condition (equation (8)

of the text) and using (A—53), we obtain the equilibrium change in the

rate of interest:


               dr                 MM*
(A—56)                   =                Y   (IM +   a(IM — IM)           +    (l_a)H)        for dTt = 0
                                  M M*
                                      rr

Likewise, the short—run efects of a tax—financed rise in government

spending are
                                           — 63
                                                                                       APPENDIX II




                =
(A—57)                           (;IM      +
                                               (_a)(IM — IM))

                        eM
                    +           (*IM +         *(IM*     -
                                                             IM))

                        M*                         eM
                    +   (Y*                    —
                                                   r'    *)i}
                                                                                         for dG = dTt




                                                                             T*
(A—58)          =
                            {        (IM   —
                                               IM)   —
                                                         (Y       (1_'*) —
                                                                                  H}     for dG =     dTt


           de           g eM
(A—59)          =
                                'r     +                                                 for   dG =
                                                                                                      dTt


Using the money market equilibrium condition together with (A—57) yields


           dr           M                                    M*                   eM
(A—60)          =   —
                                           — INt)       ÷ (f (+_a) +              Mr


                                                                                         for dG =     dTt

2.   Long—run equilibrium: the two—country world

     The long—run equilibrium of the system is characterized by

equations (A—61) — (A—65) where the first three equations are the long—run

counterparts to equations (A—41), (A—42) and (A50), and the last two

equations are the requirements of zero savings in both countries implying

(once the government budget constraint is incorporated) current account

balances. Embodied in the system are the requirements of money—market

equilibria and perfect capital mobility.
                                     — 64    —
                                                                                 APPENDIX II




(A—61)     (l_m)E(Y_T+M(l+r)B, M) +               (l—)G
                                     (l+r)
                +                                B1, M*) =         Y
                    eE*(Y*+M*+

(A—62) mET+M' M) +
                + e(l_3)E*(Y*+M* +
                                   (l+r) B", M*) = eY*


(A—63)     r(Y—T+M—(l+r)B ,     M)   =   r*(Y
                                                  *     * (l+r)
                                                      +M +
                                                                            *
                                                                       BP, M )
                                                               e



(A—64)     E(Y—T+M—(l+r)BP, M) =         Y —      rB     — T



                       (l±r)
(A—65)     E*(Y*+M*+           BP, M*)       =    y*    +



This system which determines the long—run equilibrium values of Y, Y, e,
BP and r, can be used to analyze the effects of government spending and

taxes on these endogenous variables.

3.   Exchange rate expectations

     Up to this point we have assumed that the expectations concerning

the evolution of the exchange rate are static. This assumption implied

that the rates of interest on securities denominated in different

currencies are equalized. Since, however, the actual exchange rate does

change overtime, it is useful to extend the analysis and allow for

exchange rate expectations that are not static. Specifically, in this

part of the Appendix we assume that expectations are rational in the

sense of being self fulfilling. We continue to assume that the GDP

deflators are fixed. To illustrate the main implication of exchange
                                        - 65    -
                                                                             APPENDIX II



rate expectations we consider a stripped—down version of the small—

country flexible exchange—rate model and, for expository convenience,

we present the analysis using a continuous—time version of the model.

       The budget constraint can be written as


(A—66)      Et +      — eBt        =    —T —         rfeB
where a dot over a variable represents a time derivative. The spending

and money—demand functions (the counterparts to equations (3) —               (4)   of

the text) are


(A—67)      Et       E(Yt_T —      rfeB,         —
                                                     etBt,   rf)


(A—68)               M(Yt —        —                 —
            Mt                Tt                              rf +     )


where the demand for money is expressed as a negative function of the

expected depreciation of the currency, et/et. In what follows we

simplify   the   exposition by assuming that the world rate of interest, r,

is   very low (zero), and that the effect of assets (Mt —
                                                                     etBt)
spending is negligible. With these simplifications the goods and money—

market equilibrium conditions (the counterparts to equations (20') and

(22') of the text) are


(A—69)           mtTt) +           (l—8)G   +            =



(A—70)     M(Y1—T, M—etBt, --)         =M
                                    — 66 —
                                                                 APPENDIX II




     Equation (A—69) implies that the level of output which clears the

goods market depends positively on the level of the exchange rate and on

government spending, and negatively on taxes. This dependence can be

expressed as


(A—71)    t = Y(et,        G, Tt)


where Yt/et =   /(s+a),       Yt/G (l_a)/(s+a) and YtITt = —(l—s—a)/(s+a)
are the conventional foreign trade multipliers. Substituting the functional

relation (A—71) into the money—market equilibrium condition and solving for

the (actual and expected) percentage change in the exchange rate yields



               =
(A—72)             f(et,    Bt, G, Tt, M)


where     f/e = (—M/(s+a)           +   MABt)/Mr
          Df/Bt =      etMA/Mr
                   =

                   = (l—sa)/(s+a)Mr

where MA and Mr denote, respectively, the derivatives of the demand for

money with respect to assets (M —    etBt)   and the rate of interest. The

former is positive and the latter is negative. The interpretation of the

dependence of the percentage change in the exchange rate, representing

the money—market clearing interest rate, on the various variables follows.

A rise in the exchange rate raises the goods—market clearing level of

output and raises the demand for money. To restore money—market

equilibrium the rate of interest must rise, that is, et/et must rise.
                                  — 67 —
                                                                          APPENDIX II



On the other hand, the rise in e raises the domestic—currency value of

the debt Bt. If the private sector is a net creditor, the depreciation

of the currency raises the domestic—currency value of assets and raises

the demand for money. This in turn also contributes to the rise in the

rate of interest. If, however, the private sector is a net debtor then

the value of assets falls, the demand for money is reduced, thereby

contributing to a downward pressure on the rate of interest. The net

effect on the rate of interest depends, therefore, on the net debtor

position of the private sector; if, however, Bt is zero, then the rate

of Interest must rise so that f/et > 0. Analogous interpretations

apply to the other derivatives where it is evident that

         < 0, f/DG 0 and f/T < •
     Equation (A—72) constitutes the first differential equation of the
model governing the evolution of the exchange rate over time. The second

variable whose evolution over time characterizes the dynamics of the

system is the stock of private—sector debt. Substituting the goods—market

equilibrium condition (A—7l) into the budget constraint (A—66), using the

fact that in the absence of monetary policy            = 0 we can solve for the

dynamics of private—sector debt. Accordingly,


               =
(A—73)               h(et, G, T)

               =                                  —
                     (Et[Y(et,   G, Tt) —   Tt}       Y(et,   G, Tt) +   T)

Equation (A—73) expresses the rate of change of private—sector debt as

the difference between private—sector spending and disposable income.
                                      — 68 —
                                                                            APPENDIX II




The previous discussion implies that h/ae =          — s/(s+a)       < 0,

3h/G   =   _(1_a)s/(s+a)   < 0 and 3h/aT =     s/(s+a)   > 0.

     In interpreting these expressions we note that the function h

represents the negative savings of the private sector. Accordingly,

a unit rise in et or C raises savings by the saving propensity times the

corresponding multiplier. Analogously, a unit rise in taxes which lowers

disposable income, lowers savings by the saving propensity times the

corresponding disposable—income multiplier.

     The equilibrium of the system is exhibited in Figure A—l. The

positively sloped et = 0 schedule shows combinations of the exchange rate

and private—sector debt which maintain an unchanged exchange rate. The

schedule represents equation (A—72) for et = 0.          Its slope is positive

around a zero level of private sector debt and its position depends on

the policy variables G, Tt and M. Likesse the                   = 0 locus represents

equation (A—73) for        =   0.   It is horizontal since, as specified, the

rate of change of private—sector debt does not depend on the value of

debt. The arrows around the schedules indicate the directions in which

the variables tend to move, and the solid curve shows the unique saddle

path converging towards a stationary state. As customary in this type of

analysis we associate this saddle path with the equilibrium path. The

long—run equilibrium of the system is shown by point A In Figure A—i

where, for convenience, we show a case in which the long—run value of

private—sector debt is zero.

     The effects of a unit debt—financed rise in government spending from

G0 to Cj are shown in Figure A—2. Starting from an initial long—run

equilibrium at point A, the rise in G shifts the                 0 schedule from
        — 68a   —                 APPENDIX II




    Figure A-i: The Equilibrium
     Exchange-Rate Dynamics
      and Debt Accumulation

                    e1



                             I    =0




                         A        B=0
L

                                       op
                                        ft
                                       APPENDIX   II
                                       ____________
           —   68b   —




   Figure A-2: The Effects of A
      Debt-Financed Rise in
Government Spending on the Paths
      of the Exchange Rate
     and Private-Sector Debt

                 e



                                  = O(G,T0)




                              B = O(G1,T0)




                     0   B.             pP
                                        •
                                         ft
                                 — 69 —
                                                                 APPENDIX II



point A downwards by —(l—a)/D and it also shifts the e = 0 schedule from

point A downwards by _(l_a)/My. For M < 1 the vertical displacement

of the e = 0 schedule exceeds the corresponding displacement of the

Bt =   0 schedule and the new long—run equilibrium obtains at point C at

which the domestic currency has appreciated and private—sector debt has

risen. The short—run equilibrium obtains at point B along the new saddle

path and transition towards the long run follows along the path connecting

points B and C. As is evident the initial appreciation of the currency

overshoots the long—run appreciation.

     The effects of a unit tax—financed rise in government spending are

shown in Figure A—3. With dG = dT, the Bt = 0 schedule shifts upwards

by a/* while the e = 0 schedule shifts vertically by (s+a_a)/M. The

benchmark case shown in Figure A—3 corresponds to the situation in which

the private sector and the government have the same marginal propensities

to spend on domestic goods (that is, 5+a =   as).   In that case the e = 0

remains intact, the short—run equilibrium is at point B and the long—run

equilibrium is at point C. As seen in this case the domestic currency

depreciates and the short—run depreciation undershoots the long—run

depreciation. These results are sensitive to alternative assumptions,

concerning the relative magnitudes of (s+a) and ag.
                              APPENDIX II
          — 69a   —




  Figure A-3: The Effects of A
Tax-Financed Rise in Government
     Spending on the Paths
      of the Exchange Rate
     and Private-Sector Debt


                  e          =0




                             0 (G1,T1)




Data: $ + a = a9
                                 - 70   -




                                 References

 Boyer, Russell S., "Devaluation and Portfolio Balance," American Economic
      Review 67, No. 2 (March 1977), PP. 54—63.

 Branson, William H., "Monetary Policy and the New View of International
      Capital Movements," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2, 1970,
      pp. 235—62.

 Dornbusch, Rudiger, "Expectations and Exchange Rate Dynamics," Journal of
      Political Economy 84, No. 6 (December 1976), pp. 1161—76.

_____   Open Economy Macroeconomics, New York: Basic Books, 1980.

Fleming, J. Marcus, "Domestic Financial Policies Under Fixed and Under
     Floating Exchange Rates," IMF Staff Papers 9, No. 3 (November 1962),
     pp. 369—79.

Floyd, John E., "International Capital Movements and Monetary Equilibrium,"
     American 'Economic Review 59, No. 4, Part 1 (September 1969),
     pp. 472—92.

Frenkel, Jacob A. and Michael L. Mussa, "Asset Markets, Exchange Rates
     and the Balance of Payments," in Handbook of International Economics,
     Volume II, edited by Ronald W. Jones and Peter B. Kenen, Amsterdam:
     North—Holland Publishers, 1985, pp. 680—747.

Frenkel, Jacob A. and Assaf Razin, Fiscal Policies and the World Economy:
     An Intertemporal Approach, Boston: MIT Press, forthcoming 1987.

Frenkel, Jacob A. and Carlos A. Rodriguez, "Portfolio Equilibrium and the
     Balance of Payments: A Monetary Approach," American Economic Review
     65, No. 4 (September 1975), pp. 674—88.

Kenen, Peter B., "Macroeconomic Theory and Policy: How the Closed Economy
     was Opened," in Handbook of International Economics, Volume II,
     edited by Ronald W. Jones and Peter B. Kenen, Amsterdam: North—
     Holland Publishers, 1985, pp. 625—77.

Kouri, Pentti J.K., "The Exchange Rate and the Balance of Payments in the
     Short Run and in the Long Run: A Monetary Approach," Scandinavian
     Journal of Economics 78, No. 2 (May 1976), pp. 280—304.

Machlup, Fritz, International Trade and the National Income Multiplier,
     Philadelphia: Blakiston Co., 1943.

Marston, Richard C., "Stabilization Policies in Open Economics," in
     Handbook of International Economics, Volume II, edited by Ronald W.
     Jones and Peter B. Kenen, Amsterdam: North—holland Publishers,
                                                                     1985,
     pp. 859—916.
                                    — 71 —



MeKinnon, Ronald T., "Portfolio Balance and International Payments
     Adjustment," in Monetary Problems of the International Economy,
     edited by Alexander K. Swoboda and Robert A. Mundell, Chicago:
     University of Chicago Press, 1969, PP. 199—234.

Meade, James E., The Theory of International Economic Policy, Volume I:
     The Balance of Payments, London, New York, Toronto, Oxford University
     Press, 1951.

Metzler, Lloyd A. (1942), "Underemployment Equilibrium in International
     Trade," Econometrica 10, No. 2 (April 1942), pp. 97—112.

Mundell, Robert A., "The Monetary Dynamics of International Adjustment
     Under Fixed and Flexible Rates," Quarterly Journal of Economics,
     Vol. 74 (May 1960), pp. 227—57.

_____    (l96la),
                "The International Disequilibrium System," Kyklos, Vol. 14
     (fasc. 2, 1961), pp. 152—70.

_____  (l961b) "Flexible Exchange Rates and Employment Policy," Canadian
     Journal 6f Economics, Vol. 27 (November 1961), pp. 509—17.

______ "Capital Mobility and Stabilization Policy Under Fixed and Flexible
     Exchange Rates," Canadian Journal of Economic and Political Science,
     Vol. 29 (November 1963), pp. 475—85.

_____  "A Reply: Capital Mobility and Size," Canadian Journal of Economics
     and Political Science, Vol. 30 (August 1964), pp. 421—31.

_____    International   Economics (New York: The Macmillan Company, 1968).

Mussa, Michael L., "Macroeconomic Interdependence and the Exchange Rate
     Regime," in International Economic Policy: Theory and Evidence,
     edited by Rudiger Dornbusch and Jacob A. Frenkel, Baltimore: Johns
     Hopkins University Press, 1979, pp. 160—204.

Obstfeld, Maurice and Alan C. Stockman, "Exchange Rate Dynamics," in
     Handbook of International Economics, Volume II, edited by Ronald W.
     Jones and Peter B. Kenen, Amsterdam: Elsevier Science Publishers
     B.V., 1985, Chapter 18, pp. 917—77.

Purvis, Douglas D., "Public Sector Deficits, International Capital
     Movements, and the Domestic Economy: The Medium—Term is the Message,"
     Canadian Journal of Economics 18, No. 4 (November 1985), pp. 723—42.

Rodriguez, Carlos A., "Short and Long—Run Effects of Monetary and Fiscal
     Policies Under Flexible Exchange Rates and Perfect Capital Mobility,"
     American Economic Review 69, No. 1 (March 1979), pp. 176—82.

Swoboda, Alexander K. and Rudiger Dornbusch, "Adjustment, Policy, and
     Monetary Equilibrium in a Two—Country Model," in International Trade
     and Money, edited by Michael G. Connolly and Alexander K. Swoboda,
     London: Allen & Unwln, 1973, pp. 225—61.
