                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              THE ECONOMIST AS PLUMBER

                                          Esther Duflo

                                      Working Paper 23213
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23213


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2017




This essay is based on the Ely lecture, which I delivered at the AEA meeting in January 2017.
Many thanks to Alvin Roth,both for his invitation to give this lecture, and for his license to get
our hands dirty with policy work. I thank Abhijit Banerjee and Cass Sunstein, master plumbers,
for their encouragements, for several conversations that shaped this lecture, and for details
comments on a first draft. David Atkin, Robert Gibbons, Parag Pathak, and Richard Thaler,
provided useful comments. Vestal McIntyre gave wonderful and detailed comments on style; all
awkwardness remains mine. Laura Stilwell provided excellent research assistance. Plumbing is
not a solitary activity, and I would like to acknowledge the many people who have plumbed and
discussed with me over the years, notably: Abhijit Banerjee, Rukmini Banerji, James Berry,
Raghabendra Chattopadhyay, Iqbal Dhaliwal, Rachel Glennerster, Michael Greenstone, Rema
Hanna, Clement Imbert, Michael Kremer, Shobhini Mukherjee, Karthik Muralidharan, Nicholas
Ryan, Rohini Pande, Benjamin Olken, Anna Schrimpf, and Michael Walton. The views expressed
herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Esther Duflo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
The Economist as Plumber
Esther Duflo
NBER Working Paper No. 23213
March 2017
JEL No. A0

                                          ABSTRACT

As economists increasingly help governments design new policies and regulations, they take on
an added responsibility to engage with the details of policy making and, in doing so, to adopt the
mindset of a plumber. Plumbers try to predict as well as possible what may work in the real
world, mindful that tinkering and adjusting will be necessary since our models gives us very little
theoretical guidance on what (and how) details will matter. This essay argues that economists
should seriously engage with plumbing, in the interest of both society and our discipline.


Esther Duflo
Department of Economics, E52-544
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
eduflo@mit.edu
                                     The Economist as Plumber
                                                                              ∗
                                                        Esther Duflo

                                                      23 January 2017



                                                            Abstract
           As economists increasingly help governments design new policies and regulations,
        they take on an added responsibility to engage with the details of policy making and,
        in doing so, to adopt the mindset of a plumber. Plumbers try to predict as well as
        possible what may work in the real world, mindful that tinkering and adjusting will
        be necessary since our models gives us very little theoretical guidance on what (and
        how) details will matter. This essay argues that economists should seriously engage
        with plumbing, in the interest of both society and our discipline.

    Economists are increasingly getting the opportunity to help governments around the
world design new policies and regulations. This gives them a responsibility to get the
big picture, or the broad design, right. But in addition, as these designs actually get
implemented in the world, this gives them the responsibility to focus on many details
about which their models and theories do not give much guidance.
    There are two reasons for this need to attend to details. First, it turns out that policy
makers rarely have the time or inclination to focus on them, and will tend to decide on
how to address them based on hunches, without much regard for evidence. Figuring all of
this out is therefore not something that economists can just leave to policy makers after
delivering their report: if they are taking on the challenge to influence the real world, not
only do they need to give general prescriptions, they must engage with the details.
    Second, details that we as economists might consider relatively uninteresting are in
fact extraordinarily important in determining the final impact of a policy or a regulation,
while some of the theoretical issues we worry about most may not be that relevant. This
sentiment is well summarized by Klemperer (2002) who presents his views on what matters
for practical auction design, based on his own experience designing them and advising
    ∗
      This essay is based on the Ely lecture, which I delivered at the AEA meeting in January 2017. Many thanks to Alvin Roth,
both for his invitation to give this lecture, and for his license to get our hands dirty with policy work. I thank Abhijit Banerjee and
Cass Sunstein, master plumbers, for their encouragements, for several conversations that shaped this lecture, and for details comments
on a first draft. David Atkin, Robert Gibbons, Parag Pathak, and Richard Thaler, provided useful comments. Vestal McIntyre
gave wonderful and detailed comments on style; all awkwardness remains mine. Laura Stilwell provided excellent research assistance.
Plumbing is not a solitary activity, and I would like to acknowledge the many people who have plumbed and discussed with me over the
years, notably: Abhijit Banerjee, Rukmini Banerji, James Berry, Raghabendra Chattopadhyay, Iqbal Dhaliwal, Rachel Glennerster,
Michael Greenstone, Rema Hanna, Clement Imbert, Michael Kremer, Shobhini Mukherjee, Karthik Muralidharan, Nicholas Ryan,
Rohini Pande, Benjamin Olken, Anna Schrimpf, and Michael Walton.




                                                                  1
bidders: “in short,” he writes, “good auction design is mostly good elementary economics,”
whereas “most of the extensive auction literature is of second-order importance for practical
auction design.”
    It seems appropriate to open an essay on plumbing with an actual plumbing example
that illustrates the two points I made above (Devoto et al., 2012). Many cities in the devel-
oping world seek to improve citizens’ access to home water connections. Even when there
are public taps, urban households without a connection at home spend several hours per
week collecting water, and this burden causes them considerable stress and tension. The
typical policy for improving water access is to build the necessary infrastructure, and then
to encourage “end of pipe” connections through subsidized tariffs and/or subsidized loans.
In 2007 in Tangiers, a firm called Amendis (the local subsidiary of Veolia Environnement),
which was in charge of the water and sanitation for the city, had spent considerable re-
sources building large pipes and installing toilets in each house, and, in collaboration with
the city, was offering interest-free loans to poor households to make it possible to cover the
marginal cost of new water connections. But take-up of the subsidized loan program was
very low (less than 10%); applying for the program required a trip to the municipal office
with supporting documents, and this proved a real barrier. When the research team ran-
domly visited households and offered procedural assistance by photocopying the required
documents at home and delivering them to the municipal office, take-up of the loan and
the water connections increased to 69%. As a result of this small additional expenditure,
poor residents of Tangiers gained access to water, and therefore recovered a considerable
amount of time to do other things. They were ultimately much happier and less stressed,
despite a large increase in their water bill.
    Improving access to private water connections was a sensible policy idea, and the entire
effort was broadly well designed. But the lack of attention to the very last step (the
administrative steps to sign up) had been preventing this large investment in both physical
and financial infrastructure from paying off.
    These kinds of practical design questions are ubiquitous in policy design. When new
frontline workers are hired to implement a program, will emphasizing wage and career
prospects discourage publicly minded individuals or encourage the most talented to join?
When thinking about an immunization policy, should policy makers assume that parents
understand the full costs and benefits and immunization and rationally internalize them,
or assume they may be ill informed and/or present biased? When designing the health
exchanges for the Affordable Care Act, should the health plans options be labeled with
precious metal (platinum, gold or bronze) or will that inadvertently bias the participant
choice towards one type of plan versus the other? At the outset, it will be difficult to know
the answer to these questions, especially when the policy problem is fairly new.
    Paying attention to the details of policy requires a mindset that is slightly different
from that which graduate school instills in economists. Banerjee (2007) summarizes the
reluctance of economists to engage with those details very well in his essay “Inside the
machine”. Economists, he writes, tend to think in “machine mode”: they want to find out

                                              2
the button that will get the machine started, the root cause of what makes the world go
round. He writes:

     The reason we like these buttons so much, it seems to me, is that they save us
     the trouble of stepping into the machine. By assuming that the machine either
     runs on its own or does not run at all, we avoid having to go looking for where
     the wheels are getting caught and figuring out what small adjustments it would
     take to get the machine to run properly. To say that we need to move to a
     voucher system does not oblige us to figure out how to make it work –how to
     make sure that parents do not trade in the vouchers for cash (because they do
     not attach enough value to their children’s education) and that schools do not
     take parents for a ride (because parents may not know what a good education
     looks like). And how to get the private schools to be more effective? After all,
     at least in India, even children who go to private schools are nowhere near grade
     level. And many other messy details that every real program has to contend
     with.

     When we are concerned with such details, ex-ante, we will have some priors on what
features will be important, and this guides our first-pass attempts at design. But it is not
clear that either the policy makers or the scientists will correctly identify the most impor-
tant choices. Those may not have been the focus of either practical or theoretical attention,
and thus may have been completely ignored. So an economist who cares about the details
of policy implementation will need to pay attention to many details and complications,
some of which may appear to be far below their pay grade (e.g. the font size on posters) or
far beyond their competence level (e.g. the intricacy of government budgeting in a federal
system). It will sometimes appear that the extensive training they received is underused
if, as Klemperer notes, the theoretical complexities turn out to be second order. On the
other hand, they will have a chance to apply their economist’s mind, since many of the
details have implications for issues that are an economist’s bread and butter: incentives,
information, imperfect rationality, etc. They will also need to be very observant, and keep
a close eye on the impact of any change they recommend.
     Inspired by this exhortation to go inside the machine, Alvin Roth’s image of the
economist as engineer, and Banerjee’s 2002 image of the economist as an experienced crafts-
man,1 , I label this detail-focused approach as the “plumbing” mindset. The economist-
plumber stands on the shoulder of scientists and engineers, but does not have the safety
net of a bounded set of assumptions. She is more concerned about “how” to do things
than about “what” to do. In the pursuit of good implementation of public policy, she is
willing to tinker. Field experimentation is her tool of choice.
1
    Banerjee in fact mentioned plumbers, in defending the reputation that economists will provide good
    advice because, like plumbers, they care about their reputation.



                                                 3
    What I will try to argue in this lecture is not that all of us should be plumbers, or even
that any of us should be plumbers all the time; instead, I will try to show that there is
value for economists to take on some plumbing projects, in the interest of both society and
our discipline.

1     Scientists, engineers, plumbers
1.1   Definitions
Alvin Roth’s seminal 1999 Fisher-Schultz lecture (Roth, 2002) invited economists to adopt
an “engineering” approach to their craft. Economists, he pointed out, are increasingly
called upon, not just to analyze real world institutions, but also to design them. Roth’s
focus is the design of markets, but economists are also called upon to help design incentives
schemes for firms and regulation and social policies for governments. In this paper, I will
consider the role of economists in the design of policies and regulation.
    For Roth, intervening in the real world should fundamentally alter the attitude of the
economist and her way of working. He sets the tone in the abstract of the paper:

      Market design involves a responsibility for detail, a need to deal with all of
      a market’s complications, not just its principle features. Designers therefore
      cannot work only with the simple conceptual models used for theoretical in-
      sights into the general working of markets. Instead, market design calls for an
      engineering approach (emphasis added).

    The scientist provides the general framework that guides the design. In Roth’s Fisher-
Schultz lecture, which again is focused on market design, game theory provides the general
principles. For all the other domains where economists will be called to provide inputs,
there exist a relevant body of theory (or at least general insight) that they can use to guide
design.
    The engineer takes these general principles into account, but applies them to a specific
situation. This requires careful attention to the details of the environment being studied,
but also new tools: the economist-engineer cannot shrug off the fact that a particular
situation is not covered by the assumptions of the theorem, and cannot ask agents to
change their preferences so the assumptions hold. If the specific real-world problem at
hand cannot be solved analytically, then she will reach for other tools – in particular
computation and laboratory experiments – and will simulate the behavior of a market.
    For example, in the matching for doctors who are applying for their first residency to
a hospital, which is the focus of Roth (2002), the simple matching theory does not accom-
modate the fact that some of these new doctors come as married couples, and need to be
assigned to the same town. Roth refined the theory to accommodate married couples, but
at that point, he could not solve the problem analytically: in particular, theory suggests
that, with couples, there could be a situation without stable matching, and that the se-
quencing of the decision could in principle affect results. So Roth and his colleagues used

                                              4
computation to design an algorithm, and examine the impact of different rules (using data
from previous years), including the potential impact of sequencing. The computations sug-
gested that the algorithm never failed to converge to a stable match, and that sequencing
effects were small and unsystematic. This allowed them to suggest a matching algorithm
that would work (and has worked in practice), even though the theory for why couples
were probably not a big problem after all had not been fully developed.
    The plumber goes one step further than the engineer: she installs the machine in the
real world, carefully watches what happens, and then tinkers as needed. At the time she
inherits the machine, the broad goals are clear, but many details still need to be worked
out. The fundamental difference between an engineer and a plumber is that the engineer
knows (or assume she knows) what the important features of the environment are, and can
design the machine to address these features – in the abstract, at least. There may not be
a theory fully worked out to accommodate these features, but she can use computation and
lab experiments to simulate how they will play out. When the plumber fits the machine,
there are many gears and joints, and many parameters of the world that are difficult to
anticipate and will only become known once the machine grinds into motion. The plumber
will use a number of things – the engineering design, his understanding of the context, prior
experience, and the science to date – to tune every feature of the policy as well as possible,
keeping an eye on all the relevant details as best he can. But with respect to some details,
there will remain genuine uncertainty about the best way to proceed, because the solution
depends on a host of factors he cannot easily quantify, or sometimes even identify, in the
abstract. (These are the “unknown unknowns:” all the issues we can’t predict but will
arise anyways). Thus another difference between plumbers and engineers is that engineers
will start from the outcome they are seeking to attain and engineer the machine to reach it.
Plumbers, on the other hand, will have to adopt a more tentative approach, starting from
the machine’s characteristics and identifying their effect (compared to another possible set
of choices).
    For example, in the early 2000s the city of Boston decided to change how it assigned
students to schools. There was an important engineering part to choosing the mecha-
nism that would be used, initiated by Abdulkadiroglu and Sönmez (2003) and followed by
a considerable literature (see Pathak (2011) and Abdulkadiroglu and Sönmez (2013) for
reviews). But once city leaders settled on a mechanism, they still had to make many deci-
sions. How to communicate the change to parents? How to persuade them that they could
reveal their true preferences when they ranked schools? Should there be a limit on how
many schools parents can (or are required to) rank? Should parents living near a school
receive preferential treatment, and how should that be set up? And so on. According to
Pathak (2016), who reviewed his experience working in several cities and who modeled his
conclusion on Klemperer’s:

     What really matters for school choice market design are basic insights about
     straightforward incentives, transparency, avoiding inefficiency through coordi-


                                              5
      nation of offers and well-functioning aftermarkets, and influencing inputs to the
      design, including applicant decision-making and the quality of schools. Some
      of the issues examined in the extensive theoretical literature on school choice
      matching market design are less important for practical design.
    What is more, we may not even know ex-ante which of these decisions will in fact
matter, and our models offer fairly limited guidance on what to pay attention to. Pathak
(2016) writes: “I will discuss a handful of issues examined in the theoretical literature on
matching mechanisms that have proven to be first-order. It’s worth emphasizing that it
is only with the benefit of several design case studies that we’re beginning to understand
which issues are quantitatively important.”
    This uncertainty – concerning what the true model is – has consequences for policy
engineering very similar to the problems discussed in the macroeconomics literature on
“robust” policy (Cogley et al., 2008). Since we don’t know what the true model is, we need
to design policies that are as robust as possible to this model uncertainty. For example,
Chetty (2015) argues that public policy that includes “nudges” (such as default) is more
robust, in the Hansen and Sargent sense, to a specific model uncertainty (are people rational
or not?): rational people will chose what they want, and “behavioral” agent will be in
default that should largely work for them. A smart “nudging” policy is thus a fairly robust
policy, in general. It will have an effect only if people suffer from behavioral biases, but
have no effect otherwise.
    There is no general theory of how to design policy under this kind of model uncertainty,
however, and in many cases, even the best educated guess will still be just that, a guess.
The economist-plumber will use all they know (including model uncertainty), to come up
with the best guess possible, and then pay careful attention to what happens in reality. The
uncertainty in the environment creates a highly stochastic world: the natural way to “pay
attention” to what happens, as I will argue below, is thus to analyze natural experiments
or set up field experiments to try out different plumbing possibilities.
1.2   Designing the taps, laying down the pipes: two examples
Although I will often talk about “details” as a general way to describe the handiwork of
plumbers, there are two different kinds of plumbing in policy design. First, is the “design
of the tap” work: taking care of apparently irrelevant details, such as the way the policy is
communicated or the default options offered to customers. Second, is “layout of the pipes”
work: important logistical decisions that are fundamental to the policy’s functioning but
often treated as purely mechanical, such as the way money flows from point A to point B,
or which government worker has sign-off on what decisions.
    Banerjee et al. (2015) worked with the Indonesian government on a “design of the tap”
problem, in the context of the Raskin program, a subsidized rice distribution scheme that,
with an annual budget of US $1.5 billion and a targeted population of 17.5 million house-
holds, is Indonesia’s largest targeted transfer program. The Raskin program is plagued
with corruption: Banerjee et al.’s data show that beneficiary households pay more than

                                             6
they should and receive less than their full quota of rice, to the extent that they receive only
about a third of the subsidy they are entitled to, overall. Working with the Government
of Indonesia, the researchers designed a set of field experiments to provide information
directly to eligible households. In 378 villages (randomly selected from among 572 villages
spread over three provinces), the central government mailed “Raskin identification cards”
to eligible households to inform them of their eligibility and the quantity of rice that they
were entitled to. In addition, the team varied several features of the design of the cards
and the way they were introduced: whether the copay price was also listed on the card,
whether information about all the beneficiaries was posted in the village, whether cards
were sent to all eligible households or only to a subset, and whether the cards came with
coupons to acknowledge the delivery of the rice.
    A first plumbing issue is whether or not households got a physical card. Traditionally,
households had not gotten one – the program was designed to be implemented by local
leaders, who were given considerable discretion, and any effort at information dissemination
had focused primarily on them, not on citizens. The optimistic policy maker who initially
designed this machine clearly envisioned a beneficent local administration dedicated to the
good of the people. The very specific design features of the cards and their distribution are
further plumbing issues, and would normally have been ignored, even after the government
had been convinced that sending cards was a good idea. Someone (a graphic designer
maybe?) would have made a decision on whether or not to list on the card the price to be
paid for rice. Distribution of the cards would have been up to the local leaders, and so on.
But there are good reasons to think that each of these features matter. The price to be paid
for rice is one piece of information that recipients themselves do not have, so local leaders
can easily skim off the program by inflating the copay. Making the list widely available
will create communal knowledge, potentially changing the nature of the bargaining game
between the local leader and the citizen. Distributing physical cards may not even be
necessary, if lists of those eligible are posted in the village.2
    In practice, distributing cards made a large difference: On net, across all of the vari-
ations of the program, the cards led to a large increase in subsidy received by eligible
households. Eligible households in treatment villages received a 26% increase in subsidy,
stemming from both an increase in quantity and a decrease in the copay price. This oc-
curred despite imperfect implementation: eligible households in treatment villages were
only 30 percentage points more likely to have received a card relative to the control. More-
over, several of the variations did in fact matter: gains were substantially larger when
the information was public and prominent, when the prices were displayed on the card,
and when people actually got a physical card. The coupons feature did not seem to be
particularly relevant. This piece of plumbing research was influential: since the success of
the cards was blatant, the government decided to scale them up and immediately started
2
    In a different setting, the government of India made the conscious decision not to necessarily issue and
    identity card when it established a biomarker-linked unique identifiers for all Indians.



                                                    7
distributing them to everyone, for Raskin and other government transfer programs. In
total more than 60 million beneficiaries got cards. The upside of the fact that plumbing is
not a prime focus of governments is that when you hand them a good plumbing solution,
it stands a better chance of being widely adopted than when you present a brand new
program, which is prone to come up against to someone’s ideology.
    Banerjee et al. (2016) focus on the hidden pipes. In many governments worldwide, some
programs (such as local workfare programs or infrastructure building) are financed centrally
but implemented by local communities. This causes a basic plumbing problem: how to
transfer money from the center to the outposts, which are normally strapped for cash and
unable to front the expenses for the programs. Traditionally, due to slow transmission
both of financial orders and information, the only practical way to transfer funds is to
give the local community an advance and, after they provided proof of how they used it,
give them another advance. But this system is fraught with difficulties. First, there is
a basic financial management issue: some money lies idle in one locale, whereas another
might lack money. The advances need to be large enough to avoid paralyzing the program,
but will ads up to the government’s expenditure. Second, and perhaps more importantly,
the ex-post justification of expenditures is often delayed and patchy, making auditing and
accounting difficult. This creates opportunities for leakage and embezzlement, and the
monitoring structure that is put in place to control it may become part of the problem,
creating its own red tape, inefficiencies, and leakage opportunities (Banerjee, 1997).
    We had the chance to experiment with a system that was largely the brainchild of
Santhosh Mathew, of one of the co-authors of the study. Mathew is a rare creature –
a bureaucrat-plumber. A career civil servant with a masters in economics and a PhD in
development studies, Mathew is deeply concerned with the pragmatic issues of any program
he is involved with. In the context of the MGNREGS, a public workfare program financed
by the Federal government but implemented at the village level, a unified financial platform
was put in place in Mathew’s adopted state of Bihar, whereby the money transfer could
be made directly to the local government from the bank in the state capital. This solved
half of the problem, that of the transmission of money. The other half (transmission of
information on who should get money) was originally not solved. Figure 1 shows the flow of
authorizations under the traditional system: the local government (panchayat) transmits a
request for funds to the next administrative up, the block, which ratifies it and transmit it
to the next level up, the district, which ratifies it and enters it in the financial management
platform, which generates an invoice to the Central Bank of India, leading to a transfer
right back down onto the panchayat account. Mathew designed a reform to this system.
The Panchayat now could log in directly into the financial management platform, enter
an invoice for a specific activity (“we have hired Mrs Kumar for 14 days”), and receive a
corresponding payment on a “zero balance account,” which they would immediately use to
pay Mrs Kumar. We had the opportunity to design and implement a large-scale experiment
to evaluate the impact of this reform. We worked in 120 districts, in 1000 treatment and
2000 control local governments, covering a population of 30 million people.

                                              8
    The main benefit that Mathew foresaw in this system was that it would remove the
uncertainty on whether and when money would come, and he believed that it would em-
power local governments to be more proactive in implementing the program. As it turned
out, unforeseen events meant that this could not happen in this context. A few days after
the program was launched, the central government cut Bihar’s MGNREGS funds, due to
a dispute on data entry, and massive uncertainty ensued on when the money would be
available again. This took five months to be resolved, and since it happened just after
the introduction of the system, many local officials (wrongly) believed the new uncertainty
they experienced on whether money would come was the new system’s fault.
    The plumbing reform, however, changed something else: the reformed system was
considerably more transparent than the status quo. The local official was putting his
signature on a document where he said that he had recruited specific people. This made it
easy for auditors to go look for them, and punish the officials if they did not exist or had
not worked for the program (many of the workers in MGNREGS are “ghost workers”).
Although this was not the primary motivation of the reform, basic economics suggested
that this could change the behavior of the local officials. We looked for evidence of a
reduction in corruption, and we found plenty. First, we saw a reduction of about 22% in
the expenditures on the program, without apparent change in the number of workdays in
an independent survey we conducted. Since the survey data could be noisy and miss a real
decline in expenditure, we looked for smoking guns, and found two: first, we matched all
the names reported in the public database for the program to a census that was conducted
at the same time. We estimated that a match was less likely to be found for someone in
the public database in the control group than in the treatment group, indicating that they
were more likely to be a ghost worker. Second, we examined the wealth declarations of
the Panchayat officials, and found a significant reduction in the median wealth (though we
find no impact at the top and the average effect is insignificant).
    Most anti-corruption drives focus on explicit anti-corruption tools (such as audits) or
on incentives, but not on the way that the program is structured. This example showed
that structure is not only relevant, but quantitatively important: during the course of the
experiment, the reduction in expenditure alone saved 6 million dollars to the government.
And as in the case of the Raskin program in Indonesia cited above, the experiment was
actually instrumental in getting this program scaled up across all states, and then for
the financial transfers in other types of program. Initially, before the corruption result
came out, the program was cancelled in Bihar: faced with a reduction in expenditure
and the objections of the local officials, who for obvious reasons were not fans of the
program, Mathew’s successor decided to cancel it. But after it had become apparent
that the reduction in expenditure stemmed mostly from a reduction in corruption, the
story changed: When the Prime Minister was keen to show that his government was doing
something to improve the implementation of public programs, this particular reform seemed
uncontroversial enough for top bureaucrats – a “technical reform” they could get behind
relatively easily. The program was scaled up to MGNREGS. It is now poised to be scaled

                                             9
up to other kinds of centrally sponsored scheme and has the potential to affect billions of
dollars in central government spending.

2    Why policy makers need the plumbers
It seems quite natural for policy makers to rely on economists-engineers to design compli-
cated policies and institutions. There is nothing obvious about designing a school choice
mechanism, an auction, or an exchange market for kidney. Economic theory has developed
the tools to think about those questions, and it stands to reason that policy makers would
ask for economists’ guidance, very much like economists provide advice on macro economic
policy. It may however be less clear that policy makers need plumbers, or that economists
would be particularly well suited to play this role. This section argues that policy makers
do need plumbers. The next section will argue that our discipline prepares us well to think
about many of the plumbing problem that they face.
    Abhijit Banerjee, Gita Gopinath and I recently spend a few hours with bureaucrats and
consultants from the health department in the state of Kerala, in the south of India. Kerala
is one of India’s most successful states, at least as far as the social sector. It is starting to
face first-world problems: an aging population, high prevalence of hypertension, diabetes,
and obesity. The bureaucracy and the elected leaders are committed try to do something
about both rising health care costs and non-communicable disease prevention. Their best
idea is to reform the public primary health care system in order to make it more attractive to
customers (who for the most part seek their health care in the private sector, like elsewhere
in India), and to instate better practices of prevention, management, and treatment. They
would try out a new organization of the health care sector. Nurses, volunteers from the
local governments, and doctors would work seamlessly in a health team that would be
in charge of keeping the population healthy, with a heavy focus on encouraging lifestyle
changes and preventative activities. They are currently planning to try the system in 152
health centers
    Though the Additional Chief Secretary (top bureaucrat) in charge of health had invited
us to the meeting, he was called away to deal with a doctors’ strike around the time the
conversation turned to the specifics of the reform. He handed us over to a retired professor
and a retired doctor, who have been charged with designing the specifics of the policy. This
in itself is symptomatic: top policy makers usually have absolutely no time for figuring out
the details of a policy plan, and delegate it to “experts.” In our conversation, we started to
push on some specific questions on the model that they had in mind: why would patients
pay attention to a nurse, given that until now they have only taken doctors seriously? Were
they really sure that if the nurse started to take blood pressure and fill prescriptions, this
would give her the authority she would need to dispense advice? Or that doctors would
be willing and able to signal that nurses were to be respected, in a system that has always
been heavily hierarchical? For that matter, did the planners really think it was going to
be possible for health care professionals to spend a lot more time on public health and
prevention when there were only two doctors for every 30,000 people?

                                               10
    What was striking was, not only did they not have any answer to these questions, but
they showed no real interest in even entertaining them. Whenever we asked them to spell
out what they thought their policy lever was (as opposed to their aspiration), the stock
answer was that they did not really have one, that the local governments and medical
officers could not be forced to do anything. May be a village committee would need to
decide to organize yoga classes, but another one would not, so there was really no way
to find out what really worked. This was entirely beside the point, since the presence (or
absence) yoga class would have been an outcome of what they could do at the central
government (train local governments in the fundamental of public health for example).
But they seemed to have no understanding of a causal chain going from policy design
to implementation and final outcome. Their position oscillated between presenting the
illusion of the perfect system, and presenting the illusion of complete powerlessness in the
face of local power and initiative.
    We tried, and failed, to engage them on the details of policy. Not only did they have
no understanding of plumbing issues, there was not even a realization that plumbing was
an issue at all. When the top bureaucrat popped in and was appraised of the conversation
it was decided that we would be shown some details. We went away to another meeting
and came back after three hours. They had set up the projector, a sign that things were
about to get serious. They displayed a power point with each of the new UN Sustainable
Development Goals, and a list of proposals to achieve them in Kerala. These amounted
to a long, meritorious, and likely totally vacuous, wish list (30 minutes of exercise per day
mandatory in all schools, awareness of obesity to be built in communities, etc.). Interest-
ingly enough, it had nothing to do with the health care reform that we had discussed that
morning. It appeared that the details would have to wait for another day.
    I have since learned to avoid these kinds of meetings in general, but this encounter
reminded me of my early days as a plumber. It turns out that most policy makers, and
most bureaucrats, are not very good plumbers.
    Part of this is because, contrary to most economists’ generous beliefs, agents in general
are not necessarily very skilled at what they do. This is the central argument of Banerjee
(2002) in favor of normative economics. He points out that agents have not necessarily
had the opportunity to experiment, even in their main line of trade. For example, farmers
may not have stumbled on the best mix of fertilizer, because once they have something
that works well enough, it may be optimal to stop experimenting. Even if they are inclined
to experiment, the results may not be informative if the outcome data is very noisy, and
learning from neighbors is difficult. This leaves a lot of scope for specialized expertise,
including that of economists. Banerjee focuses on the example of microcredit, and the fact
that, before the microfinance movement, bankers did not figure out how they could use
some basic principles of mechanism design to make it possible to lend to the poor.
    Hanna et al. (2014) emphasize another barrier to learning: the tendency, even for
experienced agents, not to notice some of the important features of the environment. They
test a model of selective attention with seaweeds farmers in Indonesia, which could just as

                                             11
well apply to the plight of policy practitioners. Seaweed is farmed by attaching strands
(pods) to lines in the ocean. A large number of dimensions affect yield (e.g. length of
the line, optimal distance between pods, optimal length of a cycle, size of the pod. The
farmers have limited attention, and can only attend to a limited number of dimensions.
They allocate their attention optimally, but a feedback loop may occur: if they start with
the prior that something is not important, then they don’t pay any attention to it, and they
may never notice that it is in fact important. The authors present experimental evidence
that farmers not only ignore some dimensions of farming, they continue to ignore them
even when they are presented data suggesting that they actually matter, unless they are
told very specifically to pay attention to them. In this instance, they tend to ignore the
size of the pod, and in interpreting the trial data, they do not think to compare trial by
pod size. Very experienced farmers can get it terribly wrong, even when experimenting is
not particularly costly, simply because they do not know what to look at. Very experienced
policy makers often get it just as wrong.
    This inability to notice details is may be even stronger for the economist-scientists and
the policy practitioners than for farmers. The economist-scientist is effectively trained to
ignore them: the art of modeling requires simplifying reality to work out the logic of some
essential assumptions. The spotlight is on general principles, not on details that may be
very specific to an environment – indeed, such details are distractions. In order to focus
on the general principles, the economist-scientist will tend to dismiss those nasty details
(which in fact will make the policy work or not). This applies to theorists, but to us
field experimenters as well, when we wear our scientists’ hats. At those times, we run
experiments that are as tightly controlled as possible to try to isolate a specific mechanism
or test a theoretical principle. This is not a shortcoming, just a feature of the scientist’s
work, yet it means that scientists will not typically be the ones able to identify the key
issues that hinder policy success. The policy practitioner is often not even willing to try
to acknowledge details.
    Many are, to one degree or another, afflicted by the specific blindness that affects the
“high modernist” state described by James Scott in Seeing Like a State (Scott, 1998).
Policy makers and bureaucrats have a tendency to simplify the problems that face them
until they fit some preconceived notion of what human being should want, or need, or be.
Scott’s book is mainly concerned with episodes where this high modernist approach went
particularly awry (including the Soviet period and the Villagization policy in Tanzania),
but the temptation to regulate people into what they want them to be affects policy makers
more generally.
    A striking recent example is the other unexpected and potentially calamitous event
that took place on November 8, 2016. On that day, the prime minister of India, Narendra
Modi, announced that, effective immediately, all existing Rs500 and Rs1000 notes would
be replaced by new notes, and would become illegal tender by the end of December. The
initial stated objective was to cut corruption by getting rid of black money, though other
goals were mentioned later: making India cashless, fighting terrorists by removing their

                                             12
means of payment, creating a windfall for the government in the case that less money
came back than was removed from circulation. What was absolutely remarkable is that
that this major move was made with zero preparation beforehand. The central bank had
not printed enough money, creating a cash shortage and huge bank queues. The new
money was a different size and most ATMs had to be retrofitted. Cash deposit in poor
people’s “no frills” accounts skyrocketed, presumably because someone had given them
the money for safekeeping. Between the time the policy was announced and the end of
December, the government issued and changed more than 100 different rules concerning
when individuals could deposit their cash, how much they could deposit, what kind of
justification was needed, when they could withdraw, how much they would have to pay in
penalty if they could not prove they had paid taxes and so on and so forth. The result
was a combination of a flabbergasted public, a massive disruption in the economy and, in
short, complete confusion.
    The idea that you could remove 86% of the cash in an economy without first thinking
through the logistics, including what would replace it (considering that mobile money,
credit cards, and account-to-account transfers were not particularly well developed in India)
is of course extreme. But it expresses the kind of magical thinking that many governments
indulge in – and not just in developing countries – that if you have a generally good idea
that makes sense in some abstract way, the details will work themselves out.3
    The failure to experiment, the failure to notice, and the grip of ideology combine in
what Banerjee and Duflo (2012) described as the “Three I’s” (ideology, ignorance, inertia).
Policy makers tend to design schemes based on the ideology of the time, in complete
ignorance of the reality of the field, and once these policies are in place, they just stay in
place.
    There are two implications of this attitude of policy makers, a negative one and a more
positive one. On the negative side, it means that many well-intentioned policies fail in
practice (or don’t succeed as well as they could have) even if their underlying principles
were sound, because the details are not gotten right. Examples are numerous. Despite the
considerable amount of political capital that was expended to launch the Affordable Care
Act in the US, and the importance of what was at stake, the rollout of the health exchanges
was plagued by entirely avoidable software glitches. Another example is the third-party
audit system that the Supreme Court of Gujarat mandated in an attempt to improve the
monitoring of industrial pollution (Duflo et al., 2013). Under the scheme, each firm with
high pollution potential had to hire a private firm to complete a yearly auditing report.
Each Firm selected and paid its own auditor. Auditors completed three visits and submit-
ted the resulting report to the government regulating body, the Gujarat Pollution Control
Board. A number of rules were in place to ensure quality and limit corruption: auditing
teams could not sign up more than a certain number of clients, there were qualification re-
3
    An interesting side question is why bureaucrats cannot be given incentives to get the detail of the
    policy right, since unlike policy makers they are not elected and should not be wedded to a particular
    viewpoint and ideology.


                                                   13
quirements for auditing team members, and dishonest auditors risked decertification. Yet,
the system was a complete failure. As part of a randomized evaluation, we performed back
checks on the auditors by sending an independent team to take pollution measurements
right after them. The results for one particular pollutant (Suspended Particulate Matter)
are re-produced in Figure 2 the auditors’ reports show considerable bunching right below
the threshold for acceptable pollution, which is completely absent in the back check. Even
low pollution measurements, which are apparent in the back check, are absent in the au-
ditors’ readings. It seems that, in many cases, they were not even visiting the firms. This
was reflected in the going rate for auditors’ report, which was below the minimum cost of
running an actual pollution test. The likely explanation is that the system was plagued by
conflicts of interest: since the firms were selecting and paying the auditors, the auditors
had every reason to give them the report they wanted, if possible for very little money.
Although the system was designed with worthy general principles in mind, basic design
flaws made it essentially useless.
    On the positive side, policy makers’ inattention to detail creates a space for policy
improvements even in environments where the policy discussion is paralyzed, or where in-
stitutions are not good (Banerjee and Duflo, 2012). When there are existing laws on the
books, finding ways to make them work better meets with little opposition. In the US, even
as Congress and the executive branch were fighting over every single line items in the bud-
get, millions more children were certified between 2008 and 2014 as part of the school lunch
program by successive improvements in direct certification for children of parents who ben-
efitted from other programs: SNAP, TANF or Medicaid (Office of Research and Analysis,
2012; Office of Policy Support, 2013). The Child Nutrition and WIC Reauthorization Act
of 2004 mandated direct certification, but rate of enrollment accelerated greatly after the
“Healthy, Hunger-free Kids Act” of 2010. The act contained a set of “plumbing” reforms
that led to significant increases in direct certification: mandating name matching of dif-
ferent databases three times a year; removing the option of “letter certification”, where a
letter was sent to the parents which had to be forwarded to the school; establishing awards
for the best-performing states. In 2011- 2012, 1.7 million children were directly certified (a
17% increase from the previous year), and 740,000 were added the following year (Office of
Research and Analysis, 2012; Office of Policy Support, 2013). This did not raise eyebrows
in congress, and probably did more to help kids in poverty than a more publicized measure
would have.

3    Why economists make good plumbers
All of these arguments suggest that we need someone smart to take care of the plumbing.
But why does it need to be an economist?
    The reason is that many plumbing issues are actually fundamentally economists’ prob-
lems. Not all economists need to be plumbers; we need scientists and engineers too. And
not all plumbers need to be economists. Sometimes, what a policy maker needs is a good
software engineer, lawyer, or subject expert. But economics, as a discipline, provides do-

                                             14
main expertise for some of the fundamental plumbing issues in public policy.
     There are three broad classes of reasons why plumbing matters for public policy, and
all three involve economics.
     First, the citizens (or the supposed beneficiaries of the policies) are humans, with con-
flicting objectives, limited information sets, limited attention, and limited willpower. This
means that the specific way that policies are presented and implemented will potentially
have tremendous influence on whether they will work or not. Therefore, when a new policy
is put in place, it is essential to think about those details. For example, if households
receive a cash transfer, it may matter whether the woman or the man of the household
receives the money (Field et al., 2016; Benhassine et al., 2015; Almås et al., 2015). It
may matter if the transfer is presented as something that can help children go to school
(Benhassine et al., 2015), or if households are reminded that they can save it, and so on.
     The success of the “nudge” agenda, inspired by the work of behavioral economists, and
popularized by Thaler and Sunstein (2008) has given prominence to “design of the tap”
issues among economists. Indeed, the last two Ely lecture centered on this issue. Campbell
(2016) argued that the regulation of household finance must take into account the fact
that households do not understand finance very well, and also that they are subject to
behavioral biases. Chetty (2015) argued that the “pragmatist” public finance will pay
attention to those issues regardless of their scientific foundations, because they do lead
to greater success in what the policy makers are trying to do. It is not just economists
advocating subtle behavioral intervention. Policy makers are also aware of them, at least
in the US and UK, where “Nudge Units” have been created in the White house and at
10 Downing street. The main idea behind “choice architecture” is precisely that what
may appear to be irrelevant details (default options, ease of making a decision, the way
some numbers are presented, etc.) actually influence final consumer choices. Policy makers
therefore need to be thoughtful about all those choices. (It is worth nothing that many
tap-design issue don’t have anything to do with behavioral economics: the issues explored
by Banerjee et al. in Indonesia’s Raskin program have much more to do with political
economy and corruption, for example).
     The economist’s job does not end once policy makers are made aware that these tap-
design issues matter, however, particularly because policy makers love a free lunch, and
some of the behavioral ideas may stroke this disposition. They are thus wont to treat
new behavioral ideas as general “solutions to every problem,” rather than as tools in a
plumber’s kit, perhaps necessary to tune any kind of policy properly. A plumber’s mindset
is required to carefully watch how these ideas play out in practice, and sometimes an
economist may be need to to analyze how it works. We will see several examples of cases
where “obvious” improvements did not turn out to be improvements at all. Ben Handel’s
and Jonathan Kolstad’s work on health insurance illustrates the subtle economic analysis
necessary to analyze the plumbing of a comprehensive health reform such as the Affordable
Care Act (a.k.a Obamacare). They are concerned with issues of practical relevance: In
2015, they wrote a policy document with two specific proposals for the health exchanges

                                             15
(Handel and Kolstad, 2015), a consumer search tool that personalizes choice framing and
recommendations based on an individual’s specific characteristics, and a “smart default”
policy, targeted to particular consumers, to which the government could default consumers
during open enrollment when considerable evidence indicates that they are in the wrong
plan. Those proposals are quite detailed, and they draw from a substantial academic
literature (to which Handel and Kostad have contributed before). Because the proposals are
realistic, they need to tackle issues that are beyond the simple observations that consumers
are ill-informed and tend to be characterized by inertia (although this clearly is part of
the problem). For example, Handel (2013) observes that, due to inertia, many consumers
remain in dominated plans, where they lose a substantial amount of money (consumers
leave approximately $2,000 on the table, on average). However, Handel also finds that, if
consumer inertia is reduced, adverse selection will likely increase in a marketplace with no
insurer risk-adjustment transfers: this means that any proposal that helps consumer solve
the inertia issue needs to address the adverse selection issue at the same time.
     Second, those who implement policies, often government workers, are humans too.
They may suffer from the same limitations as the final subjects of the policy, and their
incentives are not necessarily to work very hard or in the best interests of the citizens they
serve. In much the same way as plumbing details create a choice architecture for the final
consumers, they also create an “incentive architecture” for the government workers who
implement the policies. Despite the current vogue of catch phrases such as “state capacity,”
these problems have received fairly little attention in economics until relatively recently.
There are, however, several recent interesting experiments on the “personnel economics”
of the state (see a review in Olken et al. (2015)). Indeed, the decisions on how to hire,
fire, and reward government employees creates the basic environment in which government
work is happening.
     Consider what is involved in the decision to hire new frontline workers (community
liaison workers, health workers) to carry out a new program. While the bureaucracy will
generally be quite good at determining how many new workers are needed and may be
considering how to set their wages, it will almost surely not be thinking about what the
job-announcement posters should advertise. And yet, Ashraf et al. (2015) show that a
small change in the framing of a frontline health worker job on the advertisement poster –
namely, emphasizing the career path that the job can lead to rather than the opportunity to
do good for the community – makes a large difference on the observable and unobservable
characteristics of those who apply. The “go-getters” who applied for the job in the career-
path framing treatment conduct more visits, accomplish more during visits, and ultimately
lead to better health outcome than the “do-gooders.” The overall goal of this new program
was to create a new layer of health workers close to people in the community, however the
seemingly minor advertisement decision turns out to have very significant effects.
     We are far from understanding how this plays out. In contrast to the results just
discussed, Deserranno (2015) finds that financial incentives can lead to a less socially mo-
tivated applicant pool. She randomized the advertisements for a new position of health

                                             16
promoter for BRAC, a large international NGO. In one treatment arm, the job advertise-
ment mentioned the minimum amount that health promoter was expected to earn (“low-
pay” treatment) and, in another treatment arm, the maximum (“high-pay” treatment). A
third treatment advertised the mean of the expected earnings distribution (“medium-pay”
treatment). Note that the difference was only in the framing: the actual pay was the same
in all treatments. The study finds that while the high-pay treatment attracted 30% more
applicants relative to the low-pay treatment, the applicants had much less experience as
health volunteers and were much more likely to state “earning money” as the most impor-
tant feature of the job. Applicants under the medium- and high-pay treatments were also
24 percentage points less like to make a donation to a public health NGO in the context
of a dictator game.
    Some aspects of personnel economics of the state such as salary and incentives are
very salient and politically charged, and I would not characterize them as plumbing.4
Some are much less salient, such as the framing of the positions (as described above), or
transfer policy. Transfers and posting to more or less desirable locations are routinely used
by the governments of developing countries to reward performance or punish people who
are not liked, but this is not done in a systematic way. Banerjee et al. (2012) find some
positive effects of reducing the frequency of transfers of police officers on their performance.
Banerjee et al. (2012) find that the promise of a transfer out of a punishment posting
induced police officers to work harder on conducting random sobriety check points. Khan
et al. (2016a) propose, implement, and test one particular system – performance-ranked
serial dictatorship – in which tax inspectors select their most favored location in an order
that is determined by performance. The authors show that the mechanism does in fact
work, increasing tax collection by 40% to 80%. Moreover, the people who, ex-ante, their
model predicts will be the most sensitive to this incentive, are in fact those who increase
their collection the most. But note that none of these studies investigate an essential aspect
of this policy in equilibrium: if transfers are used as rewards, or if postings are more secure,
the most corrupt people may work very hard to get transferred to where they want to be.
This could entirely change the welfare implication of the policy, so this is an area where
more plumbing is needed.
    But importantly, the incentive infrastructure issues apply to the design of any policy
and regulation, not just incentives policy specifically or even personnel economics more
generally. Regardless of whether the policy maker is drafting an education intervention, a
banking regulation, a new tax, or anything else, there will be decisions to be made on who
will carry it out, under what supervision, with what level of autonomy, and how imple-
mentation will interact with their other duties. Any particular set of rules will, advertently
or inadvertently, affect the ability and willingness of the front line workers to implement
the policy. Mindful incentive infrastructure requires understanding the government as an
4
    Although they are extremely important, and the subject of important field experiments – see for
    example Dal Bó et al. (2013) on frontline worker recruitment and Khan et al. (2016b) on financial
    incentives for tax collectors.


                                                 17
organization: Any policy will necessarily take place in an organization that has power
structures, and a culture that has large impacts on how the policy will play out. The
specific way it is drafted, even the parts of it that do not formally address incentives, will
determine its ability to be implemented (Gibbons, 2010). This gives particular salience to
the piping issues, which, having not benefitted from the behavioral economics revival, are
even more neglected than the tap-design issues.
    Between 2001 and 2014, a group of us (Banerjee et al., 2016) experienced firsthand the
power of incentive architecture as we attempted to mainstream a remedial education pro-
gram through the government system. The basic idea of the intervention was that children
must be taught at the level at which they currently are, rather than at the level prescribed
by the curriculum for their grade. Several RCTs showed that it could be implemented
by volunteers or paid NGO workers to very good effect, and it had been shown to raise
learning outcomes when run by Pratham, a large NGO, outside of school. To mainstream
it within schools, Pratham trained teachers in the pedagogy. We evaluated this attempt,
as part of a large scale-up of the policy in the Indian states of Bihar and Uttarakhand
over the two school years of 2008-09 and 2009-2010. The results were disappointing: de-
spite official endorsement, teachers did not seem to apply the methodology when they were
back to their classrooms, and the intervention did not result in any increase in test scores.
Our process monitoring, and a set of qualitative interviews suggested that there was an
incentive-architecture problem in the way Pratham and its partner government had imple-
mented the program. While there was endorsement of the approach at the top, nothing else
in the teachers’ lives had really changed. In particular, their stated responsibility remained
to complete the curriculum, and from their point of view, any time devoted to the remedial
activities was essentially wasted.
    To have a chance of success, something needed to be change, not in the basic philosophy
of the program or in the content of the training, but in the plumbing. Working with the
state of Haryana, Pratham implemented two key changes to the way the intervention was
run. First, the program would be implemented during an extra hour in the day (added in
all schools, not just those were the program were implemented, but earmarked to this in
treatment schools). Since this hour was new, it was easy to make salient that the respon-
sibility of the teachers was to carry out the remedial activity during that time. Second, a
cadre of supervisors (from within the government system), were recruited and trained to
act as both supporting people and monitors for the teachers as they were implementing the
program. Nothing changed in a teacher’s pay or her formal role, but these two adjustments
made the difference between signaling that the program was an optional add-on or part of
the teacher’s core duty. We evaluated this version of the program in an RCT in 400 schools
(200 treatment, 200 control), and found significant increases in test scores.
    Finally, any regulation that seeks to affect the way that firms behave, or any policy that
relies on firms for implementation at any point must also take firm behavior into account.
This behavior is one reason why “obvious” solutions do not always work the way they
would be expected to. Willis (2013) makes this point in the context of default enrollment

                                             18
in overdraft protection plan (which Campbell (2016) describes as one of the signature
attempts to incorporate behavioral economics into the regulation of household finance
products). Defaults are settings or rules about how product, policies, or legal relationship
function that are in place unless users actively change them. Based on their success in
retirement savings in particular (Madrian and Shea, 2001; Chetty et al., 2014), default-in
programs have been come popular with policy makers. Since people tend to stick with the
option they are presented with, policy makers can get the outcome they want by setting
the default carefully, while leaving people the freedom of choice (this is what Sunstein and
Thaler have called “libertarian paternalism”). When drafting policy, picking a default is
often unavoidable, and hence, regardless of whether one is convinced of their stickiness,
choosing the right default is always a plumber’s problem. But in some cases, policy makers
can attempt to influence relationship between consumers and firms by mandating that the
firm offers a particular default option. In the consumer finance area, legally required default
terms have been put in place for checking account overdraft coverage, credit card over-the-
limit practices, and some home-mortgage escrows. In particular, a 2010 regulation imposed
on banks a policy default regarding overdraft coverage. Under this regulation, banks were
not allowed to charge an overdraft fee for when an account went into a negative balance
due to an ATM transaction or a non-recurrent debit card transaction unless the consumer
had opted out of the default and chosen the bank overdraft protection plan. The idea was
that the overdraft coverage is basically a high-interest, low-risk loan charged by bank and
is not in the interest of most customers. Banks get away with high overdraft coverage fees
because customers do not expect to go into overdraft, and thus pays no attention to this
feature when they sign up for an account. More over they don’t necessarily realize it when
they are going into overdraft (Stango and Zinman, 2014).
    The 2010 regulation required banks to offer no overdraft protection by default, and
prohibited them from charging overdraft fees in the default if the account ended up being
overdrawn anyways.5 In doing so, the regulators cited the research on the stickiness of the
default, and expressed the hope that most consumers would stick to the new default of
no overdraft protection. To enhance the stickiness of the default, the regulator set some
safeguards: to get out of the default, customer needed to take an “affirmative choice” (talk
to someone or click a box), and before allowing them to do so, the bank needed to show
them some documents.
    Thus, the regulator had taken care of the obvious plumbing concerns they could think
of. And yet, the default did not work that well. Willis (2013) cites data from the consumer
finance protection bureau suggesting that around half of the bank’s clients had opted out of
the default, and that those who switched were those more likely to then pay high overdraft
fee. Banks achieved that by using any number of strategies that Willis describes in detail,
such as minimizing the costs of opting out as much as the law allowed them to, stationing
5
    This applied to ATM or one-time transactions only. Banks could still authorize and charge for overdraft
    occasioned by checks or recurring transactions.



                                                   19
employees at ATMs to convince people to opt out, using forms for new client that made
sticking with the default just as complicated as opting out, and using language that made
the default scary and the alternative attractive.
    The bottom line is that, if the objective of the government was to protect customers
from the bank’s abusive use of overdraft policy, then the policy should have been drafted
with an understanding of the economics of the bank’s likely response. This would have
probably led to a different set of rules. The 2009 Credit Card Accountability Responsibility
and Disclosure (CARD) Act was less respectful of the banks’ freedom. It contained some
“nudges”, but also hard ceilings on the late fees that banks were allowed to charge. Agarwal
et al. (2015) find important effects on the CARD act on interest and fees paid by customers
(as the ceilings were binding on some products and were not offset by increases on other
products), and relatively little change of behavior related to the nudge.
    Economists have some domain expertise to understand those dynamics, and therefore
can help draft policies that take those incentives into account. Duflo et al. (2013) not only
studied the (faulty) third-party audit system for environment that the court had ordered in
Gujarat, but set out to improve it. Given what we know from economics, it was not rocket
science to identify the key problem: since the system was plagued by conflicts of interest,
the performance of the auditors could be expected to improve if the financial link between
them and the firm was severed, and if they were instead made liable to the regulator, who
would them reward them for accuracy. Similar proposals have been made for reforming
financial audits in the US and Europe, though they have not been implemented. The Gujrat
Pollution Control Board (the regulator in charge) implemented a reformed system, where
auditors were randomly assigned to firms, paid from a central pool, and independently
monitored in a randomized experiment in 473 firms (233 of which where assigned to the
new system). Compared to audits conducted under the status quo (even with the same
auditor operating in both systems), we found those “reformed” audits to be significantly
more accurate. This additional accuracy led to a reduction of pollution among the worst
offending plants. This work inspired a reform of the entire third party audit system in
Gujarat, once again demonstrating the convincing power of plumbing.
    These two examples may give a somewhat too simplistic view of the problem: firms,
like governments are organizations themselves and may thus not always respond optimally
to a change in the environment: taking into account how a regulation will affect firms as
organizations further underscores the role of details rules and how they interact with the
environment.
    To summarize, economists have the disciplinary training to make good plumbers: eco-
nomics trains us in behavioral science, incentives issues, and firm behavior; it also gives
us an understanding of both governments and firms as organizations, though more work
probably remains to be done there. We economists are even equipped to think about mar-
ket equilibrium consequences of apparently small changes. This comparative advantage,
along with the importance of getting these issues right, make it a responsibility for our
profession to engage with the world on those terms.

                                             20
4    Plumbing and experimentation
Roth (2002) made the point that “in the service of design, [lab] experimental and com-
putational economics are natural complements to game theory.” Lab experiments and
computational work are essential tools for the economist-engineer because sometimes real
life will not oblige with the nice assumptions that are necessary for elegant models with
closed form solutions. If that is the case, simulations are needed to understand the behavior
of the proposed systems under the more complicated set of assumptions.
     Similarly, in the service of fitting policies for the real world, field experiments are a
natural complement to theory and economic intuition.
     Evaluation in the field is necessary for the plumbers because intuition, however sophis-
ticated and however well grounded in existing theory and prior related evidence, is often
a very poor guide of what will happen in reality. Therefore, the economist-plumber is
eminently fallible. We have already seen several interventions that did not initially suc-
ceed, despite being designed as well as possible, and with economists’ inputs (e.g. the 2010
default regulation to prevent the banks from using overdraft policy, and the first attempt
to scale-up of Pratham’s “teaching at the right level” intervention). My career is peppered
with such examples, and occasionally, the best-intentioned efforts have backfired.
     In Banerjee et al. (2008), we helped the local government in Udaipur district, Rajasthan,
design an incentive programs to get nurses to come to work more often (a baseline survey
had shown that they were absent more than half of the days). Each nurse was given
a time-and-date stamp and asked to stamp a register affixed to the wall of the center
several times of the course of a day, one day a week (on Monday) to prove her presence.
The government announced that those who didn’t show up at least 50% of the time on
Mondays would get their wages docked. This policy was evaluated in an RCT. Initially,
everything went according to plan: Nurse attendance, which was around 30% before the
launch of the program, jumped to 60% after the program was introduced in centers where
it was in place, while it remained unchanged elsewhere. However a few months later, the
tide turned. Nurse attendance in the monitored centers started to drop, and kept dropping.
Eight months into the program, the monitored and unmonitored centers were performing
at an exactly equal – and very poor – level. When we looked into what happened, we were
struck by the fact that recorded absence remained low even after the program fell apart.
What went up sharply were “exempt days” – days when the nurses claimed that they were
not required to come in for some reason (training and meetings were the most common
reasons). There seems to have been a strong collusion between the nurses and the doctors
in charge of supervising them. At some point, attendance in the monitored centers actually
fell below the unmonitored ones and remained lower till the end of the study: by the end,
the nurses in monitored centers came to work only 25% of the time. We had completely
failed to foresee how this collusion would undermine the program, and would in fact make
the situation worse than it had been before, as it dawned on nurses that they could get
away with anything.


                                             21
    For some people, this very fallibility is a reason why we should not intervene at all. But
everybody makes mistakes, so this is hardly an excuse for inaction (Banerjee, 2002). How-
ever, because the economist-plumber intervenes in the real world, she has a responsibility
to assess the effects of whatever manipulation she was involved with, as rigorously as possi-
ble, and help correct the course: the economist-plumber needs to persistently experiment,
and repeat the cycle of trying something out, observing, tinkering, trying again.
    This underscores the need for evaluation, but of course, randomized controlled trials
are not the only way to evaluate policies. For example, Handel and Koldstad’s work, which
I discuss, largely exploit non-randomized situations, although they have some experimental
papers as well. Conversely, most RCTs are not plumbing experiments – they are designed
and implemented carefully with as little disturbance as possible, to learn a specific param-
eter or measure the effect of one particular intervention. They are not concerned with the
specifics of how such an intervention would be implemented at scale.
    Still, randomized field experiments are an economist-plumber’s natural tool, for several
reasons.
    First, there are the traditional identification arguments: it is generally difficult to form
a proper counterfactual when a policy was launched in the world, and hence we may not
know the real effect of many policy attempts.
    Second, precisely because policy makers are not particularly interested in plumbing,
they will in general make a large number of decisions at the same time. Even when it is
possible to evaluate one policy or one regulation with a credible identification design, it
may be difficult to “unpack”. For example Agarwal et al. (2015), estimate the impact of the
2009 CARD act, which regulated the fees that banks could charge on consumer business
cards, but not business credit cards, and also had some nudging provisions. They compare
fees and interest paid before and after the acts on consumer cards versus business cards.
This gives us a convincing estimate of the effect of the CARD act taken as a whole, but it
is a little difficult to separate out the impact of its different provisions. In contrast, with
a carefully designed experiment, it is possible to manipulate one lever at a time. Thus,
randomized experiments are a very natural complement to policy experimentation. This
is nicely illustrated by the Banerjee et al. paper on the Raskin information card, to name
just one example.
    Third, an explicit experiment, with a start date and an end date, by which a report
must be provided and a decision made has important benefits for the process of govern-
ment. Greenstone (2009) argues for a “culture of persistent regulatory experimentation
and evaluation”, where every regulation should be subject to experimentation, and an au-
tomatic sunset clause (by which it must be reviewed to determine its costs and benefits
during the experimental period) and an expansion clause (by which it will be expanded if
it turns out to have large benefits and low costs). Greenstone argues that, in the US, there
are opportunities to reform the system for evaluating, adopting, and getting rid of policies.
Most evaluations are done ex-ante, with very little relevant data to determine the cost and
benefits, and very little serious review ex-post. Almost no federal regulation comes with a

                                              22
sunset clause, although they are used more frequently by states (Baugus and Bose, 2015).
Partly inspired by this article and by Greenstone himself (who hung up his professor’s
gown for a time to engage in full-time plumbing), the Obama administration called for a
“look back”, a comprehensive review of all the costs and benefits of regulations in places
by all agencies (Executive Order 13563, 2011). This was a bold move, but without proper
data available and without any counterfactual, the exercise had a narrower scope than was
originally envisioned. Moreover, inertia is deeply ingrained in governments everywhere .
Once an apparatus is installed to support a policy or a regulation, it is unlikely to go
away. The case is different if the apparatus is the explicit subject of an experiment, with
an anticipation of a review to come. Of course, what matters for this political economy
process is that the process is viewed as experimental, not necessarily that the experiment
be randomized. But once a regulator agrees to try something out (perhaps different vari-
ations of a program) on an experimental basis, the marginal cost of randomizing is often
low, and the results of an RCT are more transparent and easier to explain. 6
    Fourth, the process of designing a randomized experiment in conjunction with a govern-
ment is an important learning process, because it forces the policy makers to think about
the levers that they actually have control over. In our conversation with partners from the
Kerala health department, which I recounted above, it was apparent that they were very
confused as to what they could and could not do as a policy. On the one hand they had
an ideal vision of the nurse and the village officials working together to be key dispensers
of health advice. On the other hand, they resisted any notion that they could actually tell
local governments what to do. If they had had to design an experiment, they would have
needed to spell out what was in fact in their control (training the panchayats? Training
doctors and nurses in a set of new guidelines and roles and responsibilities?). This would
actually have forced them to write down a policy, rather than keep it suspended at the
purely aspirational level.
    Learning happens in the course of the experiment itself as well. With Banerjee et al.
(2012), we conducted a first set of randomized experiments, designed to improve the behav-
ior of police officers with ordinary citizens in the field. The Rajasthan police top brass were
very committed to the goal of improving the force, and ready to immediately implement
reforms that we would have suggested. We convinced them to start with an experiment
to test out some of the main proposals made by the various police commissions in India:
training police officers, introducing community observers, rationalizing the workweek with
a day off and a duty roster, and limiting the frequency of transfers. Even though this
was a personnel experiment carried out on a large scale (more than 100 police stations,
covering a population of over eight million people) and with a government, this was not
a plumbing experiment, in that we did not pay much attention to the details of how each
intervention was going to be carried out. The reason is that our partners in the police did
6
    Greenstone’s agenda found some resonance in the Obama administration. A 2013 memo from the
    Office of Management and Budget (Burwell et al., 2013) encouraged all heads of agencies to use
    existing evidence to draft new rules, but also to conduct randomized experiments.


                                               23
not think that plumbing would ever be an issue at all. The police in India is structured
like a military organization, and the top brass assumed that if they ordered something, it
would happen. So they simply sent the order to carry out these different activities down
the hierarchy. Unfortunately, this was not exactly what happened. Some of the reforms
(the transfer freeze and the training) could be more or less directly implemented from the
top, and were indeed carried out. But others (the rationalization of the workweek, and
the community observer) relied on the station masters for implementation. If they had
been carried out, they would have caused a direct limitation on the autonomy of those
very station masters. So, with the benefit of hindsight, it is not entirely surprising that
those measures were in fact never actually implemented in the field: neat reports made
their way up, but when we sent monitors to the field, they found that nothing had changed
in practice. Collectively, we entirely neglected the plumbing when we were designing the
reforms and their implementation (and accordingly, we probably tested out reforms that
were unworkable, although they had been recommended by various reform commissions),
because we had a vision of the organization that turned out to be entirely different to what
it was in practice. But this project was carried out as an RCT, rather than just rolled out
(which had been our police partner’s initial idea), so we were at least able to realize what
we had gotten wrong: not only because we saw no change in the final outcome, but also
because we had put in place a comprehensive data collection apparatus to see what was
happening on the ground.
    While we never got to learn whether the rationalization of the workweek or community
observers could have worked if they had been implemented, we learned a fair amount
about what kind of interventions were possible to carry out with the police. We took this
lesson to the next project we carried out together, when Nina Singh got the responsibility
to design an anti-drunk driving project (Banerjee et al., 2012). Some of the issues that
we were concerned with are central to policing, and related to quite subtle questions of
economics: should enforcement be always in a fixed place or vary locations? Should it
follow a crackdown model or be at a lower level for a long period of time? We were
interesting in setting up an experiment to learn that. Based on the previous experiment,
however, neither the researchers nor the police officials were ready to assume that traffic
checkpoints to catch offenders would regularly happen at the specified time and place. So
we thought hard about the police as an organization, with the constraints that it faces (in
particular, the prohibition of merit pay) in order to find a space where it was possible to
provide incentives. We formed drunk driving enforcement squads out of officers assigned to
in in a certain type of station perceived as a punishment posting. We promised that good
behavior on this squad would get them a ticket out of the doghouse. We fitted the police
cars of this brigade with GPS, which allowed us to monitor whether they were in fact doing
their job. Compared to regular police stations, officers in those squads were in fact more
likely to be at their checkpoint and arrested more drunks. Thus, the first experiment gave
the police enough understanding of what was under their control in their organization and
what was not, information that allowed them to better design a new policy.

                                            24
5    The plumber and the scientist
The knowledge that is generated in a course of a plumbing experiment is often quite
context-specific (to a particular organization and institutions). One concern is that that
it may not generalize beyond this setting. In this case, even if a randomized experiment
is used to pick the version of the policy that actually works, is it still science, or is it just
glorified consulting? After all, firms also use randomized controlled trials to choose the
price of their goods, the color of their yogurt packets or what advertisement to feature
on a landing page. The number and the scale of these experiments have exploded with
the advent of the internet and A/B testing. Many of these marketing experiments are of
use to the companies that run them, but are not treated as research, do not receive IRB
approval, and are never published. When they are (see Simester (2016) for a review) it is
because they manage to make a more general point on consumer behavior. Are plumbing
experiments able to help us draw similarly able to help us draw general conclusions, valid
in other contexts as well?
     There are several answers to this criticism, which sets apart policy plumbing from usual
A/B testing.
     First, plumbing experimentation can create the counterfactual that allows for the eval-
uation of the policy itself. Many policies are implemented nationwide, which makes it
difficult to evaluate them. Plumbing experiments can help by creating variation in how
well it they are implemented. This can generate the variation sufficient to evaluate the
causal impact of the policy itself, even when it has already been rolled out. Consider De-
voto et al. (2012), the experiment on water connection. By fixing some “design of taps”
issues, and removing the barriers to access to the loan (and hence the water connections),
they generated exogenous increase in water access in a randomly selected set of households
(69% take up for treatment households, versus about 0 in control households), which gave
them the opportunity to evaluate the impact of access to water at home on health and
household welfare.
     In addition, a particular feature of plumbing experiments is that, because they can be
carried out with governments, and can therefore be done on a large scale, they give us
a window to evaluate the equilibrium effect of policies, which are otherwise very difficult
to assess and model.7 For example, Muralidharan et al. (2016a) evaluate the impact of
biometrically authenticated payment in the MGNREGS program in Andhra Pradesh. The
new system replaced the traditional method of paying beneficiaries through their postal
account, which required them to travel to the post office and often pay a bribe to an agent
if they wanted to get paid. In the new system, they could withdraw money from an ATM
in the village staffed by a local woman, using their fingerprint for identification. The rest
of the implementation of the MGNREGS program (including how the money got to the
Panchayat account) was not changed. The authors found that treatment improved the
7
    Muralidharan and Niehaus (2016) make the same argument in their discussion of experimentation at
    scale.


                                                25
implementation of the program in many dimensions. In particular it reduced leakages and
delays, leading to higher participation in the program. Importantly, the randomization was
carried out at the subdistrict level (a group of 20-25 villages, covering over 60,000 people).
This allowed the authors, in follow-up work (Muralidharan et al., 2016b), to study the
impact of the program on wages. They found that their intervention led to an increase in
private sector wages without reduction in employment. This general equilibrium impact is
quantitatively important: 90% of the increase in individual’s income due to the intervention
could be attributed to the private wage increase. The question of the equilibrium impact
of workfare programs like the MGNREGS is of central interest for the design of social
safety nets. Of course, to generalize the finding beyond Andhra Pradesh, or beyond this
particular improvement, we would only need to be willing to assume that other reasons for
intensive margin increase in program participation would have a similar effect on wages
in the private sector. That assumption is more palatable that the assumption that smart
cards themselves would work well in any context; this is a statement about the functioning
of the private labor market rather than about the government as an organization.
    Second, the plumbing experiments have also generated insights that are useful to pure
science.
    A first relationship between plumbing and pure science is that plumbing experiments
can be designed to test mechanisms, precisely because the researcher can operate very
specific levers. Thus, to employ the terminology of Ludwig et al. (2011); Kling et al.
(2016), plumbing experiments can be both mechanism and policy experiments. To be sure,
this is not a specific advantage of plumbers. The most common use of field experiments
these days is a careful test of a theoretical proposition, and this use of experiment as
“science” usually takes place in a better controlled environment (see Banerjee and Duflo
(2009) for a discussion of this use of experiments, and Glennerster (2016) for practical trade-
offs between control and relevance that arise when running experiments). But plumbing
does not preclude science, and presents some advantages. First, the policy context is
usually not replicable outside of this policy environment. Second, the relative indifference of
governments to plumbing questions often translates into a willingness to give the plumbers
a relatively free reign on the design. Third, the scale also allows many subtreatments
without losing power. The plumbers can then turn to their scientist friends (or to the
scientist within) to design quite subtle “mechanism experiments,” moving one parameter
at time to test a very specific scientific theory, in the policy-relevant context, at scale, and
on a representative population. In the Banerjee et al. (2015) experiment on the Raskin
card, for example, there were several manipulations that permit quite precise evaluation
of the mechanism at play. One of the manipulations involved varying the visibility of the
card distribution program to affect high-order belief (not only I know the benefits I’m
entitled to, but I know that the official knows, and I know that others know that we both
know). This provides quite unique empirical evidence on the impact of common knowledge,
a concept in many models of game theory and political economy.
    Another nice example is Kling et al. (2012) study of comparison friction. We have seen

                                              26
that inertia is an important feature of consumer behavior. One reason may be that it is
difficult for them to compare options, even when the information is available. There are
a number of studies of “comparison friction” contrasting the internet to other markets,
suggesting that this is a general problem. Kling et al. (2012) set up an experiment that
isolates comparison friction from other factors. In the treatment group, senior citizens in
Medicare part D received personalized information on the performance of different plans –
information that they could, in principle, have acquired very easily by going to a website and
entering the data. The intervention had large impact on plan switching (which increased
from 27% to 38%). The design, which is focused on the very narrow channel of providing the
results of the comparison, isolates the role of comparison friction from other mechanisms,
such as difficulty of acquiring information, procrastination, etc.
     More generally, well-designed plumbing experiments can sometimes introduce variation
that does not exist in natural conditions, and thus generate a counterfactual to illumi-
nate theoretical mechanisms that are not easily observable in nature. For example, it is a
question of general interest whether people hired with pro-social motivations would gen-
erally make better employees, and specifically better public service employees. But since
pro-social tendencies are not randomly assigned, this is not something where evaluating
causality is easy. The Ashraf et al. (2015) study and the Deserranno (2015) studies that
I mentioned earlier provide examples of how a plumbing experiment can help us make
progress on difficult-to-settle empirical issues: In both studies, the authors used the dif-
ferent recruitment strategies to create variation in the type of health promoters that were
recruited. Once employed, they were all tasked with the same responsibilities and faced the
same incentives. Thus the experiments clearly identify selection, controlling for incentive.
Based on this design, Ashraf et al. (2015) find health workers attracted by career incentives
are much more effective at delivering health services, as measured by home visits and the
organization of community meetings. In contrast, the Deserranno (2015) provides evidence
in support of the relationship between pro-socialness and job performance. Compared to
the high-pay treatment, the health promoters recruited under the low-pay treatment vis-
ited a larger number of households, organized more public presentations in the village, and
provided more antenatal checks. She also finds that they were more likely to target the
most vulnerable households. Clearly, these two studies do not settle the issue, as they have
opposite conclusions, but they help us think about it better.
     To be fair, it is not always possible to have very complex design in plumbing experi-
ments: in some instances, it places too much strain on the implementing agency. For ex-
ample, the Muralidharan et al. (2016a) experiment with smartcards in MGNREGS varies
many things at the same time (they give the smartcards, they move the collection point to
the village, they move it from the post office to the ATM, and they introduce local female
“banking correspondents”, who act as local agents for the bank ). This makes it difficult
in this setting to isolate one particular mechanism. But when possible, it makes the ex-
periment particularly valuable, and my sense is that such trials will become increasingly



                                             27
feasible, especially as the first experiments provide examples to follow.8
    A first relationship between plumbing and pure science is related to the “learning by
noticing” concept that I referenced earlier. Many scientists-turned-engineers and later,
turned-plumbers (Banerjee, Klemperer, Pathak) have said that experience taught them to
pay attention to an entirely different set of notions than the ones they started with. The
scientist’s focus on specific models and assumptions requires not noticing things that are
unimportant, or that cannot be made sense of in their particular paradigm. The plumber
must notice anything if it will matter for implementation. The plumber will share these
observations with engineers and scientists (or with the engineer and scientist version of
themselves) and thus hopefully generate new interesting and important questions to work
on. Plumbing experiments shine the spotlight on new problems, and new theories can be
developed to address those problems.
    For example, Pathak (2016) concludes his article reflecting on this many years of help-
ing cities design and implement school assignment mechanisms, with which I opened this
essay by saying: “Experiences from the field highlight new issues that have not been the
focus of this earlier literature such as non-consequentialist rationales for straightforward
incentives, the importance of transparency and simplicity in influencing designs, the value
of single-offer systems over multiple-offer alternatives, the need to streamline aftermarkets,
and the importance of participation on the school and student side. It is my hope that
further interaction between theory and practice will sharpen focus on these and potentially
other significant issues that have received relatively little attention from the theoretical
literature.” At the end of the paper, Pathak goes on to open yet another agenda on
feedback between market-clearing algorithms, school attributes, and students preferences.
Those are, I am guessing, difficult and interesting theoretical problems, but they would
not have arisen without careful study of the property and behavior of actual school choice
mechanisms
    Indeed, the school choice literature has several examples of where questions that first
arose as purely practical motivated further theoretical work, advancing market design as
a field. The questions of how to break a tie in school assignment mechanisms originated
as a practical question that parents and school administrators were very worried about,
and led to an active literature (see Pathak (2016) for a review). Similarly, researchers had
not originally paid much attention to a central feature of school assignment in Boston, the
“walk zone.” But when Mayor Menino promised that 50% of the students should go to a
school they could walk to, researchers started simulating what would happen if the size of
the “walk zone” was increased given the assignment mechanism that exists in Boston, and
they were surprised to see that it did not lead to many more students assigned to their
walk zone. This motivated theoretical work on what happens in an assignment system
where a student can qualify for a school on two separate lists. The results are actually not
8
    For other examples of complex plumbing experiments with many treatments that look specifically at
    mechanisms, see Olken (2007); Alatas et al. (2012, 2016); Khan et al. (2016a); Banerjee et al. (2012)



                                                  28
obvious, and interesting theoretically. The basic mechanisms at play were not understood
by policy makers, market participants, or researchers before the research. In a working
paper version of the paper Dur et al. (2013) report how their research was influenced by the
policy debate and how the policy debate was influenced by their research, which ultimately
led to the abandonment of the “walk zone” in Boston on the grounds that the MIT-Boston
College team had showed it made no difference, but it was perceived to unfairly advantage
some students. For a last example, in many cases, participants in school choice mechanism
have a different view than the scientists on whether a particular school assignment system
can be “gamed” by being strategic about it. This is an example of a much more general
problem, where participants’ perceptions of the optimal strategy in a system may be quite
different than what the optimal strategy is. As scientists, we may have dismissed this,
since agents are just wrong. But as plumbers, it obviously matters, since it will affect final
outcomes. Motivated by these sorts of issues, Li (2016) actually tried to address this issue
formally by defining the concept of “obviously strategy proof.”
    This ability of experiments to put the spotlight on new problems is important. Many
new fields in economics came about because someone decided that we could not continue to
ignore the failure of assumptions that were staring us in the face: informational economics,
behavioral economics, network economics, all come to mind. For this kind of innovation
to happen, we need to leave a space for surprising information to come in. Of course, this
requires being open to processing reality. Any field study, not just plumbing experiments
(and not just experiments), can generate such insight. The plumbing studies may even
have a particular handicap in this regard because, since they focus on details, they may
often be difficult to theorize, even when they are important for policy (Banerjee, 2002),
beyond broad and rather simple conclusions (“information matters”, “default matters”,
etc.). Plumbing experiments, since they are primarily motivated by pragmatism, must
focus on what is important for the world, not necessarily on the very subtle issues that
theorists would find worth discussing.
    On the other hand, surprising information is perhaps more interesting to theorists, and
thus likely to prompt more thinking when it is generated in very high-stakes environments
and involving many people. The unexpected behavior of a feature of a policy implemented
at scale may motivate more interest than the result from a small experiment, however well
controlled. Behavioral public finance is a good example of such back-and-forth between
theoretical insights and findings from the plumbing experiments. Madrian and Shea (2001)
were motivated by basic idea of procrastination to look at the role of default options
in retirement savings. They found that employees enrolled in the 401k by default were
much more likely to stay enrolled in the long term than those who were not defaulted in,
and this prompted a much more systematic investigation of the prevalence of the default
effect in retirement savings. The first wave of studies were empirical (see e.g. Choi et al.
(2002, 2003, 2004, 2012); Chetty et al. (2014)) and these, in turn, motivated theoretical
work both on whether setting defaults is desirable (e.g. Carroll et al. (2009)), and more
generally on how to set them, since they had been shown to matter. The core theoretical

                                             29
question that defaults raise is motivated by welfare analysis: since economist-plumbers
have demonstrated that defaults matter, the economist-engineer want to set the default at
a “reasonable” place. What is the right reasonable rate? This is not an easy theoretical
question to answer, since it is likely to depend both on the underlying reasons why defaults
matter in the first place, and because welfare analysis cannot rely on the standard tools
when agents exhibit behavioral biases. Amador et al. (2006) start tackling the question of
the optimal savings policy for an agent with hyperbolic discounting preferences. Bernheim
et al. (2015) explicitly address the question of the optimal default policy, and show both
how this depends on the underlying behavioral model, and how some relatively general
results can nonetheless be obtained.
    Last and perhaps most importantly, plumbing experiments, by their nature, are typi-
cally run on real policies and on a large scale. They are not just data points: they affect
many real people and (potentially) have real benefits as they are carried out. When an
economists work on understanding how to design a policy that is going to affect millions
of people and cost millions of dollars, the stakes are high enough that it is perhaps less
important to know whether the findings will generalize beyond the particular work. Work-
ing with governments to evaluate versions of these programs as they are being deployed
represents a tremendous opportunity to generate evidence and improve the effectiveness
of money that is already being spent. Moreover, as we have seen, the lessons that are
generated from these partnerships are often actually acted upon, which means that gains
from evaluation are not just potential, they are actual.
    To take just one extreme example, the Affordable Care Act is a unique institution,
and perhaps a less-than-ideal result of a long and complicated political process. It is
very unlikely that anybody designing a health insurance system from scratch would adopt
anything resembling it, so in a sense there is very little external validity to any work about
the Affordable Care Act. Yet, when Handel, Koldstad and others write papers that are
concerned with detailed issues of implementation of a system like the ACA, it does not
really occur to us to wonder whether this is perhaps a little too specific.
    Similarly, most plumbing studies have first-order impacts. Getting the details right
on school choice directly affect the welfare of millions of school children. Banerjee et al.
(2015)’s work on the Raskin program led to the scale-up of cards to more than 60 million
beneficiaries of public transfer programs. Obviously the scaled-up policy was adapted and
slightly different than what was tested in the experiment. If the effects of this scaled-
up version were the same as what they had estimated, they would translate in benefits
anywhere between 80 million and 170 million dollars annually. The work of Duflo et al.
(2013) on environmental audits in Gujarat, which I discussed above, led to a reform of
the regulation in the state, which has a population of 66 million. The evaluations that
are described in Banerjee et al. (2016) and Muralidharan et al. (2016a) directly affected
hundred of thousands of participants in the Indian workfare program, and eliminated mil-
lion of dollars of leakage, just while the research was underway, in the areas they covered.
These studies also played a part in the adoption of a combination of those reforms as direct

                                             30
payment to beneficiary from the center in August 2015.9 This will affect the lives of 182
million beneficiaries, for a budget of 5.6 billion dollars.
    Many of us chose economics because, ultimately, we thought science could be leveraged
to make a positive change in the world. There are many different paths to get there.
Scientists design general frames, engineers turn them into relevant machinery, and plumbers
finally make them work in a complicated, messy policy environment. As a discipline, we
are sometimes a little overwhelmed by “physics envy,” searching for the ultimate scientific
answer to all questions –and this will lead us to question the legitimacy of plumbing. This
essay is an attempt to argue that plumbing should be an inherent part of our profession:
we are well prepared for it, reasonably good at it, and it is how we make ourselves useful. A
feature unique to economics that scientists, engineers, and plumbers all talk to each other
(and in fact are often talking to themselves – the same economist wearing different hats).
This conversation should continue: it is what what will keep us relevant and, possibly,
honest.




9
    Unusually, a briefing presented by the Ministry of Rural Development to the Cabinet meeting actually
    cited a research paper (Ministry of Rural Development (MORD), 2015). “As on today, 92% of Pan-
    chayats are brought onto efms platform. The Efms has reduced the problem of parking of funds and
    increased transparency. Studies on the effectiveness of electronic fund flow in Bihar done by eminent
    economists (Banerjee et al, 2014) showed that e-governance reduced fund flow leakage by 25%”.


                                                  31
References
Abdulkadiroglu, A. and T. Sönmez (2003). School Choice: A Mechanism Design Approach.
 The American Economic Review 93(3), 729–747.

Abdulkadiroglu, A. and T. Sönmez (2013). Matching Markets: Theory and Practice.
 Advances in Economics and Econometrics 1, 3–47.

Agarwal, S., S. Chomsisengphet, N. Mahoney, and J. Stroebel (2015). Regulating Con-
  sumer Financial Products: Evidence from Credit Cards. The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 130(1), 111–164.

Alatas, V., A. Banerjee, R. Hanna, B. A. Olken, and J. Tobias (2012). Targeting the Poor:
  Evidence from a Field Experiment in Indonesia. The American Economic Review 102(4),
  1206–1240.

Alatas, V., R. Purnamasari, M. Wai-Poi, A. Banerjee, B. A. Olken, and R. Hanna (2016).
  Self-targeting: Evidence from a field experiment in Indonesia. Journal of Political
  Economy 124(2), 371–427.

Almås, I., A. Armand, O. Attanasio, and P. Carneiro (2015). Measuring and Changing
  Control: Women’s Empowerment and Targeted Transfers. NBER Working Paper No.
  21717.

Amador, M., I. Werning, and G.-M. Angeletos (2006).         Commitment vs. Flexibility.
 Econometrica 74(2), 365–396.

Ashraf, N., O. Bandiera, and S. Lee (2015). Do-gooders and Go-getters: Career Incentives,
  Selection, and Performance in Public Service Delivery. Working Paper.

Banerjee, A., R. Banerji, J. Berry, E. Duflo, H. Kannan, S. Mukherji, M. Shotland, and
  M. Walton (2016). From Proof of Concept to Scalable Policies: Challenges and Solutions,
  With an Application. NBER Working Paper No. 22931.

Banerjee, A., R. Chattopadhyay, E. Duflo, D. Keniston, and N. Singh (2012). Improving
  Police Performance in Rajasthan, India: Experimental Evidence on Incentives, Manage-
  rial Autonomy and Training. NBER Working Paper No. 17912.

Banerjee, A. and E. Duflo (2012). Poor Economics: A Radical Rethinking of the Way to
  Fight Global Poverty. PublicAffairs.

Banerjee, A., E. Duflo, and R. Glennerster (2008). Putting a Band-Aid on a Corpse:
  Incentives for Nurses in the Indian Public Health Care System. Journal of the European
  Economic Association 6(2-3), 487–500.



                                           32
Banerjee, A., E. Duflo, C. Imbert, S. Mathew, and R. Pande (2016). E-governance, Ac-
  countability, and Leakage in Public Programs: Experimental Evidence from a Financial
  Management Reform in India. NBER Working Paper No. 22803.

Banerjee, A., E. Duflo, D. Keniston, N. Singh, and R. Chattopadhyay (2012). Can Insti-
  tutions be Reformed from Within? Evidence from a Randomized Experiment with the
  Rajasthan Police. Working Paper.

Banerjee, A., R. Hanna, J. Kyle, B. Olken, and S. Sumarto (2015). The Power of Trans-
  parency: Information, Identification Cards, and Food Subsidy Programs in Indonesia.
  NBER Working Paper No. 20923.

Banerjee, A. V. (1997). A Theory of Misgovernance.            The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 112(4), 1289–1332.

Banerjee, A. V. (2002). The Uses of Economic Theory: Against a Purely Positive Inter-
  pretation of Theoretical Results. Working Paper 007, Department of Economics, MIT.

Banerjee, A. V. (2007). Making Aid Work. MIT Press.

Banerjee, A. V. and E. Duflo (2009). The Experimental Approach to Developmental
  Economics. The Annual Reviews of Economics 1(1), 151–178.

Baugus, B. and F. Bose (2015). Sunset legislation in the states: Balancing the legislature
  and the executive. Technical report, Mercatus Research, Mercatus Center at George
  Mason University, Arlington, VA.

Benhassine, N., F. Devoto, E. Duflo, P. Dupas, and V. Pouliquen (2015). Turning a Shove
  into a Nudge? A “Labeled Cash Transfer” for Education. American Economic Journal:
  Economic Policy 7(3), 86–125.

Bernheim, B. D., A. Fradkin, and I. Popov (2015). The Welfare Economics of Default
  Options in 401 (k) Plans. The American Economic Review 105(9), 2798–2837.

Burwell, S., J. Holdren, A. Krueger, and C. Muñoz (2013). Next Steps in the Evidence
  and Innovation Agenda [Memorandum M-13-17].

Campbell, J. Y. (2016). Restoring Rational Choice: The Challenge of Consumer Financial
  Regulation. American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings [Internet] 106(5), 1–30.

Carroll, G. D., J. J. Choi, D. Laibson, B. C. Madrian, and A. Metrick (2009). Optimal
  Defaults and Active Decisions. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 124(4), 1639–1674.

Chetty, R. (2015). Behavioral Economics and Public Policy: A Pragmatic Perspective.
  The American Economic Review 105(5), 1–33.


                                           33
Chetty, R., J. N. Friedman, S. Leth-Petersen, T. H. Nielsen, and T. Olsen (2014). Active
  vs. Passive Decisions and Crowd-out in Retirement Savings Accounts: Evidence from
  Denmark. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 129(3), 1141–1219.

Choi, J. J., J. Beshears, D. Laibson, and B. C. Madrian (2012). Default Stickiness among
  Low-Income Individuals. RAND Working Paper WR-926-SSA, Rand Corporation.

Choi, J. J., D. Laibson, B. C. Madrian, and A. Metrick (2002). Defined Contribution
  Pensions: Plan Rules, Participant Decisions, and the Path of Least Resistance. In J. M.
  Poterba (Ed.), Tax Policy and the Economy. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Choi, J. J., D. Laibson, B. C. Madrian, and A. Metrick (2003). Optimal Defaults. The
 American Economic Review 93(2), 180–185.

Choi, J. J., D. Laibson, B. C. Madrian, and A. Metrick (2004). For Better or For Worse:
  Default Effects and 401 (k) Savings Behavior. In D. A. Wise (Ed.), Perspectives on the
  Economics of Aging. University of Chicago Press.

Cogley, T., R. Colacito, L. P. Hansen, and T. Sargent (2008). Robustness and U.S. Mone-
  tary Policy Experimentation. Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 40(8), 1599–1623.

Dal Bó, E., F. Finan, and M. A. Rossi (2013). Strengthening State Capabilities: The Role of
 Financial Incentives in the Call to Public Service. Quarterly Journal of Economics 128(3),
 1169–1218.

Deserranno, E. (2015). Financial Incentives as Signals: Experimental Evidence from the
  Recruitment of Health Workers. Working Paper.

Devoto, F., E. Duflo, P. Dupas, W. Parienté, and V. Pons (2012). Happiness on Tap: Piped
  Water Adoption in Urban Morocco. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 4(4),
  68–99.

Duflo, E., M. Greenstone, R. Pande, and N. Ryan (2013). Truth-telling by Third-party
 Auditors and the Response of Polluting Firms: Experimental Evidence from India. The
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, qjt024.

Dur, U. M., S. D. Kominers, P. A. Pathak, and T. Sönmez (2013). The Demise of Walk
 Zones in Boston: Priorities vs. Precedence in School Choice. NBER Working Paper No.
 18981.

Executive Order 13563 (2011). Executive Order 13563: Improving Regulation and Regu-
  latory Review. Federal Register 76(14), 3821–3823.

Field, E., R. Pande, N. Rigol, S. Schaner, and C. T. Moore (2016). On Her Account: Can
  Strengthening Women’s Financial Control Boost Female Labor Supply? Working Paper.

                                            34
Gibbons, R. (2010). Inside Organizations: Pricing, Politics, and Path Dependence. Annual
  Review of Economics 2(1), 337–365.

Glennerster, R. (2016). The Practicalities of Running Randomized Evaluations: Partner-
  ships, Measurement, Ethics, and Transparency. In E. Duflo and A. Banerjee (Eds.),
  Handbook of Field Experiments, Forthcoming.

Greenstone, M. (2009). Toward a Culture of Persistent Regulatory Experimentation and
  Evaluation. In D. Moss and J. Cisternino (Eds.), New Perspectives on Regulation, pp.
  111–125. Cambridge, MA: The Tobin Project.

Handel, B. R. (2013). Adverse Selection and Inertia in Health Insurance Markets: When
  Nudging Hurts. The American Economic Review 103(7), 2643–2682.

Handel, B. R. and J. Kolstad (2015). Getting the Most from Marketplaces: Smart Policies
  on Health Insurance Choice. Brookings Hamilton Project, Discussion Paper 2015-08.

Hanna, R., S. Mullainathan, and J. Schwartzstein (2014). Learning through Noticing: The-
  ory and Evidence from a Field Experiment. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 129(3),
  1311–1353.

Khan, A. Q., A. I. Khwaja, and B. A. Olken (2016a). Making Moves Matter: Experimental
 Evidence on Incentivizing Bureaucrats through Performance-Based Postings. Working
 Paper.

Khan, A. Q., A. I. Khwaja, and B. A. Olken (2016b). Tax Farming Redux: Experi-
 mental Evidence on Performance Pay for Tax Collectors. The Quarterly Journal of
 Economics 131(1), 219–271.

Klemperer, P. (2002). What Really Matters in Auction Design. The Journal of Economic
  Perspectives 16(1), 169–189.

Kling, J. R., J. Ludwig, B. Congdon, and S. Mullainathan (2016). Social Policy: Mechanism
  Experiments and Policy Evaluations. In E. Duflo and A. Banerjee (Eds.), Handbook of
  Field Experiments, Forthcoming.

Kling, J. R., S. Mullainathan, E. Shafir, L. C. Vermeulen, and M. V. Wrobel (2012).
  Comparison Friction: Experimental Evidence from Medicare Drug Plans. The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, qjr055.

Li, S. (2016). Obviously Strategy-Proof Mechanisms. Job Market Paper.

Ludwig, J., J. R. Kling, and S. Mullainathan (2011). Mechanism Experiments and Policy
  Evaluations. The Journal of Economic Perspectives 25(3), 17–38.



                                           35
Madrian, B. C. and D. F. Shea (2001). The Power of Suggestion: Inertia in 401 (k)
 Participation and Savings Behavior. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 116(4), 1149–
 1187.

Ministry of Rural Development (MORD) (June 7, 2015). Note to cabinet. Technical report,
 Government of India.

Muralidharan, K. and P. Niehaus (2016). Experimentation at Scale. Working Paper.

Muralidharan, K., P. Niehaus, and S. Sukhtankar (2016a). Building State Capacity: Evi-
 dence from Biometric Smartcards in India. American Economic Review 106(10), 2895–
 2929.

Muralidharan, K., P. Niehaus, and S. Sukhtankar (2016b). General Equilibrium Effects of
 (Improving) Public Employment Programs: Experimental Evidence from India. Working
 Paper.

Office of Policy Support (2013, November). Direct Certification in the National School
  Lunch Program State Implementation Progress, School Year 2012-2013 Report to
  Congress - Summary. Technical report, United States Department of Agriculture
  (USDA), Food and Nutrition Service.

Office of Research and Analysis (2012, October). Direct Certification in the National
  School Lunch Program State Implementation Progress, School Year 2011-2012 Report
  to Congress - Summary. Technical report, United States Department of Agriculture
  (USDA), Food and Nutrition Service.

Olken, B., R. Pande, and F. Finan (2015). The Personnel Economics of the State. NBER
  Working Paper No. 21825.

Olken, B. A. (2007). Monitoring Corruption: Evidence from a Field Experiment in In-
  donesia. Journal of Political Economy 115(2), 200–249.

Pathak, P. (2011). The Mechanism Design Approach to Student Assignment. Annual
  Review of Economics 3(1), 513–536.

Pathak, P. (2016). What Really Matters in Designing School Choice Mechanisms. In
  Preparation for Advances in Economics and Econometrics, 11th World Congress of the
  Econometric Society.

Roth, A. (2002). The Economist as Engineer: Game Theory, Experimentation, and Com-
  putation as Tools for Design Economics. Econometrica 70(4), 1341–1378.

Scott, J. C. (1998). Seeing like a State: How Certain Schemes to Improve the Human
  Condition have Failed. Yale University Press.

                                          36
Simester, D. (2016). Field Experiments in Marketing. In E. Duflo and A. Banerjee (Eds.),
  Handbook of Field Experiments, Forthcoming.

Stango, V. and J. Zinman (2014). Limited and Varying Consumer Attention: Evidence
  from Shocks to the Salience of Bank Overdraft Fees. Review of Financial Studies, hhu008.

Thaler, R. H. and C. R. Sunstein (2008). Nudge: Improving Decisions About Health and
  Wealth. Penguin Group.

Willis, L. E. (2013). When Nudges Fail: Slippery Defaults. The University of Chicago Law
 Review 80(3), 1155–1229.




                                           37
     6   Figures

                   Figure 1: Flow of Authorizations under the Traditional System
38
     Figure 2: Audit Readings for Suspended Particulate Matter (SPM)
39
