NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

GLOBALIZED ISRAEL:
HIGH TECH PROWESS AND BUTTRESSING FDI
Assaf Razin
Working Paper 23223
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23223

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2017

The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Assaf Razin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Globalized Israel: High Tech Prowess and Buttressing FDI
Assaf Razin
NBER Working Paper No. 23223
March 2017
JEL No. F21,F3
ABSTRACT
The paper reviews the crucial role which globalization forces played in Israel’s transformation
from low tech to high tech economy. Special emphasis is placed on foreign direct
investment as a driver for the high-tech transformation.

Assaf Razin
Eitan Berglas School of Economics
Tel Aviv University
Tel Aviv 69978
ISRAEL
and Cornell University and CEPR
and also NBER
ar256@cornell.edu

Globalized Israel: High Tech Prowess and Buttressing FDI
by
Assaf Razin
Abstract
The paper reviews the crucial role which globalization forces played Israel’s transformation from
low tech to high tech economy. Special emphasis is placed on foreign direct investment as a
driver for the high-tech transformation.

Israel has had a remarkable development, emerging from a low-income developing economy in
the 1970s, to a medium to high income advanced economy in the 2000s, while increasingly
integrated into the world economy in trade, supply chains, and through financial links. The global
information-technology surge was the unprecedented growth of Israel’s high-tech sector.
Innovation requires scale, and scale require trade. An isolated small economy cannot be a center
of innovation. The incentives of entrepreneurs to invest effort and resources in generating valuable
services are related to the ability to use the resulting knowledge repeatedly, on a large scale, over
time. Foreign direct investment provides critical incentives to be able to use scale economies, to
leap from the precarious innovation stage at the confined of a small economy to the execution
stage, by utilizing the world markets. The globalization of an economy is crucial for its nascent
high-tech industry to develop, and flourish.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 1 surveys the crucial role of foreign direct investment
for Israel's transformation from low tech to high tech economy. Section 2 addresses labor

productivity of Israel in comparison to other OECD countries. Section 3 analyzes the effect of
ICT technological surge on Israel’s high-tech sector. Section 4 elaborates on R&D international
spillovers. Section 5 looks at trends and cycles of the high tech sector, and the economy
productivity at large. Section 6 concludes that concerning innovation and technological advance
globalization matters.
1. Foreign Direct Investment
Foreign direct investment (FDI) has been crucial for the emergence of Israel high tech sector into
occupying an elite position in the world economy. Recall that, FDI refers to investments in
companies and production outside the realm of the stock market. Whenever a foreign company
buys an Israeli start-up, it is counted as FDI. Israel pulled in the fourth highest level of foreign
direct investment in relation to the size of its economy in the 2010s. Israel brought in about 4
percent of GDP in FDI. The OECD average was just 1.4 percent. It fell however short of the
Ireland at 16.1 percent and Chile at 7.4 percent. For Israel, the OECD accounted for the lion’s
share of FDI inflows, more than a quarter, of late. The lion’s shares came from the United States
and the EU. Recently, China became an important source for FDI inflows.
Israel’s inward FDI flows accelerated in the 1990s and the 2000s (see Figure 1). Israel’s venture
capital development (data covers only the 2000s) exhibits a remarkable increase as a proportion of
total inward FDI, demonstrating the sharp increase in funding to high-tech startups.
Generally, a multinational ﬁrm that chooses to keep the production of an intermediate input within
its boundaries can produce it at home or in a foreign country. When it keeps it at home, it engages
in standard vertical integration. When it makes it abroad, it engages in foreign direct investment
(FDI) and intraﬁrm trade. High tech start up firm typically attempts to produce a product with two

distinct characteristics. First, the success of the research and development is highly uncertain,
needing venture capital financing because of the high risk. Second, the product is of ultimately
multiple uses. That is, it is an input into increasing returns to scale technology; hence attractive
to multinational firms. A multinational ﬁrm that chooses to keep the production of an intermediate
input within its boundaries can produce it at home or in a foreign country. When it keeps it at
home, it engages in standard vertical integration. When it makes it abroad, it engages in foreign
direct investment (FDI) and intraﬁrm trade. Deep- pocket international investment enterprises
(such as CalPERS’ pension fund) tend typically to allocate a small fraction of their investment
portfolio to foreign high-tech startups in the form of venture capital.1 The high tech firm receiving
the funds at the start up stage will have diminished transaction costs at a more mature stage. A
multinational
Venture capital picture in Israel goes back to the early 1990s, with capital raising ebbing
and flowing and with trends changing. It is highly correlated with inward FDI.

1

For a theory of foreign investor liquidity, venture capital investment and portfolio investment, see Appendix A.

Figure 1: Israeli High-Tech Venture Capital Fund Raising (right axis, Million, current US dollars)
and Inward Foreign Direct Investments (left axis, Million, current US dollars)
16000

5000

14000

4500
4000

12000

3500

10000

3000

8000

2500

6000

2000
1500

4000

1000

2000
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015

0

500
0

Foreign VC's
Source: IVC Research Center.
2. Productivity
The dot-com bubble was a brief period of surging equity prices in the internet sector and related
businesses 1997-2000. Firms discovered that they could increase share prices merely by adding
the prefix e (e-Bay) or suffix com (Amazon.com) to their corporate names. Purchasers of dot-com
equities and derivatively hard assets gulled themselves into believing that normal standards of
valuation could be set aside because dot-com ventures had unbounded profit horizons. The mania
had a direct impact on all countries with significant high-tech sectors, including Israel. The dotcom bubble not only the present discounted value of their capital stocks, it triggered large volumes
of foreign direct investment (FDI) to other economies, including the emerging high-tech sector in

Israel; which had beneficial effect on national income both during the bubble and after it burst.
This started a steady rise in inward FDI into Israel.
The relatively high R&D spending has not fully manifested itself in productivity. However, as
Figure 2 shows, Israel labor productivity picked up moderately in the 2000s.
Figure 2: 2000-2015 GDP per hour work (constant 2010 prices)

Source: OECD Library.
Israel recently pulled in the fourth highest level of foreign direct investment in relation to the size
of its economy, (OECD library); figures for in 2013. Foreign direct investment refers to
investments in companies and production outside the realm of the stock market. Whenever a
foreign company buys an Israeli start-up, it is counted as FDI. Israel brought in about 4 percent of

GDP in FDI. The OECD average was just 1.4%. 2The United States was the source of roughly
30% of global FDI outflows, followed by Japan, China and Russia. For Israel, the OECD
accounted for the lion’s share of FDI inflows, primarily the US and the EU, but China‘s share rises
fast. See a brief on FDI literature in Appendix 6A.
3. ICT technological surge and Israel’s high-tech sector
We start with potential long‐term effects of the global surge in ICT innovations, epi‐centered in
the US, on factor productivity in small advanced country. The spillover effects of technological
innovations have strong implications for the issue that has recently been debated: whether per
capita output convergence across developing and developed economies. As observed by
Helpman (1999), research‐and‐development (R&D) expenditures, which have enormous rates of
return, are heavily concentrated within a small number of industrialized countries. If R&D
expenditures do not significantly spill over to developing countries, then R&D expenditures will
tend to widen the cross‐country income gaps. Helpman (1999) raises the question of whether
the benefits of R&D expenditures is as skewed as the expenditures themselves, or whether the
substantial international spillover effects of R&D expenditures cause an international distribution
of the benefits to be more spread out. Such spillover can mitigate the cross‐country income gaps.
He bring evidence that for the conclusion that R&D spillover effects are important and that there
exist significant cross‐country links driven by foreign trade and FDI. Peri (2005) asserts that
knowledge flows within and across countries may have important consequences for both

Israel fell short only of the three countries that came ahead of it: tiny Luxembourg, in first
place, brought in 39.5% of its GDP in FDI, followed by low tax Ireland at 16.1%, and Chile at
7.4%.
2

productivity and innovation. He uses data on 1.5 million patents and 4.5 million citations to
estimate knowledge flows at the frontier of technology across 147 subnational regions during
1975–1996 within the frame of a gravity‐like equation. He estimates that only 20% of average
knowledge is learned outside the average region of origin, and only 9% is learned outside the
country of origin. However, knowledge in the computer sector flows substantially farther, as does
knowledge generated by technological leaders. In comparison with trade flows, we see that
knowledge flows reach much farther. External accessible R&D gained through these flows has a
strong positive effect on innovative activity for a panel of 113 European and North American
regions over 22 years.
Coe et al (2009) utilize an expanded data set for the purpose of this study. The new estimates
confirm the key results reported in Coe and Helpman (1995) about the impact of domestic and
foreign R&D capital stocks on TFP. In addition, we show that domestic and foreign R&D capital
stocks have measurable impacts on TFP even after controlling for the impact of human capital.
Furthermore, we extend the analysis to include institutional variables. Our results suggest that
institutional differences are important determinants of TFP and that they affect the degree of R&D
spillovers. Countries where the ease of doing business and the quality of tertiary education systems
are relatively high tend to benefit more from their own R&D efforts, from international R&D
spillovers, and from human capital formation. Strong patent protection is associated with higher
levels of total factor productivity, higher returns to domestic R&D, and larger international R&D
spillovers. Finally, countries whose legal systems are based on French and, to a lesser extent,
Scandinavian law benefit less from their own and foreign R&D capital than countries whose legal
origins are based on English or German law.

Insightfully, de la Potterie and Lichtenberg (2006) investigate econometrically whether foreign
direct investment (FDI) transfers technology across borders. (The authors do not study R&D
knowledge transmission mechanism through trade) data indicates that FDI transfers technology,
but only in one direction: a country's productivity is increased if it invests in R&D-intensive
foreign countries—particularly in recent years—but not if foreign R&D-intensive countries invest
in it. Other findings are as follows.3
Helpman (2003) examines the sources of the rise in total factor productivity (TFP) in Israel in the
1970s and 1980s estimates that slightly more than half the rise in TFP can be attributed to R&D
investment, and the rest to a rise in the level of education.
The ratio of foreign-R&D benefits conveyed by outward FDI to foreign R&D benefits conveyed
by imports is higher for large countries than it is for small ones. The failure to account for
international R&D spillovers leads to upwardly biased estimates of the output elasticity of the
domestic R&D capital stock; and that are much larger transfers of technology from the United
States to Japan than there are from Japan to the United States.4

For a brief on the FDI literature see Appendix B.
Bransfetter (2006) introduces a framework for measuring international knowledge spillovers at the firm level. He
uses this framework to directly test the hypothesis that FDI is a channel of knowledge spillovers for Japanese
multinationals undertaking direct investments in the United States. Using an original firm-level panel data set on
Japanese firms' FDI and innovative activity, he finds evidence that FDI increases the flow of knowledge spillovers
both from and to the investing Japanese firms.

3
4

Figure 3: Gross domestic spending on R&D, Total, % of GDP, 1981-2014: Israel and OECD
average
5
4.5
Israel

4
3.5
3

OECD

2.5

1.5

1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014

2

Source: OECD Data.
Israel R&D spending received a boost after the ICT global surge. Figure 6.3 describes the extent
to which Israel domestic spending on R&D rose sharply to a higher plateau following the global
ICT surge in the 1990s.5 Israel moved up in OECD ranking. Israel’s international ranking in
domestic spending on R&D is truly exeptional.
4. Spillovers
We now turn to the transmission mechanism, via the global capital markets, through which the
technology surge spreads internationally.

Another factor which explain the Israel-OECD gap is the expansion of OECD membership, with some of the new
member countries (e.g. Mexico) having low R&D spending.

5

International trade, R&D spillovers and TFP interact with each other in many diﬀerent ways. Trade
increases market size, reduces the duplication of R&D, increases knowledge spillovers, and
increases specialization. All of which will increase R&D and hence TFP. On the other hand, trade
increases competition and causes factor prices to change, which leads to a decline in TFP. In
addition, trade does not necessarily imply an international convergence of income levels. If the
R&D spillovers are international in scope, there will be convergence; however, if they are national
in scope, there will be a divergence. (See Helpman (2004)).
Capital flows of all types have increased over the past few decades, and most recently, some of
the biggest increases have occurred in foreign direct investment. This is especially true of rich
countries, but is also increasingly true of developing nations too. Obstfeld and Taylor (2002) make
an historical point: "A century ago, world income and productivity levels were far less divergent
than they are today, so it is all the more remarkable that so much capital was directed to countries
at or below the 20 percent and 40 percent income levels (relative to the United States). Today, a
much larger fraction of the world's output and population is located in such low-productivity
regions, but a smaller share of global foreign investment reaches them."
Foreign direct investment (FDI) occurs when an investor based in one country (the home country)
acquires an asset in another country (the host country) with an intent to manage that asset. The
management dimension is what distinguishes FDI from portfolio investment in foreign stocks,
bonds and other financial Instruments. Inward FDI in the high tech sector is driven by human
capital easy to do business in the host country. However, FDI flows, namely the acquisition of the
high-tech industry equity assets, provide strong incentive to innovate. Thus, FDI flows help to
expand the high tech sector activities. In other words, FDI flows are both driven by fundamentals,
which drive the high tech industry, and re-enforcing its expansion. Israel's high-tech development

in the last two and a half decades is a fascinating event study, flashing out the FDI-Productivity
interactions.6 Capital flows of all types have increased over the past few decades, and most
recently, some of the biggest increases have occurred in foreign direct investment. This is
especially true of rich countries, but is also increasingly true of developing nations too.
Turning to the short-term aspects of FDI, we consider how they are related to the global stockmarket cycle. Capital flows in the form of FDI are important because it is believed that FDI has
special benefits over other forms of capital flows. First, these flows are thought to be more stable,
and do not leave the host country exposed to financial crises. Second, FDI if often supposed to be
associated with technology transfer, which may have spillover benefits for the host country. Third,
FDI is often attributed a special role in disciplining host country governments: the threat of moving
business offshore limits the ability of host countries to extract taxes and introduce inefficient
regulations. Offsetting this, FDI is also often associated with special domestic costs in cases where
foreign ownership has caused domestic political unrest in the host country (this is often especially
true in natural resource industries).7

Not all countries follow the 10% mark for the definition of FDI. Most countries do indeed report long-term intrafirm loans, but not all countries report short-term loans. Most countries report reinvestment of retained earning only
with a considerable lag. One implication of these measurement problems is that FDI inflows do not
contemporaneously match FDI outflows. UN (2005) annual report on world investment documents how countries
are becoming more receptive to FDI. In the years 1991-2004 vast majority of changes in laws and regulations
pertaining to investment were more favorable to FDI. An exception is developing countries which introduced some
laws and regulations intended to protect some natural resources (especially in the energy field) against "foreign
intruders". The report also indicates that countries are cooperating with each other in designing pro-FDI bilateral
policies: "The number of bilateral investment treaties (BITs) and double taxation treaties (DTTs) reached 2,392 and
2,559 respectively, in 2004, with developing countries concluding more such treaties with other developing
countries." Razin and Sadka (2007) provide a comprehensive survey of theory and empirical applications of FDI.

6

7

See also Feenstra (1999).

Being equity investments, FDI flows are driven among other factors by credit availability and
stock market performance. A central problem in the credit market is that lenders are reluctant to
make loans because they cannot easily determine whether a prospective borrower has resources to
repay the loan. If the loan is made, the lender is concerned about whether the borrower will engage
in risky behavior that could lower the probability that the loan will be repaid. Collateral reduces
this information asymmetry problem because high-quality collateral (that is, assets that are easily
valued and easy to take control of) signiﬁcantly decreases the losses to the lender if the borrower
defaults on the loan. High-quality collateral also reduces the moral hazard problem because the
borrower is reluctant to engage in excessively risky behavior since now he or she has something
to lose. Creditor protection enhances the ability of the lender to take control of the collateral in
case of default and thereby alleviate credit constraints. Thus, creditor rights regulation helps to
mitigate the problems of information asymmetry and moral hazard between creditors and
borrowers. Hale et al (2014) develop a model predicting two channels through which creditor
protection enhances the performance of stock prices: the probability of a liquidity crisis leading to
a binding investment-finance constraint falls with a strong protection of creditors; the stock prices
under the investment-constrained regime increase with better protection of creditors. They find
strong empirical support for both predictions using data on stock market performance, for 52
countries over the period 1980-2008. In particular, they demonstrate that better creditor protection
is correlated across countries with lower average stock market volatility; crises are more frequent
in countries with poor creditor protection. Using propensity score matching they demonstrate that
during crises stock market returns investment fall by more in countries with poor creditor
protection. 8Israel has had international high ranking in credit protection. It became also an
The reason is that creditor rights protection affects the probability of the crisis. Hale et al (2014) estimate PROBIT
regressions of stock market crashes. They construct the propensity score and match crisis observations (treatment

8

attractive place for foreign direct investment at the time the high tech industry, capitalizing on
Israel's human capital, emerged into the world economy.
5. High Tech Israel: Cycles and Trends
Israel high tech industry benefitted from a surge in inward FDI.9 Figure 4 describes the timepattern of FDI inflows in Israel, compared with the ones in other developed economies.
Figure 4: Foreign direct investment: Inward flows, annual, 1980-2013 (percentage of
Gross Domestic Product)
60
Israel

50
40
30
20
10

Developed
Economies

0

Source: United Nations Conference on Trade and Development database

group) to non-crisis observations (control group), by using Epanechnikov-kernel matching technique. Having done
this, they then compute average treatment effect on treated (ATT), using the matched sample, for stock market
return and volatility. They find that the stock market average return is only half as high during the crisis; and that in
a matched sample the stock return volatility is substantially and significantly higher during crisis,
9

Globalization in the shape of a drop‐off of capital controls typically lead to foreign direct investment in
the form of mergers and acquisition (M&A), but not in the one in the form of greenfield investment. The
latter are typically encouraged in the political‐economy setups, even under a regime of capital‐inflow
restrictions, provided that the profits from the investments are allowed to be repatriated. Greenfield FDI
surges are primarily driven by high return projects such as high‐tech start‐ups.

To interpret Figure 4, FDI flows (in percentage of gross domestic product) as reflecting the intense
interactions of the FDI flows with investment in the high tech investment in Israel. Three features
are noteworthy:
(1) The sharp rise in inward FDI during the dotcom equity bubble;
(2) The effect of the dotcom early 2000s equity that triggered a temporary fall in inward FDI flows.
Inward FDI underwent a sharp rise in the late 1990s. The upturn happened when the nascent high
tech industry in Israel emerged on the global stage, and the upside-down-V-shaped fall when the
early 2000s dotcom equity collapse took place; and,
(3) The effect of the boom and bust of the equity markets around the 2008 crisis when Israel high
tech industry gained strength in global high tech sectors.
Helpman (2003) observes that over the last decades Israel’s economy grew faster than average,
but not exceptionally fast. Compared with countries at a similar level of development, Israel is not
outstanding. Seven-tenths of the rise in its GDP can be explained by the increase in labor input
(measured by hours worked) and investment in machinery, structures, and equipment.
Nonetheless, the investment is made possible by the increase in productivity, which in turn was
fed by improved levels of schooling, investment in R&D, and knowledge spillovers from other
countries. Based on the level of schooling and the stock of R&D.
Israel’s economy is the most tech-dependent in the world, with 13 percent of the country’s GDP
and 31 percent of all exports originating in the high tech sector; thus, the global high tech
slowdown has hit Israel harder than other advanced economies.

Friedmann (2016) analyze the implications for labor productivity of the three groups of external
shocks hit the industry since the early 1990s: Mid 1990s‐‐‐before the “Birth” of the dotcom
bubble:
1. Early 2000s‐ after the burst of the dotcom bubble;
2. Before and during the early stages of the 2008 global crisis which triggered the global
stock market crash and the sharp decline in world trade.
3. The Great Recession that followed the global crisis.
The Table exhibits the high productivity increase of the private and the ICT sectors around the
global ICT surge in the 1990s; the low productivity increase in the early 2000s in the sectors
following the burst of the dot.com bubble; and the return to a state of medium-to-high productivity
change before the 2008 global stock market crash.

Table 4: Israel's Labor Productivity (annual percentage changes)

1991‐1995

1996 ‐ 2000

1996‐2010

2006‐2010

Private
Sector: Total

1.5
(1,399)

3.5
(1,559)

1.5

1.2
(2,057)

Information
Technology
Sector

1.1
(71)

10.2
(126)

3.4

1.7
(176)

Information
Technology
(excluding
electronics)

3.1
(35)

11.6
(38)

6.0

3.3
(38)

IT Services

‐3.6
(26)

5.7
(71)

1.7

‐0.4
(112)

Source: Friedman (2016).
Note: in parentheses are the number of employees (in thousands).
There is an intriguing positive correlation between high tech industry productivity (shown in Table
4) and FDI flow cycles (shown in Figure 6.1). The clustering of high tech industries and start up
primarily in Tel-Aviv, Israel’s commercial center and its economic activities is another
productivity-enhancing development. In general, productivity-boosting mechanisms arising from
the clustering of high-tech and university centers is complimentary to the productivity-enhancing
effects of industrial agglomeration. These have attracted great attention in policy circles Empirical
evidence suggests that region-level productivity rises 3-8% when market size is doubled (World
Bank 2009).In a recent study, we employ plant-product-level data from Japanese manufacturing
to assess the effects of urban agglomeration on product quality (Saito and Matsuura 2016). Their

findings suggest that state and municipal tax breaks and other public efforts to attract enterprises
enhance economic competitiveness by improving product quality along with productivity.
Productivity gains used to project traditionally agglomeration benefits underestimate the benefits
by ignoring the quality incentives accompanying a productivity shock.
6. Globalization Matters
Globalization is currently facing some challenging political tests, more than in the past
decades. Brexit may have been the first wave of anti-globalization and rising populism that
gushes over the most advanced nations. Globalization and new-technology forces trigger a
steady decline in low-tech manufacturing industries, a rise in global financial centers, and
increased immigration flows, brought up the 2017 change of guards in the US. Meanwhile,
European countries like France, Greece, the Netherland, Spain, Demark and others witness the
anti-EU forces gather strength. The EU refugee crisis, The EMU crisis, the political backlash
against trade treaties in the US; which threatens the proposed multi-lateral trade agreements
such as the Trans-Atlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (US-EU trade deal) and the TransPacific Partnership (US-Asia trade deal), and more. The open-border model, which governed
the global economy for more than 70 years, is unravelling. However, the acceleration of
finance, technology and telecommunication and supply chains makes the reversal from
globalization self-defeating. The remarkable transformation of Israel’s economy from low tech
to high tech through trade and financial integration in the world economy provides a strong
counter example to the anti-globalization logic.

Appendix A: A model of foreign venture capital investment10
Consider a small economy faced by a continuum [0, 1] of foreign investors. Each foreign
investor has an opportunity to invest in one investment project, as in B- to-B transactions (FDI).
Foreign investment can occur in one of two forms: either as a direct venture capital, the direct
investor effectively acts like a manager; or, as a portfolio investment, the investor does not
manage the project.
There are three periods: 0, 1, and 2. In period 0, each investor decides whether to make a
direct investment or a portfolio investment. In period 2, the project matures. The net cash flow
from the start-up project is given by
1
R  K ,    1    K    AK 2 ,
2

(1)

where ε is an idiosyncratic random productivity factor, which is independently realized for each
project in period 1, and K is the level of capital input invested in the project in period 1, after the
realization of ε. The parameter A reflects production costs. The productivity shock ε is distributed
between –1 and 1 with mean 0 with the cumulative distribution function,  () , and the density
function is f ()   '() . Investors choose the form of investment that maximizes (ex ante)
expected payoff.
In period 1, after the realization of the productivity shock, the manager of the project
observes ε. Thus, if the investor owns the project as a direct investment, she observes ε, and
chooses K, so as to maximize the net cash flow: K d ( )  (1   ) / A .

10

Based on Goldstein and Razin (2006).

Therefore, the ex ante expected net cash flow from a direct investment, if held until
maturity, is
E[1    ]
2

EVd 

2A

.

(2)

In the case of a portfolio investment, the owner has an arm’s-length relationship with the
manager, and thus she cannot observe ε. In this case, the owner maximizes the expected return
absent any information on the realization of ε; and decisions are based on the ex ante zero mean.
Thus, the manager will be instructed to choose K p  K d (0)  (1/ A) . Then, the ex ante expected
payoff from a portfolio investment, if held until maturity, is
EVp  1/(2 A) .

(3)

Comparing (6A.2) with (6A.3), we see that if the project is held until maturity, it yields a higher
payoff as a direct investment than as a portfolio investment. This reflects the efficiency that
results from a hands-on management style in the case of a direct investment.
There are also costs for FDI investment, however. First, an FDI investor has to incur a
fixed cost in order to acquire the expertise to manage the project directly. We denote this cost,
which is exogenously given in the model, by C. Second, there is an endogenous cost arising from
the possibility of liquidity shocks occurring in period 1. There is a discount when selling a
project managed as direct investment due to information asymmetries, as demonstrated below.
In period 1, before the value of ε is observed, the owner of the project might get a
liquidity shock. With the realization of a liquidity shock, the investor is forced to sell the project
in period 1. This feature of the model is similar to the preference-shock assumption made by

Diamond and Dybvig (1983): An investor who is subject to a liquidity shock derives her utility
only from period 1 consumption. If, however, she is not subject to a liquidity shock, she derives
her utility from period 2 consumption. We denote by λ the probability of a liquidity shock. We
assume that there are two types of foreign investors. In particular, half of the investors will need
to sell with probability λH and half with probability λL such that 1 > λH > (1/2) > λL > 0, and λH +
λL = 1.
Investors know ex ante whether they are of a λH type or a λL type, and this is their private
information. In addition to liquidity-based sales, there is a possibility that an investor will
liquidate a project in period 1 if she observes a low realization of ε. Then the price that buyers
are willing to pay for a direct investment that is being sold in period 1 is
D

. PD 

1
2A

(1   D )  (1   ) 2 f ( ) d   D
1

(1   D ) ( D )   D

(4)

Here,  D is a threshold level of ε, set by the direct investor; below which the direct
investor is selling the project without being forced to do so by a liquidity shock; λD is the
probability, as perceived by the market, that an FDI investor gets a liquidity shock. In equation
(4), it is assumed that if the project is sold because of a liquidity shock, that is, before the initial
owner observes ε, the value of ε is not recorded in the firms before the sale. Therefore, the buyer
does not know the value of ε. However, if the project is sold for low-profitability reasons, the
owner will know the value of ε after the sale. The threshold  D is determined in equilibrium.
The initial owner sets the threshold level  D , such that given the price PD , when observing  D ,

an investor is indifferent between selling and not selling the project in absence of a liquidity
shock. Thus,

PD

1   D 

2A

2

.

(5)

Equations (4) and (5) together determine PD and  D as functions of the market-perceived
probability of sale due to the liquidity shock (λD). We denote these functions as  D (λD) and PD
(λD).
When a portfolio investor sells the projects in period 1, everybody knows she does it
because of a liquidity shock. Thus, the price of the project is given by
Pp 

1
.
2A

(6)

Comparing the price of FDI, which is determined by equations (6A.4) and (6A.5), with the price
of FPI, which is determined by equation (6A.6), we see that the resale price of a direct
investment in period 1 is always lower than the resale price of a portfolio investment in that
period. The intuition is that if a direct investor prematurely sells the investment project, the
market price must reflect the possibility that the sale originates from inside information on low
prospects of this investment project. This constitutes the second (liquidity) cost of FDI.
Based on our analysis, we can write the ex ante expected net cash flow from FDI:


 1       2       
2
D
D 

 D D 



1   D  D   

2
  i 
1
EVD  i , D , A, C   1  i  
C .
1  

2
A





f
d




    2 A



D
D



(7)

The ex ante expected net cash flow from FPI is simply
EVp  A  

1
A.
2

(8)

Then, the difference between the expected value of FDI and the expected value of FPI is

Diff  i , D , A, C   EVD  i , D , A, C   EVp ( A) .

(9)

Clearly, investors will choose FDI (FPI) when Diff  i , D , A, C   0 ( 0) and will be indifferent
between the two (i.e., may choose either FDI or FPI) when Diff  i , D , A, C   0 .
To complete the description of the equilibrium, it remains to be specified how λD, the
market-perceived probability that an FDI investor will get a liquidity shock, is determined.
Assuming that rational expectations hold in equilibrium, λD has to be consistent with the
equilibrium choice of the two types of investors between FDI and FPI, such that

D  (H H,FDI  L L,FDI ) /(H,FDI  L,FDI ) ,

(10)

where λH,FDI is the proportion of λH investors (H investors) who choose FDI in equilibrium, and
λL,FDI is the proportion of λL investors (L investors) who choose FDI in equilibrium.
Five possible cases can potentially be observed in equilibrium. Case 1: All investors
choose FDI. Case 2: L investors choose FDI; H investors split between FDI and FPI. Case 3: L
investors choose FDI; H investors choose FPI. Case 4: λL investors split between FDI and FPI; H
investors choose FPI. Case 5: All investors choose FPI. Equilibrium outcomes depend on
production cost A and liquidity preferences (λL, λH).

As the production cost A increases, we are more likely to observe FPI and less likely to
observe FDI in equilibrium. As the difference in liquidity needs of the two types of investors
widens, we are more likely to see a separating equilibrium, where different types of investors
choose different forms of investment.

References
Alfaro, Laura, Areendam Chanda, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, and Selin Sayek (2004), "FDI and
Economic Growth: The Role of Local Financial Markets", Journal of International Economics,
64(1), 89-112.
Antras, Pol (2004), "Advanced Topics in International Trade: Firms and International Trade",
Lecture Notes (Harvard University).
Antras, Pol (2015), Global Production: Firms, Contracts, and Trade Structure, Princeton
University Press.
Brainard, S. Lael (1997), "An Empirical Assessment of the Proximity-Concentration Trade-off
between Multinational Sales and Trade", American Economic Review, 87(4), 520-544.
Bransfetter, Lee (2006), “Is foreign direct investment a channel of knowledge spillovers?
Evidence from Japan's FDI in the United States,” Journal of International Economics, Volume
68, Issue 2, Pages 325–344.
Coe, D., Helpman, E., (1995). International R&D Spillovers. European Economic Review, 39,
859–887.
Coe, David T., Elhanan Helpman, and Alexander W. Hoffmaister (2009) “International R&D
spillovers and institutions,” European Economic Review, Volume 53, Issue 7, October 2009,
Pages 723–741.

de la Potterie, Bruno van Pottelsberghe, and Frank Lichtenberg (2006) “Does Foreign Direct
Investment Transfer Technology Across Borders?,” Review of Economics and Statistics, August
2001, Vol. 83, No. 3, Pages 490-497.

Djankov, Simeon, and Bernard Hoekman (2000), Foreign Investment and Productivity Growth in
Czech Enterprises, The World Bank Economic Review, 14 (1), 49-64.
Diamond, W. Douglas, and Philip H. Dybvig (1983). "Bank runs, deposit insurance, and liquidity".
Journal of Political Economy. 91 (3): 401–419.

Feenstra, Robert C. (1999), "Facts and Fallacies about Foreign Direct Investment", in Martin
Feldstein, ed.: International Capital Flows, (University of Chicago Press, Chicago, III).
Friedmann, Yoav (2016), "The Information Technology Industries: Employees, Wages and Dealing
with Shocks," Israel Economic Review Vol. 14, No. 1
Goldstein, Itay, and Assaf Razin (2006), “An information-based trade-off between foreign direct
investment and foreign portfolio investment,” Journal of International Economics, 70, pp. 271–
295.
Hale, Galina, Assaf Razin and Hui Tong (2014) “Stock Prices in the Presence of Liquidity
Crises: The Eﬀect of Creditor Protection,” Economica. Volume 81, Issue 322, April Pages 329–
347.
Helpman, Elhanan (1999) “R&D and Productivity: The International Connection,” in Assaf
Razin and Efraim Sadka (eds.) The Economics of Globalization: Policy Perspective from Public
Economics, Cambridge University Press.
Razin, Assaf, and Efraim Sadka (2012). Foreign direct investment: analysis of aggregate flows.
Princeton University Press.

