                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          SHOCK RESTRICTED STRUCTURAL VECTOR-AUTOREGRESSIONS

                                     Sydney C. Ludvigson
                                           Sai Ma
                                         Serena Ng

                                      Working Paper 23225
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23225


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                          March 2017, Revised January 2020




Ludvigson acknowledges financial support from the C.V. Starr Center for Applied Economics at
NYU. Ng acknowledges support from the National Science Foundation under grant SES-0962431
and SES-1558623. We are grateful to Ian Dew-Becker, Lutz Kilian, Jóse Luis Montiel Olea,
Mikkel Plagbourg-Moller, Stephen Terry, Jim Stock, Eric Swanson, and Harald Uhlig for many
valuable discussions. The views expressed are those of the authors and not necessarily those of
the Federal Reserve Board, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Sydney C. Ludvigson, Sai Ma, and Serena Ng. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Shock Restricted Structural Vector-Autoregressions
Sydney C. Ludvigson, Sai Ma, and Serena Ng
NBER Working Paper No. 23225
March 2017, Revised January 2020
JEL No. C01,C5,C51,E17

                                          ABSTRACT

It is well known that the covariance structure of the data alone is not enough to identify an
SVAR, and the conventional approach is to impose restrictions on the parameters of the model
based on a priori theoretical considerations. This paper suggests that much can be gained by
requiring the properties of the identified shocks to agree with major economic events that have
been realized. We first show that even without additional restrictions, the data alone are often
quite informative about the quantitatively important shocks that have occurred in the sample. We
propose shrinking the set of solutions by imposing two types of inequality constraints on the
shocks. The first restricts the sign and possibly magnitude of the shocks during unusual episodes
in history. The second restricts the correlation between the shocks and variables external to the
SVAR. The methodology provides a way to assess the validity of assumptions imposed as
equality constraints. The effectiveness and limitations of this approach are exemplified with three
applications.

Sydney C. Ludvigson                              Serena Ng
Department of Economics                          Department of Economics
New York University                              Columbia University
19 W. 4th Street, 6th Floor                      420 West 118th Street
New York, NY 10002                               New York, NY 10027
and NBER                                         and NBER
sydney.ludvigson@nyu.edu                         Serena.Ng@columbia.edu

Sai Ma
Federal Reserve Board,
C Ave & 20th Street NW
Washington, DC 20551
sai.ma@frb.gov
1        Introduction

A challenge in economic analysis is that the data represented by a vector autoregression (VAR)
can be consistent with many causal structures di¤erentiated by distinct economic models and
primitive assumptions. Structural vector-autoregressive models (SVARs) provide a simple
framework that enables researchers to perform counter-factual experiments without fully char-
acterizing all primitives or micro-foundations that lead to the dynamic system. Concisely stated,
a n-variable SVAR analysis consists of …nding an n n matrix B that relates the reduced-form
innovations        t   to the mutually uncorrelated structural shocks et :

                                                      t   = Bet :

The data provide          t,   but the above relationship only gives n(n+1)=2 pieces of information about
B through the reduced-form covariance restrictions. Hence n(n 1)=2 additional restrictions
are necessary to identify B. Sims (1980) originally proposed a triangularized system to identify
B, but long-run economic restrictions, statistical restrictions based on heteroskedasticity of the
VAR innovations, or additional information in the form of high frequency data, variables exter-
nal to the SVAR, or narrative descriptions have also been employed.1 Point identi…cation exists
if these restrictions are enough to yield a unique solution. In some cases, point identi…cation is
achievable only by imposing restrictions that are di¢ cult to defend. It may then be desirable
to abandon the goal of point identi…cation in favor of less restrictive economic assumptions.
   In this paper we are concerned with applications for which economic restrictions that permit
point identi…cation are not available. Though the literature has focused on …nding n(n 1)=2
restrictions by appealing to theory or prior information, what seems to have been overlooked is
the information conveyed by the n(n + 1)=2 atheoretical restrictions. Though they only provide
an under-identi…ed set of solutions, the behavior of the shocks in this set is often telling about
the events that might have happened, and provides a guide to additional restrictions that need
to be imposed. Unlike a typical SVAR which puts restrictions on the dynamic responses or
propagating mechanism, we put restrictions on the shocks. For this reason, we refer to our
approach as a “shock-restricted”SVARs.
   Although many types of shock-based restrictions are possible, we focus here on two main
types. The …rst is a set of inequality restrictions that require the identi…ed shocks to have de-
fensible properties during special episodes of history for which a broad historical understanding
would suggest a certain behavior of the structural shocks. Historical narratives are augmented
and veri…ed by using the data to locate distinguishing characteristics of the structural shocks.
We refer to these as event inequality constraints. The second are a set of inequality restrictions
that require the identi…ed shocks to exhibit a non-zero correlation with certain variables exter-
    1
        For a comprehensive review of SVAR models, see Ramey (2016), Kilian and Lutkepohl (2016).


                                                           1
nal to the VAR that should be informative about the shocks of interest. We refer to these as
external variable inequality constraints. Many restrictions used in econometric modeling can be
written as external variable equality constraints. We weaken these assumptions by allowing for
inequalities.
   The use of inequality constraints has a long history in the SVAR literature. They have pre-
dominantly been formulated as sign restrictions on impulse responses with zero as the threshold
value, e.g., Uhlig (2005). We entertain inequality constraints on the shocks, either on their be-
havior during particular episodes or in terms of their comovement with external variables,
possibly with non-zero thresholds. Large threshold values allow us to isolate and exploit the
information in rare events. Working with inequalities comes at the cost of foregoing point iden-
ti…cation, but the approach nonetheless enables us to check whether shocks thought to have
happened can be recovered under the assumptions of the model. The approach also allows us to
evaluate whether assumptions such as exogeneity, zero, and unit elasticity, or others are valid.
   The methodology described here is predicated on the idea that a credible identi…cation
scheme should produce estimates of et that are congruent with our ex-post understanding of
historical events and/or with broadly accepted economic notions of a shock’s de…ning proper-
ties. For example, a scheme that identi…es a large positive output shock in the 1982 recession
would be dismissed because the existence of a shock would be hard to defend given the historical
account of the events at the time. Similarly, a scheme that produces uncertainty shocks that
are negatively rather than positively correlated with the value of safe haven assets would be dis-
missed given an economic understanding of uncertainty as a phenomenon that enhances rather
than weakens precautionary motives. Such shock-based restrictions turn out to be valuable for
                                                                     ~ will generate shocks et
identi…cation because, although two feasible structural models B and B
    ~t with equivalent …rst and second moments, the et and e
and e                                                      ~t are not necessarily the same at
any given t or in terms of their comovement with external proxy variables. In other words, two
series with equivalent properties “on average”can still have distinguishable features in certain
subsamples and/or in their comovement with external variables.
   At a super…cial level, the shock-based constraints appear similar to identi…cation schemes
already present in the literature. Many important studies have used a narrative approach to
construct shock series from historical readings of political and economic events. These shock
series are typically used in an SVAR context as an external instrumental variable. A recent
literature pioneered by Mertens and Ravn (2013) and Stock and Watson (2008) has emerged that
uses economic time series external to the SVAR to help with identi…cation. These approaches
achieve point identi…cation by assuming that the external variables have a zero correlation with
some shocks (an exogeneity assumption) and while having a nonzero correlation with other
shocks (a relevance assumption). By contrast, as in Conley, Hansen and Rossi (2012), our
methodology allows the external variables and events to exhibit departures from exogeneity.

                                                2
But while their approach is Bayesian and focuses on single equation estimation, our approach
is frequentist in the spirit of the moment inequality framework of Andrews and Soares (2010)
and focuses on system estimation. And unlike Conley et al. (2012), the motivation for the event
and external variable inequality constraints considered here is not limited to relaxing exogeneity
assumptions; the more general objective is to use them to help with identi…cation.
   Like any identi…cation scheme, the one studied here is not without limitations. While the
approach often allows for weaker assumptions, clear conclusions may not emerge without the
imposition of multiple shock-based restrictions, each of which need to be located and defended.
This in turn requires a detailed reading of the relevant events. Moreover, alternative combina-
tions of these constraints, as well as alternative parameterizations of a given set of constraints,
may produce di¤ering results. In such cases, a sensitivity analysis may be undertaken to reveal
how fragile the …ndings are to di¤erent identifying assumptions.
    In what follows, we demonstrate how the methodology can be used with three applications.
In the …rst, building o¤ of previous work by Kilian (2008) and Kilian and Murphy (2012), we
use an SVAR for the oil market to illustrate how to set up the restrictions and obtain a set
of plausible solutions. It is shown that, even though the dynamic responses under di¤erent
restrictions are similar, some shocks thought to have occurred in particular episodes are not
actually evident under restrictions previously used in the literature. In the second application,
we consider the SVAR used in Gertler and Karadi (2015) to assess the transmission of monetary
policy shocks. Results using our shock-based restrictions broadly support their assumption
about instrument exogeneity, but reveal that periods of monetary easing are the source of the
identifying power. Finally, inspired by the work of Mian and Su… (2014), we use a bivariate
SVAR to estimate the macroeconomic e¤ects of ‡uctuations in housing wealth on aggregate
consumption. We …nd that much can be said about these e¤ects even in the absence of a
credibly valid instrument, and that the shock-based restrictions produce tighter bounds than
competing methods in the literature. A fourth example, given in Ludvigson, Ma and Ng (2019)
and hereafter referred to as LMN, is used to distinguish …rst from second moment shocks,
a problem for which theory o¤ers little guidance. These di¤erent applications illustrate how
the event and external variable inequality constraints may be used together or separately, and
possibly in conjunction with other identi…cation schemes that already exist in the literature.
   A general …nding is that there is much to be gained by requiring the properties of the
identi…ed shocks to agree with major economic events that have been realized. Often, the
shock-based restrictions are rich enough to conclude that the data are consistent with a clear
causal pattern among the variables. By contrast, the common approach of focusing exclusively
on restricting the SVAR parameters to achieve identi…cation often misses valuable information
about the structural shocks of interest. In some cases, the shocks implied by identi…cation
schemes derived under conventional parameter restrictions appear implausible given an ex post

                                                3
understanding of major historical or economic events.
   The rest of this paper is organized as follows. The next section describes the econometric
framework and the shock-based restrictions at a general level. Sections 3, 4 and 5 present an
analysis of the three applications mentioned above. Section 6 concludes.


2    Econometric Framework

Let Xt denote a n    1 vector time series. We suppose that Xt has a reduced-form …nite-order
                                   P
autoregressive representation Xt = pj=1 Aj Xt j + t , t (0; );          = PP0 where P is the
unique lower-triangular Cholesky factor with non-negative diagonal elements. The reduced-form
                                                                        0
parameters are collected into    = vec(A1 )0 : : : vec(Ap )0 ; vech( )0 . The reduced-form
innovations    t   are related to the structural SVAR shocks et by an invertible matrix H:

                         t   = H et     Bet ;    et       (0; IK );     diag (H) = 1;

where B       H , and        is a diagonal matrix with variance of the shocks in the diagonal entries.
The structural shocks et are mean zero with unit variance, serially and mutually uncorrelated.
We adopt the unit e¤ect normalization that Hjj = 1 for all j.
    The goal of the exercise is analyze the dynamic e¤ects of et on Xt . Let “hats” denote
estimated variables. Since the autoregressive parameters Aj can be consistently estimated
under regularity conditions, the sample residuals ^ t ( ^ ) are consistent estimates of t . The
empirical SVAR problem reduces to …nding B from ^ . But there are n2 parameters in B and
the sample covariance of ^ t only provides n(n + 1)=2 < n2 conditions gZ (B) in the form

                                  gZ (B)    vech( ^ )     vech(BB0 ) = 0;

where the operator vech( ) takes a symmetric n                n matrix and stacks the lower triangular
half into a single vector of length n (n + 1) =2. The VAR is therefore under-identi…ed as there
can be in…nitely many solutions satisfying the covariance restrictions gZ (B) = 0. Let these
uncountably many solutions be collected into the set

                                   ^ : Q 2 On ; diag (B)
                         B^ = fB = PQ                                 0; gZ (B) = 0g;

where On is the set of n         n orthonormal matrices. We shall refer to B^ as the unconstrained
solution set for short, with the understanding that it is not completely unconstrained given the
imposition of the covariance restrictions. To simplify notation, the dependence of B^ on Q and
^ is suppressed.
                                                ^ we initialize B to be the unique lower-
    To construct the unconstrained solution set B,
triangular Cholesky factor of ^ with non-negative diagonal elements, P,
                                                                     ^ and then rotate it


                                                      4
by K million random orthogonal matrices Q.2 Each rotation begins by drawing an n n
matrix M of NID(0,1) random variables. Then Q is taken to be the orthonormal matrix in the
QR decomposition of M. Since B = PQ,^    the procedure imposes the covariance restrictions
vech( ) =vech(BB0 ) by construction. Let et (B) = B 1 ^t be the shocks implied by a B 2 B^
for given ^t . The moments implied by the covariance structure alone give us K million values
of B, and thus K million unconstrained values of et (B) for t = 1; :::T .
   Researchers have used various types of restrictions to dismiss solutions in B^ leading to
a smaller set that satis…es the additional identifying restrictions. A notable example is sign
restrictions or more generally inequality restrictions of the form gS (B)          0. Existing theoretical
and empirical work tends to place these constraints on the impulse response functions, i.e., in
terms of Xt = (L)Bet , the restrictions have focused on (L)B. Point identi…cation requires
restrictions beyond the ones implied by the covariance structure to reduce B^ to a singleton.

2.1       Event Inequality Constraints
Event inequality constraints are unusual episodes of history in which a broad-based (historical
and statistical) reading of the times would suggest a speci…c feature of the structural shocks.
The idea is that a credible identi…cation scheme should produce shocks that are not grossly at
variance with our ex-post understanding of events, at least during periods of special interest.
Event inequality constraints put bounds k = k1 ; :::; kE on the sign and magnitude of et =
B 1 t during selected episodes collected into a vector of E event dates = ( 1 ; :::; E ). That
is, each “event” is associated with a speci…c date or dates in the sample. These shocks are
                                                                               ~ 6= Q,
useful for identi…cation because, from et = B 1 t = Q0 P 1 t , we see that for Q
                                            ~ 0P
                                       et = Q
                                       ~           1
                                                       t
                                                             ~ t 6= et
                                                           = Qe

at any given t. This implies that constraints involving the shocks at speci…c time periods in
                                                                 ^
the sample could be used to constrict the number of solutions in B.
       To illustrate the point, consider the n = 2 case:

                                         1t       B11 B12           e1t
                                              =                         :
                                         2t       B21 B22           e2t
With n = 2, the sample covariance of ^ t provides three restrictions, so one more is needed for
identi…cation. But solving for e2t gives

                                    e2t = jBj 1 ( B21       1t   + B11   2t );

where jBj = B11 B22 B12 B21 is the determinant of B. The values of 1 and 2 are given
since we have data for event date in . Hence, a restriction on the behavior of e.g., e2 1 ,
   2
    The basic results discussed below are little a¤ected by using any number of draws from K = 1:5 million up
to to 60 million.

                                                       5
at speci…c time 1 is a non-linear restriction on B, or equivalently, on Q. With non-Gaussian
reduced-form errors, one can also see that the third and higher order moments of e2t are not
invariant to B, hence Q. This is in spite of the fact that the …rst and second moments of et
are invariant to Q. There is thus information in et that can be used to identify B.
   Further insights can be gained if we additionally restrict BB0 = I; and B11 = B22 . In such
a special case, we can follow Uhlig (2017) and write B^ as a function of a single parameter
that could take any value on the unit circle:

                                                cos ( ) sin ( )
                              B^      B=                                 2 [0; 2 ] :
                                               sin ( ) cos ( )

A constraint such as e2        1    k reduces the set of feasible values for           to those that lie on the
circle anywhere to the right of the blue vertical line in Figure 1. A sign restriction such as that
considered by Uhlig (2005) could further restrict the set to those values on the red arc of the
unit circle.3 To be clear, we do not impose BB0 = I or B11 =                   B22 in what follows, and in
fact, we do not consider bivariate models. Nonetheless, Figure 1 serves to make the point that
all restrictions have the e¤ect of shrinking the solution set. Using the shocks to guide these
restrictions is the thrust of this analysis.

              Figure 1: Schematic Illustration of Event Inequality Constraints




                                      Note: Example based on Uhlig (2017).


   In the more general setting, there may be more than one event inequality constraint. Several
event inequality constraints may be represented as a system of inequality constraints on B:

                                              gE (et (B); ; k)      0:
  3
      We are grateful to Harald Uhlig for pointing us to this illustration.


                                                          6
This is tantamount to creating dummy variables from the timing of speci…c events, and then
putting restrictions on their correlation with the identi…ed shocks. The motivation is that
if a particular Q generates a shock series et that is di¢ cult to defend in certain episodes,
it can be removed from B.^ Such constraints could be imposed on extraordinary events such
as the major recessions, wars, and natural disasters that have been well-documented. For
example, if the …rst shock (say to monetary policy) is presumed to be strongly contractionary
in        = (1979:10; 1979:11; 1979:12), then one could formulate restrictions of the form
                                            0 PT                  1          0    1
                                                   1t=1979:10 e1t              k1
                                              PT
                                               t=1
                         gE (et (B); ; k) = @      1t=1979:11 e1t A          @ k1 A       0
                                              Pt=1
                                               T
                                               t=1 1t=1979:12 e1t
                                                                               k1

to dismiss solutions that imply highly expansionary monetary policy shocks in these episodes.
The parameter k1 is a lower bound that re‡ects how contractionary these shocks are thought
to be and represents a maintained assumption of the identi…cation scheme, analogous to the
zero restrictions of recursive identi…cation schemes. The i-th row of gEi represents an inequality
with 1t= i as instrument. In essence, gE (et (B); ; k) de…nes conditions based on the timing,
sign, and magnitude of the events to help identi…cation. Note that event inequality constraints
put restrictions on the sign and the magnitude of et (B) rather than on the signs of impulse
responses, as is common in some SVAR approaches.
   Of course, if ki is too big, or if the timing of the events in are inaccurate, the solutions
that satisfy the constraints will be meaningless even if they exist. On the other hand, if such
“big”shocks are systematically found at particular episodes when no restrictions on the shocks
are imposed, we can be more con…dent of their occurrence. Our approach is to construct the
set of shocks in B^ implied by the covariance structure alone, and then examine the properties of
the shocks in the periods for which the eit (B) are large. This is exempli…ed in the applications
below.
         In concurrent work, Antolín-Díaz and Rubio-Ramírez (2018) also suggest using restrictions
on the shocks during certain episodes of history to help identi…cation in a Bayesian setting.
They entertain event restrictions that play up the role of some shocks while simultaneously
playing down the role of others (e.g., their “Type A and B” restrictions), similar in spirit to
the traditional narrative-external instrument approach. Our event inequality constraints only
require the weaker assumption that the events be driven at least in part by one or more of the
shocks; they do not require the remaining shocks to play smaller roles. These authors also do
not use external variables, which play a role in our approach as we discuss next. A growing
number of newer research studies use event restrictions of the general form proposed here.4
     4
         See for example, Cieslak and Pang (2019); Cieslak and Schrimpf (2019); Zeev (2018).




                                                          7
2.2    External Variable Inequality Constraints
When theory or economic reasoning imply that certain variables external to the VAR should be
informative about the shocks of interest, such variables can also facilitate identi…cation. Similar
                                                                                                      1
to the event inequality constraints, restrictions involving the correlation between et = B                t
and external variables, can be used to constrict the number of solutions in B.^
   To be clear that external variables in this methodology are not necessarily valid instruments,
we refer to the external variables presumed to have valuable information about the parameters of
interest simply as St . ‘Valuable’is de…ned in terms of a lower bound on the unit-free correlation
between St and the identi…ed shocks, akin to the instrument relevance condition.
  An example helps understand the motivation of these constraints. Consider a two variable
model
                      X1t      B11 B12     e1t          e1t
               A(L)        =                     ;             N (0; I2 );
                      X2t      B21 B22     e2t          e2t
where I2 is a 2       2 identity matrix. The covariance structure             = BB0 provides three unique
pieces of information, so one more restriction would be needed for point identi…cation. If an
instrumental variable Zt exists such that (i) E[Zt e1t ] = 0 (exogeneity) and (ii) E[Zt e2t ] 6= 0
(relevance), then a unique solution for B can be obtained.
   Suppose that, instead of a valid external instrument Zt ; to use the terminology of Stock and
Watson (2008), we have an external proxy variable St that is not assured to be exogenous and
hence can be contemporaneously correlated with at least one structural shock. This suggests
we could represent St by
                                      St = e1t + e2t +              S eSt                             (1)

where eSt is an S-speci…c shock uncorrelated with e1t ; e2t by assumption. We may want to
discard solutions in B^ for which the absolute correlation between St and e2t is too small. The
quantity
                                       c(B) = p                       2
                                                                          ;
                                                    2   +   2   +     S

measures the correlation between the component St and e2 . Requiring that c(B) > c is the
            2
same as 2 + 2 + 2 > c2 , which is a non-linear constraint on the parameters of the St equation,
                  S
which are themselves functions of the shocks and data on St . That c is between zero and one
facilitates the parameterization of c.
    External variable restrictions can be collected into a system of inequality constraints on B:

                                         gC (et (B); S; c)      0;

where c is a vector of lower bounds on the correlations between et (B) and S. In many applica-
tions c can be close to but not exactly zero, thereby requiring that a shock merely be at least
weakly correlated with S. For example, if the …rst shock (say to monetary policy) is presumed

                                                   8
to be correlated with an external variable St (say Fed fund futures), then one could formulate
restrictions of the form
                             gC (et (B); S; c) = corr (e1t ; St )   c   0:

    Two points are worthy of emphasis. First, in conventional instrumental variable estimation,
instrument exogeneity is a maintained assumption. By contrast, our approach makes no such
exogeneity assumption. We only assert that the external variables be driven at least in part by
one or more of the shocks, thereby allowing us to narrow the set of solutions but not achieve
point identi…cation. Of course, St itself is a valid exogenous instrument if = 0. But when
validity of the exogeneity assumption is questionable, then St is at best plausibly exogenous in
the terminology of Conley et al. (2012). These authors consider estimation of the equation for
X1t with endogenous regressor X2t when instrument exogeneity is not known to hold exactly,
but the parameter is point identi…ed when the exogeneity assumption is valid. They put bounds
on the e¤ect due to the invalid instrument, or what we refer to as St , on X1t . In contrast, we
analyze X1t and X2t jointly, and we put more structure on the role of St so that a lower bound
can be placed on its relevance for the shock or shocks of interest. Like Conley et al. (2012), such
a bound will not, in general, be enough to achieve point identi…cation. But it could dismiss
solutions that do not achieve this bound, akin to dismissing weak instruments. Second, as in
the external instrumental variable literature, a maintained assumption of the external variable
inequality constraints is that the random processes behind the external variables are determined
outside of the VAR system. External variables St are then well suited to help with identi…cation
whenever they are informative about the shocks of interest, while the research question is not
concerned with their behavior per se. Otherwise they should be included in the SVAR system
rather than used extraneously, which means they cannot be utilized to help with identi…cation
in the subsystem that excludes St .

2.3    Overview
In the applications below, the event and external variable inequality constraints are used in-
dividually or jointly, and possibly in conjunction with other types of restrictions, such as con-
ventional sign restrictions on the IRFs. Suppose estimates of B are required to satisfy all such
restrictions for a given application. The constrained solution set is de…ned by

                           ^ : Q 2 On ;
       B(B; k; ; S) = fB = PQ                          diag(B) > 0;
                          gZ (B) = 0; gS (B)      0; gE (et (B); ; k)    0; gC (et (B); S)   0g:

where gZ (B) = 0 is the collection of covariance structure restrictions, gS (B)       0 is a set of sign
and other restrictions on the IRFs, gE (et (B); ; k) 0 is the set of event inequality constraints,
and gC (et (B); S) 0 is the collection of external variable inequality constraints. To simplify

                                                   9
notation, we simply write B(B; k; ; ; S) as B. A particular solution can be in both B^ and B
                                                                                                ^
only if all these restrictions are satis…ed. Though B is still a set, it should be smaller than B,
which is based on the covariance restrictions alone. The additional identi…cation restrictions
that lead to B explicitly recognize that not every solution in B^ is equally credible.
   Few methods are available to evaluate the sampling uncertainty of set identi…ed SVARs
from a frequentist perspective, and these tend to be speci…c to the imposition of particular
identifying restrictions. Granziera, Moon and Schorfheide (2018) suggest a projections based
method within a moment-inequality setup, but it is designed to study SVARs that only impose
restrictions on one set of impulse response functions. Gafarov, Meier and Montiel-Olea (2015)
suggest to collect parameters of the reduced-form model in a 1         Wald ellipsoid but the
approach is conservative. For the method to get an exact coverage of 1         , the radius of the
Wald-ellipsoid needs to be carefully calibrated. As discussed in Kilian and Lutkepohl (2016),
even with these adjustments, existing frequentist con…dence sets for set-identi…ed models still
tend to be too wide to be informative. It is fair to say that there exists no generally agreed upon
method for conducting inference in set-identi…ed SVARs, let alone one proven to have correct
frequentist coverage properties for shock-restricted SVARs of the type considered here. This
challenging inference problem is left to future work, while this paper focuses on identi…cation
alone.
    With this in mind, it is still desirable to have an informal sense of sampling variation, so we
undertake a bootstrap Monte Carlo procedure that is detailed in the Online Appendix. While
not proof of a valid inference procedure, the simulations generate R samples of constrained
solution sets to help assess the sensitivity of our …ndings to di¤erent samples of data. The
Online Appendix describes a Monte Carlo simulation that bootstraps from the et (B) shocks
for the Xt system to create percentile intervals for the sets of impulse responses. These intervals
are reported in several …gures below.
   We now turn to three SVAR studies to illustrate the potential usage of shock-based restric-
tions in particular applications.


3    Application 1: An Empirical Analysis of the Oil Market

In this section we consider an SVAR model of the oil market based on Kilian (2009) and Kilian
and Murphy (2012) (KM hereafter). The objective of these studies is to determine the role of
oil supply versus oil demand in driving volatility in oil price changes. These authors consider
                                                               0
an SVAR with three variables: Xt =        prodt reat rpot where prodt is the percentage
change in global crude oil production, reat is the global demand of industrial commodities
variable constructed in Kilian (2009), and rpot is the real oil price. Kilian (2009) refers to reat
simply as a variable that measures “aggregate demand,”for commodities in general, a concept


                                                10
to be distinguished from an oil market speci…c demand. The three structural shocks of interest
to oil supply shock, aggregate demand shock, and to oil-speci…c demand shock. These are
collected into the vector et , which is related to the   reduced-form errors         t   through
                          0            1 0                   10           1
                                prod;t      B11 B12      B13     e prod;t
                          @ rea;t A = @B21 B22           B33 A @ erea;t A :                              (2)
                                rpo;t       B31 B32      B33      erpo;t

3.1    Motivating Facts
Much has been written about the correlation between oil prices and geopolitical as well economic
events. See, for example, Hamilton (2013) and Baumeister and Kilian (2016) for recent reviews.
An extensive narrative history of big economic events in the oil market can also be found in
Kilian and Murphy (2014) (KM2). However, their causal relations and more precisely the
relative importance of the sources of ‡uctuations in the oil market is still a matter of debate.
   Figure 2 plots the change in the real oil price over time in our sample, 1973:02 through
2004:09. The two largest spikes in the unconditional oil price change occur in (i) 1986:02, with
a sharp downward spike following the collapse of OPEC, and (ii) 1990:08, with a sharp upward
spike in the month of the Kuwait invasion by the U.S. If a reading of events in these months
suggests that the large oil price changes are partly attributable to oil supply shocks, we would
expect a spike of the appropriate sign in the structural e prod;t shock during these episodes.
Therefore, we turn to the unconstrained set B^ to see whether the data identify these as large
oil supply shock events.
   We …rst search over increasingly large numbers of rotations (up to 20 million) in B^ over all
time periods for the date with the smallest oil supply shock e           prod;t   (i.e., largest negative oil
supply shock) and …nd that it is 1990:08, the month of the Kuwait invasion by the U.S. This
also coincides with the date with the most minima in the oil supply shock e prod;t across all
rotations. We further search over increasingly large numbers of rotations in B^ over all time
periods for the date with the biggest oil supply shock e       prod;t   (i.e., largest positive oil supply
shock) and …nd that it is 1986:02 following the collapse of OPEC. This is also the date with the
most maxima for e prod;t across all rotations. These …ndings are consistent with the hypothesis
that the large spikes in the oil price during these months were at least partly attributable to oil
supply disruptions. At the same time, KM2 have argued that the oil price increase in 1990:08
was caused by both a negative oil supply shock and a positive oil-speci…c demand shock. We
therefore repeat the search over increasingly large numbers of rotations in B^ over all time periods
for the date with the largest oil speci…c demand shock erpo;t . Consistent with the arguments
in KM2, the date with the largest erpo;t is again 1990:08, the month of the Kuwait invasion by
the U.S. This is also the date in our sample with the most maxima in erpo;t across all rotations.
In addition, we …nd that the date with the smallest oil speci…c demand shock erpo;t is 1986:02,

                                                 11
                                   Figure 2: Oil Price Change


        8



        6



        4



        2



        0



       -2



       -4



       -6
                      1980           1985            1990           1995           2000


The …gure plots the standardized change in the real oil price change. The sample spans the period 1975:01-
2004:09.


following the collapse of OPEC, which is also the date with the most minima in erpo;t across
all rotations. Thus, the covariance structure of the data alone provides overwhelming evidence
of both large oil supply and oil-speci…c demand shocks in the months 1990:08 and 1986:02,
respectively. We note that the event dates identi…ed using the above methodology remain the
same regardless of the number of rotations, in a range from K = 1:5 million to 20 million. We
therefore use the smaller number for the estimation discussed below.
    As observed by KM2, the collapse of OPEC in early 1986 was preceded by an announcement
in late 1985 by Saudi Arabia that it would no longer attempt to prop up the price of oil by
reducing its oil production. According to the historical evidence presented in KM2, the actual
supply disruption that created a major positive shock to the ‡ow supply of oil around the
OPEC collapse took place over several months between 1985:12 and roughly 1986:06, and was
accompanied in the short run by lower storage demand as oil price expectations fell. The his-
torical account given in Hamilton (2013) generally agrees and argues that the Saudi’s “ramped
up” production around this time, leading to a positive “oil supply shock for producers.” This
suggests that the OPEC collapse may be better characterized as a sequence of positive oil
supply shocks between 1985:12 and 1986:06, rather than a single shock in one month.
   Kilian (2008) provides an “exogenous oil supply shock”external variable series that measures
shortfalls in OPEC oil production associated with wars and civil disruptions. This indicator

                                                   12
is used as an external instrument for point identifying oil price shocks in Montiel-Olea, Stock
and Watson (2015) (MSW). Production shortfalls would be a valid instrumental variable if it
were uncorrelated with the two demand shocks erea;t and erpo;t . The assumption was used in
MSW to point identify oil supply shocks e            prod;t   in the above SVAR. But the variable could
be an imperfect indicator of actual production shortfalls and measurement error is possible.
Furthermore, some have argued that oil production shortfalls are at least partly caused by
political events such as wars or embargoes that could have direct implications for oil demand
(e.g., Hamilton (2013)). Yet, even if the shortfall series is not truly exogenous with respect to
the two demand shocks, it may still be relevant for oil supply shocks. Our approach is to use
the information in the shortfall variable by exploiting its correlation with the oil supply shock
but without insisting on zero correlations with the two oil demand shocks.

3.2           Shock-Based Constraints
With this background in hand, we now consider several di¤erent combinations of restrictions to
aid with identi…cation. These are summarized in Table 1 below. The row labeled gZ = 0 denotes
a weak set of constraints based on the covariance restrictions alone. Kilian (2009) combines
the covariance restrictions with traditional sign restrictions on the impact impulse response
functions. This combination of restrictions is referred to as the K09 restrictions in Table 1.
KM combine the K09 restrictions with restrictions on certain combinations of parameters in
                                                               B13         B12 5
the B matrix that place upper bounds on the ratios             B33
                                                                     and   B32
                                                                               .   Results from these combined
restrictions are used to form a basis of comparison with our distinct shock-based restrictions
and are labeled KKM in Table 1.
         Next we consider adding both event inequality constraints gE                  0 and external variable
inequality constraints gC         0 to help with identi…cation of oil supply versus aggregate and oil
demand shocks. These are combined with the covariance and K09 sign restrictions and labeled
SEE in Table 1. Event inequality constraints are summarized by gE1 and gE2 in row SEE of
the table. Constraint gE1 requires both a large negative oil supply shock and a large positive
oil-speci…c demand shock in the month of the Kuwait invasion. Speci…cally, constraint gE1
requires that the e prod; 1 found in period 1 of August 1990 be small and less than k1 standard
deviations below the mean and that the erpo; 1 be large and exceed k2 standard deviations above
the mean. Constraint gE2 requires both positive oil supply and negative oil-speci…c demand
shocks during the OPEC collapse. Speci…cally, the constraint requires the cumulation of e                  prod;t

in       2   = [1985:12; 1986:06] to be non-negative, which is to say that their sum must be above
                                                   B13
     5
     KM interpret the restrictions on the ratios B   33
                                                        and BB32 as restrictions on elasticities of oil supply to
                                                              12


demand shocks. There is, however, disagreement about whether these particular restrictions isolate the relevant
elasticities (see the debate between Baumeister and Hamilton (2019) and Kilian (2019)). We take no stand on
the interpretation of these restrictions and instead merely implement the same restrictions used in KM solely
to form a basis of comparison with the shock-based restrictions of this paper.

                                                       13
                            Table 1: Identi…cation Restrictions, Oil Application

 Model      Restrictions                                                    Notes
 gZ = 0     vec( ^ ) vech(BB 0 ) = 0                                        covariance restrictions
 K09        gZ = 0                                                          covariance restrictions
            B11 < 0; B12 > 0; B13 > 0                                       sign restrictions (Kilian (2009))
            B21 < 0; B22 > 0; B23 < 0
            B31 > 0; B32 > 0; B33 > 0
 KKM        gZ = 0, K09, B 13
                         B33
                              < 0:258, B12
                                       B32
                                           < 0:258                         covariance, sign, and KM restrictions
 SEE        gZ = 0                                                         covariance restrictions
            K09                                                            sign restrictions
            gE1 : k1 e prod; 1 0; erpo; 1 k2 0                               1 = 1990:08 (Kuwait invasion)
                                                                           k1 = 2:4 std. = q50 (e prod; 1 )
                    P                                P                     k2 = 2:9 std. = q50 (erpo: 1 )
            gE2 :       2   2
                              e   prod;     0,           2   2
                                                                 erpo;   0   2 = [1985:12; 1986:06] (OPEC collapse)


            gC : 0      corr(OSt ; e      prod;t )                          St = OSt : oil production shortfall series
 SEE(a)                                                                     k1 = 4:5 std. = q25 (e prod; 1 )
                                                                            k2 = 2:9 std. = q50 (erpo; 1 )
 SEE(b)                                                                     k1 = 0:3 std: = q75 (e prod; 1 )
                                                                            k2 = 2:9 std. = q50 (erpo; 1 )
 SEE(c)                                                                     k1 = 2:4 std. = q50 (e prod; 1 )
                                                                            k2 = 4:5 std. = q75 (erpo; 1 )
 SEE(d)                                                                     k1 = 2:4 std. = q50 (e prod; 1 )
                                                                            k2 = 0:7 std: = q25 (erpo; 1 )
 MSW        gZ = 0                                                          covariance restrictions
            E[Zt e prod;t ] 6= 0                                            Zt = OSt used as external instrument
            E[Zt erea;t ] = E[Zt erpo;t ] = 0
Notes: The table summarizes restrictions in di¤erent constrained solution sets. q (x) refers to the         percentile
value of x.


average, and the cumulation of erpo;t in 2 = [1985:12; 1986:06] to be non-positive, which is to
say that their sum may not be above average. The restrictions labeled SEE and SEE(a)-SEE(d)
                                                                                 0
set di¤erent values for the threshold parameters k = k 1 ; k 2                       and will be discussed below.
    Note that there is nothing in the event inequality constraints that explicitly precludes the
presence of the global demand shock erea;t from playing an important role in these episodes.
Nor is there anything that restricts the relative importance of the three shocks in any particular
episode. The event inequality constraints merely require that oil supply and oil-speci…c shocks
played some role in the price spikes of these episodes, where the magnitude and sign of that
role are determined by the parameters k1 and k2 .
   The external variable inequality constraints are summarized as gC 0 in row SEE of Table
1. We use the “oil production shortfall” series constructed by Kilian (2008) and denoted OSt


                                                                   14
as our St .6 The constraint requires that any oil supply shocks e                prod;t (B)   formed from B 2B^
be negatively correlated with OSt , implying that production shortfalls resulting from wars and
embargoes coincide with decreases in e prod;t , or negative oil supply shocks.
       Finally, the restrictions labeled MSW describe the constraints used in MSW to point identify
oil supply shocks e     prod;t   in the above SVAR. These restrictions assume OSt is a valid external
instrument and we therefore label it Zt in that case. MSW are concerned that OSt could be a
weak instrument. By contrast, the SEE constraints do not treat OSt as a valid instrument, but
nonetheless assume that it is relevant for supply shocks.

3.3       Results for the Oil SVAR
We use the same data used in Kilian (2009) and the largest common sample period across Kilian
(2008) and Kilian (2009) (1973:02-2004:09) for the analysis. Following KM, we use p = 24 lags
in the VAR to capture the long swings in the oil market. After losing observations to lags and
di¤erencing, the estimation sample is 1975:02 to 2004:09. We study the dynamic causal e¤ects
and propagating mechanisms of the shocks under di¤erent constraints and parameterizations
using impulse response functions. All …gures show responses to one standard deviation shocks
in the direction that raise the price of oil.
       Figure 3 shows the IRFs of the real price of oil to an oil supply shock, an aggregate commod-
ity demand shock, and an oil market speci…c demand shock, under several di¤erent combinations
of identifying restrictions. The IRFs using the KM restrictions are shown in black dotted lines
of the left panel of Figure 3. As emphasized by KM and KM2, the bounds of these sets are wide
and display a substantial range of responses to all three shocks. Among 1.5 million rotations,
4; 878 solutions satisfy both the covariance and the sign restrictions. For comparison, the top
two panels plot the IRF obtained by the point-identi…ed model of MSW, which uses OSt as an
external instrument to recover e         prod;t .   This estimate implies that oil supply shocks have tiny
if not zero e¤ects on oil prices. Indeed they are smaller for several months after the shock than
that implied by even the lower bound of the solution set obtained under K09 restriction.
   Next we consider the IRFs using the KKM restrictions These are shown in grey shaded
areas on the left panel of Figure 3. Only 34 solutions satisfy this combination of constraints,
implying that the KM constraints alone severely shrink the number of admissible solutions. The
dynamic responses to movements in e prod;t under the KKM restrictions are numerically small
(top panel), indicating that the solutions generating the large responses of oil price to a supply
                                                                     B13         B12
shock have been eliminated by the KM restrictions on                 B33
                                                                           and   B32
                                                                                     .   Instead, the aggregate
demand shock erea;t has large e¤ects on the price of oil, both in the short- and long-run. Some
KKM solutions also imply that the oil-speci…c demand shock erpo;t has quantitatively large
   6
    The data for OSt are based on the replication …les of Montiel-Olea et al. (2015) and span the period 1973:02
to 2004:09.

                                                          15
                                                   Figure 3: Impulse Response of Real Oil Prices


                        Sign and KM Restrictions                                      Sign + Event + External Variable Inequality Constraints


     10                                                                              10

      5                                                                               5

      0                                                                               0

     -5                                                                              -5


          0   2     4      6     8     10     12      14   16     18    20                0   2     4      6     8     10     12     14    16     18    20


     10                                                                              10

      5                                                                               5
16




      0                                                                               0

     -5                                                                              -5


          0   2     4      6     8     10     12      14   16     18    20                0   2     4      6     8     10     12     14    16     18    20


     10                                                                              10

      5                                                                               5

      0                                                                               0

     -5                                                                              -5


          0   2     4      6     8     10     12      14   16     18    20                0   2     4      6     8     10     12     14    16     18    20



                                                                                                                                      0
     The …gure reports solution sets of impulse response to positive, one standard deviation shocks for system Xt = ( prodt ; reat ; rpot ) under KM, KKM,
     MSW and SEE restrictions listed in Table 1. The sample spans the period 1973:02 to 2004:09.
e¤ects on oil price changes, but the upper and lower bound of the responses to this shock are
much wider and thus the …ndings in this regard are less conclusive.
     We now consider the SEE restrictions which replace the KM restrictions with, sign, event,
and external variable inequality constraints. To implement these restrictions, we need to set
                                                                                        0
parameters of the “big shock”event inequality constraints k = k 1 ; k 2 . To do so, we return to
the unconstrained set B^ to examine the observed magnitudes of the shocks in these episodes. We
…rst examine a very large number of rotations (20 million) to locate the largest absolute values of
e   prod;   1   and erpo;   1   in   1   = 1990:08 and …nd that the largest negative value for e   prod;   1   is -5.98
standard deviations, while the largest positive value for erpo;             1   is 5.98 standard deviations. The
threshold parameters of the big shock constraints set lower bounds for the absolute magnitude of
the shocks in these episodes, thus we choose them so that the relevant constraint is considerably
less restrictive than what would be implied by these largest absolute values. To start, we set
                    0
k = k1; k2   = ( 2:4; 2:9). These numbers can be more readily interpreted by noting that
they would roughly correspond to the 50th percentile values of e prod; 1 and erpo; 1 in B^ in 1 =
1990:08. The constraints therefore require a “big” negative oil supply shock to be at most 2.4
standard deviations below the mean (in the bottom 50% of all e prod; 1 in B^ in 1990:08), and
they require a “big” positive oil-speci…c demand shock to be at least 2.9 standard deviations
above the mean (in the top 50% of all erpo; 1 ). The values for k are reported in Table 1 along
with the corresponding percentile values. We denote the percentile value of x as q (x).
     We also check that the absolute magnitude of the shocks on these event dates remains for
all practical purposes the same regardless of the number of rotations, in a range from K = 1:5
million to 20 million. For example, the smallest erpo; 1 in B^ is -5.97 when examining 1.5 million
draws, and is -5.98 for 20 million. We therefore use the smaller number of draws for the various
estimations discussed below.
     The IRFs associated with the SEE restrictions under the above parameterization of k are
shown as grey shaded areas in the right panel of Figure 3, along with 90 percent bands computed
using the boot-strap sampling approach described in the appendix. Comparing results across
the two panels, we …nd that the set of responses to the two demand shocks are tighter than
those under the KKM restrictions, and preserve solutions that produce larger oil price responses
to demand shocks of either type than to supply shocks. These results are similar qualitatively
to those reported in KM. One di¤erence between the sets produced by the SEE constraints
versus the KKM restrictions is that the range of responses to the oil supply shock under the
SEE restrictions includes values that are somewhat larger than under the KKM restrictions,
even though the e¤ects of oil supply shocks are still smaller than those of the demand shocks.
The MSW point estimates give responses to oil supply shocks that fall outside the bounds of
both the KKM and SEE solution sets.
     All identi…cation approaches require assumptions, and it is important to check the sensitivity

                                                              17
                          Figure 4: IRFs under Di¤erent Parameterizations of Big Shocks: Oil Application


              Weaker/tighter constraints on e           prod   in 1990:08                        Weaker/tighter constraints on erpo in 1990:08


     10                                                                                 10

      5                                                                                  5

      0                                                                                  0

     -5                                                                                 -5


          0   2     4      6      8      10    12     14       16   18      20               0   2     4      6      8     10     12       14   16     18    20


     10                                                                                 10

      5                                                                                  5
18




      0                                                                                  0

     -5                                                                                 -5


          0   2     4      6      8      10    12     14       16   18      20               0   2     4      6      8     10     12       14   16     18    20


     10                                                                                 10

      5                                                                                  5

      0                                                                                  0

     -5                                                                                 -5


          0   2     4      6      8      10    12     14       16   18      20               0   2     4      6      8     10     12       14   16     18    20



                                                                                                                                       0
     The …gure reports solution set of impulse response to positive, one standard deviation shocks for system Xt = ( prodt ; reat ; rpot ) under SEE, SEE(a) to
     SEE (d) restrictions listed in Table 1. SEE (a) and SEE (c) correspond to tighter event inequality constraints whereas SEE(b) and SEE(d) corresponds
     to weaker event inequality constraints. The sample spans the period 1973:02 to 2004:09.
                                                                                                         0
of the results to model assumptions. For the present application, the parameters k = k1 ; k2
stipulate lower bounds in absolute terms for the oil supply or oil-speci…c demand shocks, re-
spectively, during the Kuwait invasion. To assess the sensitivity of the results the this para-
meterization, Figure 4 shows the IRFs under four di¤erent values for these parameters. Case
SEE(a) sets k1 to -4.5 standard deviations, which is the q25 (e1 ) percentile value of e prod;t in B^
at 1 while keeping k2 at q50 (erpo;t ). Case SEE(b) sets k1 to -0.3 standard deviations, which is
the q75 (e1 ) percentile value of e prod;t in B^ at 1 , also keeping k2 while keeping k2 at q50 (erpo;t ).
The …rst parameterization tightens while the second loosens the …rst event inequality constraint
relative to the SEE case. Case SEE(c) keeps k1 at q50 (e prod;t ) but sets k2 to 4.5 standard de-
viations, which is the 75th percentile value of erpo;t in B^ at 2 , while Case SEE(d) keeps k1 at
q50 (e prod;t ) and sets k2 to 0.7 standard deviations, which corresponds to the 25th percentile
value of erpo;t in B^ at 2 . Case SEE(c) loosens while SEE(d) tightens the second event inequality
constraint relative to the SEE case. The left panel of Figure 4 shows the IRFs for SEE(a) and
SEE(b) while the right panel shows the IRFs for SEE(c) and SEE(d). Its clear from the …gure
that the qualitative results are not sensitive to the parameterization of the event inequality
constraint. Under all four parameterizations, positive shocks to both types of demand lead to a
sharp increases in the price of oil that persists for many months, while the e¤ects of oil supply
shocks are more muted. No matter which parameterization, the responses to the aggregate
demand shock is bounded well away from zero as the horizon increases.

3.4     Properties of the Shocks
Although a stated objective of any SVAR analysis is to identify the structural shocks, the
properties of the shocks are rarely scrutinized. By contrast, in the methodology here the shocks
are of explicit interest, so we examine their properties. One property of interest concerns the
normality of the shocks. The e     prod;t   identi…ed by imposing the SEE restrictions exhibit strong
non-Gaussian features. Averaged across solutions, the coe¢ cient of skewness and kurtosis are
  0:6102 and 5:4865, respectively. But the e prod;t series implied by the KKM restrictions exhibit
even greater departures from normality, with an average skewness of 1:4603 and a kurtosis of
11:0722. The stronger departures from Gaussianity arises because the KKM constraints accept
solutions that imply larger e    prod;t   shocks in some time periods.
    To have a clearer picture of the properties of the shocks identi…ed by the SEE versus KKM
restrictions, Figure 5 plots the timing of “large shocks” in both cases, where for the SEE
                                      0
restriction case we set k = k 1 ; k 2 equal to the 50th percentile values in B^ of the relevant
shocks in 1990:08. For the purposes of the …gure, large shocks are de…ned to be those in
excess of two standard deviations above (or below) the mean. In view of the non-normality
of the shocks, the …gure also plots horizontal lines corresponding to three standard deviation


                                                    19
                           Figure 5: Large Shocks in Oil Application



   5                 OPEC Collapse

   0

   -5                                                           Kuwait Invasion

                   1980              1985            1990             1995            2000


                                                               Kuwait Invasion
   5

   0

   -5               OPEC Collapse

                   1980              1985            1990             1995            2000


   5                                                           Kuwait Invasion


   0

   -5                OPEC Collapse

The …gure shows all shocks in the solution set that are at least 2 standard deviations above/below the uncondi-
                                                                         0
tional mean from the solution set for system Xt = ( prodt ; reat ; rpot ) under KKM and SEE restrictions listed
in Table 1. The thin vertical line shows the date 1990:08 and the shaded vertical bar shows the range of dates
associated with the OPEC collapse, 1985:12-1986:06. The horizontal line corresponds to 3 standard deviations
above/below the unconditional mean of each series. The sample spans the period 1973:02 to 2004:09.


of the unit shocks. The …gure reports the standard deviation of all such large shocks in the
identi…ed sets B based on the SEE restrictions and compares them to those under the KKM
restrictions.7 By design, the e prod;t shocks generated by the SEE restrictions, displayed in red,
should be less than 2:45 standard deviations in 1990:08, corresponding to the median value
in B^ in 1990:08. In fact, on that date, 49 solutions have a supply shock less than 5 standard
deviations. Moreover, this is the only date in the solution sets that exhibit values for e               prod;t

that are smaller than negative …ve standard deviations. By way of comparison, the KKM
restrictions also identify large negative supply shocks in the month of the Kuwait invasion.
       On the other hand, the spotlighted area in Figure 5 around the OPEC collapse shows that
the KKM restrictions produce no big positive oil supply shocks at any time during this episode.
   7
    If multiple solutions have shocks on a given date that are larger in absolute value than two standard
deviations, they are represented in the by bars that lie exactly on top of one another. Thus, the length of the
bar indicates the size of the largest shock for the month, among all solutions.


                                                      20
This implication of the KKM restrictions appears empirically implausible on the basis of a
broadly-shared ex post understanding of the OPEC collapse. Indeed, both KM2 and Hamilton
(2013) agree that Saudi Arabia created a major positive “shock” to the ‡ow supply of oil
between the end of 1985 and the middle of 1986, which contributed to a large drop in its
price. These …ndings underscore how identi…cation schemes derived exclusively from attention
to parameter restrictions may miss valuable clues from the data that can help evaluate the
validity of the identifying restrictions.
    Figure 5 shows that the SEE constraints by no means preclude big erea;t shocks from occur-
ring in 1990:08 and   2   2 [1985:12, 1986:06], even though behavior of erea;t was left unconstrained
throughout the entire sample. Moreover, the SEE constraints generate several large erea;t and
erpo;t of both signs outside of our events, and large e prod;t outside of constrained event dates are
numerous under both the KKM and SEE identi…cation schemes. Regardless of which identi…-
cation scheme is used, large negative supply shocks coexist with large positive demand shocks
in 1990:08.
    We close this section by investigating possible reasons why the MSW point estimate di-
verges so much from the set-identi…ed results under the SEE restrictions. MSW use the oil
shortfall series OSt as an external instrument for identifying e                  prod;t ,   which explicitly imposes
the exogeneity assumption that OSt be uncorrelated with both erpo;t and erea;t . The solution
sets given by the SEE restrictions impose no such assumption but are free to recover it if they
are consistent with those restrictions. Figure 6 presents a histogram showing the distribution
of estimated correlations between the OSt and erea;t (top panel), and between OSt and erpo;t
(bottom panel) across all solutions in the constrained solution set B under the SEE parameter
                         0
values for k = k 1 ; k 2 . While the 90 percent bands for the correlations between OSt and erea;t
include zero, there is no solution that exhibits a zero correlation between OSt and erpo;t . Given
that exogeneity of OSt is inconsistent with the SEE restrictions, the MSW point estimate can
only lie outside the bounds of the solution set, thereby explaining the divergent results.

4    Application 2: Monetary Policy and Financial Markets

In this section we consider an SVAR application based on the baseline speci…cation in Gertler
and Karadi (2015) (GK hereafter), which studies role of monetary policy shocks on the aggregate
economy. The GK system is comprised of the following variables: Xt = (it ; cpit ; ipt ; ebpt )0 ;
where it is a “policy indicator,” measured here as the one-year Treasury bill (t-bill) rate, cpit
is the log of the Consumer Price Index, ipt is the log of industrial production, and ebpt is the
excess bond premium (EBP) of Gilchrist and Zakrajšek (2012), a measure of credit spreads.
   Let the four structural shocks of the SVAR be collected into the vector

                                      et = (ei;t ; ecpi;t ; eip;t ; eebp;t )0 :

                                                        21
                   Figure 6: Distribution of Correlations with Oil Demand Shocks


          25


          20


          15


          10


           5


            0
           -0.04        -0.03           -0.02           -0.01       0         0.01       0.02           0.03           0.04   0.05




          25


          20


          15


          10


           5


           0
           -0.1       -0.09     -0.08           -0.07       -0.06   -0.05    -0.04   -0.03      -0.02          -0.01      0   0.01

The …gure displays histograms for all values of correlations between oil shortfall and global demand shock (top
panel) and correlations between oil shortfall and oil speci…c demand shock (bottom panel) in an solution set for
                                   0
system Xt = ( prodt ; reat ; rpot ) under SEE restriction listed in Table 1. The sample spans the period 1973:02
to 2004:09.


The …rst shock, ei;t , is the monetary policy shock of interest. This shock is the component of
the VAR forecast error for it that is uncorrelated with the other structural shocks in the SVAR.
We refer to ecpi;t ; eip;t ; and eebp;t as “non-policy”shocks.
       The objective in GK is to identify ei;t and trace out its dynamic e¤ects on …nancial market
variables such as ebpt . To do so, they construct the di¤erence in the price of the 3-month fed
funds futures contract between 20 minutes after and 10 minutes before a Federal Open Market
Committee (FOMC) announcement. Since these are surprise movements in the fed funds futures
price in tight windows of monetary policy announcements, they are arguably attributable to
monetary policy. The VAR requires monthly data, so GK turn the futures surprises on FOMC
days into monthly average surprises by allocating them between consecutive calendar months
based on when they happened within the calendar month.8 This monthly variable (denoted
FF4 in GK) is the external instrument and will be denoted Zt below. GK then point identify
   8
    Speci…cally, if they happened at the beginning of the month, GK allocate most of the surprises to the month
(and the rest to the next month). If they happened at the end of the month, GK allocate them mostly to the
next month. We refer the reader to GK for further details.



                                                                        22
the policy shock ei;t by maintaining the following assumptions:

                     E [Zt ei;t ] =    6= 0 (inst. relevance)                                     (3)
                   E[Zt ecpi;t ] = E[Zt eip;t ] = E[Zt eebp;t ] = 0 (inst. exogeneity)            (4)

Restriction (3) requires Zt to have a non-zero correlation with the policy shock it identi…es,
implying that the instrument must be relevant. Restriction (4) requires Zt to be uncorrelated
with all the other shocks in the system, implying that the instrument must be exogenous.
   At this point it is useful to note that the term exogenous has di¤erent meanings in di¤erent
contexts. It is reasonable to assume, as GK do, that innovations in the fed funds futures prices
on FOMC days capture “exogenous” movements in Federal Reserve policy in the sense that
they are not in‡uenced by macroeconomic and …nancial conditions around tight windows of
FOMC announcements. The restrictions in (4), however, require a type of exogeneity with a
di¤erent connotation. Speci…cally, they require that the innovations in fed funds futures prices
around FOMC announcements in a month have no contemporaneous in‡uence on the forecast
errors of the non-policy variables, except insofar as they a¤ect ei;t .
    While the assumptions inherent in (4) are a reasonable starting place, relaxing them is of
interest for at least two reasons. First, a number of authors have argued that …nancial vari-
ables other than short-term Treasury rates serve as additional policy indicators that capture
distinct channels of monetary policy transmission (e.g., Gagnon, Raskin, Remache and Sack
(2011), Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2011), Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen
(2013), Swanson (2017)). If true, the exogeneity assumption (4) for variables such as ebpt may
be overly strong, since credit spreads are likely to re‡ect disparate policy transmission chan-
nels not captured by short-term interest rates. Second, and relatedly, the time-aggregation
required to turn futures market surprises on FOMC days into monthly average surprises makes
the exogeneity assumptions less tenable. For example, an FOMC announcement that occurs
in the middle of the month must be assumed to have no relation with the non-policy shocks
ecpi;t ; eip;t ; eebp;t at any time within that month, including the two weeks following the announce-
ment. If monetary policy has e¤ects that operate through channels orthogonal to short-term
interest rates, e.g., if they a¤ect other assets which in turn quickly a¤ect investment plans
and/or credit spreads, the exogeneity restriction (4) would be invalid.
   According to either reason, (4) could be relaxed. The …rst reason suggests that variables
such as ebpt should be included in a vector of policy indicators along with it . In this case,
there would no longer be a single policy shock ei;t in the system but instead a vector of policy
shocks (ei;t ; eebp;t )0 , while the scalar parameter   would become a two dimensional vector        .
The second reason suggests that any shock ecpi;t ; eip;t ; eebp;t could possibly be correlated with
Zt contemporaneously. In either case, the external instrumental variable approach to point
estimation can no longer be implemented because, with only a single instrument Zt , the system

                                                   23
is now under-identi…ed. While this renders the external instrument approach inoperative, it is
not a problem for the shock-restricted approach, which obviates the need for the exogeneity
restrictions. The challenge with the shock-restricted approach is to …nd other credible identi-
                                                                                 ^ In the next
fying restrictions capable of substantively winnowing the number of solutions in B.
section we illustrate how di¤erent types of shock-based restrictions can be used to generate
solution sets that still give a fairly clear picture of the dynamic causal e¤ects of ei;t shocks in
the GK system.

4.1    Motivating Facts
Since we are interested in understanding monetary policy shocks that a¤ect short-term interest
rates, it is useful to isolate historical episodes characterized by quantitatively large monetary
policy e¤ects on these rates. To do so, we turn to a well-known historical record of such shocks
that is based on the Greenbook residual series presented in Romer and Romer (2004). The
Greenbook residuals show changes in the “intended” federal funds rate not taken in response
to Federal Reserve Greenbook forecasts about in‡ation or real growth, formed by taking the
residuals from a multivariate regression of the intended funds rate on the Greenbook forecasts.
A negative (positive) residual indicates a negative (positive) monetary policy surprise. To locate
quantitatively large policy surprises, we isolate dates for which these Greenbook residuals were
either greater than the 95th percentile value of their sample observations, or less than the
5th percentile value. We refer to the dates that satisfy these criteria as the GB95 dates (big
tightenings) and the GB05 dates (big easings), respectively.
   Next we investigate whether these dates correspond to “big shock”events using the covari-
ance structure restrictions alone. We again search over increasingly large numbers of rotations
(up to 20 million) in B^ over the GB05 dates for the date with the smallest ei;t (i.e., the biggest
surprise easing) and …nd that it is 1981:10. This also coincides with the date in our sample
with the most minima of ei;t across all rotations. The date with the second smallest ei;t (i.e., the
second biggest surprise easing) also falls on the date 1981:10. We therefore search for the next
smallest ei;t that occurs on a unique date among the GB05 dates and …nd that it is 2001:11.
This is also the date in our sample with the second most minima of ei;t across all rotations
among the GB05 dates. (In the full sample this is the date with the third most minima.) Like-
wise, we search over increasingly large numbers of rotations (up to 20 million) in B^ in the GB95
period for the date with the largest ei;t (i.e., the biggest surprise tightening) and …nd that it is
1981:05. This also coincides with the date in our sample that has the most maxima of ei;t across
all rotations among the GB95 dates. (In the full sample this is the date with the third most
maxima.) The date with the second largest ei;t (i.e., the second biggest surprise tightening)
is also 1981:05. The next largest ei;t on a unique date in the GB95 dates is 1987:05. This is


                                                24
also the date in our sample with the second most maxima of ei;t across all rotations among the
GB95 dates. As for the previous application, we check that the event dates identi…ed using the
above methodology remain the same regardless of the number of rotations, in a range from 1.5
million to 20 million. We therefore use the smaller number for the estimation discussed below.
    Figure 7 plots the time series of it (top panel), the Greenbook residuals (middle panel), and
all ei;t shocks in B^ that are at least two standard deviations above or below the mean. The
horizontal lines in the middle panel indicate the 95th and 5th percentile values of the Greenbook
residuals. The horizontal lines in the bottom panel indicate three standard deviations above
or below the mean for ei;t . What we see is that the date 1981:10 has both a very negative
Greenbook residual and one of the most negative observations on ei;t in the solution set over
the entire sample (close to 5 standard deviations). While some solutions in B^ in the post 2005
period have ei;t smaller than       5, relatively few solutions have this property relative to the dates
                         9
1981:10 and 2001:11. Likewise, 1981:05 is both one of the largest tightening episodes according
to the Greenbook residuals, and a very large tightening episode according to the unconstrained
set of ei;t in that month.
       Other major economic events in our sample, even if they are not big monetary policy events,
may be valid candidates for restricting the behavior of the shocks. In October of 2008, following
the collapse of Lehman brothers in late September of 2008, the Dow Jones Industrial average
began a pronounced decline and subsequently fell more than 50% over a period of 17 months.
The collapse in the market over this period has been associated with a broad-based …nancial
crisis that is often cited as a “trigger” of the Great Recession. We argue that these dates are
likely to be associated with a sharp increase in credit spreads, thereby justifying restrictions on
the behavior of eebt;t during these months of the …nancial crisis.

4.2       Shock-Based Constraints
Motivated by the historical facts just discussed, we now consider two types of shock-based
restrictions summarized in the Table below. For ease of reference, the …rst row re-stipulates
the restrictions used in GK and labels the “GK restrictions.”
       We use the fed funds futures surprise FF4 series as St for this application. The constraints
labeled S1 employ two external variable inequality constraints gC1                 0 and gC2      0 that require
St = FF4t to be positively correlated with both ei;t and eebp;t . Though we do not treat FF4t
as a valid instrument, it must be at least weakly correlated with both shocks to address the
concern that monetary policy might operate through multiple …nancial indicators and chan-
nels. The constraints under S2 use all the constraints in S1 and add two more external variable
   9
    If multiple solutions have ei;t on a given date that are larger in absolute value than two standard deviations,
they are represented in the bottom panel by bars that lie exactly on top of one another. Thus, the length of
the bar indicates the size of the largest shock for the month, among all solutions.


                                                        25
                                    Figure 7: Monetary Variables


     20



     10



      0
                   1985            1990          1995           2000          2005              2010

      2
              1981:05
      1
                                 1987:05
      0

                1981:10                                                      2001:11
     -1
                   1985            1990          1995           2000          2005              2010



      5      1981:05             1987:05

      0


     -5
                 1981:10                                     2001:11
                                                        (12)
The …gure plots the time series of one-year tbill rate it , Romer and Romer (2004) Greenbook residuals, and
all shocks that are at least 2 standard deviations above/below the unconditional mean from the unconstrained
                                           0
                          (12)
set for system Xt = it ; cpit ; ipt ; ebpt . The horizontal line in the middle panel corresponds to the 5th
and 95h percentile of Greenbook residuals. The horizontal line in the bottom panel corresponds to 3 standard
deviations above/below the unconditional mean. The thin vertical line corresponds to the dates chosen for the
event inequality constraints. The data span the period 1979:07 to 2012:06.


constraints, labeled gC3 and gC4 . One would expect FF4t to be approximately uncorrelated
contemporaneously with the shocks of “slower moving” macro variables, even if such an as-
sumption is unrealistic for …nancial market variables such as the EBP. Thus constraints gC3
and gC4 require that the contemporaneous relation between ecpi;t and St , and between eip;t and
St to be very small, though not numerically zero, implying that FF4t is assumed to be approxi-
mately exogenous with respect to these variables. The results we present below are robust with
values of as large as about 0.008. We present results for much smaller values.
   The models denoted SEE, SEE(a), and SEE(b) add event inequality constraints, but do
away with constraints gC3 and gC4 that restrict the correlations between FF4t and ecpi;t and
eip;t to both be close to zero. SEE uses the constraints in S1 and adds gE1 ; gE2 ; and gE3 . Event
inequality constraint gE1 0 requires that the EBP credit spread shock be large and exceed k1
and k2 standard deviations above the mean in either            1   = 2008:09 or      2   = 2008:10 (or both),


                                                        26
                    Table 2: Identi…cation Restrictions, Monetary Application

 Model      Restrictions                                       Notes
 gZ = 0     vec( ^ ) vech(BB 0 ) = 0                           covariance restrictions
 GK         gZ = 0                                             covariance restrictions
            E[Zt ei;t ] 6= 0                                   Zt = FF4t
            E[Zt ecpi;t ] = E[Zt eip;t ] = E[Zt eebp;t ] = 0
 S1         gZ = 0                                             covariance restrictions
            gC1 : corr(St ; ei;t ) 0                           St = FF4t
            gC2 : corr(St ; eebp;t ) 0
 S2         S1
                                                                       4
            gC3 : jcorr (St ; ecpi;t )j                         = 10
            gC4 : jcorr (St ; eip;t )j
 SEE        S1
            gE1 : eebp, 1 k1 _ eebp, 2 k2                       1 =2008:09, 2 = 2008:10 (Lehman Collapse)
                                                               k1 = 3:4 std = q75 (eebp; 1 )
                                                               k2 = 5:4 std = q75 (eedp; 2 )
            gE2 : ei;   3   k3 and ei;   4   k4                 3 =1981:05, 4 =1987:05 (Monetary Tightenings)
                                                               k3 = 2:6 std. = q75 (ei; 3 )
                                                               k4 = 2:3 std. = q75 (ei; 4 )
            gE3 : ei;   5   k5 and ei;   6   k6                 5 =1981:10, 6 =2001:11 (Monetary Easings)
                                                               k5 = 3:5 std. = q25 (ei; 5 )
                                                               k6 = 2:0 std. = q25 (ei; 6 )
 SEE(a)                                                        k3 = 1:7 std. = q50 (ei; 3 )
                                                               k4 = 0:7 std. = q50 (ei; 4 )
                                                               k5 = 3:5 std: = q25 (ei; 5 )
                                                               k6 = 2:0 std: = q25 (ei; 6 )
 SEE(b)                                                        k3 = 2:6 std. = q75 (ei; 3 )
                                                               k4 = 2:3 std. = q75 (ei; 4 )
                                                               k5 = 2:5 std. = q50 (ei; 5 )
                                                               k6 = 0:4 std. = q50 (ei; 6 )
Notes: The table summarizes restrictions in di¤erent constrained solution sets. q (x) refers to the   percentile
value of x.


for these months associated with the Lehman collapse and its immediate aftermath. Event
inequality constraint gE2 0 requires that the monetary policy shock exceed k3 and k4 standard
deviations above the mean during months 3 = 1981:05 and 4 = 1987:05, respectively, when
the Greenbook residuals were unusually large and positive. Event inequality constraint gE3                    0
requires that the monetary policy shocks be smaller than k5 and k6 standard deviations below
the mean during months 5 = 1981:10 and 6 = 2001:11, respectively, when the Greenbook
residuals were unusually small. The alternatives listed in SEE(a) and SEE(b) use di¤erent
parameterizations of the parameters k3 - k6 that control how large a “big” monetary policy
shock must be and will be discussed below.


                                                        27
4.3       Results for the Monetary Policy SVAR
We follow GK and set the VAR lag to be 12 months. Where available, we use the same monthly
data used by GK and otherwise stick to their sample dates, which spans the period 1979:07
to 2012:06.10 Although the VAR variables are available over this sample, the external variable
FF4t is available only from 1991:01 onward. We therefore follow GK and use the full sample
1979:07 to 2012:06 to estimate the reduced-form VAR, but impose gC1 –gC4 only for the post
1991 subsample. We focus on the dynamic response of the EBP to a monetary policy shock,
the main object of interest in GK. All …gures show IRFs to a one standard deviation change in
ei;t in the direction that raises it . For reference, the …gures also display the GK point estimated
IRFs.
   To assess how the di¤erent constraints a¤ect the identi…ed impulse response functions, we
begin with the impulse responses under restrictions SC1 which allow both eebp;t and ei;t to be
correlated with St , but do away with all of the exogeneity restrictions. The IRFs, plotted in
the upper left panel of Figure 8, evidently are wholly uninformative and include both positive
and negative responses of credit spreads to an impulse in ei;t .
       We now employ additional constraints to shrink the set. The …rst case is SC2, which adds
gC3 and gC4 to SC1 to allow ecpi;t and eip;t but not eebp;t to have small correlation with St .
The IRFs using the SC2 restrictions are shown as gray shaded areas in the upper left panel of
Figure 8. The responses of this set are now highly informative as all responses in the set show
that a positive impulse to ei;t drives up the EBP sharply. These results are similar to those
produced by the GK point estimate, but obtained under weaker restrictions that permit eebp;t
to be contemporaneously correlated with St = FF4t .
   From the last result, it is evident that constraints gC3 and gC4 have substantial identifying
power. But they require that St =FF4t to have close to zero contemporaneous relation with the
structural shocks to in‡ation and production. We now eliminate these restrictions and instead
replace them with the event inequality constraints gE1 ; gE2 and gE3 . To implement these SEE
                                                                                    0
constraints, we need to set the parameters of our big shock events k = k1 ; :::; k6 . We examine
a large number of rotations (up 20 million) to locate the largest values of eebp;t in absolute terms
in t 2 f 1 ;   2 g,   and …nd that the largest value for eebp,          1   equals 6:48 standard deviations above
the mean, while the largest value for eebp, 2 equals 7:33 standard deviations above the mean.
Similarly, we examine a large number of rotations (up 20 million) to locate the largest values
of ei;t in absolute terms in t 2 f 3 ;      4;   5;       6 g,   and …nd that the largest value for ei;    3   is 3:52
standard deviations above the mean, the largest value for ei;                  4   is 3:13 standard deviations above
the mean, the largest negative value for ei;          5    is     4:94 standard deviations below the mean, and
  10
    We replicated the original Romer and Romer (2004) Greenbook residuals over their sample 1979:07 to
1996:12 and then extended the residuals to the end of the GK sample, 2012:06. A more detailed description of
Romer and Romer (2004) methodology is provided in the Online Appendix.


                                                             28
                                                  Figure 8: Impulse Response to Monetary Shock


                0.25                                                                     0.25

                 0.2                                                                      0.2

                0.15                                                                     0.15

                 0.1                                                                      0.1

                0.05                                                                     0.05

                  0                                                                        0

               -0.05                                                                    -0.05

                -0.1                                                                     -0.1

               -0.15                                                                    -0.15
                       0   5   10     15    20     25    30     35    40     45                 0   5   10     15    20     25    30     35       40   45
29




                0.25                                                                     0.25

                 0.2                                                                      0.2

                0.15                                                                     0.15

                 0.1                                                                      0.1

                0.05                                                                     0.05

                  0                                                                        0

               -0.05                                                                    -0.05

                -0.1                                                                     -0.1

               -0.15                                                                    -0.15
                       0   5   10     15    20     25    30     35    40     45                 0   5   10     15    20     25    30     35       40   45
                                                                                                                                              0
     The …gure reports solution set of impulse response to positive, one standard deviation shocks for system Xt = (it ; cpit ; ipt ; ebpt ) under restrictions S1,
     S2, GK, SEE, SEE(a) and SEE(b) listed in Table 2. The sample spans the period 1979:07 to 2012:06.
the largest negative value for ei;   6   is       5:08 standard deviations below the mean. Parameters
k of the big shock event inequality constraints stipulate lower bounds in absolute terms for
the shocks in these episodes, and thus should be considerably less restrictive than these largest
absolute values across all rotations. For the EBP event restriction, gE1 , we start by setting
           0
 k1 ; k2= (3:5; 5:4)0 , which may be more readily interpreted by noting that these values would
correspond to the the 75th percentile values of eebp,t in B^ for t 2 f 1 ; 2 g. Recall that event
constraint gE1 requires that the EBP credit spread shock be large and exceed k1 and k2 standard
deviations above the mean in either           1   = 2008:09 or   2   = 2008:10 (or both). For the monetary
                                                                         0
tightening event constraints, gE2 , we start by setting k3 ; k4              = (2:6; 2:3)0 , which may be more
readily interpreted by noting that these values correspond to the the 75th percentile values of
policy shock ei,t in B^ in t 2 f 3 ; 4 g. Recall that the event constraint gE2 requires that the
policy shock be large and exceed k3 and k4 standard deviations above the mean in                    3   = 1981:05
and    4= 1987:05. Thus this parameterization requires that a “big” interest rate shock must
be in the top 75% of all shocks in B^ during events when there were big positive Greenbook
residuals. The event constraint gE3 hat the policy shock be su¢ ciently negative and less than
                                                        0                                  0
or equal to the threshold parameters k 5 ; k 6 . We start by setting k 5 ; k 6                 = ( 3:5; 2:0)0 ,
which may be more readily interpreted by noting that these values would correspond to 25th
percentile values of ei;t in B^ in 5 =1981:10 and 6 =2001:11 when there were big negative
Greenbook residuals. As for the previous application, we check that the absolute magnitude
of the shocks on these event dates remains for all practical purposes the same regardless of the
number of rotations in a range from 1.5 million to 20 million. We therefore use the smaller
number of draws for the various estimations discussed below.
   The upper right panel of Figure 8 shows the IRFs for dynamic responses under the SEE con-
straints. Only 234 solutions satisfy these constraints but they are highly informative and show
that a positive impulse in ei;t sharply increases credit spreads, as measured by the EBP, which
remain elevated for many months. These results are qualitatively similar to those produced by
the GK point estimate, lending support to the GK identifying restrictions.
    We now consider the sensitivity of the results to the parameters k. Case SEE(a) sets
 k3 ; k4 = (1:7; 0:7)0 , so that the big shocks can be smaller than the ones in SEE. The constraints
are therefore less restrictive and threshold values correspond to the median rather than 75th
                                      ^ Case SEE(b) similarly sets k5 ; k6 0 = ( 2:5; 0:4)0 , so
percentile values of ei;t at 3 ; 4 in B.
that the big negative shocks at these dates may be less negative than the ones under the SEE
restrictions. The constraints are therefore less restrictive and threshold values correspond to
                                                                      ^ The bottom left panel
the median rather than 75th percentile values of ei;t at 5 ; 6 in in B.
of Figure 8 shows the IRFs under SEE(a) while the bottom right panel of Figure 8 shows the
IRFs under SEE(b). In both cases, k1 and k2 are held …xed at the 75th percentile values as in
SEE.

                                                            30
   While sets of IRFs are inevitably wider when the constraints are weakened, the left panel
shows that all solutions under weaker constraints for the tightening events still indicate that
the EBP rises sharply in response to a monetary tightening. By contrast, the bottom right
panel shows that when we weaken the event inequality constraints pertaining to monetary
policy easings, the causal e¤ect of a monetary policy tightening on credit spreads becomes
inconclusive due to the wide range of solutions retained. Speci…cally, the responses of the EBP
in the bottom right panel contain both positive and negative values for many periods after the
shock. This …nding suggests that monetary policy easings are more important for identi…cation
of monetary policy shocks than are monetary policy tightenings.
   Is this asymmetry speci…c to the shock-restricted approach? To address this question we
return to the GK external instrumental variable point-identi…cation scheme, but instead of
using Zt = FF4t as an instrument, as in GK, we consider two alternative instruments. In the
…rst case we set Zt = FF4t I ( FF4t <0), where I ( FF4t <0) is an indicator variable that
equals one if the surprise movement in the futures rate on FOMC days is negative (i.e., a
surprise easing), and zero otherwise. In the second case we set Zt = FF4t I ( FF4t >0), where
I ( FF4t >0) is an indicator variable that equals one if the surprise movements in the futures
rate on FOMC days is positive (i.e., a surprise tightening), and zero otherwise. Figure 9 shows
the IRFs obtained under these identi…cation schemes, along with the GK point estimate that
uses Zt =FF4t . It is immediately evident that the IRFs obtained using Zt = FF4t I ( FF4t <0)
are almost identical to those produced with Zt = FF4t . By contrast, the results using Zt =
FF4t I ( FF4t >0) di¤er dramatically and imply that a positive monetary policy shock has
a negligible impact on the EBP at all horizons and moreover has the “wrong” (negative) sign
in the short-run. Thus much like the shock-restricted sets of IRFs in the bottom panels of
Figure 8, the identifying power of the restrictions in this point-identi…ed case appears largely
attributable to monetary easings, with monetary tightenings playing little role.11


5    Application 3: Housing Wealth and Consumption

As a …nal application we consider a VAR inspired by the work of Mian and Su… (2014) to
estimate the macroeconomic e¤ects of housing wealth shocks on aggregate consumption. Mian
and Su… considered the role of house price gains in U.S. spending from 2002-2006, a time of
rapid home price appreciation. Their data consisted of a panel of zip-code level observations,
an ideal dataset for estimating how the consumption e¤ects of housing wealth might vary
across zip codes distinguished by, say, per-capita income, but less ideal for identifying the
  11
     Results of a …rst-stage F test to assess instrument strength for it show that Zt = FF4t delivers an F statistic
that passes the threshold value of 10 dictated by Stock, Wright and Yogo (2002) for a “non-weak” instrument.
But this result too is entirely attributable to the monetary easings. The variable Zt = FF4t I ( FF4t <0)
delivers an F statistic equal to 19.78, while Zt = FF4t I ( FF4t >0) generates an F statistic equal to 2.


                                                        31
       Figure 9: Identi…cation using Tightenings v.s. Easings: Alternative IV


     0.14


     0.12


      0.1


     0.08


     0.06


     0.04


     0.02


        0


     -0.02


     -0.04
             0     5        10       15        20         25         30    35        40       45
This …gure reports the impulse response function for the GK point-identi…cation approach with di¤erent in-
struments. The pink dotted line corresponds to the GK point estimate. The black (green) line corresponds to
results using FF4 as an instrument over the subsample when FF4 decreases (increases). The sample spans the
period 1979:07 to 2012:06.


aggregate consumption a¤ects (across all zip codes) of changing home values. Home values at
the aggregate level could be responding to an increase in aggregate consumption as opposed to
in‡uencing it.
   The shock restricted SVAR methodology o¤ers a potential resolution to this dilemma with-
out requiring the use of an instrument that may not be credibly exogenous. To illustrate
this point, we consider a bivariate VAR and use shock-based restrictions to winnow the set of
solutions that are consistent with mutually uncorrelated shocks to housing and consumption.
   Consider an SVAR with two variables: Xt = ( lnCt ; lnHt )0 ; where              lnCt is the log change
in real personal consumption expenditures for the aggregate U.S. economy, and lnHt is the
log change in real housing wealth (de‡ated by PCE de‡ator). Our objective is to identify a set
of mutually uncorrelated structural shocks

                                            et = (eC;t ; eH;t )0 ;

where eC;t refers to the consumption shock, and eH;t to the housing shock. Movements in
eH;t represent unforecastable changes in housing wealth that are not a response to changes in
consumption. These shocks may therefore be used to estimate the dynamic causal e¤ects of an
impulse to housing wealth on aggregate consumption.

                                                     32
    The possible role of housing wealth in driving aggregate ‡uctuations has become a subject
of special interest as economists ponder the possible factors that lead to the Great Recession,
a protracted economic downturn that overlapped with a global …nancial crisis and a dramatic
boom-bust cycle in residential real estate prices. It is now widely accepted that the period of
rapid home price appreciation from 2002 to 2006 was associated with a wide-spread relaxation
of mortgage lending standards accompanied by declining credit spreads, lower …nancial market
risk premia, and easier …nancial conditions. Conversely, the housing bust that started some
time in 2007 accompanied by a global …nancial crisis was associated with a sharp increase in
credit spreads and a tightening of …nancial conditions.12
   With this historical backdrop in mind, we consider a shock-restricted identi…cation strategy
to recover et = (eC;t ; eH;t )0 . For this application we use a single external variable inequality
constraint that requires housing shocks to have a non-zero correlation of the “right”sign with
measures of credit spreads or …nancial conditions. We use two separate external variables for
this purpose, employed as alterative measures of …nancial conditions one at a time. The …rst,
denoted EBPt is the EBP variable used in the previous application. The second, denoted FCIt ,
is the National Financial Conditions Index constructed by the Chicago Federal Reserve. The
…rst is a measure of risk premia in credit markets; the second is a measure of the tightness of
…nancial conditions.

5.1       Shock-Based Constraints
According to the economic history just described, house price movements should be correlated
with aggregate …nancial conditions, with positive (negative) house price shocks associated with
looser (tighter) …nancial conditions and narrower (wider) credit spreads. This motivates the
following restrictions.
       We consider several sets of alternative restrictions. The …rst row refers to the covariance
restrictions alone. The restrictions in the rows labeled Recursive (a) and Recursive (b) refer
to the two possible recursive identi…cation schemes that may be employed for this system. In
SEE(a) and SEE(b) we apply the external variable restriction using either EBPt or FCIt . That
is, we apply the constraints one at a time to investigate the sensitivity of the …ndings to a
particular St . The restriction requires that a positive housing wealth shock be associated with
lower credit market risk premia and looser …nancial conditions. Conversely, a negative housing
wealth shock must be associated with higher risk premia and tighter …nancial conditions. Note
that there is nothing in the external variable constraints that explicitly precludes a non-zero
  12
    For empirical evidence on lending standards during this period see (Favilukis, Kohn, Ludvigson and Van
Nieuwerburgh (2013) and Jordà, Schularick and Taylor (2017)). For a theoretical model that shows how relaxed
lending standards lower risk premia and raise house prices, see (Favilukis, Ludvigson and Van Nieuwerburgh
(2017)).



                                                    33
                        Table 3: Identi…cation Restrictions, Housing Application

 Model                 Restrictions                             Notes
 gZ = 0                vec( ^ ) vech(BB 0 ) = 0                 covariance restrictions
 Recursive (a)         Recursive Identi…cation                  variable order: Xt = ( lnCt ; lnHt )0
 Recursive (b)         Recursive Identi…cation                  variable order: Xt = ( lnHt ; lnCt )0
 SEE(a)               gZ = 0                                    covariance restrictions
                      gC (eH;t ; St ): corr(EBPt ; eH;t ) < 0   external variable: Excess Bond Premium
 SEE(b)               gZ = 0                                    covariance restrictions
                      gC (eH;t ; St ): corr(FCIt ; eH;t ) < 0   external variable: Financial Condition Index
 ADRR                 gPZ = 0                                   covariance restrictions
                          2 eH; < 0                             sign restriction during = [2007:Q3;2007:Q4]
                       jHC;H; j > jHC;C; j                      Type A/B restriction on historical decomposition
Notes: The table summarizes restrictions in di¤erent constrained solution sets. ADRR’s Type A and B restric-
tions on historical decomposition are identical under bivariate VAR system. HC;H; is the contribution of eH
to the unexpected change in log consumption during = [2007:Q3;2007:Q4]. q (x) refers to the percentile
value of x.


correlation between the consumption shock eC;t and these measures of …nancial conditions. Nor
is there anything that restricts the relative importance of the two shocks in any particular
episode.
    Finally, the row labeled ADRR considers the “narrative sign” type restrictions introduced
in Antolín-Díaz and Rubio-Ramírez (2018). As discussed above, the restrictions considered in
Antolín-Díaz and Rubio-Ramírez (2018) di¤er from those here in two ways. First, they entertain
event restrictions that play up the role of some shocks while simultaneously playing down the
role of others (e.g., their “Type A and B”restrictions on the historical decompositions), similar
in spirit to the traditional narrative-external instrument approach. Second, they do not use
external variables at all. Thus to use their approach we need at least one event. For this
purpose we consider the U.S. banking panic that occurred in the third and fourth quarters
of 2007. The historical chronology of this panic and its speci…c link to an adverse housing
“shock” has been extensively documented by Gorton (2008), Gorton (2009), and Gorton and
Metrick (2012), who argue that the panic began August 2007 and continued for the rest of that
year. The constraints labeled ADRR impose both a sign restriction on eH;t in 2007:Q3 and
2007:Q4 requiring that the sum of the housing shocks in these two periods be negative, which
is to say below average, as well as a Type A/B historical decomposition restriction, requiring
that contribution of eH;t to the observed log change in consumption in 2007:Q3 and 2007:Q4
exceed that of eC;t .13 Note that this latter event constraint di¤ers from those considered in the
previous applications since it explicitly requires some shocks to play smaller roles than others
in this episode.
  13
       Due to the use of a bivariate VAR, their Type A and B restrictions are identical for this application.


                                                         34
5.2    Results for the Housing Application
For this application our data are quarterly and we use the largest common sample available
for observations on consumption growth, housing wealth growth, and the …nancial variables
used as external variables. This leaves us with a sample that spans the period 1973:Q1 to
2016:Q4. A more detailed description of the data and our sources is provided in the Online
Appendix. We estimate the VAR using four quarterly lags. Since the data for this VAR are in
log di¤erences, the IRF …gures below display the cumulative responses of consumption growth
to a one standard deviation increase in eH;t .
   Figure 10 shows the solution sets of IRFs. We focus …rst on the sets of responses obtained
by imposing only the covariance structure restrictions gZ (B) = 0. In the absence of additional
identifying assumptions it is di¢ cult to assign an interpretation to the shocks, but the case is
useful as a benchmark.
   Next we add external variable restrictions to shrink the admissible set. The IRFs obtained
by imposing SEE(a) are shown in the top panel; those obtained by imposing SEE(b) are shown
in the bottom panel. We see that the restrictions greatly narrowed the range of possible
responses compared to those based only on gZ (B) = 0, and in both cases they show that a
positive housing wealth shock drives up consumption sharply and persistently, with all solutions
in the identi…ed sets displaying this pattern. The bounds using EBPt are particularly tight.
The results imply that when a positive housing wealth shock is associated with declining credit
spreads and looser …nancial conditions, or conversely when a negative housing wealth shock
is associated with rising credit spreads and tighter …nancial conditions, it a¤ects aggregate
consumer spending. This aspect of the …ndings echo those in Krishnamurthy and Muir (2017).
The application shows that, even without valid instruments, fairly clear conclusions can be
drawn about the causal e¤ects of housing on aggregate consumption.
   The IRFs obtained under the ADRR restrictions are presented in red dashed lines of Figure
10. The sets are much wider than those under the SEE restrictions. The upper bound of
the ADRR solution set is close to those obtained under either the SEE(a) or SEE(b) solution
sets, but the lower bound is much lower than those using SEE(a) and SEE(b). This example
underscores the value for some applications of using information in external variables to help
shrink the set of plausible solutions. For this particular application, a single external variable
constraint requiring merely that housing shocks exhibit a negative correlation tight …nancial
conditions evidently has more identifying power than a pair of event constraints that restrict
the relative importance of housing and consumption shocks in the banking panic of 2007.
   It is instructive to also consider the IRFs that would be obtained if this system were point-
identi…ed using a recursive identi…cation scheme. Note that the assumptions embedded in the
shock-restricted SVAR do not rule out the possibility of a recursive structure, so the estimation


                                                 35
                        Figure 10: Housing Wealth and Consumption



        1


        0


       -1


       -2
            0      2        4        6         8          10     12       14       16        18       20



        1


        0


       -1


       -2
            0      2        4        6         8          10     12       14       16        18       20
The …gure reports the solution set of impulse response to positive, one standard deviation change in eH;t for
                             0
system Xt = ( lnC; lnH) under SEE(a) and SEE(b) restrictions listed in Table 3. The pink dotted line
                                                                          0
corresponds to the recursive identi…cation with order Xt = ( lnC; lnH) . The cyan dotted line corresponds
                                                             0
to the recursive identi…cation with order Xt = ( lnH; lnC) . The red dotted line corresponds to the set of
solutions under ADRR restriction. The sample spans the period 1973:Q5 to 2016:Q4.


is free to recover one if such a structure is consistent with the restrictions. With two variables
in the SVAR, there are two possible recursive orderings, hence two possible point estimates of
B. The IRFs implied by these two point-identi…ed models are shown in Figure 10 as di¤erent
colored dashed lines.
    The results show that, under either recursive ordering, the impact of a housing shock on con-
sumption is estimated to be close to zero at most horizons, implying that housing shocks have
little role to play in aggregate consumption ‡uctuations. Furthermore, both point-identi…ed so-
lutions are outside the range of values suggested by the shock-restricted SVAR. An examination
shows why: under either recursive ordering, the identi…ed eH;t is found to be positively rather
than negatively correlated with both EBPt and FCIt , a property that is ruled out by assumption
by the SEE restrictions. Given our ex post understanding of events in a sample that included
unusually large house price ‡uctuations, it is doubtful that a positive correlation between these
variables is sensible. To have con…dence in those identi…cation schemes, one would have to


                                                     36
believe that positive housing wealth shocks that were explicitly not a response to changes in
consumption coincided with higher risk premia and tighter …nancial conditions, while negative
housing wealth shocks coincided with a relaxation of lending standards and looser …nancial
conditions.
   We close this section by considering whether there are important asymmetries in the e¤ects
of housing shocks on aggregate consumption over time across the housing boom and bust.
For the purposes of this investigation, we de…ne the housing boom period to be 2002:Q1 to
2006:Q4, and the bust period to be 2007:Q1-2011:Q4. Our analysis makes use of an historical
decomposition, which measures the contribution of a shock to the observed unexpected change in
a variable in the VAR at any given time period t of the sample, or between any two time periods
t and t+h: For each solution k in the solution set, we calculate the historical contribution of eH;t
to the observed unexpected change in lnCt at time t and then locate the smallest and largest
contributions among all solutions. Figure 11 reports the largest and smallest contributions
of both eH;t and eC;t to the cumulative unexpected change in lnCt over the two subsamples:
2002:Q1-2006:Q4 and 2002:Q1-2011:Q4. For both plots, the results pertain to the solution set
obtained by imposing the SEE(a) restrictions or the ADRR restrictions. Details on how the
contributions are computed are given in the Online Appendix.
   Consider …rst the SEE(a) restrictions. As Figure 11 indicates, housing shocks played a
substantial role in driving aggregate consumption ‡uctuations in the housing bust, but their
role in the housing boom is unclear. For the boom period, the demeaned log di¤erence in
consumption was just 0.20% at an annual rate, while the contribution of eH;t ranges anywhere
from -0.27% and 0.28%. The role of the consumption shocks in driving consumption during the
boom is also unclear, with the contribution of eC;t ranging from -0.08% to 0.47%. This may be
because consumption growth was fairly typical in this subperiod, exceeding its historical mean
by only a small magnitude. By contrast, for the period 2007:Q1-2011:Q4, the demeaned log
di¤erence in consumption was -2.22% at an annual rate with the estimated contribution of eH;t
ranging from -2.32% to -1.31%, indicating that housing shocks explained anywhere from 105% to
60% of the aggregate consumption decline during the housing bust. The range of contributions
of the consumption shocks, on the other hand, ranges from -0.91% to 0.10%, making their role
again unclear. For the entire boom-bust subsample 2002:Q1 to 2011:Q4 where variation was
dominated by the bust, the demeaned log di¤erence in consumption was -1.01% at an annual
rate and the contribution of housing shocks ranges from -1.12% to -0.79%. We conclude that
housing played a potentially large role in the sharp declines in aggregate consumption that were
characteristic of the Great Recession, but an unclear role in the housing boom years.
   The results using the ADRR restrictions are less clear overall. The …ndings are similar to
those under the SEE(a) restrictions for the boom period. In this case the contribution of eH;t
ranges anywhere from -0.29% and 0.28%, while the contribution of eC;t ranges from -0.08% to

                                                37
                                       Figure 11: Historical Decomposition of Consumption
      Change in Consumption (%)




                                  0



                                  -1



                                  -2


                                                    2002-2006            2007-2011
      Change in Consumption (%)




                                  0



                                  -1



                                  -2


                                                    2002-2006            2007-2011
The …gure reports the contribution of the housing shock to the changes in demeaned real log consumption from
                                                                                        0
2002:Q1 to 2006:Q4 and from 2007:Q1 to 2011:Q4 for system Xt = ( lnC; lnH) under SEE(a) and ADDR
restrictions listed in Table 3. The blue (red) bars in the top panel report the smallest contributions of eH;t to the
cumulative unexpected change in lnCt over the two subsamples under SEE(a) (ADDR) restriction. The bottom
panel reports the largest such contributions. The grey bars in both panels correspond to the actual changes in
demeaned log consumption, reported at an annual rate. The VAR parameters and historical decompositions
are estimated on a sample that spans the period 1973:Q1 to 2016:Q4.


0.49%. But in contrast to the results under the SEE(a) restrictions, the ADRR restrictions
suggest that a wide range of contributions from housing shocks were possible during the bust
period, with the contribution of eH;t ranging from -2.32% to -0.17%, indicating that housing
shocks explained anywhere from 8% to 105% of aggregate consumption ‡uctuations. This
contrast with the results using the SEE restrictions is not surprising given the wider solution
sets shown in Figure 10.


6    Conclusion

Identifying assumptions need to be imposed in order to give impulse responses generated by
vector autoregressions an economically meaningful interpretation. But in many cases the as-
sumptions required for point identi…cation may be overly strong, while commonly used set-


                                                                38
identi…ed approaches are often not rich enough to conclude that the data are consistent with
a clear causal pattern among the variables. In this paper we explore the properties of a new
type of restrictions based on moment inequalities that can help winnow the range of plausible
solutions. The restrictions take the form of constraining the structural shocks rather than the
parameters of a VAR. To illustrate the potential uses of the approach, we consider two types
of restrictions adapted to three applications. The …rst type restricts the sign and magnitude
of identi…ed shocks in speci…c episodes of history so that they accord with a broad historical
understanding of events at particular points in the sample. These restrictions are tantamount
to creating dummy variables from the timing of speci…c events and then putting restrictions
on their correlation with the identi…ed shocks, thereby turning a restriction based on a small
number of observations into a moment restriction. The second type restricts the correlations
between the identi…ed shocks and variables that are external to the VAR. Monte Carlo methods
are used to get a sense of sampling variability. The issue of how to best conduct frequentist
inference in shock-restricted SVARs remains an important topic for future research.
   Most existing empirical work using vector autoregressions focuses closely on the set of the-
oretical restrictions that may be defensibly placed on the SVAR parameters to achieve identi-
…cation. But the structural shocks implied by the chosen identi…cation scheme, which are the
product of both the data and the restricted parameter vector, are rarely scrutinized. We con-
tend that this focus often misses valuable clues from the data that may be highly informative
about the shocks of interest, for two reasons. First, the applications studied here demonstrate
that the shocks are additional empirical objects of interest, no matter what the identi…cation
scheme. In some cases, the shocks obtained by identi…cation schemes derived exclusively from
attention to parameter restrictions appear implausible given an ex post understanding of ma-
jor historical or economic events. Second, any model that may be written as a VAR provides
n(n+1)=2 restrictions from the covariance structure, thereby yielding a set of admissible shocks
that are a product of the data alone. This set can be employed directly as part of the shock-
restricted approach discussed here to provide additional evidence on major economic events of
the sample, before any identifying restrictions are imposed.




                                              39
References

Andrews, Donald W. K. and Gustavo Soares, “Inference for parameters de…ned by mo-
   ment inequalities using generalized moment selection,” Econometrica, 2010, 78 (1), 119–
    157.

Antolín-Díaz, Juan and Juan F Rubio-Ramírez, “Narrative sign restrictions for SVARs,”
   American Economic Review, 2018, 108 (10), 2802–29.

Baumeister, Christiane and James D Hamilton, “Structural Interpretation of Vector
   Autoregressions with Incomplete Identi…cation: Setting the Record Straight,”manuscript,
    UC San Diego, 2019.

     and Lutz Kilian, “Forty years of oil price ‡uctuations: Why the price of oil may still
    surprise us,”The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2016, 30 (1), 139–160.

Cieslak, Anna and Andreas Schrimpf, “Non-monetary news in central bank communica-
    tion,”Journal of International Economics, 2019, 118, 293–315.

     and Hao Pang, “Common shocks in stocks and bonds,” Available at SSRN 3409340,
    2019.

Conley, Timothy G, Christian B. Hansen, and Peter E. Rossi, “Plausibly Exogenous,”
    The Review of Economics and Statistics, 2012, 94 (1), 260–272.

Favilukis, Jack, David Kohn, Sydney C. Ludvigson, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh,
    “International Capital Flows and House Prices: Theory and Evidence,” in Edward L.
    Glaeser and Todd Sinai, eds., Housing and the Financial Crisis, Chicago, IL: University
    of Chicago Press, 2013, pp. 235–299.

    , Sydney C. Ludvigson, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, “The Macroeconomic E¤ects
    of Housing Wealth, Housing Finance and Limited Risk Sharing in General Equilibrium,”
    Journal of Political Economy, 2017, 125 (1), 140–223.

Gafarov, Bulat, Matthias Meier, and José-Luis Montiel-Olea, “Projection Inference
    for Set-Identi…ed SVARs,”2015. Unpublished paper, New York University.

Gagnon, Joseph, Matthew Raskin, Julie Remache, and Brian Sack, “The …nancial
    market e¤ects of the Federal Reserve’s large-scale asset purchases,”International Journal
    of Central Banking, 2011, 7 (1), 3–43.
Gertler, Mark and Peter Karadi, “Monetary policy surprises, credit costs, and economic
   activity,”American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2015, 7 (1), 44–76.

Gilchrist, Simon and Egon Zakrajšek, “Credit Spreads and Business Cycle Fluctuations,”
    American Economic Review, 2012, 102 (4), 1692–1720.

Gorton, Gary and Andrew Metrick, “Securitized banking and the run on repo,” Journal
    of Financial economics, 2012, 104 (3), 425–451.

Gorton, Gary B, “The Panic of 2007,”NBER Working Paper, 2008, (w14358).

    , “Slapped in the Face by the Invisible Hand: Banking and the Panic of 2007,” Available
    at SSRN 1401882, 2009.

Granziera, Eleonora, Hyungsik Roger Moon, and Frank Schorfheide, “Inference for
   VARs identi…ed with sign restrictions,”Quantitative Economics, 2018, 9 (3), 1087–1121.

Hamilton, James D., “Historical Oil Shocks„” in Randall E. Parker and Robert Whaples,
    eds., Routledge Handbook of Major Events in Economic History, New York: Routledge
    Taylor and Francis Group, 2013, pp. 49–56.

Jordà, Òscar, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M Taylor, “Macro…nancial history and the
    new business cycle facts,”NBER macroeconomics annual, 2017, 31 (1), 213–263.

Kilian, Lutz, “Exogenous oil supply shocks: how big are they and how much do they matter
    for the US economy?,”The Review of Economics and Statistics, 2008, 90 (2), 216–240.

    , “Not All Oil Price Shocks Are Alike: Disentangling Demand and Supply Shocks in the
    Crude Oil Market,”American Economic Review, 2009, 99 (3), 1053–1069.

    , “Facts and Fiction in Oil Market Modeling,”manuscript, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas,
    2019.

     and Daniel P. Murphy, “Why agnostic sign restrictions are not enough: understanding
    the dynamics of oil market VAR models,”Journal of the European Economic Association,
    2012, 10 (5), 1166–1188.

     and Daniel P Murphy, “The role of inventories and speculative trading in the global
    market for crude oil,”Journal of Applied Econometrics, 2014, 29 (3), 454–478.

     and Helmut Lutkepohl, Structural Vector Autoregressive Analysis, Cambridge Univer-
    sity Press, 2016.
Krishnamurthy, Arvind and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, “The E¤ects of Quantitative
    Easing on Interest Rates: Channels and Implications for Policy,” Brookings Papers on
    Economic Activity, 2011, 2011 (2), 215–287.

     and      , “The ins and outs of LSAPs,” in “Kansas City Federal Reserve Symposium
    on Global Dimensions of Unconventional Monetary Policy”2013, pp. 57–111.

     and Tyler Muir, “How credit cycles across a …nancial crisis,”Technical Report, National
    Bureau of Economic Research 2017.

Ludvigson, Sydney C., Sai Ma, and Serena Ng, “Uncertainty and Business Cycles:
    Exogenous Impulse or Endogenous Response?,” American Economic Journal: Macroeco-
    nomics, forthcoming, 2019. http://www.econ.nyu.edu/user/ludvigsons/ucc.pdf.

Mertens, Karel and Morten O Ravn, “The dynamic e¤ects of personal and corporate
    income tax changes in the United States,”The American Economic Review, 2013, 103 (4),
    1212–1247.

Mian, Atif and Amir Su…, “House price gains and US household spending from 2002 to
    2006,”Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2014.

Montiel-Olea, José-Luis, James H. Stock, and Mark D. Watson, “Inference in Struc-
    tural VARs with External Instruments,” 2015. Unpubished manuscript, Harvard Univer-
    sity.

Ramey, Valerie A, “Macroeconomic shocks and their propagation,”in “Handbook of Macro-
    economics,”Vol. 2, Elsevier, 2016, pp. 71–162.

Romer, Christina D and David H Romer, “A new measure of monetary shocks: Derivation
    and implications,”American Economic Review, 2004, 94 (4), 1055–1084.

Sims, Christopher A., “Macroeconomics and Reality,”Econometrica, 1980, pp. 1–48.

Stock, James H. and Mark W. Watson, “NBER Summer Institute Minicourse 2008:
    What’s New in Econometrics: Time Series, Lecture 7: Structural VARs,” Cambridge,
    Mass.: National Institute for Economic Research. www. nber. org/minicourse_2008. html,
    2008.

    , Jonathan H. Wright, and Motohiro Yogo, “A Survey of Weak Instruments and
    Weak Identi…cation in Generalized Method of Moments,” Journal of Business and Eco-
    nomic Statistics, October 2002, 20 (4), 518–528.
Swanson, Eric T, “Measuring the e¤ects of Federal Reserve forward guidance and asset
   purchases on …nancial markets,”Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research
    2017.

Uhlig, Harald, “What are the e¤ects of monetary policy on output? Results from an agnostic
    identi…cation procedure,”Journal of Monetary Economics, 2005, 52 (2), 381–419.

    , “Shocks, Sign Restrictions, and Identi…cation,” in “Advances in Economics and Econo-
    metrics: Volume 2: Eleventh World Congress,”Vol. 59 Cambridge University Press 2017,
    p. 95.

Zeev, Nadav Ben, “What can we learn about news shocks from the late 1990s and early
    2000s boom-bust period?,”Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 2018, 87, 94–105.
Appendix for Online Publication

Data Description
Oil Application
   Data for the system Xt = ( prodt , reat , rpot )0 are obtained from the data …le of Kilian
(2009) at URL:https://www.aeaweb.org/aer/data/june09/20070211_data.zip.                                                   prodt is
the percentage change in global crude oil production, reat is the global demand of industrial
commodities variable constructed in Kilian (2009) and rpot is the real oil price.
   For this application we also use Killian’s (2008) measure of “exogenous oil supply shocks”
as an external variable. The variable measures shortfalls in OPEC oil production associated
with wars and civil disruptions. This indicator is used as an external instrument for point
identifying oil price shocks in Montiel-Olea et al. (2015).
   We use the same data used in Kilian (2009) and the largest common sample period across
Kilian (2008) and Kilian (2009) (1973:02-2004:09) for the analysis.
   Monetary Policy Application
                                                                                       0
                                                       (12)
   Both the data for the system Xt =                  it       ; cpit ; ipt ; ebpt          and the data for the external
variable Fed funds futures FF4 are obtained from the data and code …le of Gertler and Karadi
(2015) at URL:https://www.aeaweb.org/aej/mac/data/0701/2013-0329_data.zip. For the
analysis in the paper, we use the same data used by GK and otherwise stick to their sample
dates. The sample is monthly and spans the period 1979:07 to 2012:06.
   The Greenbook residuals are constructed in Romer and Romer (2004). For each FOMC
meeting m, they estimated the following equation,

                                              X
                                              2
                                                     y
                                                                     X
                                                                     2
                                                                                                 u
         T Rm =      0+       1 T Rm    1+           k gm;k      +           k    m;k      +     k um;0
                                             k= 1                    k= 1
                       X
                       2
                               y
                                                                     X
                                                                     2
                   +                 (gm;k gm        1;k )      +           k      (       m;k         m 1;k )   + "m
                               k
                                     |     {z              }                       |             {z         }      |{z}
                       k= 1                                          k= 1                                         Residual
                                   Change in growth forecast                    Change in in‡ation forecast


where   T Rm is the change in the target rate at meeting m from the last meeting, gm;k is the
k-horizon forecast of real output growth released at meeting m,                                  m;k   is the k-horizon forecast
of in‡ation released at meeting m, and um;0 is the current forecast of the unemployment rate
at meeting m.
   We obtained the Greenbook historical forecast data on real GDP, in‡ation, and unemploy-
ment rate from the Philadelphia Fed’s Greenbook Data Set (URL:https://www.philadelphiafed.
org/research-and-data/real-time-center/greenbook-data/philadelphia-data-set). We
replicated the Romer and Romer (2004) Residuals over the sample 1979:07 to 1996:12. We then
used the same estimation equation and extended the residuals to 2012:06.
   Housing Application
   The total PCE data are from the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis (Series ID DPCERX1).
The housing wealth combines two series from the Flow of Funds. One is the "Households;
owner-occupied real estate" (Flow of Funds B.101 Line 4). The second one is the "Non…-
nancial noncorporate business; residential real estate at market value" (Flow of Funds B.104
Line 4). The housing wealth is de‡ated using the PCE de‡ator. The excess bonds premium
data are obtained from URL: http://people.bu.edu/sgilchri/Data/GZ_M_August_2016.
csv.zip. The National Financial Conditional Index (FCI) series constructed by the Fed-
eral Reserve Bank of Chicago are obtained from FRED (Series ID NFCI) available at URL:
https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/NFCI. By construction, higher values of the FCI are
associated with tighter …nancial conditions.

Repeated Sampling Simulation
This appendix describes a bootstrap Monte Carlo procedure to assess the sampling error of our
inequality restrictions when St are variables external to the SVAR.
    Let R be the number of replications in a repeated sampling experiment. Let “hats”denote
estimated values from historical data, e.g., b                                          b esti-
                                             et denotes estimated structural shocks and B
mated structural covariance matrix. To denote simulated data, we use a “*”, while to denote
estimated values from simulated data, a “hat”is combined with a “*”.
    To generate samples of the structural shocks from this solution in a way that ensures the
events that appear in historical data also occur in our simulated samples, we …rst divide the
historical sample into two subsamples, one consisting of observations on dates for which event
inequality constraints are imposed, and another consisting of observations on non-event dates.
For latter subsample consisting of non-event dates, we draw randomly with replacement from the
                                                                                                       0
sample estimates of the shocks in the non-event subsample, i.e., from fb
                                                                       et g 8t 2
                                                                               =      = ( 1 ; :::;   E)    ;
where    is the vector of event dates and E denotes the number of events. For the former
subsample, we divide the set of shocks on each event date i into two categories, those that
are unconstrained, denoted b eU; i , and those that are subject to the event inequality constraint,
denoted b
        eC; i . For b
                    eU; i , we draw randomly with replacement from the set of corresponding
                                                                                     0
shocks in the subsample of non-event dates, i.e., fb
                                                   eU;t g 8t 2
                                                             =      = ( 1 ; :::;   E) .   For b
                                                                                              eC; i , we
draw randomly with replacement from the set of corresponding shocks in the subsample of
                            eC; i 2 B^ that satisfy the event inequality constraint given ki .
event dates, i.e., from the b
   Since we identify a set of estimated parameters B    b and therefore a set of estimated shocks
b
et , we generate R samples of data for each b
                                            et in the constrained solution set B(B; k; ; ; S),
or R M samples, where M is the number of solutions in our estimate of B(B; k; ; ; S).
   Let m index an arbitrary solution in B. Index each draw from the estimated shocks with
r and denote the r-th draw from the m-th solution as emr
                                                      t . Each et
                                                                 mr
                                                                    is combined with the B
                                 b
parameters of the m-th solution, B to generate R samples of size T of mr
                                   m
                                                                           =Bb m emr . Next,
                                                                        t         t
R new samples of Xt are recursively generated for each replication r = 1; :::; R using Xt =
Pp b            mr
  j=1 Aj Xt j + t  ; with initial conditions …xed at their sample values, [X p+1 ; :::; X0 ]. Using
each
h      of these new samples
                       i    of Xt , we …t a VAR(p) model to obtain new least squares estimates
    mr   b mr     b
  b t ; A1 ; :::; Apmr
                         and b mr =cov(b mr   ; b mr                 b mr = P
                                                     ) ; and B^mr = fB      ^ mr Q : Q 2 On ,
                                           t      t

     b mr
diag B         0; gZ (B) = 0g, where where On is the set of n                        n orthonormal matrices and
^ mr is the unique lower triangular Cholesky factor of b mr .
P
   To generate samples of the external variable St from m-th solution in a way that ensures
that the correlations with the shocks that appear in our historical data also appear in our
simulated samples, we …rst generate historical idiosyncratic St shocks em St as the …tted residuals
from regressions of St on a single autoregressive lag and on b  et ; respectively. Next, we draw
randomly with replacement from em                                      mr
                                St to obtain r = 1; :::; R new values eSt and R new values of
St by recursively iterating on

                                         Stmr = dm      mr     m0 mr  mr
                                                 01 + bSt 1 + d et + eSt                                                 (5)

with initial condition …xed at its initial sample values, S1 : The parameters b are estimated
from a …rst order autoregression for St . The parameters dm0 in (5) are calibrated to target the
                                em
observed correlations corr(St ; b                                                           mr   mr
                                 t ) for the m-th solution in historical data so that corr(St ; et )
                        em
roughly equal corr(St ; bt ) on average across all replications R.
       We construct percentile regions for our estimated set of IRFs in repeated samples as fol-
lows. The number of replications is set to R = 1; 000. In each replication of each solution,
K = 1:5 million random rotation matrices Q are entertained, but only Kmr            K rotations
will generate solutions that are admitted into the constrained solution set for that replication,
                    m;r;k
B mr ( ). Let       i;j;s   be the s-period ahead response of the i-th variable to a standard devia-
tion change in shock j at the k-th rotation of Kmr , for replication r and solution m.14 Let
 m;r                         m;r;k          m;r                       m;r;k              m;r       m;r
 i;j;s   = mink2[1;Kmr ]     i;j;s   and    i;j;s   = maxk2[1;Kmr ]   i;j;s :   Each (   i;j;s ;   i;j;s )   pair represents
the extreme (highest and lowest) dynamic responses in replication r of solution m. From the
                      m;r M;R
quantiles of the set  i;j;s m=1;r=1 that includes all replications for all solutions we can obtain
                                                                                          m;r      M;R
the =2 critical point          i;j;s ( =2). Similarly, from the quantiles of  i;j;s m=1;r=1 , we have the
1   =2 critical point          i;j;s (1     =2). Eliminating the lowest and highest =2 percent of the
  14
       The s-period ahead dynamic responses to one-standard deviation shocks in the jth
                                                                                    / variable are de…ned as

                                                    @Xt+s        b mrkj ;
                                                          = b mr
                                                              s  b
                                                     @ejt

      b mrkj is the jth column of B
where b                            b mrk and the coe¢ cient matrixes b mr are given by b mr (L) = b mr +
                                                                       s                            0
b mr L + b mr L2 + : : : = A
                           b mr (L) 1 .
  1        2
samples gives a (1         )% percentile-based interval de…ned by

                                 CI   ;g   =   i;j;s (   =2);      i;j;s (1      =2) :

CI   ;g   denotes the intervals for sets of solutions that satisfy all constraints, including the event
and correlation constraints: gZ (B) = 0; gE (B; ; k)        0; gC (B; S)    0: We use CI ;gZ to
denote the intervals for sets of solutions that satisfy only the covariance structure restrictions
gZ (B) = 0.

Historical Decomposition
The decompositions are computed as follows. Let ki;j;s be the s-period ahead impulse response
of the i-th variable to a standard deviation change in shock j at the k-th solution of the solution
                                                                                        k
set. For each solution k in the solution set, we calculate the historical contribution HC;H;t of
eH;t to the observed unexpected change in log consumption at time t as

                                                         X
                                                         t 1
                                            k                   k      k
                                           HC;H;t   =           C;H;s eH;t s :
                                                         s=0

                         k                              k
Let HC;H;t = mink2[1;K] HC;H;t and HC;H;t = maxk2[1;K] HC;H;t : The (HC;H;t ; HC;H;t ) pair gives
the smallest and largest contributions, respectively, of eH;t to the unexpected change in log
consumption among all solutions in the solution set. The contributions for the subsamples
2002:Q1-2006:Q4 and 2002:Q1-2011:Q4 are computed by cumulating the time t contributions
over these subsamples. Note that since the shocks are mean zero by construction, the data
must be demeaned in order to make the contributions meaningful.
