                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         THE MAKING OF HAWKS AND DOVES:
                        INFLATION EXPERIENCES ON THE FOMC

                                      Ulrike Malmendier
                                         Stefan Nagel
                                          Zhen Yan

                                      Working Paper 23228
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23228


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 2017




We thank Michael McMahon, Ricordo Reis, David Robinson, Christina Romer, David Romer,
Jeremy Stein, and workshop participants at the Bank of Finland, Harvard University, London
School of Economics, Max Planck Institute for Research on Collective Goods, Stanford
University, Stockholm School of Economics, Temple University, UC Berkeley, University of
Bonn, University of Chicago, University of Michigan Economics Department and Law School,
Vanderbilt University, as well as the NBER SI Monetary Economics meeting, Research in
Behavioral Finance Conference 2016, and Annual Research Conference of the European Central
Bank for helpful comments. Jonas Sobott, Marius Gunzel, Canyao Liu, Jeffrey Zeidel, and Albert
Lee provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Ulrike Malmendier, Stefan Nagel, and Zhen Yan. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Making of Hawks and Doves: Inflation Experiences on the FOMC
Ulrike Malmendier, Stefan Nagel, and Zhen Yan
NBER Working Paper No. 23228
March 2017
JEL No. D84,E03,E50

                                         ABSTRACT

We show that personal experiences of inflation strongly influence the hawkish or dovish leanings
of central bankers. For all members of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) since 1951,
we estimate an adaptive learning rule based on their lifetime inflation data. The resulting
experience-based forecasts have significant predictive power for members' FOMC voting
decisions, the hawkishness of the tone of their speeches, as well as the heterogeneity in their
semi-annual inflation projections. Averaging over all FOMC members present at a meeting,
inflation experiences also help to explain the federal funds target rate, over and above
conventional Taylor rule components.

Ulrike Malmendier                              Zhen Yan
Department of Economics                        Ross School of Business
549 Evans Hall # 3880                          University of Michigan
University of California, Berkeley             701 Tappan Street Ann
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880                        Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER                                       zachyan@umich.edu
ulrike@econ.berkeley.edu

Stefan Nagel
Ross School of Business and
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
701 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER
stenagel@umich.edu
       I think these three players are all products of their experience. Yellen re-
       ceived her Ph.D in 1971. Fischer in 1969. Both experienced the Great
       Inflation first hand. Brainard earned her Ph.D in 1989. Her professional
       experience is dominated by the Great Moderation.
                                           – Tim Duy’s Fed Watch, Oct. 12, 2015


    Macroeconomic models of optimal monetary policy tend to abstract from individual
preferences and subjective beliefs of policy makers. If monetary policy makers appear
at all explicitly in such models, they are modeled as maximizing social welfare, and the
relative weights they assign to inflation and output stabilization depend on private-
sector agent preferences and on objective data. When forming beliefs that affect their
actions, these agents use all available information. There is no role for subjective beliefs
or preferences that are distinct from those of private-sector agents (see, e.g., Rotemberg
and Woodford 1999). Models in which policy makers learn from observing historical
data, e.g. Sargent (1999), assume that beliefs are formed based on an objective histor-
ical data set that is disconnected from the personal history experienced by a specific
individual policy maker.1
    Contrast this modelling approach with the frequent discussions whether a central
banker is a ‘hawk’ or a ‘dove,’ and what a new appointment to a central-bank commit-
tee such as the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) or European Central Bank
(ECB) Governing Council means for future policy decisions. Like in the quote above,
these discussions frequently refer to an appointee’s background and personal experi-
ences. When Charles Plosser and Richard Fisher stepped down as the Philadelphia and
Dallas Federal Reserve Bank Presidents in September 2014, many newspapers inter-
preted this as a generational shift from, as the New York Times put it, “policy makers
trained in the 1970s, who tend to fear inflation above all else” to a new generation of
“younger officials more comfortable with pursuing broader policy goals” and related
those differences to personal experiences: “Annual inflation in the United States has
averaged 3.8 percent during Mr. Plosser’s adult life. By contrast, inflation has aver-
aged just 2.5 percent during the adult life of Narayana Kocherlakota, president of the
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, who at 50 is the youngest member of the policy-
making committee and who has become the most outspoken proponent of expanding
   1
    Other existing work has explored variations in preferences, such as career-concerns, and variation
in belief formation, such as learning frictions. For an overview, see Sibert (2006).


                                                  1
the Fed’s stimulus campaign.”2
   In this paper, we analyze how lifetime experiences influence monetary policy views
and the stated beliefs of policy makers about future inflation. We show that the lifetime
experiences of FOMC members significantly affect their tendency to cast dissenting
votes and, as a more subtle expression of their policy leanings, the hawkish or dovish
tone in their speeches. Aggregating over all FOMC members present at a meeting,
we also show that the average experience-based forecast has incremental explanatory
power for the federal funds target rate, over and above conventional forward-looking
Taylor rule components. Finally, inflation experiences have a strong direct impact on
FOMC members’ inflation forecasts as reported in their semi-annual Monetary Policy
Reports (MPR) to the U.S. Congress.
    Our analysis starts from the voting decisions of FOMC members. We ask whether
heterogeneity in inflation experiences can explain their dovish or hawkish voting pat-
terns. The FOMC meets at least four times (and typically eight times) per year in
Washington. Members share their assessment of the economic situation and propose
targets and policy measures for the upcoming inter-meeting time window, as well as
for the long-run. We focus on the ultimate votes of the individual FOMC members as
they allow us to study clearly defined policy decisions over a sample spanning several
decades, from March 1951 to January 2014, combined with detailed information on
their personal characteristics.
    Our central hypothesis is that FOMC member voting decisions are influenced by
the inflation experiences they have accumulated during their lifetimes. We model
members’ subjective inflation expectations using an AR(1) adaptive learning rule as
in Malmendier and Nagel (2016): Individuals use inflation data realized during their
lifetimes up to the FOMC meeting to estimate the long-run mean and the persistence
of inflation. In each period, the fitted value based on this learning rule provides an
experience-based inflation forecast for each FOMC member.
    We then link these experience-based inflation expectations to the desired level of
nominal interest rates using a subjective version of the Taylor rule (Taylor 1993). In
our formulation, FOMC members can differ in their weights on the inflation and output
stabilization objectives, in their views about the appropriate inflation and output tar-
  2
     See “Charles Plosser and Richard Fisher, Both Dissenters, to Retire From Fed,” by Binyamin
Appelbaum, New York Times Sept. 22, 2014, www.nytimes.com/2014/09/23/business/fed-official-
crtical-of-policies-set-to-retire-in-march.html.


                                              2
gets themselves, as well as the level of the natural interest rate. Most importantly, we
introduce a subjective forward-looking element by allowing FOMC members to evalu-
ate the deviation from the inflation target partly in terms of their own experience-based
inflation forecast.
    Our estimation focuses on members’ within-meeting heterogeneity in inflation ex-
periences and voting behavior. We find a strong relationship between inflation expe-
riences and voting decisions. A one within-meeting standard-deviation increase in the
experience-based inflation forecast raises the probability of a hawkish dissent by about
one third, and it lowers the probability of a dovish dissent also by about one third,
relative to the unconditional dissent probabilities.
    In a second step, we relate inflation experiences to a more subtle expression of
monetary policy leanings, namely the hawkish or dovish “tone” of FOMC members
expressed in their speeches. FOMC members, and Federal Reserve governors in partic-
ular, often seem reluctant to dissent, especially since November 1993 when the Federal
Reserve agreed to publish, with a delay, the transcripts of FOMC meetings. Members
might voice their concerns about a tight or loose monetary policy in discussions or
speeches, but ultimately shy away from casting a dissenting vote. As a consequence,
voting data may be too coarse to fully expose the dispersion in FOMC members’ views,
but the tone of speeches may be more informative about their disagreement.
    We categorize language as hawkish or dovish employing the automated search-and-
counts-approach of Apel and Grimaldi (2014). We apply their Net Index of hawk-
ishness to the sample of “Speeches and Statements” available from the Federal Re-
serve Archival System for Economic Research (FRASER), as well as additional hand-
collected speeches from the websites of the regional Federal Reserve Banks (FRBs).
Consistent with our voting results, we find that FOMC members use a more hawkish
tone in their speeches when their life-time experiences imply a higher experience-based
inflation forecast.
    In a third step, we turn from the cross-sectional analysis of individual behavior to
the time series of the federal funds rate target. We work with a forward-looking version
of the Taylor rule that contains the Federal Reserve Board staff’s Greenbook forecast
of inflation and the output gap as standard ingredients. We show that the federal funds
rate target is tilted away from the Greenbook forecast of inflation towards the average
of the experience-based inflation forecasts of the voting members in the corresponding
FOMC meeting. This result is robust to controlling for interest smoothing as part of the

                                           3
Federal Reserve’s policy, i.e., including the lagged federal funds rate in the interest-rate
rule. Our estimates imply—in a rough calculation that abstracts from the equilibrium
consequences of a different interest-rate path—that the federal funds target that the
FOMC would have chosen if members had relied only on the staff forecast, not on their
own inflation experiences, is quite similar to the actually chosen one in the late 1980s
and 1990s, but often by about 50 to 100 basis points lower in the 2000s.
     Finally, we ask whether lifetime experiences affect FOMC members’ stated beliefs
about future inflation. We analyze the individual inflation forecasts FOMC members
submit for the semi-annual Monetary Policy Reports (MPRs) to Congress. Romer and
Romer (2008) examine the central tendency of these forecasts and find that FOMC
members’ deviations from the staff’s Greenbook forecast reduce the forecast accuracy.
Working with the individual forecast data, we show that the influence of inflation
experiences helps explain why FOMC members deviate from the Greenbook forecasts.
We find that members put a weight of 37% and possibly more, depending on the
specification, on their experience-based forecasts. The strength of this tilt away from
the staff forecast towards the experience-based forecast is broadly consistent with the
tilt that we estimated in the federal funds target rate regressions.
     Our four sets of empirical results can be parsimoniously explained by a unified
model in which inflation experiences affect subjective beliefs about future inflation:
When forming beliefs about future inflation, individuals overweight realizations of past
inflation that they have experienced in their lives so far. Such a model of experience-
based learning is also consistent with earlier evidence on experience effects in individual
inflation expectations in Malmendier and Nagel (2016). At the same time, it is also
possible that there is a preference-based link between inflation experiences and aver-
sion to inflation. However, a preference-based explanation does not easily explain our
evidence for at least two reasons. First, under a preference-based explanation, it is not
clear why experience-based forecasts from an AR(1) adaptive learning rule would be a
good way to summarize FOMC members’ inflation preferences. Second, the preference
channel explanation does not easily explain the link between inflation experiences and
FOMC members’ stated beliefs about future inflation in their MPR forecasts. The
preference-based explanation would require the MPR forecasts to reflect members’ in-
flation preferences rather than their beliefs about future inflation. This is a possibility,
but not the standard interpretation of these data (e.g., Romer and Romer 2008). Ir-
respective of which of the two channels is the preferred explanation, our findings show

                                             4
that heterogeneity in lifetime experiences is economically and statistically important
in explaining heterogeneity in the monetary policy views and the decisions of the ex-
perts on the FOMC. Prior lifetime experiences help predict both the direction and the
magnitude of their hawkish or dovish leanings.
    This article connects to several strands of literature. First, our analysis of vot-
ing behavior builds on prior empirical evidence that links monetary policy decisions
to the characteristics of the FOMC members. Chappell, Havrilesky, and McGregor
(1993, 1995) and Chappell and McGregor (2000) document that a number of personal
characteristics of central bankers, including their role as regional Federal Reserve pres-
ident versus Federal Reserve governor, are associated with differences in their voting
behavior. We contribute to this literature the new insight that differences in personal
macroeconomic experiences also generate heterogeneity in voting behavior, and that
the direction and strength of members’ dissenting views can be linked directly to the
magnitude of their lifetime experiences in inflatioin. Moreover, while the earlier liter-
ature viewed policy maker characteristics as influences on their preferences or on the
incentives they have, our approach is motivated by a subjective beliefs channel, and we
show a direct impact of lifetime experiences on stated beliefs about future inflation.
    In the same vein, the evidence in this paper also sheds light on the likely conse-
quences of choosing specific individuals as central bankers – a topic much discussed in
practice. Romer and Romer (2004) provide narrative evidence that the Federal Re-
serve chairs are heterogeneous in their views about the workings of the macroeconomy
and the potency of monetary policy. They argue that this heterogeneity affects policy
choices. Accordingly, Reis (2013) suggests that the choice of a central banker shapes
the effective objective function for the central bank. Our evidence suggests that het-
erogeneity in macroeconomic experiences of central bankers can influence the beliefs
that enter as inputs into this objective function.
    Our analysis of the tone in FOMC members’ speeches relates to the literature on
textual analysis in monetary policy. We employ the approach established by Apel and
Grimaldi (2014) who measure the tone of the Swedish central bank minutes using an au-
tomated search-and-count approach. Apel and Grimaldi find that their measure helps
to predict policy rate decisions. Numerous other text-mining approaches have recently
been employed, for example by Hansen and McMahon (2016a, 2016b). Lucca and
Trebbi (2011) analyze FOMC communication. Using an automated linguistics-based
method, they find that the FOMC statement contains useful information predicting

                                            5
long-term Treasury yields. Most studies in this area focus on transcripts, minutes, and
statements of official meetings. We instead focus on how personal experiences can help
explain the tone differences across FOMC members’ speeches outside their meetings.
    Our findings also add to a growing literature that studies experience-related het-
erogeneity in economic decisions and macroeconomic expectations. Existing research
has focused on households (Malmendier and Nagel 2011, 2016), mutual fund managers
(Greenwood and Nagel 2009), flood insurance customers (Gallagher 2014), CEOs (Mal-
mendier and Tate 2005; Malmendier, Tate, and Yan 2011), lenders in 18th century Am-
sterdam (Koudijs and Voth 2016), and investors participating in initial public offerings
(Kaustia and Knüpfer 2008; Chiang, Hirshleifer, Qian, and Sherman 2011). This paper
is the first to provide such evidence for policy makers. That heterogeneous experiences
matter for FOMC decision-making is particularly surprising. FOMC members are pre-
sumably well informed about macroeconomic history, and monetary policy may be the
most technocratic and model-driven of all economic policy areas. Nevertheless, we find
that differences in FOMC members’ lifetime experiences induce heterogeneity in their
monetary policy views and their inflation expectations.
    Finally, in terms of methodology, our study connects to the literature on adaptive
learning (Evans and Honkapohja 2001), and more specifically, the application of adap-
tive learning to model the evolution of monetary policy makers’ beliefs (e.g., Sargent
1999; Cogley and Sargent 2005; Primiceri 2006). Following the approach of Malmendier
and Nagel (2016), we introduce experience-based heterogeneity into this framework by
allowing policy makers to place greater weight on their life-time experiences than on
other historical data. This helps shed light on policy maker heterogeneity (that these
earlier approaches are silent about) and it allows us to use such heterogeneity for the
econometric identification of experience effects.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we lay out the
methodology underlying our empirical approach, including the derivation of FOMC
members’ desired interest rate and of their learning rule. We then apply this method-
ology to four different outcome variables. In Section II, we ask whether the dissenting
votes of FOMC members can be explained by differences in their lifetime inflation
experiences. In Section III, we introduce the Apel and Grimaldi (2014) measure of
hawkish tone and apply it to FOMC members’ speeches. In Section IV, we connect
the average inflation experiences of all FOMC members at each meeting to the federal
funds rate decision. In Section V, we show that lifetime experiences also help predict

                                           6
the MPR inflation forecasts of FOMC members. Section VI concludes.


I    Methodology
The key question in this paper is whether the hawkish or dovish leanings and policy
outcomes of central bankers are related to their personal lifetime experiences of infla-
tion. We apply the learning-from-experience model of Malmendier and Nagel (2016)
to construct experience-based inflation forecasts of central bankers, which in turn feed
into their policy decisions.


A    Policy Rule
To isolate the effects of prior inflation experiences on policy decisions from other sources
of heterogeneity, we need a framework that allows us to also incorporate FOMC mem-
bers’ heterogeneity in their policy preferences and incentives. We model monetary pol-
icy makers as following (explicitly or implicitly) an interest-rate rule that pins down
their desired interest rate. We use the Taylor rule (Taylor 1993) as a starting point
and we augment it to allow for heterogeneity.
    The standard Taylor rule implies a nominal interest rate

              i∗t = r + π ∗ + λ(πt − π ∗ ) + γ(yt − y ∗ )   with λ > 0, γ > 0,          (1)

where πt is the inflation rate, π ∗ is the inflation target (assumed to be 2 percent by
Taylor), yt denotes output, y ∗ is potential output, and r is the “natural” real interest
rate consistent with a zero output gap yt − y ∗ . Orphanides (2003) shows that this rule
does a good job in explaining the evolution of the Federal Reserve’s policy rate—i.e.,
the federal funds rate—all the way back to the 1950s (with the exception of a few years
in the early 1980s during the “Volcker disinflation.”) This does not mean that the
FOMC explicitly followed such a rule; instead, it means that the FOMC’s interest-rate
decisions can be well described by such a rule.
    We introduce heterogeneity in two ways. First, we allow FOMC members to differ
in their preferences for inflation versus output stabilization through different weights
λ and γ on inflation and on the output gap, and we allow them to entertain different
views about the targets π ∗ , y ∗ and the natural rate r. Second, we introduce a subjec-


                                               7
tive forward-looking element into the Taylor rule by assuming that FOMC members
evaluate the deviations from the inflation target partly in terms of their own subjective
inflation expectation. With these sources of heterogeneity incorporated into the policy
rule, FOMC member j’s desired nominal interest rate at time t becomes

 i∗j,t = rj,t + πj,t
                 ∗             e
                     + λj,t (ωπj,t+1|t                ∗
                                       + (1 − ω)πt − πj,t                 ∗
                                                          ) + γj,t (yt − yj,t ),     with 0 ≤ ω ≤ 1. (2)

The parameter ω represents the weight that FOMC members put on their own subjec-
                   e
tive expectation πj,t+1|t rather than the objective information πt .
    One can go further and replace πt and yt with expectations of future inflation and
output to make the Taylor rule fully forward-looking as in Clarida, Galı́, and Gertler
(2000). However, this does not change the specification of our estimating equation
in a substantial way when we focus on cross-sectional heterogeneity between FOMC
members, i.e., in our analysis of individual voting decisions and the tone of speeches.
It does matter when we examine the time-series of the federal funds rate. In that
latter analysis, we will turn to a fully forward-looking specification, albeit with a much
shorter sample (due to limited availability of forecast data).
    We specify the heterogeneity of FOMC members in the following way:

                                      λj,t = λ0 + (xj,t − µx )0 λ1 ,
                                      γj,t = γ0 + (xj,t − µx )0 γ1 ,
                                       ∗
                                      πj,t = π ∗ + (xj,t − µx )0 α1 ,
                                       ∗
                                      yj,t = y ∗ + (xj,t − µx )0 α2 ,
                                      rj,t = r + (xj,t − µx )0 α3 ,                                  (3)

where xj,t is a vector of characteristics of FOMC member j at time t with population
mean µx . After substituting these expressions into equation (2) and performing a first-
                                                      e
order Taylor approximation of ij,t as a function of (πj,t+1|t , x0j,t ) around (πt , µ0x ), shown
in Appendix A, we obtain

                  i∗j,t ≈ at + λ0 ωπj,t+1|t
                                    e
                                            + κ0 xj,t + πt x0j,t λ1 + (yt − y ∗ )x0j,t γ1 ,          (4)

where at is a time fixed effect and κ is a vector of constants. We will utilize this version
of the Taylor rule to derive individual desired interest rates and corresponding policy


                                                     8
views, whether expressed in voting decisions or tone.


B    Learning from experience
                                                  e
To specify the subjective inflation expectation πj,t+1|t , we employ the learning-from-
experience framework of Malmendier and Nagel (2016). Their model aims to capture
the relationship between experienced inflation and subjective inflation expectations. It
is based on the assumption that an individual making an inflation forecast perceives
the inflation process as AR(1). The individual uses data on experienced inflation to
estimate the parameters of the AR(1) and to construct a forecast. As the individual
experiences a new inflation realization, she updates the AR(1) parameters and revises
the forecast. Intuitively, the AR(1) assumption implies that the experienced inflation
is summarized in terms of mean inflation rate and inflation persistence.
    We modify this framework to address the seasonality of inflation. Especially towards
the end of our sample period, the empirical seasonality in inflation rates is substantial,
and FOMC members are likely aware of the pattern. Hence, we assume that the
perceived law of motion is a seasonal AR(1)

                       πt+1 = α + φ1 πt + φ4 πt−3 − φ5 πt−4 + ηt+1 ,                    (5)

where the t − 3 and t − 4 lags capture a four-quarter seasonal pattern.
   FOMC members use least-squares to estimate the vector b of seasonal AR(1) pa-
rameters, b ≡ (α, φ1 , φ4 , φ5 )0 . Expressed recursively, the least-squares estimates of an
FOMC member born in year s are updated every period as follows:

                                           −1
                     bt,s = bt−1,s + γt,s Rt,s ht−1 (πt − b0t−1,s ht−1 ),               (6)
                          Rt,s = Rt−1,s + γt,s (ht−1 h0t−1 − Rt−1,s ),                  (7)

where ht ≡ (1, πt , πt−3 , πt−4 )0 . The sequence of gains γt,s determines how strongly
cohort s revises the parameter estimates when faced with an inflation surprise at time
t. Following Malmendier and Nagel (2016), we specify the gain as
                                          
                                               θ
                                          
                                              t−s
                                                        if t − s ≥ θ
                                 γt,s =                                                 (8)
                                          1            if t − s < θ.


                                                    9
This gain specification represents a key difference to standard implementations of adap-
tive learning (see Evans and Honkapohja 2001), and it is the source of between-cohort
heterogeneity in inflation forecasts in our framework. In standard adaptive learning
models with decreasing gain, the gain would be decreasing with the size of the total
sample of historical data available until t, which is the same for everybody. In contrast,
the gain in (8) is decreasing with the size, t − s, of the lifetime data set of cohort s at
time t. As a consequence, younger individuals have a higher gain and therefore react
more strongly in response to an inflation surprise than older individuals.
    The parameter θ > 0 is constant and determines how much weight the forecaster
puts on recent data versus data in the distant past. For example, θ = 1 implies equal
weighting of recent data and data earlier in life, while θ > 1 implies that recent data re-
ceives more weight than early lifetime experiences. We conduct our baseline estimation
by setting θ = 3.044, which is the value Malmendier and Nagel (2016) estimate from
the data on inflation expectations in the Michigan Survey of Consumers. This value of
θ implies that weights on past observations decline a little faster than linearly, going
back from the current period to a weight of zero at birth.3 By imposing consistency
with earlier evidence in this way, we tie our hands with regards to this parameter,
rather than picking θ to best fit the FOMC voting data. We also explore robustness
to variation of this parameter value around this point estimate. In particular, we re-
estimate θ on the Michigan Survey of Consumers for college graduates, a sample that
is plausibly more similar to FOMC members, and show that the results are unaffected
when we use the corresponding estimate of θ = 3.334.
                                                                                   e
    For a given value of θ, we calculate the experience-based inflation forecast πj,t+1|t of
member j at time t for the forecast horizon until t+1 using inflation data since member
j’s birth year. Our data source is the quarterly CPI series from 1871 Q1 to 2013 Q4
from Shiller (2005).4 We measure inflation rates as annualized quarterly changes in
the log CPI.
                                                                    e
    We plug the resulting experience-based inflation forecasts πj,t+1|t   into the Taylor-
rule formulation of equation (4) to obtain all FOMC members’ heterogeneous desired
   3
      Values in a fairly wide range around θ = 3.044 also imply (sensibly) that the initial years in the
lifetime data set carry very little weight. As a consequence, the inflation forecast of an adult is not
sensitive to the precise starting point of the experience accumulation. Malmendier and Nagel (2016)
discuss this point in more detail.
    4
      See the updated long term stock, bond, interest rate and consumption data at http://www.econ.
yale.edu/~shiller/data.htm.



                                                  10
interest rates at each point in time during our sample period.


II        Inflation Experiences and Voting
As a first step in our analysis, we estimate the effect of inflation experiences on the
voting choices of each member at each FOMC meeting.


A        Data on the FOMC voting history
We study the FOMC member voting history from March 1951 to January 2014. The
starting point of our sample period is dictated by the Treasury–Federal Reserve Accord
of 1951, with which the Federal Reserve System re-gained its independence from the
Department of Treasury after World War II.
    The voting data comes from several sources. For meetings between January 1966
and December 1996, we use the data from Chappell, McGregor, and Vermilyea (2005).
For meetings before January 1966 and after January 1997, we collect the voting history
directly from FOMC meeting statements. Each statement reports the voting results,
typically followed by explanations of the dissenting opinions, if any. We exclude eight
dissents who cannot easily be classified as hawkish or dovish. (Details on the construc-
tion of the voting data set are provided in Appendix B.) We note that four members of
the FOMC were both regional Fed presidents and governors at different points during
their career, and we account for their varying roles in our empirical analysis.
    We also collect biographical information for each FOMC member from the Federal
Reserve History Gateway5 and the Who’s Who database. The data includes the year
of birth, place of birth, gender, highest degree earned, the program they graduated
from, the role served (board member or regional bank president), and the political
party of U.S president who was in office at the time of the member’s first appointment.
We use these data to construct the vector xj,t of FOMC member j’s characteristics
that we allow to influence the desired interest rate in equation (4). We include age
to make sure the experienced-based inflation forecast is not picking up an age effect,
as well as other characteristics that the prior literature has found to be important
determinants of FOMC voting decisions (Chappell, Havrilesky, and McGregor 1993;
Chappell, Havrilesky, and McGregor 1995; Chappell and McGregor 2000): gender,
    5
        http://www.federalreservehistory.org/People


                                             11
                                  Table 1: Summary Statistics

The table shows statistics for all FOMC meetings from 3/8/1951 to 1/29/2014. Details of
the data construction are in Appendix B. The first column in Panel A reports the statistics
for all FOMC members; columns 2 to 4 focus on members who dissent towards monetary
easing (Dovish Dissent), members who consent (Consent), and members who dissent towards
monetary tightening (Hawkish Dissent). Panel B reports the pairwise correlation between
voting record, experience-based inflation forecast, and a vector of member characteristics.
We code V ote as 1 for a hawkish dissent, 0 for consent, and −1 for dovish dissent; Fed Role
as 1 for regional Fed presidents and 0 for board members; P arty as 1 if the member was first
appointed while a Republican was U.S. president and 0 otherwise; and Same Party as 1 if
the party of the U.S. president at the time of the appointment is the same as the party of
the current president and 0 otherwise.

                                                   Panel A
                                             All      Dovish Dissent     Consent    Hawkish Dissent
      #Meetings                             659               109           659            178
      #Votes                               7,350              160          6,925           265

      Avg. age                             56.4            55.6            56.4            57.1
      Avg. tenure (in days)                2,286           1,924           2,285           2,545
      % w/ PhD                              46.3           50.6            45.8             56.2
      % studied Economics                  67.5            70.6            67.0            78.9
      % Male                               93.9             83.1            93.9            100
      % Regional Fed president              44.6            23.7            44.0            72.1
      % Republicans                         53.7           45.0            53.3             70.9
      % Same party as current pres.        56.7             67.5            56.6            52.1

      Expr.-based infl. fcst.: mean         3.4%           3.8%            3.4%            4.1%
                               std.dev.     1.8%           2.2%            1.8%            2.1%

                                      Panel B: Pairwise Correlation
                              Vote      Infl. fcst.   Male      Age     Fed role   Party   Same pty.
     Vote                      1.00          -           -         -       -         -          -
     Exp.-based infl. fcst.    0.04        1.00          -         -       -         -          -
     Male                     0.08        -0.03       1.00         -       -         -          -
     Age                       0.02       -0.07        0.06      1.00      -         -          -
     Fed role: Fed pres.       0.12       -0.01        0.10     -0.09    1.00        -          -
     Party: Republican         0.07        0.15       -0.01     -0.02    0.10      1.00         -
     Same Party               -0.03        0.05       -0.05     -0.18    0.03      0.12       1.00




                                                      12
indicators for being a Regional Federal Reserve Bank President, being appointed during
the time a Republican U.S. president was in office, and for the U.S. president at the
time of the first appointment being the same as the party of the current president.
For reasons we discuss below, we also include an interaction between the indicator
for Regional Federal Reserve Bank President and an indicator for meeting time after
November 1993.6
     Table 1 presents the summary statistics. In total, we have data from 659 FOMC
meetings with 7,350 votes. Over the whole sample, we have 160 dovish and 265 hawkish
dissenting votes. For the interpretation of the estimation results below it is useful to
keep in mind that the share of dovish and hawkish dissents is quite small, typically
somewhere between 2.2% and 3.6%. These averages hide, however, a large degree of
heterogeneity by role served and over time.
     Figure 1 shows the number of dissents in each FOMC meeting separately for Federal
Reserve Board members (Panel a) and Regional Federal Reserve Presidents (Panel b).
It is easy to see that governors are much more likely to cast a dovish dissenting vote than
a hawkish dissenting vote. The opposite holds for regional presidents. Here we observe
a much higher fraction of hawkish dissents, as also indicated earlier in Panel A of Table
1. Figure 1 also reveals that a significant shift in voting behavior occurred in November
1993, indicated by the red line. At that time, the Federal Reserve responded to pressure
from Congress for more transparency and accountability and agreed to publish lightly
edited transcripts of the FOMC meetings with a five-year lag (Lindsey 2003). Before
1993, the Federal Reserve published individual votes and summary minutes, but not
the full transcripts. Meade and Stasavage (2008) find that this change reduced the
willingness of FOMC members to verbally express dissent in the meetings. They also
find a decrease in the propensity of Federal Reserve board members to dissent in
formal voting, but the effect is not statistically significant in their sample until 1997.
Figure 1, however, shows a fairly clear pattern. Dissents among Federal Reserve Board
members became almost non-existent after the increase in transparency in 1993 (only 6
subsequent dissents). In contrast, dissents among regional Federal Reserve presidents
remained quite common (71 subsequent dissents). Thus, the thresholds for FOMC
members’ to voice dissent seems to have changed in 1993. This is an important feature
   6
     We have also checked the robustness to including further available control variables (and their
interactions) such as tenure (as a possible control for expertise, cf. Hansen and McMahon 2016a) and
educational background. None of our results are affected if we include tenure, tenure squared, and
controls for the school attended, the highest degree, and the field studied.


                                                13
              4
     Number of Dissents
      2       1     3




                 1/1/1950   1/1/1960    1/1/1970          1/1/1980            1/1/1990   1/1/2000   1/1/2010
                                                            Meeting Date

                                                   Hawkish Dissent    Dovish Dissent



                                (a) Dissents by Federal Reserve Board Members
              4
     Number of Dissents
      2       1     3




                 1/1/1950   1/1/1960    1/1/1970          1/1/1980            1/1/1990   1/1/2000   1/1/2010
                                                            Meeting Date

                                                   Hawkish Dissent    Dovish Dissent



                             (b) Dissents by Regional Federal Reserve Presidents

Figure 1: Number of dissents in each FOMC meeting. The red vertical line is the
time-stamp for Nov. 1993, after which FOMC agreed to make public its lightly-edited
transcripts with a five-year lag.




                                                              14
of the data that we will need to accommodate in our econometric specification.
    Returning to Panel A of Table 1, we see that hawkish dissenters are also older,
have a longer tenure on the FOMC, are more likely to have a PhD, to have studied
economics, to be male, and were appointed when the U.S. president in office was from a
different party than the current U.S. president. (All differences other than the doctoral
degree and field of study are statistically significant.)
    At the bottom of Panel A, we show the mean and standard deviation of FOMC
                                          e
members’ experience-based forecasts πj,t+1|t   , calculated as described in Section I.B.
The average experience-based inflation forecasts for dovish dissenters is 3.8% while the
average for hawkish dissenters is 4.1%, though the difference is not significant, and
the average among consenters is even lower (3.4%). The difference between dissenters’
experience-based forecasts is not significant, though the difference between hawkish
dissenters and dovish dissenters combined with consenters is.
    Panel B shows the pairwise correlation between the key variables. We note again
the positive relationship between the role of Fed president and votes leaning in a
hawkish direction, and the same for being male, older, and Republican. Experience-
based forecasts and hawkish voting are also positively correlated, and the correlation
is significant. Our empirical analysis will test whether this relationship persists when
analyzing the between-member variation in experiences after controlling for all other
characteristics and their interaction effects, as implied by the policy rule in (4).
    In order to illustrate the identifying variation in experience feeding into our es-
timation, we plot two measures of the cross-sectional differences in experience-based
inflation forecasts. Panel (a) of Figure 2 shows the learning-from-experience forecast
  e
πi,t+1|t of the youngest and oldest FOMC members at each meeting, after subtract-
           e
ing the πi,t+1|t of the median-age member in each meeting. As the plot reveals, these
differences take values of at most around 1.5 percentage points. The biggest differ-
ences occur during the high-inflation years in the late 1970s and early 1980s, when the
youngest members have the highest experience-based forecasts. At that time, younger
members’ inflation experiences are dominated, to a larger extent than older members’
experiences, by the high mean rates of inflation during the 1970s and the high persis-
tence that inflation exhibited during those years. The high perceived mean and high
perceived persistence produce, in combination, a high experience-based inflation fore-
cast among younger cohorts in this period. Subsequently, from the mid-1980s onwards,
younger members adapted more quickly to the now low rates of inflation and the rela-

                                           15
                      1.5       1
         Inflation Forecast (%)
          0          .5
                      −.5




                         1/1/1950   1/1/1960             1/1/1970             1/1/1980         1/1/1990              1/1/2000         1/1/2010
                                                                                Meeting Date

                                               Youngest Member Relative to the Median          Oldest Member Relative to the Median




(a) Experience-based inflation forecast for the youngest and oldest FOMC member relative
to the median age member’s forecast
                      .5
                      .4
         Standard Deviation (%)
              .2       .3
                      .1
                      0




                         1/1/1950   1/1/1960             1/1/1970             1/1/1980         1/1/1990              1/1/2000         1/1/2010
                                                                                Meeting Date



               (b) Standard deviation of members’ experience-based inflation forecasts

Figure 2: Dispersion of members’ experience-based inflation forecasts during each
FOMC meeting




                                                                                 16
tively low persistence, and the lines cross. The perception of a relatively low inflation
persistence among younger members also contributes to the spike around 2010, when
young members’ learning-from-experience forecast is temporarily much higher than the
median: When faced with the recession-driven low inflation rates at the time, young
members expected a faster reversion of inflation rates up (towards the mean of slightly
above 2%) than older members.
    As another measure of the differences in experience-based inflation forecasts, Panel
                                                                        e
(b) plots the time-series of the within-meeting standard deviation of πi,t+1|t . There is a
lot of variation in this dispersion measure over time. A somewhat typical value would
be around 0.1 percentage points (the full-sample within-meeting s.d. is 0.102 pp). As
the age differences between FOMC members are typically not big, their experienced
inflation histories are quite similar, and thus the learning model from Section I.B pro-
duces forecasts that are quite close for most of the members on the FOMC. Exceptions
occur in the late 1970s and early 1980s when high inflation rate realizations lead to
substantial dispersion despite the relatively small age differences. It is useful to keep
these magnitudes in mind for the interpretation of our empirical tests below. As we will
show, even a relatively small dispersion in experience-based forecasts can be sufficient
to induce substantial differences in voting behavior.


B    Econometric specification
At each FOMC meeting, all current voting members cast a vote to either support or
dissent from the proposal of the Fed chairperson. We classify the vote Vj,t of member
j in the meeting at time t as falling into one of three categories, Vj,t ∈ {−1, 0, 1}, for
dovish dissent, no dissent, and hawkish dissent, respectively. We express the probability
of being in one of these three categories as a function of the desired interest rate from
equation (4) via the following ordered probit model: For k ∈ {−1, 0}

                        e
           P (Vj,t ≤ k|πj,t+1|t , xj,t , πt , yt )
                                   e
            = Φ[δk,j,t − at − λ0 ωπj,t+1|t − κ0 xj,t − πt x0j,t λ1 − (yt − y ∗ )x0j,t γ1 ],   (9)

where Φ(.) denotes the standard normal cumulative distribution function, and where
we normalize a0 = 0 and suitably scale all variables so that the latent residual has unit




                                                     17
standard deviation.7
    The model in (9) is a generalized version of the ordered probit model because we
allow the thresholds for dissent δk,j,t to vary with the characteristics of the FOMC mem-
ber and across the transparency regime change in 1993. The most important concern
motivating this generalization is that regional Fed presidents may have different dissent
thresholds compared with Federal Reserve Board governors. As we illustrated in Figure
1, this concern is particularly relevant since the November 1993 change in transparency.
To accommodate the possibility of threshold-heterogeneity among FOMC members, we
let the thresholds in (9) depend on the FOMC member characteristics xj,t , including
an interaction between indicators for the role Regional Federal Reserve Bank President
and for a meeting time after November 1993:

                                          0
                         δk,j,t = δ0,k + δ1,k xj,t    for k ∈ {−1, 0}.

Note that coefficients of δ0,k and δ1,k are threshold-specific. With this threshold specifi-
cation, we obtain a version of the generalized ordered probit model in Williams (2006).
We estimate the model with maximum likelihood.


C       Baseline Results
Do these differences in the learning-from-experience forecasts of FOMC members help
explain differences in their voting behavior? Table 2 presents estimates of our baseline
ordered probit specification (9) using data from 1951 to 2014. Our focus is on the co-
efficient estimate, and the corresponding marginal effect, of each member’s experience-
                            e
based inflation forecast πj,t+1|t . The chairman’s vote is excluded from the sample
because the chairman never dissented in the FOMC meeting during our sample period.
    In addition to the experience-based forecast variable, our sample composition re-
quires us to include a dummy capturing hyperinflation experience. One FOMC member
in our data set, Henry Wallich, personally experienced hyperinflation. Mr. Wallich was
born in Germany in 1914 into a family of bankers, and he lived through Germany’s
hyperinflation from 1921 to 1924 before emigrating to the United States in the 1930s
and serving as Federal Reserve governor from 1974 to 1986. Mr. Wallich dissented
27 times during his tenure on the Federal Reserve Board, the highest number of dis-
    7
     These normalizations are of no consequence for the estimated partial effects and so we do not
explicitly write them out.


                                                 18
sents among all FOMC members in Federal Reserve history, according to Thornton
and Wheelock (2014).8 We cannot integrate the hyperinflation observations into the
experience-based forecast as the inflation rate reached tens of thousands percent per
month in 1923; estimation of an AR(1) with these observations included would produce
nonsensical results even with a sample spanning decades. We dub the corresponding
indicator “Wallich Dummy.” With the caveat that this variable captures the voting
behavior of just one individual member, the corresponding coefficient estimate provides
at least tentative evidence on the effects of a “hyperinflation” treatment, i.e., how the
extreme experience of hyperinflation may have influenced Wallich’s monetary policy
views.
    Column (i) of Table 2 reports estimates for a specification of the ordered probit
model (9) where the dissent thresholds can vary with indicators for the type of FOMC
member (board governor versus regional president) and with an indicator for the post-
November 1993 period, as well as their interaction. This allows the model to accommo-
date the dramatic shift towards fewer dissents among Federal Reserve Board members
after November 1993 that we saw in Figure 1. The coefficient on the experience-based
inflation forecast of 216.6 (s.e. 66.1) is significantly different from zero at conventional
significance levels. The magnitude of the effect on the probability of dissent can be
inferred from the average partial effects (APE) reported in the middle block of the
table. An increase of 0.1 percentage points (pp) in the experience-based forecasts of an
FOMC member—which, according to Figure 2b, is a typical within-meeting standard
deviation of FOMC members experience-based inflation during much of the sample—
translates into an increase in the probability of a hawkish dissent vote of roughly 1.21
pp, which is a little less than a third of the unconditional probability of hawkish dis-
sent (265/6707 ≈ 4.0%). The probability of a dovish dissent drops by about 0.76
pp, which is approximately a third of the unconditional probability of dovish dissent
(160/6707 ≈ 2.4%). Thus, the estimates imply an economically large impact of infla-
tion experiences on voting behavior.
    The APE of the Wallich dummy indicates that the hyperinflation “treatment” is
associated with a very large reduction in the probability of dovish dissent of 5.0 pp, and
an increase in the probability of hawkish dissent of 8.0 pp. In other words, the effects
   8
     In our sample, we identify only 26 dissents by Wallich, 24 of which were hawkish. The difference
to Thornton and Wheelock’s classification could be Wallich’s vote on the 2/6/1979. In this meeting he
dissented regarding the adopted growth rates of the monetary aggregates (M1-M3), but not regarding
the open market transactions that were authorized. In our sample, this vote is not counted as dissent.


                                                 19
on probabilities associated with the Wallich dummy are roughly of the same magnitude
as those associated with an increase of 1.0 pp in an FOMC member’s experience-based
inflation forecast.
    All results are virtually identical when we allow the dissent thresholds to also depend
on the FOMC members’ individual characteristics (age, gender, party of president at
appointment indicator, and same party as current president indicator), as shown in
column (ii).


D       Robustness Checks
One potential concern with the estimates in columns (i) and (ii) in Table 2 is that
the inclusion of meeting fixed effects in the ordered probit model might introduce an
incidental parameters problem.9 To address this concern, we estimate an alternative
specification in which we omit the meeting fixed effects. Instead, we specify that the
probabilities of dissent are driven directly by cross-sectional differences (against the
incumbent Chairperson) in inflation experiences and other personal characteristics.
That is, we forgo the non-parametric controls for the time-specific determinants of
voting behavior, but we still remove at least some of them to the extent they are
captured by the explanatory variables values associated with the chairperson.
     The results are shown in columns (iii) and (iv) of Table 2. The coefficient estimates
of the experience-effect forecast variable and the Wallich dummy decrease, but these
changes largely reflect the altered econometric specification. As the APE calculations
reveal, the implied economic magnitudes remain similar to those in columns (i) and
(ii). Both sets of estimates also remain statistically significant. We conclude that our
findings are not generated by estimator inconsistencies due to the incidental parameter
problem.
     As a second robustness check, we test whether we still find experience effects if we
employ a simple ordered probit model with fixed dissent thresholds and restrict the
analysis to subsamples in which the fixed-threshold assumption is more likely to hold,
i.e., prior to the dramatic decrease in dissents since November 1993 and for the votes
of regional presidents.
    9
    As T increases, the number of meeting fixed effects grows at the same rate as T and therefore, the
probit estimator is inconsistent and standard formulas for the asymptotic distribution of the estimator
may not provide a good approximation of its finite-sample properties.



                                                  20
      Table 2: Experience-based Inflation Forecasts and FOMC Voting Behavior

The sample period is from March 8, 1951 to January 29, 2014. The experience-based inflation forecast
for each member at each meeting is calculated by recursively estimating a seasonal AR(1) model using
the member’s lifetime history of inflation, as described in Section I.B (with θ = 3.044). The Wallich
dummy equals one if the member is Henry Wallich; 0 otherwise. The average partial effects (APE)
reported at the bottom of the table are calculated by taking the partial derivative of the probability
of a given voting category with respect to the experience-based inflation forecast at each sample
observation and then averaging these partial derivatives across the whole sample. Column (i) and (iii)
report the results assuming that the thresholds depend on a) whether the member is a board member
or regional president, and b) whether the meeting occurs after Nov. 1993 and the interaction of a) and
b). Column (ii) and (iv) report the results assuming that the thresholds depends, in addition, on age,
gender, party of president at appointment indicator, and same party as current president indicator. In
parentheses we report the standard error based on two-way clustering by both member and meeting.


                                                  Ordered Probit           Ordered Probit
                                                                            “de-chaired”
                                                      (i)        (ii)       (iii)      (iv)

     Experienced-based forecast                   216.6        214.4         97.2         98.5
                                                  (66.1)       (67.8)       (39.5)       (39.0)

     Wallich Dummy                                 1.43         1.39         1.05         1.05
                                                  (0.36)       (0.36)       (0.17)       (0.17)

     Meeting FE                                    Yes          Yes         No            No
     Thresholds                                Role × I>93      All     Role × I>93       All

     Observations                                  6,707       6,707        6,707        6,707
     Pseudo R2                                     0.390       0.391        0.097        0.100

     APE of experienced-based forecast:
     Dovish Dissent                                -7.6         -7.6         -5.1         -5.1
     Consent                                       -4.4         -4.3         -2.5         -2.5
     Hawkish Dissent                               12.1         11.9          7.6          7.7

     APE of Wallich Dummy:
     Dovish Dissent                               -0.050       -0.050       -0.055       -0.055
     Consent                                      -0.029       -0.028       -0.027       -0.027
     Hawkish Dissent                               0.080        0.077        0.082        0.082




                                                 21
Table 3: Experience-based Inflation Forecasts and FOMC voting behavior: Different
Sample Periods with Fixed Ordered Probit Thresholds

The experience-based inflation forecast for each member at each meeting is calculated as in Table 2.
The Wallich dummy equals one if the member is Henry Wallich; 0 otherwise. The average partial
effects (APE) reported at the bottom of the table are calculated by taking the partial derivative of the
probability of a given voting category with respect to the experience-based inflation forecast at each
sample observation and then averaging these partial derivatives across the whole sample. Column
(i) reports the results with all FOMC members prior to November 1993. Column (ii) reports the
results with regional Fed presidents only prior to November 1993. Column (iii) reports the results
with regional Fed presidents only over the entire sample. Column (iv) reports the results with all
FOMC members prior to November 1993 and regional Fed presidents only afterwards. In parentheses
we report the standard error based on two-way clustering by both member and meeting.

                                         All        Regional        Regional        Mixed
                                      Members      Pres. Only      Pres. Only      Members
                                      pre-1993     Full Sample      pre-1993      Full Sample
                                         (i)            (ii)          (iii)           (iv)

       Expr.-based fcst.                230.0           379.2         495.5           230.9
                                        (80.0)         (103.9)       (155.9)          (68.9)

       Wallich Dummy                     1.49             -              -             1.51
                                        (0.37)            -              -            (0.37)

       Meeting FE                        Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes

       Observations                     5,123          3,275          2,467           5,931
       Pseudo R2                        0.380          0.453          0.492           0.383

       APE of expr.-based fcst.:
       Dovish Dissent                    -9.5           - 6.4          -8.0            -9.0
       Consent                           -3.5           -19.5         -21.0            -5.2
       Hawkish Dissent                   13.0            26.0         29.0             14.2

       APE of Wallich Dummy:
       Dovish Dissent                   -0.062            -              -            -0.059
       Consent                          -0.022            -              -            -0.034
       Hawkish Dissent                  0.084             -              -             0.093




                                                  22
    Table 3 presents the results of this exercise. The specification in column (i) employs
the voting records of all members from November 1993 onwards. The estimated results
turn out to be very close to our benchmark case (with characteristics-dependent dissent
thresholds). We estimate slightly larger average partial effects of −9.5 pp for dovish
dissents and +13.0 pp for hawkish dissents, again measured as the response to an
increase of 0.1 pp in FOMC member’s experience-based forecasts. The APE of the
Wallich dummy also become slightly larger in both directions in this subsample.
    In columns (ii) we restrict the sample to regional Fed presidents, but we use all time
periods. This subsample exploits the fact, shown in Figure 1, that the November 1993
transparency change did not have much effect on the voting behavior of regional pres-
idents. We find that the estimated effects are even stronger.10 In this subsample, the
proper comparison for the APEs is the unconditional probability of dovish or hawkish
dissent by Federal Reserve presidents. The estimated average partial effects (APE) of
changes in experience-based inflation forecast on the voting behavior of regional presi-
dents suggests that an increase of 0.1% in the experience-based forecast of regional Fed
presidents translates into an increase in the probability of a hawkish dissent by roughly
2.6 pp, which is a bit less than one half of the unconditional probability of a hawkish
dissent by regional Fed presidents (191/3275 ≈ 5.8%). Meanwhile, the probability of a
dovish dissent drops by 0.6 pp, which is roughly half of the unconditional probability of
dovish dissent by regional Fed presidents (38/3275 ≈ 1.2%). Comparing these numbers
to our baseline case with all FOMC members, it appears that past inflation experience
has a stronger effect on the votes of regional Fed presidents.
    In column (iii), we further restrict the sample of regional presidents to include only
the pre-November 1993 periods. The estimated APEs remain very similar. Finally, in
column (iv), we analyze the union of the column (i) and column (ii) subsamples, i.e.,
all members pre-November 1993 and only Fed presidents post-November 1993. The
estimated effects are very similar to those in column (i), as well as to the benchmark
case.
    Appendix C contains an additional set of results with fixed thresholds where we
use the full sample of all members and meetings. These results, shown in Table A.1,
are again very similar. This simplified specification also allows a straightforward inter-
pretation of the effects of the member characteristics, xj,t . We report the coefficients
  10
     Since Henry Wallich is not a regional Fed president, we cannot estimated the Wallich dummy
coefficient in this case.


                                              23
associated with these variables in Table A.2.
    As a last robustness check, we employ variations in the gain parameter θ of the
learning algorithm. So far we fixed θ at the point estimate of 3.044 from Malmendier
and Nagel (2016). Relying on a prior estimate has the advantage that we credibly
tied our hands, rather than picking θ to fit the voting behavior of FOMC members.
We now check how the fit and the estimated APE change if we vary θ. That is, we
re-estimate the learning rule for each FOMC member over a range of plausible values
of θ. We then re-run the estimation from column (i) of Table 2 with the corresponding
alternative experience-based forecasts of inflation.
    For our first alternative value, we re-estimate the gain parameter using data from
the Michigan Survey of Consumers based on the same procedure as in Malmendier and
Nagel (2016), but with the sample restricted to college graduates. This sub-sample is
more comparable to the FOMC members in terms of educational background. We
estimate θ = 3.334 (with s.e. of 0.347). That is, the θ estimate for college grads is less
than one s.e. from the full-sample estimate. As column (i) of Table 4 shows, employing
θ = 3.334 rather than θ = 3.044 does not alter our findings. The results remain very
similar to our baseline estimates in column (i) of Table 2.
    Second, we employ a range of θ values between θ = 2 to θ = 4 (in steps of 0.5).
As shown in columns (ii) to (v) of Table 4, all results are qualitatively similar to our
baseline estimates as in column (i) of Table 2. We conclude that our results are robust
to variations over a broad range of plausible θ values.
    In summary, we find that lifetime inflation experiences have an economically large
and robust effect on FOMC members’ voting behavior. When an FOMC members’
lifetime experience suggests higher inflation going forward than the experience of their
peers, they are more likely to dissent in a hawkish direction. The opposite holds for
inflation experiences suggesting lower future inflation; they induce dovish dissents.


III     Inflation Experiences and the Tone of FOMC
        Members’ Speeches
The seeming reluctance of governors to dissent, especially since November 1993, indi-
cates that FOMC members may not always fully reveal their disagreement in their vot-
ing behavior. They might voice their monetary policy views in discussions or speeches,


                                           24
Table 4: Experience-based Inflation Forecast and FOMC voting behavior: Varying
Weights on Past Experience

The sample period is from March 8, 1951 to January 29, 2014. The ordered probit specification is
the same as in column (i) of Table 2, but here with different values of the gain parameter θ in the
calculation of the experience-based inflation forecast. The Wallich dummy equals one if the member is
Henry Wallich; 0 otherwise. The average partial effects (APE) reported at the bottom of the table are
calculated by taking the partial derivative of the probability of a given voting category with respect
to the experience-based inflation forecast at each sample observation and then averaging these partial
derivatives across the whole sample. We assume that the ordered probit thresholds depend on a)
whether the member is a board member or regional president, and b) whether the meeting occurs
after Nov. 1993 and the interaction of a) and b). In parentheses we report the standard error based
on two-way clustering by both member and meeting.


                                             θ = 3.334     θ=2      θ = 2.5    θ = 3.5    θ=4
                                                (i)         (ii)      (iii)      (iv)      (v)

    Experience-based forecast                  183.8       218.2     256.7     165.4     117.6
                                               (61.2)      (68.4)    (74.3)    (58.0)    (48.5)

    Wallich Dummy                               1.42        1.45      1.46      1.41      1.39
                                               (0.36)      (0.36)    (0.36)    (0.36)    (0.36)

    Meeting FE                                   Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes

    Observations                                6,707      6,707     6,707      6,707     6,707
    Pseudo R2                                   0.389      0.389     0.391      0.388     0.386


    APE of experienced-based forecast
    Dovish Dissent                              -6.5        -7.7      -9.1       -5.9      -4.2
    Consent                                     -3.8        -4.5      -5.2       -3.4      -2.4
    Hawkish Dissent                             10.3        12.2      14.3       9.2        6.6

    APE of Wallich Dummy
    Dovish Dissent                             -0.050      -0.051    -0.052    -0.058    -0.050
    Consent                                    -0.029      -0.030    -0.030    -0.029    -0.029
    Hawkish Dissent                            0.079        0.081     0.081    0.079      0.078




                                                 25
but ultimately refrain from casting a dissenting vote.
    In this section, we test whether FOMC members’ attitude towards monetary policy
can be detected in the language, or tone, they use in their speeches. To categorize
language as hawkish or dovish, we employ an automated search-and-counts-approach
that closely builds on the analysis of Apel and Grimaldi (2014). Apel and Grimaldi
(2014) examine the Swedish Riksbank minutes and test whether their tone conveys
a policy inclination toward loosening or tightening monetary policy. We apply their
classification of tone to speeches of FOMC members, with some adjustment to the
different context and sample, as described in detail below.
    Our starting sample of speeches consists of all 6, 353 “Speeches and Statements”
available from the Federal Reserve Archival System for Economic Research (FRASER),
and additional 658 hand-collected speeches from the websites of the regional FRBs. To
be consistent with the analysis of votes in the previous section, we focus on voting
members and remove speeches delivered by the (rotating) non-voting regional Fed
presidents. We also drop pdf files that could not be properly converted into text and
for which the date of the speech cannot be determined. The final sample consists of
4, 298 speeches for 86 FOMC members in the period from the meeting on March 8th,
1951, to June 2014, with an average of 50 speeches per member. A quarter of the
members have 15 or less speeches in the sample, while long-serving FOMC members,
especially chairmen, tend to have more than 100 speeches. For example, our sample
includes 482 speeches by Alan Greenspan and 264 by Ben Bernanke. Appendix D
provides further details on the construction of the data set.
    Figure 3 shows the time series of the speeches in our sample. The total number
increases over time. From 1965 onwards, the average number of speeches in a quarter
is above 17, i.e., more than one speech per FOMC member per quarter. The share of
speeches delivered by the chair increases only slightly over time and lies around 30%.
    To classify the tone of these speeches, we follow Apel and Grimaldi (2014) and
generate two-word combinations from two sets of words: nouns describing the goals
of a central bank, and adjectives describing the attitudes of a central banker towards
a goal. The list of goals in Apel and Grimaldi (2014) consists of “inflation,” “cycli-
cal position,” “growth,” “price,” “wages,” “oil price,” and “development.” We will
also show estimation results after adapting the list to the FOMC context by adding
“(un-)employment.” Apel and Grimaldi had omitted this term because the Swedish
Riksbank has price stability as a single goal, while the U.S. Federal Reserve System

                                         26
                   50
                   40
          Number of Speeches
             20    10
                   0  30




                        1950q1      1965q1      1980q1     1995q1      2010q1

                                              Total       Chairmen



                         Figure 3: Number of FOMC Member Speeches Over Time


has a dual mandate. The list of attitudes consists of “decrease,” “slow,” “weak,” and
“low” on the dovish side, and “increase,” “fast,” “strong,” and “high” for the hawkish
counterpart. For unemployment, we swap the hawkish and the dovish adjectives.
    For each mention of a goal, we check whether words from the attitudes list oc-
cur within a range (n-gram) of two words before and after the goal. While Apel and
Grimaldi (2014) require the attitude word to appear directly before the goal, such
two-word combinations do not generate sufficient variation between the speeches of
FOMC members, possibly because the language is less formal and standardized than
the Swedish central bank minutes, and the speeches of the FOMC members address
a wider audience. We choose a range of two words before and after the goal (i.e.,
five-grams) in order to accommodate two-word goals such as “oil price,” as well as
to accommodate different relative positions of the classification words. For example,
an FOMC member might refer to “increasing prices” or mention that “prices are in-
creasing.” In addition, by centering the n-grams around the noun of interest, we avoid
double-counting: Every word of the speech occurs in at least n n-grams but is only at
most once in the center of an n-gram.
    We drop n-grams containing more than one “goal” or “attitude” with different con-


                                                  27
                     Table 5: Tone of Speeches: Summary Statistics

The sample includes voting FOMC members’ speeches from March 1951 to June 2014. Net In-
dex is an index of hawkishness calculated as described in equation (10). Hawkish/Dovish Tags is
the average count of hawkish and dovish word combinations in a speech. Hawkish/Dovish Tags for
employment counts the additional hawkish/dovish word combination per speech for the goal employ-
ment/unemployment.

                                     N     Mean     Std. Dev.   Min    Median      Max
      5-grams per speech           4,298    3,411     2,228      11     3,063     28,470

      Net Index excl. empl.        4,298    0.11       0.55       -1       0        1
      Net Index incl. empl.        4,298    0.11       0.55       -1       0        1

      Hawkish Tags excl. empl.     4,298    1.51       3.07       0        0        68
      Hawkish Tags for empl.       4,298    0.28       0.83       0        0        14

      Dovish Tags excl. empl.      4,298    0.98       2.10      00       33
      Dovish Tags for empl.        4,298    0.20       0.70       0        0        12


notations. For example, the sequence “... low growth and unemployment ...” generates
a five-gram centered around the goal ‘growth’ combined with the attitude ‘low;’ but the
same five-gram also features another goal, unemployment. Since these two goals gener-
ate a dovish combination (“low growth”) as well a hawkish one (“low unemployment”),
we drop the five-gram from our analysis.
    As in Apel and Grimaldi (2014), we then collapse the number of hawkish and dovish
combinations in each speech into a single index:

                                 Hawkish           Dovish
                Net Index =                   −                 .                          (10)
                              Hawkish + Dovish Hawkish + Dovish

The index is bounded between −1 and +1. A value of −1 indicates that all of the
tagged n-grams are dovish, and a value of +1 that all tagged n-grams are hawkish.
Hence, larger values of Net Index indicate greater hawkishness. If no hawkish or dovish
n-grams can be found in the text, Net Index is set to zero.
   Table 5 provides some summary statistics of Net Index and its components. On av-
erage, a speech contains 3,411 five-grams, but there is large variation across speeches.
A mean of 1.51 five-grams are tagged as hawkish, and 0.98 as dovish, when we use
the original set of goals defined in Apel and Grimaldi (2014). By adding “employ-

                                              28
ment/unemployment” to the goal list, we add an additional 0.28 additional hawkish
and 0.20 dovish tags per speech. The average Net Index across speeches is about
0.11, irrespective of the specification of the goal list. The positive value indicates that
the language used in our sample of speeches is slightly tilted towards a more hawkish
wording, albeit with a large standard deviation of 0.55.
   To develop our estimating equation, we assume that cross-sectional differences in
Net Index between FOMC members map approximately linearly into differences in
their desired interest rate according to equation (4). We obtain

                                    e
            Net Indexj,t = αt + β1 πj,t+1|t + β20 xj,t + πt x0j,t β3 + (yt − y ∗ )x0j,t β4 ,   (11)

where the coefficients are multiples (by the same factor) of the corresponding coeffi-
cients in equation (4). As before in the voting analysis, we relate the outcome during
                                            e
quarter t (speech tone in this case) to πj,t+1|t  , which is constructed based on the in-
flation history leading up to the end of quarter t − 1. We also continue to focus on
cross-sectional heterogeneity by employing time-fixed effects, αt , to absorb common
time-variation in the use of hawkish and dovish expressions.11 The vector of member
characteristics xj,t is the same as in the voting analysis (age, gender, party of president
at appointment indicator, and same party as current president indicator) and it can
influence the level of hawkishness as well as the extent to which inflation or output gap
increase or decrease hawkishness.
    In addition, we also account for the fact that measured speech tone is likely subject
to additional sources of heterogeneity compared with the voting behavior on the FOMC.
‘Speech style’ and the choice of words can depend on other personal characteristics of
the speaker, including education and prior professional experience. This heterogeneity
adds noise and it could introduce correlated omitted variables. We use two approaches
to account for these additional personal characteristics. First, we augment (11) with
dummy variable controls for education and prior professional experience.12 We generate
indicator variables for having earned a PhD, a JD, an MBA, or a Master’s degree as
the highest degree earned. We also collect information on FOMC members’ prior
professional experience from the Fed’s History Gateway and from the personal CVs of
  11
     For example, in times of high unemployment, all FOMC members might be likely to employ the
goal-attitude combination “high unemployment” in their five-grams.
  12
     Details on the construction of both variables are at the end of Appendix D, and include summary
statistics in Appendix-Table A.3.


                                                  29
Table 6: Experience-based Inflation Forecasts and FOMC Members’ Tone of Speeches

Dependent variable is the N etIndex measure of speech hawkishness defined as in equation (11). The
experience-based inflation forecast for each member at each meeting is calculated as in Table 2. All
estimations include the same controls and interactions with recent CPI inflation and unemployment
as in Table 2. In addition, we include controls for education and professional background as explained
in the text, except for columns (3) and (6) where we instead employ member fixed effects. In columns
(2) and (5), we drop speeches from chairmen. The regressions are estimated with OLS. Standard
errors, shown in parentheses, are calculated allowing for two-way clustering by FOMC member and
year-quarter.

                                            Net Index                       Net Index
                                       excluding (un)empl.             including (un)empl.
                                      (i)       (ii)       (iii)     (iv)       (v)       (vi)
     Experience-based fcst.          29.05     34.72      35.51     24.65      33.29     39.34
                                    (14.02)   (18.00)    (16.10)   (13.06)    (17.24)   (14.28)

     Wallich dummy                   0.10       0.17        -        0.11      0.16         -
                                    (0.08)     (0.09)       -       (0.07)    (0.07)        -

     Member FE                        No        No         Yes       No         No        Yes
     Year-quarter FE                  Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes
     Chair’s speeches dropped         No        Yes        No        No         Yes       No
     Industry expr. controls          Yes       Yes        No        Yes        Yes       No
     Degree controls                  Yes       Yes        No        Yes        Yes       No
     Adjusted R2                     0.047     0.052      0.058     0.040      0.044     0.048
     Observations                    4,298     3,300      4,298     4,298      3,300     4,298



FOMC members, and generate indicator variables for prior experience in the financial
industry, in non-finance industries, in other government organizations and agencies
(besides the Fed), and as an academic (i.e., having worked full-time in an academic
department at some point prior to becoming an FOMC member). Second, we absorb
any time-invariant personal characteristics with member fixed effects. In this case, the
coefficient of interest, β1 , is identified from within-member variation of speech tone as
their inflation experience changes. The inclusion of member fixed effects is, on the one
hand, most comprehensive in accounting for unobserved person-specific determinants
of language use. On the other hand, it removes a substantial amount of variation
coming from the differences in average experience-based inflation forecasts between
FOMC members.
    Table 6 presents the results. In columns (i) to (iii), we use the original N etIndex


                                                 30
from Apel and Grimaldi (2014), and in columns (iv) to (vi), we expand the index and
add (un-)employment to the list of goals.
    Our baseline specification in column (i) shows that differences in inflation experi-
ences have a significant effect on speech tone. The coefficient of 29.05 (s.e. 14.02) is
significantly different from zero at the 5% level. An increase of 0.1% in the experience-
based forecasts of an FOMC member—which is a typical within-meeting standard
deviation—is associated with an increase of about 0.03 in the N etIndex. This mag-
nitude seems plausible as the experience effects must be relatively subtle given the
relatively small age heterogeneity of FOMC members. In this estimation, it amounts
to about 1/16th of a standard deviation of N etIndex. Relatedly, we also note that
there is a lot of measurement noise in N etIndex. This is apparent from the fact that
the R2 is only 4.7% even though we include time fixed effects, and one would expect
substantial common time-variation in true hawkishness tone of speeches.
    The point estimate for the Wallich dummy suggests that hyperinflation experience
predicts a 0.10 higher N etIndex than that of other Fed governors with similar charac-
teristics at the time; but given the standard error (0.08) it is not possible to rule out
a zero effect at conventional significance levels in first specification. Nevertheless, it is
noteworthy that the ratio of the point estimates for the experience-based forecasts and
the Wallich dummy (about 200-300 here depending on the specification) is of the same
order of magnitude as in the voting analysis in Table 2 (about 100-150).
    In column (ii) we test the extent to which our estimation results are affected by
the large number of speeches given by the chairperson. Speeches of the chair might
systematically differ from the speeches of other FOMC member for at least two reasons.
First, chairs might use a more balanced language for political reasons, especially given
that they tend to attract more attention. Second, chairs might use the speeches to
provide signals to financial markets, whereas the other FOMC member might primarily
use the speeches to communicate their views between each other. When we drop the
chair’s speeches, we obtain a slightly larger coefficient of 34.72 (s.e. 18.00) which is
just about significant at the 5% level. In column (iii), we include member fixed effects
and consequently, the coefficient rises a little further and the standard error drops.
    In columns (iv) through (vi), we reestimate the specifications from columns (i)
through (iii) for the version of Net Index that includes (un-)employment as a goal.
The results are very similar.
    We conclude that the personal lifetime inflation experiences of FOMC members

                                             31
leave a significant imprint not only on their dissenting votes and the strong policy
leanings expressed within those, but also on the more subtle expressions of attitudes
towards monetary policy voiced in speeches.


IV      Inflation Experiences and the Federal Funds Rate
        Target
Our analyses of cross-sectional differences in voting decisions and in the tone of speeches
reveal that FOMC members rely, to a significant extent, on their own inflation experi-
ences. We now test whether this partial reliance on personal experiences affects even
the committee’s ultimate decision about the Federal Funds target rate. That is, we
check whether there is an incremental effect of FOMC members’ experience-based in-
flation forecast on the consensus decision if we introduce such a channel alongside
conventional interest-rate determinants in a Taylor rule.
    In the preceding analyses, we were able to identify the effects of inflation experiences
from cross-sectional cohort-specific differences in voting and tone in speeches, as well
as from changes in those differences over time. Time dummies allowed us to absorb
any potentially confounding time-series factors, including conventional determinants
of monetary policy. Here, we aim to explain the time series of federal funds rates
rather than cross-sectional differences in behavior. As a consequence, we need to take
a stand on a specific model of the time-series determinants of monetary policy decisions.
We will focus on standard versions of the Taylor rule that have proven successful in
the recent empirical literature to address the specification issues as well as possible.
Nevertheless, uncertainty about the correct specification of the policy rule as well as the
limited data availability in the time-series dimension make identification and estimation
much more challenging than in our earlier cross-sectional analyses. However, rather
than a stand-alone definitive test of the experience effects hypothesis, these time-series
tests should be viewed in conjunction with our earlier evidence from voting decisions
and tone in speeches. Our goal in this section is simply to check whether the federal
funds rate moves over time in a way that is consistent with this earlier evidence.
    We start from the linear approximation of the subjective Taylor rule in (4) that rep-
resents the desired federal funds rates of the FOMC members present at the meeting.
In our baseline specification, we assume that the federal funds rate target decided at an


                                            32
FOMC meeting represents the average of the members’ desired rate levels. (Alterna-
tively, we use the median or the chairperson’s desired rates instead; see the robustness
checks in Appendix E.) Averaging equation (4) across all FOMC members present at
a meeting at time t, we obtain (see Appendix A)

                         i∗t = β0 + z̄t + βe π̄t+1|t
                                               e
                                                     + βπ πt + βy (yt − y ∗ ),                  (12)

        e
where π̄t+1|t is the average of the FOMC members experience-based inflation forecasts
as of the meeting at time t, and z̄t is the time-t average of

                           zj,t = κ0 xj,t + πt x0j,t λ1 + (yt − y ∗ )x0j,t γ1 .                 (13)

With z̄t = 0 and βe = 0 (if ω = 0) this reduces to the standard Taylor rule. Our
earlier analyses of voting and speech tone suggest ω > 0 and hence βe > 0, i.e., that
FOMC members rely to some extent on their experience-based inflation forecast, over
and above the standard inflation- and output-gap components of the Taylor rule.
                                                                                       e
    Turning to the empirical implementation, we aim to minimize the chance that π̄t+1|t
picks up the effects of measurement error in the objective macroeconomic information
used by the FOMC. In order to do so, we need to use empirical measurements of πt and
(yt − y ∗ ) that are as close as possible to the information used by the FOMC. We take
three steps. First, as shown by Orphanides (2001, 2003), forecast-based variants of the
Taylor rule provide a better empirical fit to the actual decisions about the federal funds
rate target than a rule based on realized macroeconomic data. We follow Orphanides
(2003) and replace, for every meeting in quarter t, πt and (yt − y ∗ ) with the Federal
Reserve staff’s Greenbook forecasts of inflation from quarter t − 1 to t + 3 and forecasts
of the output gap in quarter t + 3.13 Second, it is important to use the inflation
index that the FOMC relies on primarily. We follow Mehra and Sawhney (2010) and
Bernanke (2010) and use Greenbook forecasts of the core CPI inflation before the year
2000 and Greenbook forecasts of core PCE inflation thereafter. We refer to the time
series that we obtain from joining the core CPI and core PCE series as the staff’s core
inflation forecast. Third, we follow Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2012) and use one
  13
     For the earlier part of the sample, the output gap forecasts were not explicitly included in the
Greenbooks, but they were used by the staff of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Sys-
tem in constructing its Greenbook forecast of wages and inflation. See the Philadelphia Federal Re-
serve (http://www.philadelphiafed.org/research-and-data/real-time-center/greenbook-data/ gap-and-
financial-data-set.cfm) for more details.


                                                   33
FOMC meeting per quarter (the one that is closest to the middle of the quarter). This
ensures that the CPI information leading up to the end of the previous quarter that is
                e
embedded in π̄t+1|t  is available to the FOMC. Moreover, in this way we get data points
that are almost equally spaced in time, which is useful when we include lagged interest
rates.
    We start the sample in 1987Q3 when the Federal Reserve’s staff forecast of the
output gap become available. As shown in Orphanides (2001), in the periods thereafter,
the Taylor rule, and its forecast-based variant in particular, provides a good description
of actual Federal Reserve policy. We end the sample in 2007Q2, just before the start
of the financial crisis. Mishkin (2010) argues that starting in the summer of 2007,
the FOMC reacted to information from financial markets that did not yet show up in
inflation and output gap forecasts. As a consequence, the Taylor rule does not provide
a good description of the FOMC’s policy during this period.14
    Column (i) of Table 7 provides a benchmark for the analysis of experience effects.
                                                                      e
We replicate the standard Taylor rule findings (without z̄t and π̄t+1|t   ). The estimated
coefficients on the output gap (0.67) and on the inflation variable (1.51) are consistent
with typical findings in the literature. In column (ii), we include the average experience-
                   e
based forecast, π̄t+1|t . We estimate a coefficient of 0.38 (s.e. 0.21) that is significantly
different from zero at a 10% level. Hence, FOMC members’ average experience-based
inflation forecast has explanatory power for the federal funds rate target over and above
the staff forecast of inflation and the output gap. Considering the coefficients on the
two inflation variables together, the weight on the experience-based forecast in our
experience-augmented Taylor rule (12) is about 0.38/(1.27 + 0.38) ≈ 0.23.
    Column (iii) turns to the full specification (12) by including z̄t , which captures the
effect of the changing characteristics of the FOMC members on interest-rate decisions.
We construct z̄t from the estimates in our voting analysis. The fitted values of the
latent desired interest rate of our ordered probit model (9) allow us to construct zt in
(13) up to scaling by a constant. More precisely, we use the ordered probit specification
with fixed thresholds, shown in the robustness tables in the Appendix in Table A.1.
(With characteristics-dependent thresholds, we would not be able to separate the effect
of characteristics on the thresholds from the effect on the latent desired interest rate.)
  14
     Baxa, Horváth, and Vašı́ček (2013) provide empirical evidence consistent with this description of
FOMC policy. They show that adding financial market variables to the Taylor rule equation matters
a lot in 2008-09, over and above inflation and output gap information.



                                                   34
Table 7: Influence of FOMC Members’ Inflation Experiences on the Target Federal
Funds Rate

The sample period is from the 8/18/1987 to 6/28/2007. The dependent variable is the target federal
funds rate set at the FOMC meeting closest to the middle of the quarter t. The experience-based
forecast is the average of FOMC members’ experienced-based 4-quarter forecast of inflation based on
CPI data leading up to the end of quarter t − 1, calculated as in Table 2. The staff’s core inflation
forecast is from end of quarter t − 1 to end of quarter t + 3 based on the core CPI before 2/1/2000 and
the core PCE thereafter. The staff’s output gap forecast at quarter t is the forecast for quarter t + 3.
The staff’s forecasts of CPI/PCE and of the output gap are from the Philadelphia Fed Greenbook
data set. Lagged fed funds rate target is the federal fund funds rate target from the previous quarter’s
meeting. Columns (i) to (iii) report the OLS estimates based on (12). Columns (iv) and (v) report the
estimates of βe , βπ , βy , ρ, and c from non-linear least-squares regressions as specified in (15). Columns
(iii) and (v) include a proxy for z̄t , the linear combination of five FOMC member characteristics and
their interaction with inflation and unemployment estimated from voting data as reported in the
Appendix in Table A.1. In parentheses, we report Newey-West standard errors with six lags from
column (i) to (iii), and zero lags in column (iv) and (v).

                                                      (i)      (ii)      (iii)     (iv)      (v)
        Experience-based inflation forecast            -       0.38      0.61     0.46      0.44
                                                       -      (0.21)    (0.24)   (0.21)    (0.21)

        Staff’s core inflation forecast              1.51      1.27      1.44     1.27      1.25
                                                    (0.13)    (0.23)    (0.23)   (0.17)    (0.20)

        Staff’s output gap forecast                  0.67      0.69      0.46     0.98      1.00
                                                    (0.06)    (0.06)    (0.10)   (0.08)    (0.15)

        Lagged federal funds rate target               -         -        -       0.68      0.69
                                                       -         -        -      (0.04)    (0.04)

        Intercept                                    0.80      0.11      2.17     -0.03     -0.08
                                                    (0.44)    (0.36)    (0.86)   (0.16)    (0.42)

        Member characteristics                        N         N         Y         N        Y
        Method                                      OLS       OLS       OLS       NLS      NLS
        Observations                                 80        80         80        80      80
        Adjusted R2                                 0.858     0.865     0.877     0.976    0.976




                                                    35
Averaging across FOMC members each period yields z̄t . Adding z̄t to the Taylor rule
as an explanatory variable in column (iii) of Table 7, we find that the coefficient on the
experience-based inflation forecast increases to 0.61 (s.e. 0.24) which is now statistically
highly significant.
    In columns (iv) to (v), we check whether the experience variable might be picking
up the effect of a lagged federal funds rate in these regressions. Existing evidence from
the literature on monetary policy rules, e.g., Clarida, Galı́, and Gertler (2000) and
more recently Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2012), indicates that the Federal Reserve’s
policy is best characterized by partial adjustment, where the actual fed funds rate
target it is a weighted average of the desired fed funds rate i∗t from equation (12) and
the lagged actual federal funds rate target it−1 ,

                                   it = (1 − ρ)i∗t + ρit−1 .                           (14)

To check whether accounting for partial adjustment of this form could change the
conclusions regarding the experience effects, we combine the partial adjustment rule
with (12):

                                          e
                                                + βπ πt + βy (yt − y ∗ ) + ρit−1 .
                                                                       
              it = c + (1 − ρ) z̄t + βe π̄t+1|t                                        (15)

Since the parameter of interest, βe , is now interacted with 1 − ρ, we estimate (15) with
non-linear least squares. We report the estimates of βe , βπ , βy , ρ, and c in columns
(iv) and (v) for the specification without and with the z̄t variable, respectively.
    Column (iv) presents the version without the z̄t variable. Consistent with the exist-
ing literature on federal funds rate inertia, the lagged target rate has strong predictive
power and absorbs a large portion of the residual. The coefficients on the inflation
variables are not affected much, though. The estimate of βe of 0.46 (s.e. 0.21) is
now a bit higher than in column (ii), and significantly different from zero at the 5%
level. The implied weight on experienced inflation relative to the staff forecast is now
0.46/(1.27 + 0.46) ≈ 0.27. Turning to the estimation with the z̄t variable included in
column (v), we find that adding z̄t has very little effect on the estimates when the
lagged federal funds rate target present in the regression
    Overall, the evidence from the time-series of the target federal funds rate is con-
sistent with the inflation experience effects that we identified in FOMC members’


                                              36
                    10
                    8
               Target rate
               4    2
                    0   6




                        1987q3     1992q3            1997q3          2002q3           2007q3
                                                      Date

                                            Actual            Counterfactual



  Figure 4: Counterfactual federal funds rate target with experience effects removed


heterogeneous voting decisions and wording of speeches. In Figure 4 we illustrate the
magnitude of the effect by constructing a counterfactual federal funds rate target path
that removes the estimated experience effects from the actual path. To construct the
counterfactual path, we take the actual federal funds rate target and subtract the es-
timated βe from column (ii) times the difference between FOMC members’ average
experience-based forecast and the Greenbook forecast of inflation. This counterfactual
path represents the target that the FOMC would have chosen if its members had relied
only on the staff forecast, not on their own inflation experiences—at least if we abstract
from follow-on equilibrium effects.15
    As the figure shows, the incremental effects of inflation experiences are substantial
at times, but not unreasonably large. In the late 1980s and early 1990s, the effects
were small. At the time, the average experience-based forecast remained very close to
the staff’s core inflation forecast. In contrast, in the 2000s the counterfactual federal
funds rate target is often between 50 to 100 basis points lower than the actual federal
  15
     If the FOMC had chosen a different target rate path, macroeconomic performance would presum-
ably have been different. As a consequence, the inputs to the Taylor rule would have been different,
which would in turn have affected the federal funds rate target. Our simple counterfactual analysis
does not consider these equilibrium effects, but it is nevertheless useful to get a sense of the magnitude
of the experience effects relative to the other drivers of the federal funds rate target.


                                                     37
funds rate.


V     Inflation Experiences and Inflation Forecasts
Our results so far indicate a strong effect of prior inflation experiences on FOMC
members’ voting behavior and tone, and on the committee’s target rate decision. We
have built these analyses on the learning-from-experience framework of Malmendier and
Nagel (2016). Their framework is one of adaptive belief formation, and Malmendier and
Nagel (2016) show that it helps explain household beliefs about future inflation. Thus,
a natural interpretation of the findings in this paper is that the experience effects of
FOMC members also arise through a beliefs channel. A complementary, or alternative,
interpretation is that experience effects arise through a preference channel, i.e., that
inflation experiences affect FOMC members’ aversion to inflation. While it would be
somewhat surprising that the belief-updating scheme in (7), which we use to construct
FOMC members’ experience-based inflation forecasts, could capture such preference-
channel effects, we cannot rule out that learning correlate with changes in inflation
aversion.
    To shed further light on this issue, we present direct evidence on the relationship
between experienced inflation and FOMC members’ inflation forecasts. We show that
these forecasts, too, are related to differences in FOMC members inflation experiences.
    We obtain individual inflation forecasts of FOMC members from the Semiannual
Monetary Policy Report (MPR).16 Twice a year, in February and July, the FOMC
prepares a Monetary Policy Report, which is submitted to Congress and which contains
the FOMC members’ inflation forecasts. The forecasts in February concern the time
period from Q4 of the previous year to end to Q4 of the current year. In July, two
sets of forecasts are included in the report: one for Q4 of the previous year to Q4
of the current year, and another one for Q4 of the current year to Q4 in the next
year. This data set is introduced and described in Romer (2010). We supplement
the individual FOMC members’ forecasts with forecasts in the “Greenbooks” that are
prepared by Federal Reserve staff about a week prior to each FOMC meeting.17 We
use the Greenbooks for the February and July FOMC meeting and match them with
 16
     https://www.philadelphiafed.org/research-and-data/real-time-center/
monetary-policy-projections/
  17
     http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomc_historical.htm


                                          38
the member forecasts from the MPR.
    Romer and Romer (2008) show that the central tendency of FOMC members’ fore-
casts deviates from the staff forecast in the Greenbooks, and that this deviation from
the staff forecasts reduces the forecast accuracy. Our objective here is to test whether
the deviations from staff forecasts reflect the influence of their personal inflation ex-
periences. For this purpose, we extract the individual inflation forecasts contained in
the MPRs (rather than the central tendency that Romer and Romer (2008) analyze)
to construct a panel data set. The individual FOMC members’ forecasts become avail-
able only with a 10-year lag, and the earliest ones available are from 1992. Hence, our
sample runs from 1992 to 2004, covering 26 FOMC meetings.
    We allow FOMC member j’s stated forecast at time t, π̃j,t+1|t , to be a weighted
                                            e
average of j’s experience-based forecast, πj,t+1|t , and the staff forecast reported in the
most recent Greenbook, π̃t+1|t :

                                           e
                             π̃j,t+1|t = φπj,t+1|t + (1 − φ)π̃t+1|t .                 (16)

Subtracting π̃t+1|t on both sides, our estimating equation becomes

                                                   e
                      π̃j,t+1|t − π̃t+1|t = a + φ(πj,t+1|t − π̃t+1|t ) + εt ,         (17)

where we included a constant and a residual to account for other unobserved variables
that could influence the FOMC members’ forecasts.
    One complication when estimating equation (17) is that the forecasted inflation
variable switched in February 2000 from the consumer price index (CPI-U) to the
                                                                                   e
price index for personal consumption expenditure (PCE). Our construction of πj,t+1|t
is based on the history of the CPI, and from 2000 to the end of our sample in 2004, the
average CPI inflation rate was about 0.40% higher than the PCE inflation rate. We
take two approaches to address this discrepancy. First, we simply re-calculate π̃j,t+1|t
post-1999 by adding the difference in CPI and PCE inflation rates over the 12 months
prior to the meeting to the FOMC member forecast. Second, we estimate a version of
equation (17) with time fixed effects. As long as views about the CPI-PCE discrepancy
are similar among FOMC members, the effect of the discrepancy will be absorbed by
the time fixed effects. In this case, the coefficient φ is identified purely from (time-
varying) cross-sectional differences between FOMC members in their forecasts and their


                                                39
Table 8: Influence of FOMC Members’ Inflation Experiences on their Inflation Forecasts

The dependent variable is the difference between i) FOMC member’s stated inflation projection from
the MPR and ii) the most recent Fed Staff’s inflation forecast from the Greenbook prior to the
February or July FOMC meeting. In February, the horizon of the members’ MPR forecasts is over
the four quarters until the end of the current year. In July, two horizons are available: four quarters
until the end of the current year and the four quarters during next year. The sample period runs
from the first half of 1992 to the second half of 2004. The key explanatory variable is the difference
                                             e
between the i) experience-based forecast πj,t+1|t  for each FOMC member at each meeting, calculated
as in Table 2, and ii) the Fed staff’s inflation forecast. In columns (i) and (iii), from February 2000
                         e
and on, we calculate πj,t+1|t   by adding the difference between CPI and PCE inflation rate to each
FOMC member forecast. In columns (ii) and (iv) we include the interaction of time fixed effects with
forecast horizon fixed effects. In parentheses we report the standard error based on two-way clustering
by both member and meeting.

                                           All FOMC Members          Regional Fed Presidents
                                             (i)          (ii)        (iii)          (iv)

     Expr.-based fcst. - staff fcst.        0.37          0.81        0.40           1.48
                                           (0.09)        (0.40)      (0.10)         (0.59)
     Meeting × forecast horizon FE          No            Yes         No             Yes
     Observations                           383           383         190            190
     Adjusted R2                           0.347         0.777       0.355          0.764



inflation experiences.
    Another complication is that the forecast horizons in the July MPR do not match
the usual four-quarter horizon, from end of quarter t − 1 until end of quarter t + 3, of
the experience-based inflation forecast variable that we used in all of our tests above.
We construct experience-based forecasts that match the horizons of the two MPR
projections in July as follows: (i) For the current-year July forecast (i.e., the forecast
from Q4 of the previous year to Q4 of the current year), we use the average of the
two quarter-ahead experience-based forecast (from end of Q2 to end of Q4) and of the
realized inflation over the past two quarters (from end of Q4 of last year to end of Q2).
And (ii) for the next-year July forecast (i.e., the forecast from Q4 of the current year
to Q4 of next year), we subtract the same two-quarter ahead experience-based forecast
from the six-quarter ahead experience-based forecast (from end of Q2 this year to end
of Q4 next year).


                                                    40
    Table 8 reports the estimates of the weight φ in equation (17). We find that the
experience-based inflation forecast plays a significant role in explaining the variation
of members’ reported inflation forecasts. The estimate of 0.37 (s.e. 0.09) in column (i)
implies that FOMC members put about 37% weight on their experience-based forecast
and 63% on the staff forecast. The estimation in column (iii) uses only the forecasts
of regional Federal Reserve presidents and the results are very similar. To assess the
magnitude of this effect, we can compare these estimate to the those from the federal
funds target rate regressions in Table 7. There, we found that members put a weight
of around 25% on their experience-based forecast. It is reassuring that the weights
obtained from these two different approaches are of the same order of magnitude, and
within a one to two standard error range from each other. Moreover, it also seems
reasonable that the weight in the interest-rate decision is somewhat lower than in
the members’ stated inflation forecasts. Deviating from the forecast provided by the
Federal Reserve staff in the target-rate decision may require more confidence than
deviating in one’s forecast that does not directly affect any decisions.
    In columns (ii) and (iv), we include time of meeting × forecast horizon fixed effects
in the estimation. The magnitude of the φ estimates more than doubles. However,
the standard errors become fairly large, and we cannot reject that the estimates are
unchanged compared to those in column (i) and (iii).
    This last set of findings is consistent with the interpretation that heterogeneity
in lifetime experiences of inflation results in heterogeneity in FOMC members’ beliefs
about future inflation. In this regard, FOMC members’ expectation formation appears
to be quite similar to that of the individual respondents in the Michigan Survey of
Consumers studied by Malmendier and Nagel (2016). While the similarity is striking,
one potential concern specific to the FOMC setting is that the forecasts stated in the
MPR could be affected by strategic concerns, including the desire to appear consistent
or to send a message. This concern is somewhat muted because individual forecasts
are actually not revealed in the MPR and the focus of public attention is usually on
the published summary measures, especially the central tendency of the distribution of
member forecasts.18 Moreover, as always with data on reported beliefs, it is important
to keep in mind that it may not be possible to cleanly separate beliefs from prefer-
ences. However, a direct effect of inflation experienced on beliefs about future inflation
provides the most straightforward explanation of the collection of findings—on voting
 18
      The individual forecasts are made public only with a 10-year lag.


                                                  41
speech tone, interest-rate target, and stated inflation forecasts—in this paper.


VI      Conclusion
We present novel evidence showing that personal lifetime experiences significantly af-
fect the voting behavior, tone of speeches, federal funds rate decisions, and inflation
forecasts of FOMC members. Our findings suggests that heterogeneous inflation expe-
riences do generate heterogeneity in the desired policies and the macroeconomic outlook
of FOMC members.
    Our findings add to a growing literature on the role of experience-based hetero-
geneity in economic decisions and macroeconomic expectations. While existing studies
focus on decisions and expectations of individual consumers and investors, this study is
the first one to provide evidence of similar experience effects for policy makers. Given
that FOMC members are highly educated decision-makers with extensive expertise and
support from professional staff, it is not clear, a priori, and may in fact be particularly
surprising, that experience effects of this kind also play a role in their decisions.
    The evidence in this paper also helps shed light on the behavioral origins of ‘ex-
perience effects’. The overweighting of personal experiences by individual consumers
documented in the earlier literature could perhaps be explained by informational fric-
tions that restrict the availability of data they did not experience themselves. For
sophisticated policy makers like the FOMC members in this study, such an explana-
tion seems less plausible. Presumably, FOMC members are extensively exposed to
historical macroeconomic data. Thus, there seems to be a deeper behavioral reason
for why personal experiences get a relatively high weight in belief formation, even if
historical information is easily accessible.
    On the policy side, our results add a twist to the practical notion that the choice
of a policy maker can have a long-lasting impact on policy outcomes: To predict a
policy makers leanings, it is helpful to look at the person’s prior lifetime experiences.
For a given outcome variable of interest, here inflation, we can calculate their weighted
average experience with (roughly) linearly declining weights, and obtain a directional
and quantitative prediction about their future decision-making. It will be interesting
to explore in future research to what extent such a model of experience-based learning
is helpful in predicting policy maker behavior in other policy areas.


                                            42
References
 Apel, M. and M. B. Grimaldi (2014). How Informative Are Central Bank Minutes?
   Review of Economics 65 (1), 53–76.
 Baxa, J., R. Horváth, and B. Vašı́ček (2013). Time-varying Monetary-Policy Rules
    and Financial Stress: Does Financial Instability Matter for Monetary Policy?
    Journal of Financial Stability 9 (1), 117–138.
 Bernanke, B. S. (2010). Monetary Policy and the Housing Bubble. Speech at the
    Annual Meeting of the American Economic Association.
 Chappell, H. W., T. M. Havrilesky, and R. R. McGregor (1993). Partisan Monetary
   Policies: Presidential Influence Through the Power of Appointment. Quarterly
   Journal of Economics, 185–218.
 Chappell, H. W., T. M. Havrilesky, and R. R. McGregor (1995). Policymakers, Insti-
   tutions, and Central Bank Decisions. Journal of Economics and Business 47 (2),
   113–136.
 Chappell, H. W. and R. R. McGregor (2000). A Long History of FOMC Voting
   Behavior. Southern Economic Journal , 906–922.
 Chappell, H. W., R. R. McGregor, and T. A. Vermilyea (2005). Committee Deci-
   sions on Monetary Policy: Evidence from Historical Records of the Federal Open
   Market Committee. MIT Press.
 Chiang, Y.-M., D. Hirshleifer, Y. Qian, and A. E. Sherman (2011). Do Investors
    Learn from Experience? Evidence from Frequent IPO Investors. Review of Fi-
    nancial Studies 24, 1560–1589.
 Clarida, R., J. Galı́, and M. Gertler (2000). Monetary Policy Rules and Macroe-
    conomic Stability: Evidence and Some Theory. Quarterly Journal of Eco-
    nomics 115 (1), 147–180.
 Cogley, T. and T. J. Sargent (2005). The Conquest of US Inflation: Learning and
    Robustness to Model Uncertainty. Review of Economic Dynamics 8 (2), 528–563.
 Coibion, O. and Y. Gorodnichenko (2012). Why Are Target Interest Rate Changes
    so Persistent? American Economic Journal. Macroeconomics 4 (4), 126.
 Evans, G. W. and S. Honkapohja (2001). Learning and Expectations in Macroeco-
    nomics. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
 Gallagher, J. (2014). Learning About an Infrequent Event: Evidence from Flood
    Insurance Take-Up in the United States. American Economic Journal: Applied
    Economics 6 (3), 206–233.
 Greenwood, R. and S. Nagel (2009). Inexperienced Investors and Bubbles. Journal
    of Financial Economics 93, 239–258.


                                        43
Hansen, S. and M. McMahon (2016a). First Impressions Matter: Signalling as a
  Source of Policy Dynamics. Review of Economic Studies, forthcoming.
Hansen, S. and M. McMahon (2016b). Shocking language: Understanding the
  macroeconomic effects of central bank communication. Journal of International
  Economics 99 (S1), S114–S133.
Kaustia, M. and S. Knüpfer (2008). Do Investors Overweight Personal Experience?
  Evidence from IPO Subscriptions. Journal of Finance 63, 2679–2702.
Koudijs, P. and H.-J. Voth (2016). Leverage and Beliefs: Personal Experience and
  Risk-Taking in Margin Lending. The American Economic Review 106 (11), 3367–
  3400.
Lindsey, D. E. (2003). A Modern History of FOMC Communication: 1975-2002.
   Working Paper, Federal Reserve Board.
Lucca, D. O. and F. Trebbi (2011). Measuring Central Bank Communication: An
   Automated Approach with Application to FOMC Statements. Working Paper
   15367, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Malmendier, U. and S. Nagel (2011). Depression Babies: Do Macroeconomic Expe-
  riences Affect Risk-Taking? Quarterly Journal of Economics 126, 373–416.
Malmendier, U. and S. Nagel (2016). Learning from Inflation Experiences. Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 131 (1), 53–87.
Malmendier, U. and G. Tate (2005). CEO Overconfidence and Corporate Investment.
  Journal of Finance 60 (6), 2661–2700.
Malmendier, U., G. Tate, and J. Yan (2011). Overconfidence and Early-life Experi-
  ences: The Effect of Managerial Traits on Corporate Financial Policies. Journal
  of Finance 66 (5), 1687–1733.
Meade, E. E. and D. Stasavage (2008). Publicity of Debate and the Incentive to
  Dissent: Evidence from the US Federal Reserve. Economic Journal 118 (528),
  695–717.
Mehra, Y. P. and B. Sawhney (2010). Inflation Measure, Taylor Rules, and the
  Greenspan-Bernanke Years. FRB Richmond Economic Quarterly 96 (2), 123–151.
Mishkin, F. S. (2010). Monetary Policy Flexibility, Risk Management, and Financial
   Disruptions. Journal of Asian Economics 21 (3), 242–246.
Orphanides, A. (2001). Monetary Policy Rules Based on Real-Time Data. American
   Economic Review 91 (4), 964–9999.
Orphanides, A. (2003). Historical Monetary Policy Analysis and the Taylor Rule.
   Journal of Monetary Economics 50 (5), 983–1022.
Primiceri, G. E. (2006). Why Inflation Rose and Fell: Policy-Makers’ Beliefs and US
   Postwar Stabilization Policy. Quarterly Journal of Economics 121 (3), 867–901.

                                       44
Reis, R. (2013). Central Bank Design. Journal of Economic Perspectives 27 (4), 17–
   43.
Romer, C. D. and D. H. Romer (2004). Choosing the Federal Reserve Chair: Lessons
  from History. The Journal of Economic Perspectives 18 (1), 129–162.
Romer, C. D. and D. H. Romer (2008). The FOMC versus the Staff: Where Can
  Monetary Policymakers Add Value? The American Economic Review , 230–235.
Romer, D. H. (2010). A New Data Set on Monetary Policy: The Economic Fore-
  casts of Individual Members of the FOMC. Journal of Money, Credit and Bank-
  ing 42 (5), 951–957.
Rotemberg, J. J. and M. Woodford (1999). Interest Rate Rules in an Estimated
   Sticky Price Model. In J. B. Taylor (Ed.), Monetary Policy Rules. University of
   Chicago Press.
Sargent, T. J. (1999). The Conquest of American Inflation. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
   University Press.
Shiller, R. J. (2005). Irrational Exuberance. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
   Press.
Sibert, A. (2006). Central Banking by Committee. International Finance 9 (2), 145–
   168.
Taylor, J. B. (1993). Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice. Carnegie-Rochester
   Conference Series on Public Policy 39, 195–214.
Thornton, D. L. and D. C. Wheelock (2014). Making Sense of Dissents: A History
  of FOMC Dissents. Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review 96, 213–227.
Williams, R. (2006). Generalized Ordered Logit/Partial Proportional Odds Models
   for Ordinal Dependent Variables. Stata Journal 6 (1), 58–82.




                                       45
                   Appendix for Online Publication


A       First-order Taylor approximation of the Subjec-
        tive Taylor Rule
We start from the subjective Taylor rule in equation (2), and substitute the linear
specifications in (3) to obtain.

        ij,t = r + (xj,t − µx )0 α3 + π ∗ + (xj,t − µx )0 α1
               + λ0 + (xj,t − µx )0 λ1 ωπj,t+t|t   + (1 − ω)πt − π ∗ − (xj,t − µx )0 α1
                                         e                                            

               + γ0 + (xj,t − µx )0 γ1 yt − y ∗ − (xj,t − µx )0 α2 .
                                                                
                                                                                          (A.1)

                                                                              e
We then perform a first-order Taylor approximation of ij,t as a function of (πj,t+1|t , x0j,t )
around (πt , µ0x ), which yields

     ij,t ≈ r + π ∗ + λ0 (πt − π ∗ ) + γ0 (yt − y ∗ ) + (πj,t+1|t
                                                          e
                                                                  − πt )ωλ0
            + (xj,t − µx )0 [α3 + α1 − λ0 α1 − γ0 α2 + λ1 (πt − π ∗ ) + γ1 (yt − y ∗ )]          (A.2)

We can rewrite this expression as

                   ij,t ≈ a0 + [λ0 (1 − ω) − µ0x λ1 ] πt + (γ0 − µ0x γ1 )(yt − y ∗ )
                                 e
                          + λ0 ωπj,t+1|t + κ0 xj,t + πt x0j,t λ1 + (yt − y ∗ )x0j,t γ1 ,         (A.3)

where

                  a0 = r + π ∗ (1 − λ0 ) − µx (α3 + α1 − λ0 α1 − γ0 α2 − λ1 π ∗ ),
                  κ = α3 + α1 − λ0 α1 − γ0 α2 − π ∗ λ1 .

Collecting the first three terms on the right-hand side of (A.3) into at yield equation
(4) in the main text. Defining

     β 0 = a0 ,      βe = λ0 ω,        βπ = λ0 (1 − ω) − µ0x λ1 ,           βy = γ0 − µ0x γ1 ,   (A.4)



                                                     1
                                                       Appendix for Online Publication


and averaging across FOMC members at meeting time t yields equation (12) in the
text.


B      Vote Sample Construction
Our sample of FOMC votes starts in 1951, after the official statement about the agree-
ment between Treasury and Federal Reserve was issued on March 4, 1951. During our
sample period from March 1951 to January 2014, eight Fed Chairmen lead the FOMC:
McCabe (4/1948 to 4/1951), Martin (4/1951 to 1/1970), Burns (2/1970 to 3/1978),
Miller (3/1978 to 8/1979), Volcker (8/1979 to 8/1987), Greenspan (8/1987 to 1/2006),
and Bernanke (2/2006 to 1/2014).
    The data set is constructed from two main sources. First, for meetings before Jan-
uary 1966 and after January 1997, we collect information on the votes from the FOMC
meeting statements, available at http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/
fomccalendars.htm. Second, for meetings between January 1966 and December 1996,
we use the data from Chappell, McGregor, and Vermilyea (2005), available at http:
//professorchappell.com/Data/Book/index.htm. In this latter data, we correct one
coding error: In the meeting on 11/5/1985, governor Seger cast a dovish dissent (−1);
the original data set had her vote coded as consent (0).
    We also note several discrepancies between our sample and the data employed by
Thornton and Wheelock (2014) in their analysis of votes in the Federal Reserve Bank
of St. Louis Review.

    • For the meeting on 10/3/1961, the Fed Review data records one dissent. We find
      no dissent in that meeting according to the meeting minutes.

    • For the meeting on 2/9/1983, the Fed Review data records one dissent. We find
      four dissents reported in the minutes.

    • Other discrepancies reflect dissents that occurred in conference calls (no separate
      Record of Policy Actions was released), which are not included in our sample.
      Our sample does include nine conference calls (94 total votes and 2 dissents), after
      which a separate Record of Policy Actions/Statement was available. We exclude
      those from the baseline sample. Including them does not alter the results.



                                            2
                                                            Appendix for Online Publication


    We further exclude five votes by the two members who voted less than five times
during their tenure with the FOMC, Paul Miller and Jamie Stewart. Mr. Miller only
had one vote because he died in office (on Oct. 21 1954) less than three month after
he was appointed to the Board of Governors (on Aug. 13 1954). Mr. Stewart cast
four votes as the acting governor, when he was the first vice president of New York
Fed, from June through December 2003, during which the position of New York Fed
president was vacant after the resignation of McDonough resigned in 2003 and his
successor Geithner took place in Nov. 2003.
    After the above corrections (and excluding the 94 votes from the conference calls
in our sample), our sample contains 160 dovish dissents, 265 hawkish dissents, and 8
un-codeable dissents between 3/8/1951 to 1/29/2014.19 The eight un-codeable dissents
are as follows:

   • In the 12/19/1961 meeting, Robertson dissented with the reason explained as
     follows: “While Mr. Robertson’s analysis of the economic situation and the
     proper direction of policy was the same in its essentials as that of the major-
     ity, he voted against adoption of this directive on the grounds that it was unde-
     sirable to tie monetary policy to the bill rate.” See www.federalreserve.gov/
     monetarypolicy/files/fomcropa19611219.pdf.

   • In the 7/30/1963 meeting, Bopp dissented with the reason explained as follows:
     “Mr. Bopp stated that he had voted favorably on the policy directive at the July
     9 meeting because it seemed to him that the use of the different instruments of
     monetary policy should be consistent and an increase in the discount rate was then
     imminent. Under such circumstances, it had seemed undesirable to reverse what
     had taken place in terms of yields only to reverse again. His vote, therefore, was
     essentially a vote on tactics. As to the future, it was still an open question whether
     short-term rates could be maintained at the new levels, and reserve availability
     at the old. Under these conditions, he agreed with the view that it would be
     desirable to maintain essentially an even keel for the time being, and to supply
     reserves through purchases of coupon issues, selling bills if necessary. In his
     opinion, emphasis should be placed on the availability of reserves.” See www.
     federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/fomchistmin19630730.pdf.
  19
    There are 13 additional dissents that occurred between 1936 and 1950, and two dissenting votes
were cast during the nine conference calls in our sample. Neither are not included in our data.


                                                3
                                                   Appendix for Online Publication


• In the 12/12/1967 meeting, Maisel dissented with the reason explained as fol-
  lows: “Mr. Maisel dissented from this action in part because he thought the
  directive was susceptible to an interpretation under which growth in member bank
  reserves and bank deposits would be slowed too abruptly, and perhaps succeeded
  by contraction. He favored seeking growth rates in reserves, deposits, and bank
  credit considerably below the average rates thus far in 1967, but still high enough
  to facilitate expansion in GNP at a somewhat faster rate than had prevailed on
  average in the first three quarters of the year. He noted that whether or not in-
  terest rates would rise further under the course he advocated would depend upon
  the strength of market demands for funds in relation to the supplies that would
  be available under such a Committee policy. Mr. Maisel also thought that the
  statement of the Committee’s general policy stance contained in today’s direc-
  tive had far too narrow a focus; in particular, he objected to the omission of
  reference to the basic policy goal of facilitating sustainable economic expansion.
  This omission resulted from the substitution of language stating that it was the
  Committee’s policy “to foster financial conditions conducive to resistance of in-
  flationary pressures and progress toward reasonable equilibrium in the country’s
  balance of payments” for the language of other recent directives stating that it
  was the Committee’s policy “to foster financial conditions, including bank credit
  growth, conducive to sustainable economic expansion, recognizing the need for rea-
  sonable price stability for both domestic and balance of payments purposes.” See
  www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/fomcropa19671212.pdf.

• In the 1/11/1972 meeting, Brimmer dissented with the reason explained as fol-
  lows: “Mr. Brimmer shared the majority’s views concerning broad objectives of
  policy at this time, and he indicated that he would have voted favorably on the
  directive were it not for the decision to give special emphasis to total reserves as
  an operating target during coming weeks. In his judgment the Committee should
  have had more discussion of the implications of that decision, and in any case it
  should have postponed the decision until after it had held a contemplated meet-
  ing to be devoted primarily to discussion of its general procedures with respect
  to operating targets.” See www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/
  fomcropa19720111.pdf.

• In the 7/17/1973 meeting, Francis dissented with the reason explained as fol-

                                        4
                                                   Appendix for Online Publication


  lows: “Mr. Francis dissented from this action not because he disagreed with
  the objectives of the policy adopted by the Committee but because he believed
  that—as had proved to be the case following other recent meetings—the objectives
  would not be achieved because of the constraint on money market conditions.” See
  www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/fomcropa19730717.pdf.

• In the 7/20/1976 meeting, Volcker dissented with the reason explained as follows:
  “Mr. Volcker dissented from this action because in the present circumstances
  he would not wish to raise or lower the Federal funds rate by as much as 1/2
  of a percentage point—a change that might be interpreted as a strong signal of
  a change in policy and that could have repercussions in financial markets—in
  response merely to short-term fluctuations in the monetary aggregates that might
  well prove transient.” See www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/
  fomcropa19760720.pdf.

• In the 12/22/1981 meeting, Soloman dissented with the reason explained as
  follows: “Mr. Solomon dissented from this action because he felt it was par-
  ticularly important at the beginning of an annual target period that the Com-
  mittee not formulate its directive in terms that conveyed an unrealistic sense
  of precision. In his view, the directive language referring to the November-
  to-March growth rates in M1 and M2 did seem to convey such a sense.” See
  www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/fomcropa19811222.pdf.

• In the 2/9/1983 meeting, Horn dissented with the reason explained as follows:
  “Mr. Black and Mrs. Horn dissented from this action because they preferred to
  give more weight to M1 as a policy objective. While recognizing the difficulties
  in interpreting M1 currently, they believed that over time M1 was more reliably
  related to the Committee’s ultimate economic objectives than were the broader
  aggregates and that it constituted a better basis for setting appropriate paths for
  reserve growth. They also favored reemphasizing M1 because they viewed it as a
  more controllable aggregate. In addition, Mr. Black indicated that he saw a need
  for lower target ranges, but he wanted to reduce monetary expansion gradually
  to avert dislocative effects.” See www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/
  files/fomcropa19830209.pdf. And, we record Black’s vote as hawkish (+1)
  in this meeting.


                                        5
                                                       Appendix for Online Publication


   As we note in the main text, four members of the FOMC where both regional
Fed presidents and governors at some point during their career, and we account for
their varying roles in our empirical analysis. These four members are: Phillip Coldwell
(Dallas Fed President from 2/68 to 10/74 and governor from 10/74 to 2/80), Oliver
Powell (governor from 9/50 to 6/52 and Minneapolis Fed President from 7/52 to 3/57),
Paul Volcker (NY Fed president from 5/75 to 8/79 and Fed Chairman from 8/79 to
11/87), and Janet Yellen (governor from 8/94 to 2/97, SF Fed president from 6/04 to
10/10, and and then again governor since 10/2010, including her current role as Fed
Chairwoman).


C     Simple Ordered Probit Estimates
This section presents estimates from an ordered probit model as in (9), but with fixed
dissent thresholds. Note that we will use the fitted values from this estimation to
construct the z̄t variable in (12), which is the basis for the results on the Fed Funds
Rate target presented in Table 7.
    Table A.1 presents the ordered probit estimates. In column (i) we employ time
fixed effects, and in column (ii) we express explanatory variables values as deviations
from their values for the chairperson. The results are similar to the corresponding ones
in Table 2 in the main text.
    This fixed-threshold specification also offers the opportunity to examine the coeffi-
cients of the control variables. In the characteristics-dependent specification they are
difficult to interpret because their effect on the dissent threshold is intertwined with
their effect on the conditional mean of the latent variable and hence the voting deci-
sion. Table A.2 presents the coefficient estimates, including those for the interactions.
Directionally, the results are broadly sensible. For example, FOMC members put more
weight on current inflation and less weight on unemployment if they are older, are
regional Fed presidents, male, appointed when a Republication U.S. president was in
office, and are not in the same party as the current president. However, many of these
estimates are statistically not significantly different from zero. To interpret the direct
effect of the characteristics, we need to add the interacted terms evaluated at particu-
lar values of CPI inflation (e.g., 2%) and unemployment (e.g., 6%). Doing so reveals
that there is a fairly strong association of hawkishness with with regional president
role and appointment while a Republican president was in office, while female gender

                                            6
                                                               Appendix for Online Publication




Table A.1: Experience-based Inflation Forecasts and FOMC voting behavior: Simple
Ordered Probit without Characteristics-Dependent Thresholds

The sample period is from March 8, 1951 to January 29, 2014. The experience-based inflation forecast
for each member at each meeting is calculated by recursively estimating a seasonal AR(1) model using
the member’s lifetime history of inflation with θ = 3.044, as described in Section I.B. The Wallich
dummy equals one if the member is Henry Wallich; 0 otherwise. The average partial effects (APE)
reported at the bottom of the table are calculated by taking the partial derivative of the probability
of a given voting category with respect to the experience-based inflation forecast at each sample
observation and then averaging these partial derivatives across the whole sample. In parentheses, we
report the standard error based on two-way clustering by both member and meeting.

                                                      Ordered Probit    Ordered Probit
                                                                         “de-chaired”
                                                            (i)               (ii)

           Experienced-based forecast                     192.2                89.7
                                                          (60.0)              (36.1)

           Wallich Dummy                                    1.6                1.2
                                                           (0.4)              (0.2)

           Meeting FE                                      Yes                 No

           Observations                                   6,707               6,707
           Pseudo R2                                      0.370               0.082

           APE of experienced-based forecast:
           Dovish Dissent                                  -7.0                -4.7
           Consent                                         -4.1                -2.3
           Hawkish Dissent                                 11.1                7.1

           APE of Wallich Dummy:
           Dovish Dissent                                  -0.06              -0.06
           Consent                                         -0.03              -0.03
           Hawkish Dissent                                 0.09               0.09




                                                  7
                                                            Appendix for Online Publication


is associated with a more dovish voting behavior.


D         Speech Sample Construction
The FRASER economic history database at the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis
maintains a digital library of speeches of past and current FOMC members.
    To construct our sample of speeches, we first download the HTML source code of the
webpage listing the Statements and Speeches of Federal Reserve Officials. The source
code contains a list of the FOMC members and their record IDs. (See the screenshot
in Figure A.1a.) Each record ID uniquely identifies a webpage with the links to all
speeches of the respective FOMC member.
    We use the record IDs to download the HTML source code of those webpages
(see Figure A.1b), and then extract the so-called issue IDs of the individual speeches.
The issue IDs, in turn, link to the webpages containing the metadata of the speeches,
including the links to the pdfs (see Figure A.1c). We collect all links to the pdfs of
the speeches in a single text document and parse the document to the wget function,
which downloads the pdf files.20 Finally, we hand-collected speeches from the websites
of the regional FRBs for the regional presidents.
    To search the speeches for hawkish and dovish language, the downloaded pdfs are
fed to R using the readPDF function of the text mining package tm. (Even though some
of the speeches are photographs of the manuscript, the images are already translated
into text and we do not have to run OCR for any of the cases.) We restructure the
text into sequences of five adjacent words, and then select the relevant subset of goal-
centered five-grams. For example, words from the sentence “Inflation continued to be
well behaved, and in fact with talk of lower oil prices there was even a whiff of deflation.”
said by Thomas Meltzer in a 1985 address to the Harry J. Loman Foundation, initially
show up in twenty nine different five-grams. Only two of these five grams are kept and
searched for words from the attitudes list: “[two words from the previous sentence].
Inflation continued to” and “of lower oil prices there”. After searching for these attitude
words, the second five-gram is tagged as dovish, because it contains the word “lower”
from the attitudes list, and the first is not tagged at all.
    There is a cluster of short speeches with around 500 n-grams. Checking these
  20
       We invoke the wget function from www.gnu.org/software/wget/Overview via OS X Terminal.



                                                8
                                                                        Appendix for Online Publication


    Table A.2: Expr.-based Infl. Fcst. and FOMC voting behavior: All coefficients
The sample period is from March 8, 1951 to January 29, 2014. The variables are defined as in the text. In parentheses
we report the standard error based on two-way clustering by both member and meeting.

                                                Ordered Probit       Ordered Probit - “de-chaired”
            Experienced-based forecast              192.24                      89.66
                                                   (60.04)                     (36.12)
            Wallich Dummy                             1.57                          1.16
                                                     (0.37)                        (0.18)
            Age                                       -0.04                         -0.03
                                                     (0.03)                        (0.01)
            Fed Role                                  0.41                          0.15
                                                     (0.36)                        (0.28)
            Gender                                    0.01                          0.09
                                                     (0.87)                        (0.58)
            Party                                     1.09                          0.47
                                                     (0.46)                        (0.29)
            Same Party                                -0.09                         -0.42
                                                     (0.43)                        (0.25)
            Fed Role ×    1Post1993                   -0.11                         -0.03
                                                     (0.25)                        (0.20)
            CPI × Age                                 0.45                          0.44
                                                     (0.30)                        (0.14)
            CPI × Fed Role                            4.23                          5.42
                                                     (3.88)                        (1.96)
            CPI × Gender                             12.44                          6.22
                                                     (6.21)                        (3.23)
            CPI × Party                               -5.83                         -1.72
                                                     (4.08)                        (2.57)
            CPI × Same Party                          -0.88                         -2.85
                                                     (3.68)                        (1.88)
            Unemp. rate × Age                         -0.67                         -0.39
                                                     (0.45)                        (0.25)
            Unemp. rate × Fed Role                    -1.21                         -2.25
                                                     (5.90)                        (4.89)
            Unemp. rate × Gender                      -9.87                         -4.49
                                                     (11.54)                       (6.58)
            Unemp. rate × Party                       9.78                          5.16
                                                     (7.61)                        (4.47)
            Unemp. rate × Same Party                  0.36                          -7.43
                                                     (7.60)                        (4.31)
            Meeting FE                                 Yes                          No
            Observations                              6707                         6707
            Pseudo R2                                 0.370                        0.082



                                                         9
                                                        Appendix for Online Publication




(a) Step 1: HTML source code of the FRASER webpage for the Statements and Speeches
of Federal Reserve Officials. The record IDs, highlighted by the box, identify the webpages
with all speeches of the respective FOMC member.




(b) Step 2: HTML code identified by the record ID obtained in the previous step. The issue
IDs, highlighted by the boxes, identify the webpages with the metadata of the speeches of
the respective FOMC member, including the links to the pdf files with the speeches.




  (c) Step 3: Metadata of a speech, including a link to the pdf (highlighted by the box).

             Figure A.1: FRASER Source Code to Obtain Speech PDFs


                                            10
                                                      Appendix for Online Publication




               .75
               .5
               .25
            Net Index
          -.25 -.5
               -.750




                   1950q1   1965q1       1980q1        1995q1        2010q1


Figure A.2: Net Index Over Time. The graph depicts the average Net Index (using
the expanded set of goals) of all speeches in year-quarter.


speeches by hand reveals that a large fraction are short opening remarks and intro-
ductions for other speeches, or short-hand notes for longer speeches instead of full
transcripts. Controlling for these short speeches by including an indicator variable for
less than 750 n-grams has virtually no effect on the results.
    In the main text, we describe the construction of the Net Index of speech hawkish-
ness. Figure A.2 plots the time-series of the index. The index decreases slightly over
time, especially after 1980. But overall there is fairly strong time-variation without
much persistence. This may reflect a considerable amount of measurement noise in
Net Index. The more muted amplitude of the Net Index in later sample years probably
reflects the substantially larger number of speeches available, rather than a general
trend towards a more neutral language, implying that the mean of Net Index contains
less measurement error in later years.
    As also discussed in the main text, our analysis of FOMC members’ choice of words
and tone of speeches might warrant further controls for personal characteristics to
reduce noise and concerns about correlated omitted variables. We construct control
variables for education and prior professional experience. Information on education,


                                          11
                                                           Appendix for Online Publication




    Table A.3: Summary Statistics on FOMC Members’ Educational Background

The table below shows statistics on the educational background for the 144 FOMC members
who voted at least 5 times during the meetings from 3/8/1951 to 1/29/2014. Panel A shows
every school that awarded the highest degree of at least three members, along with the number
of bachelor’s and PhD degrees awarded by those schools. Panel B shows the frequency with
which each degree type was the highest degree awarded to an FOMC member. All data is
from the Federal Reserve History Gateway.

                                 Panel A: Most Common Schools
           School                                Highest Degree    PhD      Bachelors
           Harvard University                         24             10        8
           University of Pennsylvania                 10              6        4
           MIT                                         7              7        1
           University of Michigan                      6              4        1
           University of Missouri                      6              1        3
           Indiana University                          5             4         2
           University of Chicago                       4             4         1
           John Hopkins University                     4              2        0
           Stanford University                         4              1        3
           UCLA                                        3              3        0
           University of Wisconsin                     3              3        0
           University of California, Berkeley          3              2        3
           Yale                                        3              1        5
           University of Virginia                      3              1        3
           Columbia University                         3              1        2
           Iowa State University                       3              1        1
           NYU                                         3              1        1
           Georgetown University                       3              0        1

                                    Panel B: Highest Degree
                    School        Number of FOMC Members          Percentage
                    PhD                         65                  45.1%
                    JD                          22                  15.3%
                    Master’s                    20                  13.9%
                    Bachelor’s                  17                  11.8%
                    MBA                         15                  10.4%
                    Other                        5                   3.5%




                                                12
                                                      Appendix for Online Publication


including degree type and degree granting institutions, is available from the member
biographies provided by the Fed on the Federal Reserve History Gateway website.
    Table A.3 shows the summary statistics on the educational background for the
144 FOMC members in our sample.: 45.1% of members have a PhD as their highest
degree, while 15.3% have a law degree, and 10.4% have an MBA. 24 of the 144 members
hold their highest degrees from Harvard, ten from the University of Pennsylvania, seven
from MIT, and six each from the University of Michigan and the University of Missouri.
Harvard has also granted the most PhDs to FOMC members (ten). MIT follows with
seven, six members have PhDs from the University of Pennsylvania, and four have
PhDs from the Universities of Chicago, Michigan, and Indiana each. 67.4% have their
highest degree in economics, or majored in it if their highest degree is a bachelors.
    Also from the Federal Reserve History Gateway website, we collect mentions of
FOMC members’ industry experience prior to their first FOMC meeting. Members are
classified as having had, or not had work experience in the financial industry, an aca-
demic department, the military, a government agency other than the Federal Reserve
or the military, and other industries, e.g. manufacturing. 76 of the 144 members with
at least three votes are classified as having financial industry experience, 74 as having
worked at another government agency, 62 in academia, 53 in another industry, and 37
as having military experience.


E     Target Federal Funds Rate Regressions with Me-
      dian and Chair’s Experience Measures
The results on experience effects on the fed funds rate target in Table 7 use a measure
of mean experiences across FOMC members. To address the concern that committee
decisions do not necessarily reflect the average opinion of the committee’s members,
we show that our results are robust to using the median or the chairman’s experience-
based forecast, rather than the average. We also note that the concern is immaterial
in our application as the difference between the average experience-based forecast at
a meeting and the conventional, objective inflation-rate component of the Taylor rule
tends to be substantially bigger than the differences between FOMC members. As a
result, it does not matter much whether we use the average, the median, or even any
specific FOMC member’s experience-based forecast.


                                           13
     Table A.4: Influence of FOMC Members’ Inflation Experiences on Target Federal Funds Rate: Median and Chair’s
     Experienced Inflation
     The sample period is from the 8/18/1987 to 6/28/2007. The dependent variable is the target federal funds rate set at the FOMC
     meeting closest to the middle of the quarter t. The experience-based forecast is the median (chair’s) experienced-based CPI
     forecast from quarter t − 1 to quarter t + 3 at each meeting. The staff’s core inflation forecast is from quarter t − 1 to quarter
     t + 3 and represents the core CPI before 2/1/2000 and the core PCE thereafter. The staff’s output gap forecast at quarter t is
     the forecast for quarter t + 3. The staff’s forecasts of CPI/PCE and of the output gap are from the Philadelphia Fed Greenbook
     data set. Lagged fed funds rate target is the federal fund funds rate target from the previous quarter. Columns (i) to (iii) report
     the OLS coefficient estimates for the estimating equation in (12). Columns (iv) and (v) report the estimates of c, βe , βπ , βy ,
     and ρ from non-linear least-squares regressions as specified in (15). In parentheses, we report Newey-West standard errors with
     six lags from column (i) to (iii), and zero lags in column (iv) and (v).
                                                        (i)      (ii)     (iii)    (iv)     (v)      (vi)    (vii)    (viii)
                  Exper.-based infl. fcst. (median)     0.39     0.62      -        -       0.47     0.46      -        -
                                                       (0.21)   (0.24)     -        -      (0.21)   (0.21)     -        -




14
                  Exper.-based infl. fcst. (chair)       -        -       0.40     0.63      -        -       0.47     0.45
                                                         -        -      (0.22)   (0.24)     -        -      (0.21)   (0.21)

                  Staff’s core inflation forecast       1.27     1.44     1.26     1.44     1.26     1.25     1.26     1.25
                                                       (0.23)   (0.23)   (0.23)   (0.23)   (0.17)   (0.20)   (0.17)   (0.20)

                  Staff’s output gap forecast           0.69     0.46     0.70     0.46     0.98     1.00     0.98     1.00
                                                       (0.06)   (0.10)   (0.06)   (0.10)   (0.07)   (0.15)   (0.07)   (0.15)

                  Lagged federal funds rate target       -        -        -        -       0.68     0.69     0.68     0.69
                                                         -        -        -        -      (0.04)   (0.04)   (0.04)   (0.04)

                  Intercept                             0.10     2.16     0.10     2.19     -0.03    -0.08    -0.03    -0.08
                                                       (0.35)   (0.86)   (0.36)   (0.86)   (0.16)   (0.42)   (0.16)   (0.42)

                  Member characteristics                 N        Y        N        Y        N        Y        N        Y
                                                                                                                                           Appendix for Online Publication




                  Method                               OLS      OLS      OLS      OLS      NLS      NLS      NLS      NLS
                  Observations                           80      80        80      80       80        80      80       80
                  Adjusted R2                          0.866    0.877    0.866    0.878    0.976    0.976    0.976    0.976
                                                      Appendix for Online Publication


    In columns (i) and (ii) of Table A.4, we use the median, and in columns (iii) and
(iv) the chairman’s experience-based forecast. As the table show, these changes result
in only minor changes in the coefficient estimate compared with Table 7. The same is
true when we add the lagged federal funds rate in columns (v) to (viii). The reason
is that the time-series variation in the members’ experience-based forecasts relative to
the staff forecast is much greater than the dispersion between members’ experience-
based forecasts. These results imply that it does not matter much which measure
of central tendency of the experience-based forecasts, or which individual experience-
based forecast is used.




                                          15
