                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               DISSECTING CHARACTERISTICS NONPARAMETRICALLY

                                      Joachim Freyberger
                                       Andreas Neuhierl
                                        Michael Weber

                                      Working Paper 23227
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23227


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 2017




We thank Jonathan Berk, Philip Bond, Oleg Bondarenko, John Campbell, Jason Chen, Josh
Coval, Gene Fama, Ken French, Erwin Hansen, Lars Hansen, Bryan Kelly, Leonid Kogan,
Shimon Kogan, Jon Lewellen, Bill McDonald, Stefan Nagel, Stavros Panageas, Lubos Pastor,
Seth Pruitt, Alberto Rossi, George Skoulakis, Raman Uppal, Adrien Verdelhan, Amir Yaron and
conference and seminar participants at Dartmouth College, FRA Conference 2016, HEC
Montreal, McGill, 2017 Revelstoke Finance Conference, Santiago Finance Workshop, Stockholm
School of Economics, TAU Finance Conference 2016, Tsinghua University PBCSF, Tsinghua
University SEM, the University of Chicago, the University of Illinois at Chicago, the University
of Notre Dame, and the University of Washington for valuable comments. Weber gratefully
acknowledges financial support from the University of Chicago and the Fama-Miller Center. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Joachim Freyberger, Andreas Neuhierl, and Michael Weber. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Dissecting Characteristics Nonparametrically
Joachim Freyberger, Andreas Neuhierl, and Michael Weber
NBER Working Paper No. 23227
March 2017
JEL No. C14,C52,C58,G12

                                         ABSTRACT

We propose a nonparametric method to test which characteristics provide independent
information for the cross section of expected returns. We use the adaptive group LASSO to select
characteristics and to estimate how they affect expected returns nonparametrically. Our method
can handle a large number of characteristics, allows for a flexible functional form, and is
insensitive to outliers. Many of the previously identified return predictors do not provide
incremental information for expected returns, and nonlinearities are important. Our proposed
method has higher out-of-sample explanatory power compared to linear panel regressions, and
increases Sharpe ratios by 50%.

Joachim Freyberger                               Michael Weber
Department of Economics                          Booth School of Business
University of Wisconsin-Madison                  University of Chicago
1180 Observatory Drive                           5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Madison, WI 53706                                Chicago, IL 60637
jfreyberger@ssc.wisc.edu                         and NBER
                                                 michael.weber@chicagobooth.edu
Andreas Neuhierl
University of Notre Dame
College of Business
221 Mendoza
Notre Dame, IN 46556
aneuhier@nd.edu
I       Introduction
In his presidential address, Cochrane (2011) argues the cross section of the expected
return “is once again descending into chaos”. Harvey et al. (2016) identify more than 300
published factors that have predictive power for the cross section of expected returns.1
Many economic models, such as the consumption CAPM of Lucas (1978), Breeden (1979),
and Rubinstein (1976), instead predict that only a small number of state variables suffice
to summarize cross-sectional variation in expected returns.
        Researchers typically employ two methods to identify return predictors:                     (i)
(conditional) portfolio sorts based on one or multiple characteristics such as size or
book-to-market, and (ii) linear regression in the spirit of Fama and MacBeth (1973). Both
methods have many important applications, but they fall short in what Cochrane (2011)
calls the multidimensional challenge: “[W]hich characteristics really provide independent
information about average returns? Which are subsumed by others?” Portfolio sorts are
subject to the curse of dimensionality when the number of characteristics is large, and
linear regressions make strong functional-form assumptions and are sensitive to outliers.2
Cochrane (2011) speculates, “To address these questions in the zoo of new variables, I
suspect we will have to use different methods.”
        We propose a nonparametric method to determine which firm characteristics provide
independent information for the cross section of expected returns without making
strong functional-form assumptions. Specifically, we use a group LASSO (least absolute
shrinkage and selection operator) procedure suggested by Huang, Horowitz, and Wei
(2010) for model selection and nonparametric estimation. Model selection deals with
the question of which characteristics have incremental predictive power for expected
returns, given the other characteristics. Nonparametric estimation deals with estimating
the effect of important characteristics on expected returns without imposing a strong
functional-form.3
        We show three applications of our proposed framework. First, we study which
    1
     Figure 2 documents the number of discovered factors over time.
    2
     We discuss these, and related concerns in Section II and compare current methods with our proposed
framework in Section III.
   3
     In our empirical application, we estimate quadratic splines.


                                                  2
characteristics provide independent information for the cross section of expected returns.
We estimate our model on 36 characteristics including size, book-to-market, beta, and
other prominent variables and anomalies on a sample period from July 1963 to June
2015. Only 15 variables, including size, idiosyncratic volatility, and past return-based
predictors, have independent explanatory power for expected returns for the full sample
period and all stocks. An equally-weighted hedge portfolio going long the stocks with the
10% highest expected returns and shorting the 10% of stocks with the lowest predicted
returns has an in-sample Sharpe ratio of close to 3. Only eight characteristics have
predictive power for returns in the first half of our sample. In the second half, instead,
we find 17 characteristics are significantly associated with cross-sectional return premia.
For stocks whose market capitalization is above the 20% NYSE size percentile, only seven
characteristics, including size, past returns, and standardized unexplained volume, remain
significant return predictors. The in-sample Sharpe ratio is still 1.81 for large stocks.
       Second, we compare the out-of-sample performance of the nonparametric model with
a linear model. We estimate both models over a period until 1990 and select significant
return predictors. We then use 10 years of data to estimate the model on the selected
characteristics. In the first month after the end of our estimation period, we take the
selected characteristics, predict one-month-ahead returns, and construct a hedge portfolio
similar to our in-sample exercise. We roll the estimation and prediction period forward
by one month and repeat the procedure until the end of the sample.
       Specifically, we perform model selection once until December 1990.                  Our first
estimation period is from December of 1981 until November of 1990, and the first
out-of-sample prediction is for January 1991 using characteristics from December 1990.4
We then move the estimation and prediction period forward by one month.                          The
nonparametric model generates an average Sharpe ratio for an equally-weighted hedge
portfolio of 3.42 compared to 2.26 for the linear model.5               The linear model selects
21 characteristics in sample compared to only eight for the nonparametric model, but
performs worse out of sample. Nonlinearities are important. We find an increase in
   4
     We merge balance-sheet variables to returns following the Fama and French (1993) convention of
requiring a lag of at least six months, and our results are therefore indeed out of sample.
   5
     The linear model we estimate and the results for the linear model are similar to Lewellen (2015).


                                                  3
out-of-sample Sharpe ratios relative to the Sharpe ratio of the linear model when we
employ the nonparametric model for prediction on the 21 characteristics the linear model
selects. The linear model appears to overfit the data in sample. We find an identical
Sharpe ratio for the linear model when we use the eight characteristics we select with the
nonparametric model as we do with the 21 characteristics the linear model selects.
    Third, we study whether the predictive power of characteristics for expected returns
varies over time. We estimate the model using 120 months of data on all characteristics we
select in our baseline analysis, and then estimate rolling one-month-ahead return forecasts.
We find substantial time variation in the predictive power of characteristics for expected
returns. As an example, momentum returns conditional on other return predictors vary
substantially over time, and we find a momentum crash similar to Daniel and Moskowitz
(2016) as past losers appreciated during the recent financial crisis. Size conditional on the
other selected return predictors, instead, has a significant predictive power for expected
returns throughout our sample period similar to the findings in Asness, Frazzini, Israel,
Moskowitz, and Pedersen (2015).


A    Related Literature

The capital asset pricing model (CAPM) of Sharpe (1964), Lintner (1965), and Mossin
(1966) predicts that an asset’s beta with respect to the market portfolio is a sufficient
statistic for the cross section of expected returns. Fama and MacBeth (1973) provide
empirical support for the CAPM. Subsequently, researchers identified many variables,
such as size (Banz (1981)), the book-to-market ratio (Rosenberg et al. (1985)), leverage
(Bhandari (1988)), earnings-to-price ratios (Basu (1983)), or past returns (Jegadeesh and
Titman (1993)) that contain additional independent information for expected returns.
Sorting stocks into portfolios based on these characteristics often led to rejection of the
CAPM because the spread in CAPM betas could not explain the spread in returns. Fama
and French (1992) synthesize these findings, and Fama and French (1993) show that a
three-factor model with the market return, a size, and a value factor can explain cross
sections of stocks sorted on characteristics that appeared anomalous relative to the CAPM.
In this sense, Fama and French (1993) and Fama and French (1996) achieve a significant

                                             4
dimension reduction: researchers who want to explain the cross section of stock returns
only have to explain the size and value factors.
    Daniel and Titman (1997), on the contrary, argue that characteristics have higher
explanatory power for the cross section of expected returns than loadings on pervasive
risk factors.   Chordia, Goyal, and Shanken (2015) develop a method to estimate
bias-corrected return premia from cross-sectional data for individual stocks. They find
firm characteristics explain more of the cross-sectional variation in expected returns
compared to factor loadings. Kozak, Nagel, and Santosh (2015) show comovements of
stocks and associations of returns with characteristics orthogonal to factor exposures
do not allow researchers to disentangle rational from behavioral explanations for return
spreads. We study which characteristics provide incremental information for expected
returns but do not aim to investigate whether rational models or behavioral explanations
drive our findings.
    In the 20 years following the publication of Fama and French (1992), many researchers
joined a “fishing expedition” to identify characteristics and factor exposures that the
three-factor model cannot explain. Harvey, Liu, and Zhu (2016) provide an overview of
this literature and list over 300 published papers that study the cross section of expected
returns. They propose a t-statistic of 3 for new factors to account for multiple testing on
a common data set. Figure 3 shows the suggested adjustment over time. However,
even employing the higher threshold for the t-statistic still leaves approximately 150
characteristics as useful predictors for the cross section of expected returns. Fama and
French (2015) take a different route and augment the three-factor model of Fama and
French (1993) with an investment and profitability factor (Haugen and Baker (1996)
and Novy-Marx (2013)). Fama and French (2016) test the five-factor model on a small
set of anomalies and find substantial improvements relative to a three-factor model, but
also substantial unexplained return variation across portfolios. Hou et al. (2015) test a
q-factor model consisting of four factors on 35 anomalies that are univariately associated
with cross-sectional return premia, and find their model can reduce monthly alphas to an
average of 0.20%. Barillas and Shanken (2016) develop a new method to directly compare
competing factor models.


                                            5
    The large number of significant predictors is not a shortcoming of Harvey et al.
(2016), who address the issue of multiple testing. Instead, authors in this literature
usually consider their proposed return predictor in isolation without conditioning on
previously discovered return predictors. Haugen and Baker (1996) and Lewellen (2015)
are notable exceptions. They employ Fama and MacBeth (1973) regressions to combine
the information in multiple characteristics. Lewellen (2015) jointly studies the predictive
power of 15 characteristics and finds that only a few are significant predictors for the cross
section of expected returns. Green, Hand, and Zhang (2016) extend Lewellen (2015) to
many more characteristics for a shorter sample starting in 1980, but confirm his basic
conclusion. Although Fama-MacBeth regressions carry a lot of intuition, they do not
offer a formal method to select significant return predictors. We build on Lewellen (2015)
and provide a framework that allows for nonlinear association between characteristics and
returns, provide a formal framework to disentangle significant from insignificant return
predictors, and study many more characteristics.
    Light, Maslov, and Rytchkov (2016) use partial least squares (PLS) to summarize
the predictive power of firm characteristics for expected returns.         PLS summarizes
the predictive power of all characteristics and therefore does not directly disentangle
important from unimportant characteristics and does not reduce the number of
characteristics for return prediction.      Brandt, Santa-Clara, and Valkanov (2009)
parameterize portfolio weights as a function of stock characteristics to sidestep the
task to model the joint distribution of expected returns and characteristics. DeMiguel,
Martin-Utrera, Nogales, and Uppal (2016) extend the parametric portfolio approach
of Brandt et al. (2009) to study which characteristics provide incremental information
for the cross section of returns.    Specifically, DeMiguel et al. (2016) add long-short
characteristic-sorted portfolios to benchmark portfolios, such as the value-weighted market
portfolio, and ask which portfolios increase investor utility.
    We also contribute to a small literature estimating non-linear asset-pricing models
using semi- and nonparametric methods. Bansal and Viswanathan (1993) extend the
arbitrage pricing theory (APT) of Ross (1976) and estimate the stochastic discount factor
semiparametrically using neural nets. They allow for payoffs to be nonlinear in risk factors


                                              6
and find their APT is better able to explain the returns of size-sorted portfolios. Chapman
(1997) explains the size effect with a consumption-based model in which he approximates
the stochastic discount factor with orthonormal polynomials in a low number of state
variables. Connor, Hagmann, and Linton (2012) propose a nonparametric regression
method relating firm characteristics to factor loadings in a nonlinear way. They find
momentum and stock volatility have explanatory power similar to size and value for the
cross section of expected returns as size and value.
      We build on a large literature in economics and statistics using penalized regressions.
Horowitz (2016) gives a general overview of model selection in high-dimensional models,
and Huang, Horowitz, and Wei (2010) discuss variable selection in a nonparametric
additive model similar to the one we implement empirically. Recent applications of LASSO
methods in finance are Huang and Shi (2016), who use an adaptive group LASSO in a
linear framework and construct macro factors to test for determinants of bond risk premia.
Chinco, Clark-Joseph, and Ye (2015) assume the irrepresentable condition of Meinshausen
and Bühlmann (2006) to achieve model-selection consistency in a single-step LASSO. They
use a linear model for high-frequency return predictability using past returns of related
stocks, and find their method increases predictability relative to OLS.
      Bryzgalova (2016) highlights that weak identification in linear factor models could
result in an overstatement of significant cross-sectional risk factors.6 She proposes a
shrinkage-based estimator to detect possible rank deficiency in the design matrix and to
identify strong asset-pricing factors. Giglio and Xiu (2016) instead propose a three-pass
regression method that combines principal component analysis and a two-stage regression
framework to estimate consistent factor risk premia in the presence of omitted factors
when the cross section of test assets is large. We, instead, are mainly concerned with
formal model selection, that is, which characteristics provide incremental information in
the presence of other characteristics.
  6
   See also Jagannathan and Wang (1998), Kan and Zhang (1999), Kleibergen (2009), Gospodinov,
Kan, and Robotti (2014), Kleibergen and Zhan (2015), and Burnside (2016).




                                              7
II        Current Methodology

A        Expected Returns and the Curse of Dimensionality

One aim of the empirical asset-pricing literature is to identify characteristics that predict
expected returns, that is, find a characteristic C in period t−1 that predicts excess returns
of firm i in the following period, Rit . Formally, we try to describe the conditional mean
function,
                                            E[Rit | Cit−1 ].                                          (1)

        We often use portfolio sorts to approximate equation (1). We typically sort stocks
into 10 portfolios and compare mean returns across portfolios. Portfolio sorts are simple,
straightforward, and intuitive, but they also suffer from several shortcomings. First,
we can only use portfolio sorts to analyze a small set of characteristics. Imagine sorting
stocks jointly into five portfolios based on CAPM beta, size, book-to-market, profitability,
and investment. We would end up with 55 = 3125 portfolios, which is larger than the
number of stocks at the beginning of our sample.7 Second, portfolio sorts offer little
formal guidance to discriminate between characteristics. Consider the case of sorting
stocks into five portfolios based on size, and within these, into five portfolios based on the
book-to-market ratio. If we now find the book-to-market ratio only leads to a spread in
returns for the smallest stocks, do we conclude it does not matter for expected returns?
Fama and French (2008) call this second shortcoming “awkward.” Third, we implicitly
assume expected returns are constant over a part of the characteristic distribution,
such as the smallest 10% of stocks, when we use portfolio sorts as an estimator of the
conditional mean function. Fama and French (2008) call this third shortcoming “clumsy.”8
Nonetheless, portfolio sorts are by far the most commonly used technique to analyze which
characteristics have predictive power for expected returns.
        Instead of (conditional) double sorts, we could sort stocks into portfolios and perform
    7
     The curse of dimensionality is a well-understood shortcoming of portfolio sorts. See Fama and French
(2015) for a recent discussion in the context of the factor construction for their five-factor model. They
also argue not-well-diversified portfolios have little power in asset-pricing tests.
   8
     Portfolio sorts are a restricted form of nonparametric regression. We will use the similarities of
portfolio sorts and nonparametric regressions to develop intuition for our proposed framework below.



                                                    8
spanning tests, that is, we regress long-short portfolios on a set of risk factors. Take 10
portfolios sorted on profitability and regress the hedge return on the three Fama and
French (1993) factors. A significant time-series intercept would correspond to an increase
in Sharpe ratios for a mean-variance investor relative to the investment set the three Fama
and French (1993) factors span (see Gibbons, Ross, and Shanken (1989)). The order
in which we test characteristics matters, and spanning tests cannot solve the selection
problem of which characteristics provide incremental information for the cross section of
expected returns.
       An alternative to portfolio sorts and spanning tests is to assume linearity of equation
(1) and run linear panel regressions of excess returns on S characteristics, namely,

                                               S
                                               X
                                   Rit = α +         βs Cs,it−1 + εit .                            (2)
                                               s=1


Linear regressions allow us to study the predictive power for expected returns of many
characteristics jointly, but they also have potential pitfalls. First, no a priori reason
explains why the conditional mean function should be linear.9 Fama and French (2008)
estimate linear regressions as in equation (2) to dissect anomalies, but raise concerns over
potential nonlinearities. They make ad hoc adjustments and use, for example, the log
book-to-market ratio as a predictive variable. Second, linear regressions are sensitive to
outliers. Third, small, illiquid stocks might have a large influence on point estimates
because they represent the majority of stocks. Researchers often use ad hoc techniques to
mitigate concerns related to microcaps and outliers, such as winsorizing observations and
estimating linear regressions separately for small and large stocks (see Lewellen (2015) for
a recent example).
       Cochrane (2011) synthesizes many of the challenges that portfolio sorts and linear
regressions face in the context of many return predictors, and suspects “we will have to
use different methods.”
   9
    Fama and MacBeth (1973) regressions also assume a linear relationship between expected returns and
characteristics. Fama-MacBeth point estimates are numerically equivalent to estimates from equation (2)
when characteristics are constant over time.




                                                     9
B       Equivalence between Portfolio Sorts and Regressions

Cochrane (2011) conjectures in his presidential address, “[P]ortfolio sorts are really the
same thing as nonparametric cross-sectional regressions, using nonoverlapping histogram
weights.” Additional assumptions are necessary to show a formal equivalence, but his
conjecture contains valuable intuition to model the conditional mean function formally.
We first show a formal equivalence between portfolio sorts and regressions and then use
the equivalence to motivate the use of nonparametric methods.10
       Suppose we observe excess returns Rit and a single characteristic Cit−1 for stocks
i = 1, . . . , Nt and time periods t = 1, . . . , T . We sort stocks into L portfolios depending
on the value of the lagged characteristic, Cit−1 . Specifically, stock i is in portfolio l at
time t if Cit−1 ∈ Itl , where Itl indicates an interval of the distribution for a given firm
characteristic. For example, take a firm with lagged market cap in the 45th percentile
of the firm size distribution. We would sort that stock in the 5th out of 10 portfolios in
period t. For each time period t, let Ntl be the number of stocks in portfolio l,

                                              Nt
                                              X
                                      Ntl =         1(Cit−1 ∈ Itl ).
                                              i=1


The excess return of portfolio l at time t, Ptl , is then

                                             N
                                         1 X
                                  Ptl =         Rit 1(Cit−1 ∈ Itl ).
                                        Ntl i=1

The difference in average excess returns between portfolios l and l0 , or the excess return
e(l, l0 ), is
                                                   T
                                          0     1X
                                     e(l, l ) =       (Ptl − Ptl0 ),
                                                T t=1

which is the intercept in a (time-series) regression of the difference in portfolio returns,
Ptl − Ptl0 , on a constant.11
       Alternatively, we can run a pooled time-series cross-sectional regression of excess
  10
     Cattaneo et al. (2016) develop inference methods for a portfolio-sorting estimator and also show the
equivalence between portfolio sorting and nonparametric estimation.
  11
     We only consider univariate portfolio sorts in this example to gain intuition.


                                                    10
returns on dummy variables, which equal 1 if firm i is in portfolio l in period t. We
denote the dummy variables by 1(Cit−1 ∈ Itl ) and write,

                                          L
                                          X
                                  Rit =          βl 1(Cit−1 ∈ Itl ) + εit .
                                           l=1


Let R be the N T × 1 vector of excess returns and let X be the N T × L matrix of dummy
variables, 1(Cit−1 ∈ Itl ). Let β̂ be an OLS estimate,


                                          β̂ = (X 0 X)−1 X 0 R.


It then follows that

                                                               T X
                                                                 N
                                           1                   X
                 β̂l = PT PN                                             Rit 1(Cit−1 ∈ Itl )
                            t=1        i=1 1(Cit−1 ∈ Itl )     t=1 i=1
                                        T X
                                          N
                              1         X
                       = PT                        Rit 1(Cit−1 ∈ Itl )
                            t=1 Ntl     t=1 i=1
                                         T
                              1         X
                       = PT                    Ntl Ptl
                            t=1   Ntl   t=1
                            T
                         1X             Ntl
                       =           1
                                       PT             Ptl .
                         T t=1     T      t=1   Ntl

      Now suppose we have the same number of stocks in each portfolio l for each time
period t, that is, Ntl = N̄l for all t. Then

                                                            T
                                                         1X
                                                β̂l =          Ptl
                                                         T t=1

and
                                                  T
                                               1X
                            β̂l − β̂l0 =             (Ptl − Ptl0 ) = e(l, l0 ).
                                               T t=1

Hence, the slope coefficients in pooled time-series cross-sectional regressions are equivalent
to average portfolio returns, and the difference between two slope coefficients is the excess
return between two portfolios.
      If the number of stocks in the portfolios changes over time, then portfolio sorts and

                                                         11
regressions typically differ. We can restore equivalence in two ways. First, we could take
the different number of stocks in portfolio l over time into account when we calculate
averages, and define excess return as

                                                    T                                  T
                         ∗      0         1         X                       1          X
                       e (l, l ) = PT                     Ntl Ptl − PT                       Ntl0 Ptl0 ,
                                        t=1   Ntl   t=1                   t=1   Ntl0   t=1


in which case, we again get β̂l − β̂l0 = e∗ (l, l0 ).
        Second, we could use the weighted least squares estimator,


                                           β̃ = (X 0 W X)−1 X 0 W R,


where the N T × N T weight matrix W is a diagonal matrix with the inverse number of
stocks on the diagonal, diag(1/Ntl ). With this estimator, we again get β̃l − β̃l0 = e(l, l0 ).



III         Nonparametric Estimation
We now use the relationship between portfolio sorts and regressions to develop intuition
for our nonparametric estimator, and show how we can interpret portfolio sorts as a
special case of nonparametric estimation. We then show how to select characteristics
with independent information for expected returns within that framework.
        Suppose we knew the conditional mean function mt (c) ≡ E[Rit | Cit−1 = c].12 Then,
                                                          Z
                             E[Rit | Cit−1 ∈ Ilt ] =             mt (c)fCit−1 |Cit−1 ∈Itl (c)dc,
                                                           Itl


where fCit−1 |Cit−1 ∈Itl is the density function of the characteristic in period t−1, conditional
on Cit−1 ∈ Itl . Hence, to obtain the expected return of portfolio l, we can simply
integrate the conditional mean function over the appropriate interval of the characteristic
distribution.       Therefore, the conditional mean function contains all information for
portfolio returns.            However, knowing mt (c) provides additional information about
nonlinearities in the relationship between expected returns and characteristics, and the
  12
       We take the expected excess return for a fixed time period t.


                                                              12
functional form more generally.
       To estimate the conditional mean function, mt , consider again regressing excess
returns, Rit , on L dummy variables, 1(Cit−1 ∈ Itl ),

                                           L
                                           X
                                   Rit =         βl 1(Cit−1 ∈ Itl ) + εit .
                                           l=1


In nonparametric estimation, we call indicator functions of the form 1(Cit−1 ∈ Itl ) constant
splines. Estimating the conditional mean function, mt , with constant splines, means we
approximate it by a step function. In this sense, portfolio sorting is a special case of
nonparametric regression. A step function is nonsmooth and therefore has undesirable
theoretical properties as a nonparametric estimator, but we build on this intuition to
estimate mt nonparametrically.13
       Figures 4–6 illustrate the intuition behind the relationship between portfolio sorts and
nonparametric regressions. These figures show returns on the y-axis and book-to-market
ratios on the x-axis, as well as portfolio returns and the nonparametric estimator we
propose below for simulated data.
       We see in Figure 4 that most of the dispersion in book-to-market ratios and returns
is in the extreme portfolios. Little variation in returns occurs across portfolios 2-4 in
line with empirical settings (see Fama and French (2008)). Portfolio means offer a good
approximation of the conditional mean function for intermediate portfolios. We also see,
however, that portfolios 1 and 5 have difficulty capturing the nonlinearities we see in the
data.
       Figure 5 documents that a nonparametric estimator of the conditional mean function
provides a good approximation for the relationship between book-to-market ratios and
returns for intermediate values of the characteristic, but also in the extremes of the
distribution.
       Finally, we see in Figure 6 that portfolio means provide a better fit in the tails of
the distribution once we allow for more portfolios. Portfolio mean returns become more
comparable to the predictions from the nonparametric estimator the larger the number
 13
      We formally define our estimator in Section III. D below.



                                                      13
of portfolios.


A       Multiple Regression & Additive Conditional Mean Function

Both portfolio sorts and regressions theoretically allow us to look at several characteristics
simultaneously. Consider small (S) and big (B) firms and value (V ) and growth (G) firms.
We could now study four portfolios: (SV ), (SG), (BV ), and (BG). However, portfolio
sorts quickly become infeasible as the number of characteristics increases. For example,
if we have four characteristics and partition each characteristics into five portfolios, we
end up with 54 = 625 portfolios. Analyzing 625 portfolio returns would, of course, be
impractical, but would also result in poorly diversified portfolios.
       In nonparametric regressions, an analogous problem arises.                     Estimating the
conditional mean function mt (c) ≡ E[Rit | Cit = c] fully nonparametrically with many
regressors results in a slow rate of convergence and imprecise estimates in practice.14
Specifically, with S characteristics and Nt observations, assuming technical regularity
                                                                          −4/(4+S)
conditions, the optimal rate of convergence in mean square is Nt                     , which is always
smaller than the rate of convergence for the parametric estimator of Nt−1 . Notice the rate
of convergence decreases as S increases.15 Consequently, we get an estimator with poor
finite sample properties if the number of characteristics is large.
       As an illustration, suppose we observe one characteristic, in which case, the rate of
                   −4/5
convergence is Nt         . Now suppose instead we have 11 characteristics, and let Nt∗ be the
number of observations necessary to get the same rate of convergence as in the case with
one characteristic. We get,

                                                 −4/5
                                 (Nt∗ )−4/15 = Nt       ⇒ Nt∗ = Nt3 .


Hence, in the case with 11 characteristics, we have to raise the sample size to the power
of 3 to obtain the same rate of convergence and comparable finite sample properties as
in the case with only one characteristic. Consider a sample size, Nt , of 1,000. Then, we
  14
     This literature refers to this phenomenon as the “curse of dimensionality” (see Stone (1982) for a
formal treatment).
  15
     We assume the conditional mean function mt is twice continuously differentiable.


                                                  14
would need 1 billion return observations to obtain similar finite sample properties of an
estimated conditional mean function with 11 characteristics.
     Conversely, suppose S = 11 and we have Nt∗ = 1, 000 observations. This combination
yields similar properties as an estimation with one characteristic and a sample size Nt =
(Nt∗ )1/3 of 10.
     Nevertheless, if we are interested in which characteristics provide incremental
information for expected returns given other characteristics, we cannot look at each
characteristic in isolation. A natural solution in the nonparametric regression framework
is to assume an additive model,

                                                         S
                                                         X
                               mt (c1 , . . . , cS ) =         mts (cs ),
                                                         s=1


where mts (·) are unknown functions. The main theoretical advantage of the additive
                                                                      −4/5
specification is that the rate of convergence is always Nt                   , which does not depend on
the number of characteristics S (see Stone (1985), Stone (1986), and Horowitz et al.
(2006)).
     An important restriction of the additive model is

                                    ∂ 2 mt (c1 , . . . , cS )
                                                              =0
                                         ∂cs ∂cs0

for all s 6= s0 ; therefore, the additive model does not allow for interactions between
characteristics; for example, the predictive power of the book-to-market ratio for expected
returns does not vary with firm size. One way around this shortcoming is to add certain
interactions as additional regressors. For instance, we could interact every characteristic
with size to see if small firms are really different. An alternative solution is to estimate
the model separately for small and large stocks. Brandt et al. (2009) make a similar
assumption but also stress that we can always interpret characteristics c as the cross
product of a more basic set of characteristics.
     Although the assumption of an additive model is somewhat restrictive, it provides
desirable econometric advantages and is far less restrictive than assuming linearity right



                                                 15
away as we do in Fama-MacBeth regressions. Another major advantage of an additive
model is that we can jointly estimate the model for a large number of characteristics, select
important characteristics, and estimate the summands of the conditional mean function,
mt , simultaneously, as we explain in Section D.


B     Comparison of Linear & Nonparametric Models

We now want to compare portfolio sorts and a linear model with nonparametric models
in some specific numerical examples. The comparison helps us understand the potential
pitfalls from assuming a linear relationship between characteristics and returns, and gain
some intuition for why we might select different characteristics in a linear model in our
empirical tests in Section V.
    Suppose we observe excess returns Rit and a single characteristic, Cit−1 distributed
according to Cit−1 ∼ U [0, 1] for i = 1, . . . , N and t = 1, . . . , T with the data-generating
process,
                                    Rit = mt (Cit−1 ) + εit ,

where E[εit | Cit−1 ] = 0.
    Without knowing the conditional mean function mt , we could sort stocks into
portfolios according to the distribution of the characteristic. Cit−1 predicts returns if
mean returns differ significantly across portfolios. For example, we could construct 10
portfolios based on the percentiles of the distribution and test if the first portfolio has a
significantly different return than the 10th portfolio.
    If we knew the conditional mean function mt , we could conclude that Cit−1 predicts
returns if mt is not constant on [0, 1]. Moreover, knowing the conditional mean function
allows us to construct portfolios with a large spread in returns. Instead of sorting stocks
based on the values of the characteristic Cit−1 , we could sort stocks directly based on the
conditional mean function mt (Cit−1 ). For example, let qt (α) be the α-quantile of mt (Cit−1 )
and let stock i be in portfolio l at time t if mt (Cit−1 ) ∈ [qt ((l − 1)/10), qt (l/10)]. That
is, we construct 10 portfolios based on return predictions. Portfolio 1 contains the 10%
of stocks with the lowest predicted returns, and portfolio 10 contains the 10% of stocks


                                               16
with the highest predicted returns.
     If mt is monotone and we only study a single characteristic, both sorting based on
the value of the characteristic and sorting based on predicted returns mt (Cit−1 ) results in
the same portfolios. However, if mt is not monotone, the “10-1 portfolio” return is higher
when we sort based on mt (Cit−1 ).
     As a simple example, suppose mt (c) = (c − 0.5)2 . Then the expected “10-1 portfolio”
return when sorting based on characteristic, Cit−1 , is 0.
     We now consider two characteristics, C1,it−1 ∼ U [0, 1] and C2,it−1 ∼ U [0, 1], and
assume the following data-generating process:


                          Rit = mt1 (C1,it−1 ) + mt2 (C2,it−1 ) + εit ,


where E[εit | C1,it−1 , C2,it−1 ] = 0. Again, we can construct portfolios with a large spread
in predicted returns based on the value of the conditional mean function, mt . The idea is
similar to constructing trading strategies based on the predicted values of a linear model,


                           Rit = β0 + β1 C1,it−1 + β2 C2,it−1 + εit .


We will now, however, illustrate the potential pitfalls of the linear model and how a
nonparametric model can alleviate them.
     Assume the following return-generating process:

                                       p               2
                       Rit = −0.2 + 0.3 C1,it−1 + 0.25C2,it−1 + εit .


In this example, a regression of returns Rit on the characteristics C1,it−1 and C2,it−1 yields
slope coefficients of around 0.25 in large samples. Therefore, the predicted values of a
linear model treat C1,it−1 and C2,it−1 almost identically, although they affect returns very
differently.
     We now compare the performance of the linear and nonparametric model for the
“10-1” hedge portfolio. The table below shows monthly returns, standard deviations, and




                                               17
Sharpe ratios from a simulation for 2, 000 stocks and 240 periods for both models.16
     Predicted returns for the nonparametric model are slightly higher compared to the
linear model, with almost identical standard deviations resulting in larger Sharpe ratios
with the nonparametric method. Nevertheless, the linear model is a good approximation
in this example, and the nonparametric method improves only marginally on the linear
model.

                                              Linear    Nonparametric
                            Return            0.1704         0.1734
                            Std               0.2055         0.2054
                            Sharpe Ratio      0.8329         0.8480


     Instead, now we study the following data-generating process:


          Rit = −0.3 + 0.3Φ((C1,it−1 − 0.1)/0.1) + 0.3Φ((C2,it−1 − 0.9)/0.1) + εit ,


where Φ denotes the standard normal cdf. Figure 1 plots the two functions, along with a
parametric and a nonparametric estimate for a representative data set.
     In this example, a regression of Rit on C1,it−1 and C2,it−1 yields two slope coefficients
of around 0.15. Hence, as in the previous example, the predicted values of a linear model
treat C1,it−1 and C2,it−1 identically.

                                              Linear    Nonparametric
                            Return            0.1154         0.1863
                            Std               0.1576         0.1576
                            Sharpe Ratio      0.7352         1.1876

     The portfolio returns using the nonparametric model are now substantially higher
compared to the linear model, with almost identical standard deviations, resulting in
much larger Sharpe ratios. In this example, the linear model is a poor approximation
  16
     The numbers in the table are averages of portfolio means, standard deviations, and Sharpe ratios
of 1, 000 simulated data sets. We use the first 120 periods to estimate the conditional functions using
quadratic splines, which we explain below, and form portfolios for each remaining period based on the
estimates. Therefore, the portfolio means in the table are based on 120 time periods.


                                                  18
                                                                                                         0.5
                           0.6
                                     True function m 1                                                             True function m 2
                                     Linear estimate                                                    0.45       Linear estimate
                          0.55
                                     Nonparametric estimate                                                        Nonparametric estimate

                                                                                                         0.4
                           0.5
        Expected Return




                                                                                      Expected Return
                          0.45                                                                          0.35


                           0.4                                                                           0.3


                          0.35                                                                          0.25


                           0.3                                                                           0.2


                          0.25                                                                          0.15


                           0.2                                                                           0.1
                                 0   0.2       0.4         0.6       0.8     1                                 0   0.2       0.4         0.6   0.8   1
                                                  C1;t!1                                                                        C2;t!1


                                               Figure 1: Regression functions and estimates

of the true data-generating process even though returns increase monotonically in both
characteristics.17
        Note that we do not know the true data-generating process, and the linear model
may provide a good or poor approximation. Therefore, nonparametric methods are the
natural choice.
        In a last example, we want to discuss how the linear and nonparametric models
treat nonlinear transformations of variables. This example helps us understand why a
linear model might select more variables in empirical settings. Consider the following
data-generating process:
                                                                 Rit = C1,it−1 + C2,it−1 + εit ,

                2
with C2,it−1 = C1,it−1 ; that is, the second characteristic is just the square of the first
characteristic. In the linear model, both characteristics are important to describe the
conditional mean function, whereas in the nonparametric model, mt is a function of
C1,it−1 only (or alternatively, C2,it−1 only). In Section D, we consider model selection
next to estimation, and these differences between the linear and the nonparametric model
  17
       We thank Seth Pruitt for raising this point.



                                                                                 19
will play an important role.


C       Normalization of Characteristics

We now describe a suitable normalization of the characteristics, which will allow us to map
our nonparametric estimator directly to portfolio sorts. As before, define the conditional
mean function mt for S characteristics as


                    mt (C1,it−1 , . . . , CS,it−1 ) = E[Rit | C1,it−1 , . . . , CS,it−1 ].


For each characteristic s, let Fs,t (·) be a known strictly monotone function and denote its
            −1
inverse by Fs,t (·). Define C̃s,it−1 = Fs,t (Cs,it−1 ) and

                                                        −1                  −1
                          m̃t (c1 , . . . , cS ) = mt (F1,t (c1 ), . . . , FS,t (cS )).


Then,
                      mt (C1,it−1 , . . . , CS,it−1 ) = m̃t (C̃1,it−1 , . . . , C̃S,it−1 ).

Knowledge of the conditional mean function mt is equivalent to knowing the transformed
conditional mean function m̃t . Moreover, using a transformation does not impose any
additional restrictions and is therefore without loss of generality.
     Instead of estimating mt , we will estimate m̃t for a rank transformation that has
desirable properties and nicely maps to portfolio sorting. When we sort stocks into
portfolios, we are typically not interested in the value of a characteristic in isolation,
but rather in the rank of the characteristic in the cross section. Consider firm size. Size
grows over time, and a firm with a market capitalization of USD 1 billion in the 1960s
was considered a large firm, but today it is not. Our normalization considers the relative
size in the cross section rather than the absolute size, similar to portfolio sorting.
     Hence, we choose the rank transformation of Cs,it−1 such that the cross-sectional
distribution of a given characteristic lies in the unit interval; that is, Cs,it−1 ∈ [0, 1].
Specifically, let
                                                         rank(Cs,it−1 )
                                    Fs,t (Cs,it−1 ) =                   .
                                                            Nt + 1

                                                      20
Here, rank(mini=1...,Nt Cs,it−1 ) = 1 and rank(maxi=1...,Nt Cs,it−1 ) = Nt . Therefore, the α
quantile of C̃s,it−1 is α. We use this particular transformation because portfolio sorting
maps into our estimator as a special case.18
       Although knowing mt is equivalent to knowing m̃t , in finite samples, the estimates
of the two typically differ; that is,

                                                            −1                  −1
                           b t (c1 , . . . , cS ) 6= m
                           m                         b̃ t (F1,t (c1 ), . . . , FS,t (cS )).


In numerical simulations and in the empirical application, we found m̃t yields better
out-of-sample predictions than mt . The transformed estimator appears to be less sensitive
to outliers thanks to the rank transformation, which could be one reason for the superior
out-of-sample performance.
       In summary, the transformation does not impose any additional assumptions, directly
relates to portfolio sorting, and works well in finite samples because it appears more robust
to outliers.19


D        Adaptive Group LASSO

We use a group LASSO procedure suggested by Huang et al. (2010) for estimation and
to select those characteristics that provide incremental information for expected returns,
that is, for model selection. To recap, we are interested in modeling excess returns as a
function of characteristics; that is,

                                               S
                                               X
                                      Rit =           m̃ts (C̃s,it−1 ) + εit ,                         (3)
                                                s=1


where m̃s (·) are unknown functions and C̃s,it−1 denotes the rank-transformed character-
istic.
       The idea of the group LASSO is to estimate the functions m̃ts nonparametrically,
  18
     The general econometric theory we discuss in Section D (model selection, consistency, etc.) also
applies to any other monotonic transformation or the non-transformed conditional mean function.
  19
     Cochrane (2011) stresses the sensitivity of regressions to outliers. Our transformation is insensitive
to outliers and nicely addresses his concern.



                                                         21
while setting functions for a given characteristic to 0 if the characteristic does not help
predict expected returns. Therefore, the procedure achieves model selection; that is, it
discriminates between the functions m̃ts , which are constant, and the functions that are
not constant.20
       In portfolio sorts, we approximate m̃ts by a constant within each portfolio. We
instead propose to estimate quadratic functions over parts of the normalized characteristic
distribution. Let 0 = t0 < t1 < · · · < tL−1 < tL = 1 be a sequence of increasing numbers
between 0 and 1 similar to portfolio breakpoints, and let I˜l for l = 1, . . . , L be a partition
of the unit interval, that is, I˜l = [tl−1 , tl ) for l = 1, . . . , L − 1 and I˜L = [tL−1 , tL ]. We
refer to t1 , . . . , tL−1 as knots and choose tl = l/L for all l = 1, . . . , L in our empirical
application. Because we apply the rank transformation to the characteristics, the knots
correspond to quantiles of the characteristic distribution and we can think of I˜l as the lth
portfolio.
       To estimate m̃t , we use quadratic splines; that is, we approximate m̃t as a quadratic
function on each interval I˜l . We choose these functions so that the endpoints are connected
and m̃t is differentiable on [0, 1]. We can approximate each m̃ts by a series expansion with
these properties, i.e.,
                                                         L+2
                                                         X
                                           m̃ts (c̃) ≈         βtsk pk (c̃),                                   (4)
                                                         k=1

where pk (c) are known basis functions.21
       The number of intervals L is a user-specified smoothing parameter, similar to the
number of portfolios. As L increases, the precision of the approximation increases, but so
does the number of parameters we have to estimate and hence the variance. Recall that
portfolio sorts can be interpreted as approximating the conditional mean function as a
constant function over L intervals. Our estimator is a smooth and more flexible estimator,
but follows a similar idea (see again Figures 4 – 6).
       We now discuss the two steps of the adaptive group LASSO. In the first step, we
  20
     The “adaptive” part indicates a two-step procedure, because the LASSO selects too many
characteristics in the first step and is therefore not model-selection consistent unless restrictive conditions
on the design matrix are satisfied (see Meinshausen and Bühlmann (2006) and Zou (2006) for an in-depth
treatment of the LASSO in the linear model).
  21
     In particular, p1 (c) = 1, p2 (c) = c, p3 (c) = c2 , and pk (c) = max{c − tk−3 , 0}2 for k = 4, . . . , L + 2.
See Chen (2007) for an overview of series estimation.


                                                         22
obtain estimates of the coefficients as

                                     N                S X
                                                        L+2
                                                                                    !2          S L+2
                                                                                                                    ! 21
                                     X                X                                         X X
  β̃ t =           arg min                    Rit −              bsk pk (C̃s,it−1 )      + λ1                b2sk          ,    (5)
            bsk :s=1,...,S;k=1,...,L+2 i=1            s=1 k=1                                   s=1    k=1


where β̃ t is an (L + 2) × S vector of bsk estimates and λ1 is a penalty parameter.
     The first part of equation (5) is just the sum of the squared residuals as in ordinary
least squares regressions; the second part is the LASSO group penalty function. Rather
than penalizing individual coefficients, bsk , the LASSO penalizes all coefficients associated
with a given characteristic. Thus, we can set the point estimates of an entire expansion
of m̃t to 0 when a given characteristic does not provide independent information for
expected returns. Due to the penalty, the LASSO is applicable even when the number
of characteristics is larger than the sample size. In the application, we choose λ1 in a
data-dependent way to minimize a Bayes Information Criterion (BIC) proposed by Yuan
and Lin (2006).
     However, as in a linear model, the first step of the LASSO selects too many
characteristics. Informally speaking, the LASSO selects all characteristics that predict
returns, but also selects some characteristics that have no predictive power. A second
step addresses this problem.
     We first define the following weights:

                                                 1
                                      PL+2 β̃ 2 − 2 if PL+2 β̃ 2 =
                                      
                                         k=1 sk          k=1 sk 6   0
                                ws =                    PL+2 2                                                                  (6)
                                       ∞             if  k=1 β̃sk = 0.
                                     


Intuitively, these weights guarantee we do not select any characteristic in the second step
that we did not select in the first step.
     In the second step of the adaptive group LASSO, we solve

                                   N                 S X
                                                       L+2
                                                                                !2           S             L+2
                                                                                                                        ! 21
                                   X                 X                                       X             X
 β̆ t =          arg min                     Rit −             bsk pk (C̃s,it−1 )     + λ2            ws         b2sk          . (7)
          bsk :s=1,...,S;k=1,...,L+2 i=1             s=1 k=1                                 s=1           k=1


We again choose λ2 to minimize a BIC.



                                                           23
     Huang et al. (2010) show β̆ t is model-selection consistent; that is, it correctly selects
the non-constant functions with probability approaching 1 as the sample size grows large.
However, the estimators have unfavorable statistical properties because they are not oracle
efficient. We re-estimate the model for the selected characteristics with OLS to address
this problem.
     Denote the estimated coefficients for characteristic s by β̂ ts . The estimator of the
function m̃ts is then
                                                        L+2
                                                        X
                                         m
                                         b̃ ts (c̃) =         β̂tsk pk (c̃).
                                                        k=1

     If the cross section is sufficiently large, model selection and estimation can
be performed period by period.                Hence, the method allows for the importance of
characteristics and the shape of the conditional mean function to vary over time. For
example, some characteristics might lose their predictive power for expected returns.
McLean and Pontiff (2016) show that for 97 return predictors, predictability decreases
by 58% post publication. However, if the conditional mean function was time-invariant,
pooling the data across time would lead to more precise estimates of the function and
therefore more reliable predictions. In our empirical application in Section V, we estimate
our model over subsamples and also estimate rolling specifications to investigate the
variation in the conditional mean function over time.


E     Confidence Bands

We also report uniform confidence bands for the functions m̃ts . We approximate m̃ts (c̃)
by L+2
  P                                      PL+2
     k=1 βtsk pk (c̃) and estimate it by  k=1 β̂tsk pk (c̃).

    Let p(c̃) = (p1 (c̃), . . . , pL+2 (c̃))0 be the vector of spline functions and let Σts be the
                                           √
L + 2 × L + 2 covariance matrix of n(β̂ts − βts ). We define Σ̂ts as the heteroscedasticity-
                                                        q
consistent estimator of Σts and define σ̂ts (c̃) = p(c̃)0 Σ̂ts p(c̃).
     The uniform confidence band for m̃ts is of the form
                    "L+2                                     L+2
                                                                                              #
                     X                                       X
                           β̂tsk pk (c̃) − dts σ̂ts (c̃) ,         β̂tsk pk (c̃) + dts σ̂ts (c̃) ,
                     k=1                                     k=1




                                                        24
where dts is a constant.
     To choose the constant, let Z ∼ N (0, Σ̂ts ) and let dts be such that
                                                                                  
                                                         0
                                            Z p(c̃)
                               P  sup q                    ≤ dts  = 1 − α.
                                  c̃∈[0,1]      0
                                           p(c̃) Σ̂ts p(c̃)

We can calculate the probability on the left-hand side using simulations.
     Given consistent model selection and under the conditions in Belloni, Chernozhukov,
Chetverikov, and Kato (2015), it follows that
                   "L+2                                       L+2
                                                                                                    #              !
                    X                                         X
 P   m̃ts (c̃) ∈          β̂tsk pk (c̃) − dts σ̂ts (c̃) ,           β̂tsk pk (c̃) + dts σ̂ts (c̃)       ∀c̃ ∈ [0, 1]   →1−α
                    k=1                                       k=1


as the sample size increases.


F     Interpretation of the Conditional Mean Function

In a nonparametric additive model, the locations of the functions are not identified.
Consider the following example. Let αs be S constants such that

                                                         S
                                                         X
                                                                αs = 0.
                                                         s=1


Then,
                                                       S
                                                       X                     S
                                                                             X
                          m̃t (c̃1 , . . . , c̃S ) =         m̃ts (c̃s ) =         (m̃ts (c̃s ) + αs ) .
                                                       s=1                   s=1

Therefore, the summands of the transformed conditional mean function, m̃s , are only
identified up to a constant. The model-selection procedure, expected returns, and the
portfolios we construct do not depend on these constants. However, the constants matter
when we plot an estimate of the conditional mean function for one characteristic, m̃s . We
now discuss two possible normalizations.
     Let c̄s be a fixed value of a given transformed characteristic s, such as the mean or




                                                                 25
the median. Then,
                                                                        S
                                                                        X
                         m̃t (c̃1 , c̄2 . . . , c̄S ) = m̃t1 (c̃1 ) +         m̃ts (c̄s ),
                                                                        s=2

which is identified and a function of c̃1 only. This function is the expected return as a
function of the first characteristic when we fix the values of all other characteristics. When
we set the other characteristics to different values, we change the level of the function,
but not the slope. We will report these functions in our empirical section, and we can
interpret both the level and the slope of the function.
     An alternative normalization is m̃1 (0.5) = 0. The conditional mean function for
a characteristic now takes the value of 0 for the median observation. Now, we cannot
interpret the level of the function. This normalization, however, is easier to interpret when
we plot the estimated functions over time in a three-dimensional surface plot. Changes
in the slope over time now tell us the relative importance of the characteristic in the time
series. The first normalization has the disadvantage that in years with very low overall
returns, the conditional mean function is much lower. Hence, interpreting the relative
importance of a characteristic over time from surface plots is more complicated when we
use the first normalization.



IV      Data
Stock return data come from the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP) monthly
stock file. We follow standard conventions and restrict the analysis to common stocks of
firms incorporated in the United States trading on NYSE, Amex, or Nasdaq with market
prices above USD 5.
     Market equity (ME) is the total market capitalization at the firm level. LME is the
total market capitalization at the end of the previous calendar month. LTurnover is the
ratio of total monthly trading volume over total market capitalization at the end of the
previous month. The bid-ask spread (spread) is the average daily bid-ask spread during
the previous month. We also construct lagged returns over the previous month (r2−1 ), the
previous 12 months leaving out the last month (r12−2 ), intermediate momentum (r12−7 ),



                                                      26
and long-run returns from three years ago until last year (r36−13 ). We follow Frazzini and
Pedersen (2014) in the definition of Beta (Beta), and idiosyncratic volatility (Idio vol)
is the residual from a regression of daily returns on the three Fama and French factors in
the previous month as in Ang, Hodrick, Xing, and Zhang (2006).
     Balance-sheet data are from the Standard and Poor’s Compustat database. We define
book equity (BE) as total stockholders’ equity plus deferred taxes and investment tax
credit (if available) minus the book value of preferred stock. Based on availability, we use
the redemption value, liquidation value, or par value (in that order) for the book value
of preferred stock. We prefer the shareholders’ equity number as reported by Compustat.
If these data are not available, we calculate shareholders’ equity as the sum of common
and preferred equity. If neither of the two are available, we define shareholders’ equity as
the difference between total assets and total liabilities. The book-to-market (BM) ratio
of year t is then the book equity for the fiscal year ending in calendar year t − 1 over
the market equity as of December t − 1. We use the book-to-market ratio for estimation
starting in June of year t until May of year t + 1 predicting returns from July of year t
until June of year t. We use the same timing convention for balance-sheet variables unless
we specify it differently.
     AT are total assets, ATO are sales scaled by net operating assets, and cash (C)
is cash and short-term investments over total assets. CTO is capital turnover, D2A is
depreciation and amortization over total assets, and DPI2A is the change in property,
plant, and equipment. E2P is the earnings-to-price ratio. We define expenses to sales
(FC2Y) as the sum of advertising expenses; research and development expenses; and
selling, general, and administrative expenses over sales, and Free CF is net income and
depreciation and amortization less the change in working capital and capex. Investment
is the growth rate in total assets, Lev is the ratio of total debt to total debt and
shareholders’ equity, and NOA are net operating assets to lagged total assets. We define
operating accruals (OA) as in Sloan (1996), and operating leverage (OL) is the ratio of
cost of goods sold and selling, general, and administrative expenses over total assets. We
define the price-to-cost margin (PCM) as sales minus cost of goods sold over sales, the
profit margin (PM) as operating income after depreciation to net sales, gross profitability


                                            27
(Prof ) as gross profits over book value of equity, and Q is Tobin’s Q. Rel to high is
the closeness to the 52-week high price and RNA is the return on net operating assets.
The return-on-assets (ROA) is income before extraordinary items to total assets and the
return-on-equity (ROE) is the ratio of income before extraordinary items to lagged book
value of equity. S2P is the ratio of sales to market capitalization, SGA2S is the ratio of
selling, general, and administrative expenses to net sales, spread is the monthly average
bid-ask spread, and SUV is standardized unexplained volume.
    To alleviate a potential survivorship bias due to backfilling, we require that a firm
has at least two years of Compustat data. Our sample period is July 1963 until June 2015.
Table 1 reports summary statistics for various firm characteristics and return predictors.
We calculate all statistics annually and then average over time. On average we have 2.5
million observations in our analysis.
    Section I in the online appendix contains a detailed description of the characteristics,
the construction, and the relevant references.



V     Results
We now study which of the 36 characteristics we describe in Section IV provide
independent information for expected returns, using the adaptive group LASSO for
selection and estimation.


A    Selected Characteristics and Their Influence

Table 2 reports average annualized returns with standard errors in parentheses of 10
equally-weighted portfolios sorted on the characteristics we study.       Most of the 36
characteristics have individually predictive power for expected returns in our sample
period and result in large and statistically significant hedge portfolio returns and alphas
relative to the Fama and French three-factor model (Table 3). Twenty-one sorts have
annualized hedge returns of more than 5%, and 12 characteristics are even associated with
excess returns of more than 10%. Twenty-one characteristics have a t-statistic above 2.
Correcting for exposure to the Fama-French three-factor model has little impact on these

                                            28
findings. The vast majority of economic models, that is, the ICAPM (Merton (1973))
or consumption-based models, as surveyed in Cochrane (2007), suggest a low number of
state variables can explain the cross section of returns. Therefore, all characteristics are
unlikely to provide independent information for expected returns.
     To tackle the multi-dimensionality challenge, we now estimate the adaptive group
LASSO with four, nine, 14, and 19 knots. The number of knots corresponds to the
smoothing parameter we discuss in Section III. Nine knots corresponds to 10 portfolios
in sorts.
     Figure 7 and Figure 8 show the mean function, m̃(C̃it−1 ), for Tobin’s Q, return-
on-assets, profitability, and investment. The left panels report the unconditional mean
functions, whereas the right panels plot the association between the characteristic and
expected returns conditional on all selected characteristics.
     Stocks with low Q, low return on assets, investment, but high profitability have higher
expected returns than stocks with high Q, return on assets, investment, or low profitability
unconditionally. These results are consistent with our findings for portfolio sorts in Table
2. Portfolio sorts result in average annualized hedge portfolio returns of around 14%, 5%,
13%, and 6% for sorts on Q, return on assets, investment, and profitability, respectively.
Profitability, Q, and investment also have t-stats relative to the Fama-French three-factor
model substantially larger than the threshold Harvey et al. (2016) suggest (see Table 3).
     These characteristics, however, are correlated with other firm characteristics. We now
want to understand whether they have marginal predictive power for expected returns
conditional on all other firm characteristics we study. We see in the right panels that
the association of these characteristics with expected returns vanishes once we condition
on other stock characteristics. The estimated conditional mean functions are now close
to constant and do not vary with the characteristics. The constant conditional mean
functions imply Q, return on assets, investment, and profitability have no marginal
predictive power for expected returns once we condition on other firm characteristics.
     The examples of Tobin’s Q, return-on-asset, profitability, and investment show the
importance of conditioning on other characteristics to infer on the predictive power of
characteristics for expected returns. We now study this question for 36 firm characteristics


                                            29
using the adaptive group LASSO.
       Table 4 reports the selected characteristics of the nonparametric model for different
numbers of knots, sets of firms, and sample periods. We see in column (1) that the
baseline estimation for all stocks over the full sample period using 14 knots selects 15 out
of the universe of 36 firm characteristics. The assets-to-market cap, total assets, beta,
capital intensity, earnings to price, fixed costs to sales, idiosyncratic volatility, lagged
market cap, lagged turnover, the closeness to the 52-week high, momentum, short-term
reversal, long-term reversal, SG&A -to-market cap, and standardized unexplained volume
all provide incremental information conditional on all other selected firm characteristics.
       When we allow for a wider grid in column (2) with only nine knots, we also select cash
to total assets, free cash flow, intermediate momentum, and the average bid-ask spread.
We instead select the same characteristics when we impose a finer grid and estimate the
group LASSO with 19 interpolation points (see column (3)).
       We estimate the nonparametric model only on large stocks above the 10%-, 20%-,
and 50%-size quintile of NYSE stocks in columns (3) to (5), reducing the sample size
from more than 1 million observations to around 300,000. Assets-to-market cap, total
assets, beta, fixed-costs to sales, and idiosyncratic volatility lose their predictive power
for returns for a sample of firms above the 10%-size threshold compared to all stocks in
column (1), whereas operating accruals becomes a significant return predictor. For firms
above the 20%-size threshold of NYSE firms, we also see capital intensity, earnings to price,
lagged turnover, and momentum lose the predictive power, but intermediate momentum
becomes a significant return predictor. For the largest firms, only seven characteristics
have significant incremental predictive power for expected returns, including the book-
to-market ratio, the closeness to the high price, past return-based predictors, SG&A to
market cap, and standardized unexplained volume.22
       Columns (7) and (8) split our sample in half and re-estimate our benchmark
nonparametric model in both sub-samples separately to see whether the importance of
characteristics for predicted returns varies over time. Only eight characteristics have
  22
    The number of knots increases with the sample size. The penalty function instead increases in the
number of knots. In the nonparametric model with nine knots, the penalty is proportional to 12 times
the number of selected characteristics, which is why we select fewer characteristics with more knots.


                                                 30
predictive power for expected returns in the sample until 1990. All the characteristics
we select in the first half of our sample still provide incremental information for expected
returns in the second half starting in 1991, but now nine additional characteristics gain
predictive power for expected returns.
    Size, the closeness to the previous 52-week high, short-term reversal, and standardized
unexplained volume are the most consistent return predictors across different sample
periods, number of interpolation points, and sets of firms. Table A.1 in the online appendix
reports selected characteristics for additional specifications.
    Figure 9 and Figure 10 plot the conditional and unconditional mean functions for
short-term reversal, momentum, size, and the assets-to-market-cap ratio. We see in
Figure 9 both for reversal and momentum a more monotonic association between the
characteristic distribution and expected returns once we condition on other characteristics
in the right panel relative to the unconditional association in the left panels. Size matters
for returns for all firms in the right panel of Figure 9 and the conditional association
is more pronounced than the relationship in the left panel. This finding is reminiscent
of Asness, Frazzini, Israel, Moskowitz, and Pedersen (2015), who argue “size matters,
if you control your junk”. We see in the lower panels, the assets-to-market-cap ratio is
unconditionally positively associated with expected returns. Once we condition on other
characteristics, though, the association flips sign, and stocks with a high ratio have lower
expected returns compared to stocks with a lower ratio.
    Figure 11 plots the conditional and unconditional mean functions for the book-to-
market ratio and idiosyncratic volatility. Both book-to-market and idiosyncratic volatility
have a monotonic, positive unconditional association with expected returns across the
whole characteristic distribution. Conditional on other characteristics, book-to-market
loses the predictive power for returns and only stocks with the highest idiosyncratic
volatility are significantly associated with returns.
    This section shows that many of the univariate significant return predictors do not
provide incremental predictive power for expected returns once we condition on other
stock characteristics.




                                             31
B    Time Variation in Return Predictors

McLean and Pontiff (2016) document substantial variation over time in the predictive
power of many characteristics for expected returns. Figure 12 to Figure 15 show the
conditional mean function for our baseline nonparametric model for all stocks and nine
knots over time. We perform model selection on the first 10 years of data. We then
fix the selected characteristics and estimate the nonparametric model on a rolling basis
using 10 years of data. We normalize the conditional mean function to equal 0 when the
normalized characteristic equals 0.5 (the median characteristic in a given month).
    We see in Figure 12 that the conditional mean function is non-constant throughout
the sample period for lagged market cap.            Small firms have higher expected
returns compared to large firms, conditional on all other significant return predictors.
Interestingly, the size effect seems largest during the end of our sample period, contrary
to conventional wisdom (see Asness et al. (2015) for a related finding). The bottom panel
shows that firms with higher total assets have higher expected returns conditional on
other firm characteristics, contrary to the unconditional association (see Table 2).
    We see in the top panel of Figure 13 that intermediate momentum has a significant
conditional association with expected returns throughout the sample period. Interestingly,
past intermediate losers tend to outperform once we condition on other characteristics.
In the bottom panel, we see momentum lost part of the predictive power for expected
returns in the more recent period because of high returns of past losers, consistent with
findings in Daniel and Moskowitz (2016).
    Figure 14 shows the effect of long-term reversal on expected returns has been
strongest in the modern sample period because past losers tend to appreciate more than
they did historically. The bottom panel shows the association of idiosyncratic volatility
and returns has been flat until the early 1990s and only afterwards did stocks with the
highest level of idiosyncratic volatility earn substantially higher returns than all other
stocks.




                                            32
C       Out-of-Sample Performance and Model Comparison

We argued in Section II that the nonparametric method we propose overcomes potential
shortcomings of more traditional methods, and show potential advantages of the adaptive
group LASSO in simulations.
       We now want to compare the performance of the nonparametric model with the linear
model out of sample. The out-of-sample context ensures that in-sample overfit does not
explain a potentially superior performance of the nonparametric model.
       We estimate the nonparametric model for a period from 1963 to 1990 and carry
out model selection with the adaptive group LASSO with nine knots, but also use the
adaptive LASSO for model selection in the linear model over the same sample period and
with the same number of knots. We then use 10 years of data to estimate the model
on the selected characteristics. In the next months, we take the selected characteristics
and predict one-month-ahead returns and construct a hedge portfolio going long stocks
with the 10% highest predicted returns and shorting stocks with the 10% lowest predicted
returns. We roll the estimation and prediction period forward by one month and repeat
the procedure until the end of the sample.
       Specifically, in our first out-of-sample predictions, we use return data from January
1981 until December 1990 and characteristics data from December 1980 until November
1990 to get estimators β̂.23 We then take the estimated coefficients and characteristics
data from January 1981 until December 1990 to predict returns for January 1991 and
form two portfolios for each method. We buy the stocks with the 10% highest expected
returns and sell the stocks with the 10% lowest predicted returns. We then move our
estimation sample forward by one month from February 1981 until January 1991, get new
estimators β̂, and predict returns for February 1991.
       Table 5 reports the out-of-sample Sharpe ratios for both the nonparametric and linear
models for different sample periods, number of knots, and equally- and value-weighted
portfolios. For a sample from 1991 to 2014 and nine knots, the nonparametric model
generates an out-of-sample Sharpe ratio for an equally-weighted hedge portfolio of 3.42
  23
     To be more precise, for returns until June 1981, many of the balance-sheet variables will be from the
fiscal year ending in 1979.



                                                   33
compared to 2.26 for the linear model (compare columns (1) and (3)).24 The linear model
selects 21 characteristics in sample compared to only eight for the nonparametric model,
but performs worse out of sample.25
        We see a substantial drop in out-of-sample Sharpe ratios both for the nonparametric
and linear model when we study value-weighted portfolios (see columns (2) and (4)). The
difference in Sharpe ratios between value- and equally-weighted portfolios is similar to
Lewellen (2015), who finds Sharpe ratios of value-weighted portfolios 50% smaller than
the equally-weighted counterpart. Most studies in empirical finance winsorize the data,
including size. When we winsorize size at the 1% and 5% levels, we find out-of-sample
value-weighted Sharpe ratios of 1.38 and 1.73 for the nonparametric model (results not
reported).
        Column (5) studies a linear model that also employs the rank transformation we
discuss in Section III. The linear model now selects even 27 of the 36 characteristics,
but the out-of-sample Sharpe ratio is similar to the linear model for non-transformed
characteristics.
        Nonlinearities are important. We find an increase in out-of-sample Sharpe ratios
relative to the Sharpe ratio of the linear model when we employ the nonparametric model
for prediction on the 21 characteristics the linear model selects (see column (6)). The
linear model appears to overfit the data in sample. The Sharpe ratio for the linear model
when we use the eight characteristics we select with the nonparametric model is identical
to the one we find when we use the 21 characteristics the linear model selects (see column
(7)).
        We see in columns (8) and (9) that Sharpe ratios drop by more than 50% for both
models when we exclude firms below the 10th percentile of NYSE stocks (around 200,000
firm-months observations out of 650,000). Lewellen (2015) also finds Sharpe ratios for an
equally-weighted hedge portfolio that are lower by 50% when he excludes “all but tiny
stocks.” Columns (10) to (12) show Sharpe ratios larger than 3 for an out-of-sample
  24
     The linear model we estimate and the results are similar to Lewellen (2015). Specifically, he finds
for a linear model out-of-sample Sharpe ratios of 1.65 and 0.85 for equally- and value-weighted hedge
portfolios and an out-of-sample period of 1974 to 2013.
  25
     The linear model might be misspecified and therefore select more variables (see discussion and
simulation results in Section III).


                                                  34
period starting in 1975 using the first 10 years for model selection and estimation and for
our baseline sample starting in 1991, or using 4 or 14 knots rather than 9 as in column
(1).
       We also studied whether the return forecasts of the nonparametric model actually
picks up cross-sectional variation in ex-post realized returns at the firm level. A return
estimate that provides an unbiased forecast of returns should predict ex-post returns
with a slope of 1. For all stocks and a sample from 1991 until 2014, we find the return
forecasts from the nonparametric model have a slope estimate of 0.78 and explain 3.11%
of the ex-post variation in returns at the firm level. These estimates compare favorably
to Lewellen (2015), who typically finds smaller point estimates and R2 s of below 1%.



VI        Conclusion
We propose a nonparametric method to tackle the challenge posed by Cochrane (2011)
in his presidential address, namely, which firm characteristics provide independent
information for expected returns. We use the adaptive group LASSO to select significant
return predictors and to estimate the model.
       We document the properties of our framework in three applications: (i) Which
characteristics have incremental forecasting power for expected returns? (ii) Does the
predictive power of characteristics vary over time? (iii) How does the nonparametric
model compare to a linear model out of sample?
       Our results are as follows: (i) Out of 36 characteristics, only 7 to 15 provide
independent information depending on the number of interpolation points (similar to
the number of portfolios in portfolio sorts), sample period, and universe of stocks (large
versus small stocks). (ii) Substantial time variation is present in the predictive power of
characteristics. (iii) The nonparametric model selects fewer characteristics than the linear
model in sample and has a 50% higher Sharpe ratio out of sample.
       We see our paper as a starting point only and ask the following questions. Are the
characteristics we identify related to factor exposures? How many factors are important?
Can we achieve a dimension reduction and identify K factors that can summarize the N


                                            35
independent dimensions of expected returns with K << N similar to Fama and French
(1993) and Fama and French (1996)?




                                       36
References
Ang, A., R. J. Hodrick, Y. Xing, and X. Zhang (2006). The cross-section of volatility and
  expected returns. The Journal of Finance 61 (1), 259–299.
Asness, C. S., A. Frazzini, R. Israel, T. J. Moskowitz, and L. H. Pedersen (2015). Size
  matters, if you control your junk. Unpublished Manuscript, University of Chicago.
Balakrishnan, K., E. Bartov, and L. Faurel (2010). Post loss/profit announcement drift.
  Journal of Accounting and Economics 50 (1), 20–41.
Ball, R., J. Gerakos, J. T. Linnainmaa, and V. V. Nikolaev (2015). Deflating profitability.
  Journal of Financial Economics 117 (2), 225–248.
Bansal, R. and S. Viswanathan (1993). No arbitrage and arbitrage pricing: A new
  approach. The Journal of Finance 48 (4), 1231–1262.
Banz, R. W. (1981). The relationship between return and market value of common stocks.
  Journal of Financial Economics 9 (1), 3–18.
Barillas, F. and J. Shanken (2016). Which alpha?               Review of Financial Studies
  (forthcoming), hhw101.
Basu, S. (1983). The relationship between earnings’ yield, market value and return for
  NYSE common stocks: Further evidence. Journal of Financial Economics 12 (1), 129–
  156.
Belloni, A., V. Chernozhukov, D. Chetverikov, and K. Kato (2015). Some new
  asymptotic theory for least squares series: Pointwise and uniform results. Journal
  of Econometrics 186 (2), 345–366.
Bhandari, L. C. (1988). Debt/equity ratio and expected common stock returns: Empirical
  evidence. The Journal of Finance 43 (2), 507–528.
Brandt, M. W., P. Santa-Clara, and R. Valkanov (2009). Parametric portfolio policies:
  Exploiting characteristics in the cross-section of equity returns. Review of Financial
  Studies 22 (9), 3411–3447.
Breeden, D. T. (1979). An intertemporal asset pricing model with stochastic consumption
  and investment opportunities. Journal of Financial Economics 7 (3), 265–296.
Bryzgalova, S. (2016). Spurious factors in linear asset pricing models. Technical report,
  Unpublished Manuscript, Stanford University.
Burnside, C. (2016). Identification and inference in linear stochastic discount factor models
  with excess returns. Journal of Financial Econometrics 14 (2), 295–330.
Bustamante, M. C. and A. Donangelo (2016). Product market competition and industry
  returns. Review of Financial Studies (forthcoming).
Cattaneo, M. D., R. K. Crump, M. H. Farrell, and E. Schaumburg (2016). Characteristic-
  sorted portfolios: estimation and inference. Unpublished Manuscript.
Chapman, D. A. (1997). Approximating the asset pricing kernel. The Journal of
  Finance 52 (4), 1383–1410.
Chinco, A., A. D. Clark-Joseph, and M. Ye (2015). Sparse signals in the cross-section of
  returns. Available at SSRN 2606396 .
Chordia, T., A. Goyal, and J. A. Shanken (2015). Cross-sectional asset pricing with
  individual stocks: betas versus characteristics. Unpublished Manuscript, Emory


                                             37
  University.
Chung, K. H. and H. Zhang (2014). A simple approximation of intraday spreads using
  daily data. Journal of Financial Markets 17, 94–120.
Cochrane, J. H. (2007). Financial markets and the real economy. In R. Mehra (Ed.),
  Handbook of the Equity Risk Premium. Elsevier.
Cochrane, J. H. (2011). Presidential address: Discount rates. Journal of Finance 66 (4),
  1047–1108.
Connor, G., M. Hagmann, and O. Linton (2012). Efficient Semiparametric Estimation of
  the Famaı̈¿ 21 French Model and Extensions. Econometrica 80, 713–754.
Cooper, M. J., H. Gulen, and M. J. Schill (2008). Asset growth and the cross-section of
  stock returns. The Journal of Finance 63 (4), 1609–1651.
D’Acunto, F., R. Liu, C. E. Pflueger, and M. Weber (2016). Flexible prices and leverage.
  Unpublished Manuscript, University of Chicago.
Daniel, K. and T. J. Moskowitz (2016). Momentum crashes. Journal of Financial
  Economics 122 (2), 221–247.
Daniel, K. and S. Titman (1997). Evidence on the characteristics of cross sectional
  variation in stock returns. Journal of Finance 52 (1), 1–33.
Datar, V. T., N. Y. Naik, and R. Radcliffe (1998). Liquidity and stock returns: An
  alternative test. Journal of Financial Markets 1 (2), 203–219.
Davis, J. L., E. F. Fama, and K. R. French (2000). Characteristics, covariances, and
  average returns: 1929 to 1997. The Journal of Finance 55 (1), 389–406.
De Bondt, W. F. and R. Thaler (1985). Does the stock market overreact? The Journal
  of Finance 40 (3), 793–805.
DeMiguel, V., A. Martin-Utrera, F. Nogales, and R. Uppal (2016). A portfolio perspective
  on the multitude of firm characteristics. Unpublished Manuscript, London Business
  School 22 (5), 1915–1953.
Fama, E. F. and K. R. French (1992). The cross-section of expected stock returns. Journal
  of Finance 47 (2), 427–465.
Fama, E. F. and K. R. French (1993). Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and
  bonds. Journal of Financial Economics 33 (1), 3–56.
Fama, E. F. and K. R. French (1996). Multifactor explanations of asset pricing anomalies.
  Journal of Finance 51 (1), 55–84.
Fama, E. F. and K. R. French (2008). Dissecting anomalies. Journal of Finance 63 (4),
  1653–1678.
Fama, E. F. and K. R. French (2015). A five-factor asset pricing model. Journal of
  Financial Economics 116 (1), 1–22.
Fama, E. F. and K. R. French (2016). Dissecting anomalies with a five-factor model.
  Review of Financial Studies 29 (1), 69–103.
Fama, E. F. and J. D. MacBeth (1973). Risk, return, and equilibrium: Empirical tests.
  Journal of Political Economy 81 (3), 607–636.
Frazzini, A. and L. H. Pedersen (2014). Betting against beta. Journal of Financial
  Economics 111 (1), 1–25.
Gandhi, P. and H. Lustig (2015). Size anomalies in US bank stock returns. The Journal

                                           38
  of Finance 70 (2), 733–768.
Garfinkel, J. A. (2009). Measuring investors’ opinion divergence. Journal of Accounting
  Research 47 (5), 1317–1348.
George, T. J. and C.-Y. Hwang (2004). The 52-week high and momentum investing. The
  Journal of Finance 59 (5), 2145–2176.
Gibbons, M. R., S. A. Ross, and J. Shanken (1989). A test of the efficiency of a given
  portfolio. Econometrica 57 (5), 1121–1152.
Giglio, S. W. and D. Xiu (2016). Inference on risk premia in the presence of omitted
  factors. Unpublished Manuscript, University of Chicago.
Gorodnichenko, Y. and M. Weber (2016). Are sticky prices costly? Evidence from the
  stock market. The American Economic Review 106 (1), 165–199.
Gospodinov, N., R. Kan, and C. Robotti (2014). Misspecification-robust inference in linear
  asset-pricing models with irrelevant risk factors. Review of Financial Studies 27 (7),
  2139–2170.
Green, J., J. R. Hand, and F. Zhang (2016). The characteristics that provide independent
  information about average us monthly stock returns. Review of Financial Studies
  (forthcoming).
Harvey, C. R., Y. Liu, and H. Zhu (2016). ... and the cross-section of expected returns.
  Review of Financial Studies 29 (1), 5–68.
Haugen, R. A. and N. L. Baker (1996). Commonality in determinants of expected stock
  returns. Journal of Financial Economics 41 (3), 401–439.
Hirshleifer, D., K. Hou, S. H. Teoh, and Y. Zhang (2004). Do investors overvalue firms
  with bloated balance sheets? Journal of Accounting and Economics 38, 297–331.
Horowitz, J., J. Klemelä, and E. Mammen (2006). Optimal estimation in additive
  regression models. Bernoulli 12 (2), 271–298.
Horowitz, J. L. (2016). Variable selection and estimation in high-dimensional models.
  Canadian Journal of Economics 48 (2), 389–407.
Hou, K., G. A. Karolyi, and B.-C. Kho (2011). What factors drive global stock returns?
  Review of Financial Studies 24 (8), 2527–2574.
Hou, K., C. Xue, and L. Zhang (2015). Digesting anomalies: An investment approach.
  Review of Financial Studies 28 (3), 660–705.
Huang, J., J. L. Horowitz, and F. Wei (2010). Variable selection in nonparametric additive
  models. Annals of Statistics 38 (4), 2282–2313.
Huang, J.-Z. and Z. Shi (2016). Determinants of bond risk premia. Unpublished
  Manuscript, Penn State University.
Jagannathan, R. and Z. Wang (1998). An asymptotic theory for estimating beta-pricing
  models using cross-sectional regression. The Journal of Finance 53 (4), 1285–1309.
Jegadeesh, N. (1990). Evidence of predictable behavior of security returns. The Journal
  of Finance 45 (3), 881–898.
Jegadeesh, N. and S. Titman (1993). Returns to Buying Winners and Selling Losers:
  Implications for Stock Market Efficiency. Journal of Finance 48, 65–91.
Kan, R. and C. Zhang (1999). Two-pass tests of asset pricing models with useless factors.
  Journal of Finance 54 (1), 203–235.

                                           39
Kleibergen, F. (2009). Tests of risk premia in linear factor models. Journal of
  econometrics 149 (2), 149–173.
Kleibergen, F. and Z. Zhan (2015). Unexplained factors and their effects on second pass
  r-squared’s. Journal of Econometrics 189 (1), 101–116.
Kozak, S., S. Nagel, and S. Santosh (2015). Interpreting factor models. Unpublished
  Manuscript, University of Michigan.
Lewellen, J. (2015). The cross section of expected stock returns. Critical Finance
  Review 4 (1), 1–44.
Light, N., D. Maslov, and O. Rytchkov (2016). Aggregation of information about the
  cross section of stock returns: A latent variable approach. Review of Financial Studies
  (forthcoming).
Lintner, J. (1965). The valuation of risk assets and the selection of risky investments in
  stock portfolios and capital budgets. The Review of Economics and Statistics 47 (1),
  13–37.
Lucas, R. E. (1978). Asset prices in an exchange economy. Econometrica 46 (6), 1429–
  1445.
Lyandres, E., L. Sun, and L. Zhang (2008). The new issues puzzle: Testing the investment-
  based explanation. Review of Financial Studies 21 (6), 2825–2855.
McLean, D. R. and J. Pontiff (2016). Does academic research destroy return predictability.
  Journal of Finance 71 (1), 5–32.
Meinshausen, N. and P. Bühlmann (2006). High-dimensional graphs and variable selection
  with the Lasso. Annals of Statistics 34 (3), 1436–1462.
Merton, R. C. (1973). An intertemporal capital asset pricing model. Econometrica 41 (5),
  867–887.
Mossin, J. (1966). Equilibrium in a capital asset market. Econometrica 34 (4), 768–783.
Novy-Marx, R. (2011). Operating leverage. Review of Finance 15 (1), 103–134.
Novy-Marx, R. (2012). Is momentum really momentum?                    Journal of Financial
  Economics 103 (3), 429–453.
Novy-Marx, R. (2013). The other side of value: The gross profitability premium. Journal
  of Financial Economics 108 (1), 1–28.
Palazzo, B. (2012). Cash holdings, risk, and expected returns. Journal of Financial
  Economics 104 (1), 162–185.
Rosenberg, B., K. Reid, and R. Lanstein (1985). Persuasive evidence of market inefficiency.
  The Journal of Portfolio Management 11 (3), 9–16.
Ross, S. A. (1976). The arbitrage theory of capital asset pricing. Journal of Economic
  Theory 13 (3), 341–360.
Rubinstein, M. (1976). The valuation of uncertain income streams and the pricing of
  options. The Bell Journal of Economics 7 (2), 407–425.
Sharpe, W. F. (1964). Capital asset prices: A theory of market equilibrium under
  conditions of risk. The Journal of Finance 19 (3), 425–442.
Sloan, R. (1996). Do stock prices fully reflect information in accruals and cash flows about
  future earnings? Accounting Review 71 (3), 289–315.
Soliman, M. T. (2008). The use of DuPont analysis by market participants. The

                                            40
  Accounting Review 83 (3), 823–853.
Stone, C. J. (1982). Optimal global rates of convergence for nonparametric regression.
  Annals of Statistics 10 (4), 1040–1053.
Stone, C. J. (1985). Additive regression and other nonparametric models. The Annals of
  Statistics 13 (2), 689–705.
Stone, C. J. (1986). The dimensionality reduction principle for generalized additive
  models. The Annals of Statistics 14 (2), 590–606.
Yuan, M. and Y. Lin (2006). Model selection and estimation in regression with
  grouped variables. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical
  Methodology) 68 (1), 49–67.
Zou, H. (2006). The adaptive Lasso and its oracle properties. Journal of the American
  Statistical Association 101 (476), 1418–1429.




                                         41
   … and the Cross-Section of Expected Returns

                               Figure 2: Numbers of published Factors




                                                                                                                        Downloaded from http://rfs.oxfordjournals.org/ at Interdisciplinary Center Herzliya on May 15, 2016
             Number of discovered factors over time. Source: Figure 2 of Harvey, Liu, and Zhu
   Figure 2 (2016).
   Factors and publications.



   period from 1980 to 1991, only about one factor is discovered per year. This
   number has grown to around five for the 1991–2003 period, during which
   time a number of papers, such as Fama and French (1992), Carhart (1997),
   and Pastor and Stambaugh (2003), spurred interest in studying cross-sectional
   return patterns. In the last nine years, the annual factor discovery rate has
   increased sharply to around 18. In total, 164 factors were discovered in the past
   nine years, roughly doubling the 84 factors discovered in all previous years. We
   do not include working papers in Figure 2. In our sample, there are 63 working
   papers covering 68 factors.
      We obtain t-statistics for each of the 316 factors discovered, including the
   ones in the working papers.26 The overwhelming majority of t-statistics exceed
   the 1.96 benchmark for 5% significance.27 The nonsignificant ones typically
   belong to papers that propose a number of factors. These likely represent
   only a small subsample of nonsignificant t-statistics for all tried factors.
   Importantly, we take published t-statistics as given. That is, we assume they are
   econometrically sound with respect to the usual suspects (data errors, coding
   errors, misalignment, heteroscedasticity, autocorrelation, clustering, outliers,
   etc.).
                                                           42
26 The sign of a t-statistic depends on the direction of the long/short strategy. We usually calculate p-values based
   on two-sided t-tests, so the sign does not matter. From an investment perspective, the sign of the mean return of
   a long/short strategy does not matter as we can always reverse the direction of the strategy. Therefore we use
   absolute values of these t-statistics.
     [10:26 26/11/2015 RFS-hhv059.tex]
                                              3 of Harvey, Liu, and Zhu (2016).




43
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                … and the Cross-Section of Expected Returns




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Figure 3: Suggested t-stats adjustment




                                                                                              Figure 3
                                                                                              Adjusted t-statistics, 1965–2032.
                                                                                              Bonferroni and Holm are multiple testing adjustment procedures that control the family-wise error rate (FWER) and are described in Sections 4.4.1 and 4.4.2, respectively. BHY is a multiple
                                                                                              testing adjustment procedure that controls the false discovery rate (FDR) and is described in Section 4.4.3. The green solid curve shows the historical cumulative number of factors discovered,
                                                                                              excluding those from working papers. Forecasts (dotted green line) are based on a linear extrapolation. The dark crosses mark selected factors proposed by the literature. They are MRT
                                                                                              (market beta; Fama and MacBeth 1973), EP (earnings-price ratio; Basu 1983), SMB and HML (size and book-to-market; Fama and French (1992)), MOM (momentum; Carhart 1997), LIQ




                                              Recommendation to adjust t-statistics for multiple testing problem. Source: Figure
                                                                                              (liquidity; Pastor and Stambaugh 2003), DEF (default likelihood; Vassalou and Xing 2004), IVOL (idiosyncratic volatility; Ang et al. 2006); DCG (durable consumption goods; Yogo 2006),




                                         21




     Page: 21
                                                                                              SRV and LRV (short-run and long-run volatility; Adrian and Rosenberg 2008), and CVOL (consumption volatility; Boguth and Kuehn 2012). t-statistics over 4.9 are truncated at 4.9. For
                                                                                              detailed descriptions of these factors, see Table 6 and http://faculty.fuqua.duke.edu/∼charvey/Factor-List.xlsx.




     1–64
                                                                                                                                   Downloaded from http://rfs.oxfordjournals.org/ at Interdisciplinary Center Herzliya on May 15, 2016
                           Figure 4: 5 Portfolios sorted on Book-to-Market




                               Stock
                                                                                     Portfolio
                                                                                      Mean
Monthly Returns




                           1        2              3               4                     5


                                        Portfolios Sorted on Book{to{Market

                  This figure plots expected returns on the y-axis against the book-to-market ratio on
                  the x-axis as well as portfolio mean returns for simulated data.




                                                          44
Figure 5: 5 Portfolios sorted on Book-to-Market and nonparametric Estimator



                                                                Quadratic
                                                                 Spline




                                   Stock
                                                                                         Portfolio
                                                                                          Mean
    Monthly Returns




                               1        2              3               4                     5


                                            Portfolios Sorted on Book{to{Market

                      This figure plots expected returns on the y-axis against the book-to-market ratio on
                      the x-axis as well as portfolio mean returns and a nonparametric conditional mean
                      function for simulated data.




                                                              45
Figure 6: 10 Portfolios sorted on Book-to-Market and nonparametric Estimator



                                                                Quadratic
                                                                 Spline




                                     Stock                                                      Portfolio
                                                                                                 Mean
    Monthly Returns




                           1     2      3    4     5     6         7     8           9              10


                                             Portfolios Sorted on Book{to{Market

                      This figure plots expected returns on the y-axis against the book-to-market ratio on
                      the x-axis as well as portfolio mean returns and a nonparametric conditional mean
                      function for simulated data.




                                                              46
Figure 7: Unconditional and Conditional Mean Function: Tobin’s Q (Q) and
Return on Assets (ROA)

                          unconditional                                               conditional
    0.03                                                          0.03
                                  Estimated function                                         Estimated function
    0.02                          95% confidence band             0.02                       95% confidence band

    0.01                                                          0.01

       0                                                             0

   -0.01                                                          -0.01

   -0.02                                                          -0.02

   -0.03                                                          -0.03

   -0.04                                                          -0.04
           0        0.2     0.4       0.6     0.8       1                 0    0.2    0.4         0.6    0.8           1
                                  Q                                                          Q

                          unconditional                                              conditional
    0.04                                                         0.04
                                  Estimated function                                        Estimated function
                                  95% confidence band                                       95% confidence band
    0.03                                                         0.03


    0.02                                                         0.02


    0.01                                                         0.01


      0                                                             0


   -0.01                                                         -0.01

           0        0.2    0.4        0.6    0.8        1                0    0.2    0.4         0.6    0.8        1
                              ROA                                                      ROA
               Effect of normalized Tobin’s Q (Q) and return-on-assets (ROA) on average
               returns (see equation (3)). The left panels report unconditional associations
               between a characteristic and returns, and the right panels report associations
               conditional on all other selected characteristics. The sample period is July 1963
               to June 2015. See Section IV for variable definitions.




                                                            47
Figure 8: Unconditional and Conditional Mean Function: Profitability (Prof )
and Investment

        #10-3               unconditional                                              #10-3               conditional
   20                                                                            20
                                       Estimated function                                                        Estimated function
                                       95% confidence band                                                       95% confidence band
   15                                                                            15


   10                                                                            10


    5                                                                              5


    0                                                                              0


   -5                                                                             -5


        0           0.2         0.4         0.6         0.8         1                  0           0.2     0.4       0.6     0.8         1
                                  Prof                                                                        Prof


                                 unconditional                                                               conditional
    0.03                                                                          0.03
                                            Estimated function                                                     Estimated function
   0.025                                                                         0.025
                                            95% confidence band                                                    95% confidence band

    0.02                                                                          0.02

   0.015                                                                         0.015

    0.01                                                                          0.01

   0.005                                                                         0.005

            0                                                                              0

   -0.005                                                                        -0.005

    -0.01                                                                         -0.01
                0         0.2         0.4         0.6         0.8       1                      0     0.2     0.4       0.6     0.8           1
                                  Investment                                                                 Investment
                Effect of normalized profitability (Prof) and investment (Investment) on average
                returns (see equation (3)). The left panels report unconditional associations
                between a characteristic and returns and the right panels report associations
                conditional on all other selected characteristics. The sample period is July 1963
                to June 2015. See Section IV for variable definitions.




                                                                            48
Figure 9: Unconditional and Conditional Mean Function: Short-Term Reversal
(r2−1 ) and Momentum (r12−2 )

                              unconditional                                             conditional
    0.04                                                               0.04
                                       Estimated function                                       Estimated function
                                       95% confidence band                                      95% confidence band
    0.03                                                               0.03


    0.02                                                               0.02


    0.01                                                               0.01


          0                                                               0


    -0.01                                                             -0.01
              0        0.2      0.4          0.6    0.8      1                0   0.2    0.4          0.6   0.8       1
                                      r2!1                                                     r2!1

                             unconditional                                              conditional
   0.04                                                               0.04
                                      Estimated function                                       Estimated function
                                      95% confidence band                                      95% confidence band
   0.03                                                               0.03


   0.02                                                               0.02


   0.01                                                               0.01


     0                                                                   0


  -0.01                                                               -0.01
          0          0.2      0.4        0.6       0.8       1                0   0.2   0.4           0.6   0.8       1
                                 r12!2                                                     r12!2
                  Effect of normalized short-term reversal (r2−1 ) and momentum (r12−2 ) on average
                  returns (see equation (3)). The left panels report unconditional associations
                  between a characteristic and returns, and the right panels report associations
                  conditional on all other selected characteristics. The sample period is July 1963
                  to June 2015. See Section IV for variable definitions.




                                                                 49
Figure 10: Unconditional and Conditional Mean Function: Size (LME) and
Assets-to-Market Cap (A2ME)

                      unconditional                                            conditional
     0.1                                                      0.1
                              Estimated function                                     Estimated function
    0.08                                                     0.08
                              95% confidence band                                    95% confidence band

    0.06                                                     0.06

    0.04                                                     0.04

    0.02                                                     0.02

      0                                                         0

   -0.02                                                     -0.02

   -0.04                                                     -0.04

   -0.06                                                     -0.06
           0    0.2     0.4      0.6     0.8        1                0   0.2   0.4      0.6     0.8        1
                          LME                                                    LME

                      unconditional                                            conditional
    0.02                                                     0.02
                              Estimated function                                     Estimated function
                              95% confidence band                                    95% confidence band
    0.01                                                     0.01


      0                                                         0


   -0.01                                                     -0.01


   -0.02                                                     -0.02


   -0.03                                                     -0.03
           0    0.2     0.4      0.6     0.8        1                0   0.2   0.4      0.6     0.8        1
                         A2ME                                                    A2ME
           Effect of normalized size (LME) and assets-to-market cap (A2ME) on average
           returns (see equation (3)). The left panels report unconditional associations
           between a characteristic and returns, and the right panels report associations
           conditional on all other selected characteristics. The sample period is July 1963
           to June 2015. See Section IV for variable definitions.




                                                        50
Figure 11: Unconditional and Conditional Mean Function: Book-to-Market
(BEME) and Idiosyncratic Volatility (Idio vol)

                          unconditional                                              conditional
    0.03                                                           0.03
                                   Estimated function                                       Estimated function
   0.025                                                          0.025
                                   95% confidence band                                      95% confidence band

    0.02                                                           0.02

   0.015                                                          0.015

    0.01                                                           0.01

   0.005                                                          0.005

          0                                                           0

  -0.005                                                          -0.005

   -0.01                                                           -0.01
              0    0.2      0.4       0.6      0.8       1                 0   0.2    0.4      0.6      0.8       1
                                BEME                                                   BEME

                         unconditional                                               conditional
  0.05                                                            0.05
                                  Estimated function                                        Estimated function
  0.04                            95% confidence band             0.04                      95% confidence band

  0.03                                                            0.03

  0.02                                                            0.02

  0.01                                                            0.01

     0                                                                0

  -0.01                                                           -0.01

  -0.02                                                           -0.02
          0       0.2     0.4        0.6     0.8         1                0    0.2   0.4       0.6     0.8        1
                           Idio vol                                                   Idio vol
              Effect of normalized book-to-market (BEME) and idiosyncratic volatility (Idio
              vol) on average returns (see equation (3)). The left panels report unconditional
              associations between a characteristic and returns and the right panels report
              associations conditional on all other selected characteristics. The sample period is
              July 1963 to June 2015. See Section IV for variable definitions.




                                                             51
Figure 12: Time-varying Conditional Mean Function: Size (LME) and Total
Assets (AT)




       Effect of normalized size (LME) and total assets (AT) on average returns over
       time (see equation (3)) conditional on all other selected characteristics. The
       sample period is July 1963 to June 2015. See Section IV for variable definitions.




                                              52
Figure 13: Time-varying Conditional Mean Function: Intermediate Momentum
(r12−7 ) and Standard Momentum (r12−2 )




       Effect of normalized intermediate momentum (r12−7 ) and standard momentum
       (r12−2 ) on average returns over time (see equation (3)) conditional on all other
       selected characteristics. The sample period is July 1963 to June 2015. See Section
       IV for variable definitions.




                                              53
Figure 14: Time-varying Conditional Mean Function: Long-Term Reversal
(r36−13 ) and Idiosyncratic Volatility (Idio vol)




       Effect of normalized long-term reversal (r36−13 ) and idiosyncratic volatility (Idio
       vol) on average returns over time (see equation (3)) conditional on all other
       selected characteristics. The sample period is July 1963 to June 2015. See Section
       IV for variable definitions.




                                               54
Figure 15: Time-varying Conditional Mean Function: Earnings-to-Price Ratio
(E2P) and Relative to High Price (Rel to High)




        Effect of normalized earnings-to-price ratio (E2P) and relative to high price (Rel
        to High) on average returns over time (see equation (3)) conditional on all other
        selected characteristics. The sample period is July 1963 to June 2015. See Section
        IV for variable definitions.




                                               55
                                              Table 1: Descriptive Statistics for Firm Characteristics

     This table reports average returns, medians, time series standard deviations, and number of observations for the firm characteristics discussed in section IV.
     The sample period is July 1963 to June 2015.


                      r 0         A2ME          AT          ATO         BEME         Beta         C          CTO         D2A         DPI2A          E2P         FC2Y        Free CF
      Mean           0.01         3.26    2621.57      −0.95             0.89        1.02        0.14      12.93         0.04          1.36      −0.02          1.45       −0.22
      Median         0.00         1.55     192.73        1.83            0.72        0.95        0.08       1.18         0.03          0.06        0.06         0.23         0.04
      Std           (0.14)      (7.96) (19213.51)     (244.93)          (0.84)     (0.57)       (0.17)   (566.70)       (0.04)      (71.36)       (0.85)      (30.74)      (10.24)
      Nobs         2,745,433    2,448,288   2,448,288   2,368,107      2,371,870   2,171,311   2,422,996   2,368,412   2,359,509     2,336,364   2,444,601     2,180,291    2,368,287


                   Idio vol     Investment      Lev         LME        Lturnover     NOA         OA          OL          PCM           PM           Prof          Q




56
      Mean           0.03          1.14        0.36     1250.38          0.08        7.96       7.17         1.09      −0.91        −1.46           1.13        1.93
      Median         0.02          0.08        0.32      127.35          0.05        0.63     −0.03          0.94         0.33         0.08         0.61        1.28
      Std           (0.02)      (52.59)       (0.58)   (5991.41)        (0.13)   (444.79)    (946.78)       (1.00)     (37.49)      (41.37)      (17.88)       (3.46)
      Nobs         2,731,335     2,376,295   2,352,936    2,745,465    2,507,198   2,376,857   2,246,843   2,433,413    2,411,302    2,412,446    2,359,128   2,448,288


                  Rel to High     RNA          ROA          ROE         r12−2       r12−7        r2−1       r36−13        S2P        SGA2M        Spread        SUV
      Mean           0.75       −0.26           0.62        0.20         0.14        0.08        0.01        0.35        2.64         0.54         0.04         0.21
      Median         0.79          0.13         0.04        0.10         0.06        0.03        0.00        0.17        1.43         0.29         0.02       −0.18
      Std           (0.19)      (47.85)      (59.55)      (15.10)       (0.54)     (0.36)       (0.14)      (0.97)      (4.94)       (1.09)       (0.05)       (2.55)
      Nobs         2,709,951     2,365,486    2,374,463    2,271,634   2,678,307   2,685,565   2,745,200   2,195,483   2,437,326    2,079,188    2,745,403    2,486,721
                            Table 2: Returns of 10 Portfolios Sorted on Characteristics
     This table reports equally-weighted returns with standard errors in parentheses for ten portfolios sorted on firm characteristics
     discussed in Section IV. The sample period is July 1963 to June 2015.


                       P1        P2        P3        P4        P5        P6        P7        P8        P9       P10         P10-P1
     A2ME             8.79  12.31 13.80            15.13     16.48     18.21     18.32     19.11     18.84     19.32         10.53
                     (2.98) (3.28) (2.97)          (2.90)    (2.84)    (3.05)    (2.90)    (2.83)    (2.97)    (3.26)        (2.71)
     AT              20.52 18.74 17.54             15.42     16.31     15.59     15.21     14.49     13.81     12.55          -7.96
                     (2.89) (2.80) (2.80)          (3.77)    (2.68)    (2.40)    (3.49)    (3.27)    (3.12)    (2.96)        (3.06)
     ATO             14.43 14.39 15.85             16.30     17.28     17.21     17.05     16.45     15.36     15.88          1.44
                     (2.70) (2.96) (2.99)          (3.06)    (2.88)    (2.92)    (2.89)    (2.99)    (3.13)    (2.88)        (1.83)
     BEME             8.51  12.14 13.06            14.55     15.99     16.62     17.30     18.68     20.08     23.23         14.72
                     (2.83) (2.98) (3.37)          (2.78)    (2.79)    (2.84)    (2.91)    (2.85)    (3.27)    (3.08)        (2.27)
     Beta            16.12 17.09 17.28             17.12     16.43     16.48     15.75     14.92     15.33     13.75          -2.37
                     (2.25) (2.03) (2.38)          (2.53)    (2.63)    (2.85)    (3.11)    (3.90)    (4.80)    (3.40)        (3.61)
     C               15.22 14.96 15.13             15.26     16.19     16.53     17.30     17.12     15.49     16.97          1.75
                     (3.02) (2.92) (2.90)          (2.83)    (2.83)    (2.90)    (2.78)    (2.88)    (3.21)    (3.30)        (1.82)




57
     CTO             13.90 14.23 17.05             16.58     16.91     16.49     17.44     16.23     15.72     15.56          1.66
                     (2.74) (2.87) (3.14)          (2.96)    (3.05)    (2.96)    (2.92)    (2.98)    (2.94)    (3.02)        (1.82)
     D2A             13.12 13.98 14.03             15.14     15.76     16.71     16.01     18.18     18.34     18.90          5.78
                     (2.88) (2.90) (2.86)          (3.27)    (2.84)    (2.95)    (2.94)    (2.94)    (3.00)    (2.96)        (2.19)
     DPI2A           20.50 19.91 17.72             16.36     15.96     16.70     15.78     14.92     13.00      9.42         -11.08
                     (2.67) (2.96) (2.72)          (2.70)    (2.73)    (3.49)    (3.32)    (2.79)    (3.06)    (2.93)        (1.56)
     E2P             19.38 14.11 12.98             12.92     15.11     15.26     15.48     16.30     18.02     20.45          1.07
                     (2.57) (2.59) (2.67)          (2.62)    (2.97)    (4.20)    (3.42)    (2.95)    (2.75)    (3.17)        (2.32)
     FC2Y            14.97 14.77 15.38             16.75     14.48     15.93     15.69     16.83     18.30     17.15          2.18
                     (2.85) (2.82) (2.72)          (3.87)    (3.30)    (2.80)    (2.86)    (2.82)    (3.01)    (2.80)        (2.55)
     Free CF         13.54 16.46 16.87             15.87     16.17     16.37     15.66     16.45     16.49     16.37          2.84
                     (2.54) (2.65) (2.60)          (2.81)    (2.90)    (4.02)    (3.04)    (3.41)    (2.62)    (2.84)        (2.11)
     Idio vol        12.95 14.72 15.67             16.79     17.58     17.38     17.24     16.54     15.47     15.86          2.91
                     (3.02) (2.60) (2.77)          (2.42)    (3.50)    (3.26)    (3.91)    (1.90)    (2.22)    (4.49)        (3.58)

                                                                                            continued on next page
                                     Table 2: Continued from Previous Page


                    P1       P2        P3      P4       P5       P6       P7       P8       P9       P10     P10-P1
     Investment    21.65    20.77    18.59    17.42    16.21    15.52    15.25    13.99    12.52     8.22    -13.43
                   (2.57)   (3.09)   (2.59)   (2.53)   (2.82)   (3.46)   (2.77)   (2.66)   (3.09)   (3.86)   (1.80)
     Lev           16.35    16.64    15.36    16.27    16.47    16.32    16.50    15.78    14.87    15.59     -0.76
                   (2.92)   (2.78)   (2.81)   (2.82)   (2.88)   (2.91)   (3.00)   (3.09)   (3.34)   (2.95)   (1.76)
     LME           31.51    15.84    15.09    14.16    15.08    15.36    14.85    13.64    12.75    11.67    -19.84
                   (3.18)   (3.18)   (3.11)   (3.03)   (3.41)   (4.05)   (2.95)   (2.82)   (2.62)   (2.30)   (3.43)
     Lturnover     11.87    14.52    15.45    16.30    17.14    17.66    17.81    16.79    18.13    14.64     2.77
                   (2.16)   (2.47)   (2.59)   (2.72)   (2.94)   (2.87)   (3.09)   (3.30)   (3.64)   (4.11)   (3.08)
     NOA           18.28    17.66    17.50    17.65    18.32    17.13    16.40    14.42    13.72     9.12     -9.15
                   (2.95)   (2.91)   (3.25)   (2.93)   (2.83)   (2.86)   (2.91)   (2.83)   (2.82)   (2.95)   (1.46)
     OA            16.99    18.82    17.63    17.69    17.18    16.35    15.94    15.27    14.30    10.12     -6.88
                   (2.79)   (2.83)   (2.74)   (2.73)   (2.72)   (2.89)   (2.71)   (3.44)   (2.99)   (3.33)   (1.27)
     OL            13.43    12.56    14.48    15.53    16.36    16.62    16.10    17.92    18.42    18.68     5.25




58
                   (2.67)   (2.79)   (2.98)   (3.06)   (3.03)   (3.09)   (3.03)   (2.98)   (3.13)   (2.99)   (2.05)
     PCM           16.00    15.62    16.18    15.48    16.46    16.17    15.74    15.87    15.78    16.85     0.84
                   (2.76)   (2.74)   (2.87)   (2.88)   (2.93)   (3.22)   (2.96)   (3.02)   (2.92)   (3.00)   (1.53)
     PM            16.41    19.17    17.96    17.67    16.39    15.83    15.19    14.81    13.48    13.25     -3.15
                   (2.44)   (2.50)   (2.69)   (2.78)   (3.57)   (2.85)   (4.20)   (2.96)   (2.80)   (3.17)   (3.13)
     Prof          12.39    14.23    15.53    14.92    15.72    16.58    16.44    17.64    18.82    17.98     5.58
                   (2.74)   (2.76)   (3.10)   (2.88)   (2.92)   (2.74)   (2.81)   (3.02)   (3.05)   (3.24)   (1.50)
     Q             22.64    19.04    19.21    17.69    16.29    16.37    14.37    13.77    12.00     8.83    -13.81
                   (2.88)   (2.87)   (2.99)   (2.88)   (3.13)   (2.90)   (2.96)   (3.01)   (3.26)   (2.96)   (2.13)
     Rel to High   26.55    15.29    14.08    13.71    14.52    14.72    15.67    15.73    16.15    13.56    -12.99
                   (2.45)   (2.34)   (2.56)   (2.18)   (2.69)   (2.85)   (3.09)   (3.37)   (3.74)   (4.90)   (3.96)
     RNA           15.38    18.51    17.44    17.58    17.10    16.54    15.27    15.26    13.99    13.21     -2.16
                   (3.26)   (3.06)   (3.82)   (2.92)   (2.67)   (2.78)   (2.68)   (2.78)   (2.97)   (2.69)   (2.04)

                                                                                   continued on next page
                                Table 2: Continued from Previous Page


               P1       P2       P3       P4       P5       P6       P7       P8       P9       P10     P10-P1
     ROA      17.28    20.13 17.31       16.00 16.47       15.56    16.48    14.71    13.81    12.41     -4.86
              (2.60)   (2.64) (3.05)     (3.63) (4.36)     (2.71)   (2.71)   (2.69)   (2.89)   (2.63)   (2.60)
     ROE      16.88    19.50 17.22       17.43 16.04       15.48    15.32    15.44    14.65    12.27     -4.61
              (2.55)   (2.58) (2.54)     (2.77) (4.34)     (3.56)   (2.98)   (2.63)   (2.77)   (3.06)   (2.52)
     r12−2    13.87    12.02    12.71    13.33 15.15       15.50    16.68    18.77    19.53    22.51     8.63
              (2.75)   (2.61)   (2.54)   (2.56) (2.63)     (2.83)   (3.46)   (3.07)   (3.42)   (4.52)   (3.43)
     r12−7    12.95 11.55       13.52    15.33    15.51    16.30    16.62    17.99    19.38    21.04     8.08
              (2.60) (2.61)     (2.76)   (2.89)   (2.63)   (2.71)   (2.96)   (3.44)   (3.20)   (3.99)   (2.41)
     r2−1     34.79    21.39    18.07    16.74    16.19    14.88    12.91    11.43    10.24     3.32    -31.47




59
              (2.52)   (2.82)   (2.68)   (3.23)   (3.03)   (2.59)   (2.72)   (2.58)   (3.38)   (4.39)   (2.96)
     r36−13   21.79 19.15       17.97    15.85    15.94    15.35    15.21    13.79    13.59    11.48    -10.31
              (2.63) (2.74)     (3.00)   (2.53)   (2.55)   (2.63)   (2.87)   (3.40)   (3.39)   (4.23)   (2.80)
     S2P       9.15    11.47    12.77    14.62    16.02    16.48    18.20    19.14    19.52    22.74    13.59
              (2.72)   (2.72)   (2.85)   (2.99)   (3.20)   (3.42)   (3.30)   (2.75)   (2.84)   (2.96)   (2.39)
     SGA2M     9.12    11.37    11.88    13.48    15.39    16.45    16.70    19.85    21.54    24.38    15.26
              (2.73)   (2.77)   (2.71)   (2.64)   (3.31)   (3.57)   (2.90)   (3.01)   (3.12)   (2.92)   (2.46)
     Spread   13.72    15.23    15.28    16.02    15.94    16.28    16.04    14.46    15.96    21.20     7.48
              (3.49)   (3.28)   (3.15)   (3.98)   (3.07)   (2.76)   (2.88)   (2.61)   (2.55)   (2.48)   (2.95)
     SUV       6.89     9.27    11.12    12.14    13.04    16.15    17.92    20.20    23.64    29.81    22.92
              (2.80)   (2.88)   (2.77)   (3.28)   (3.02)   (2.89)   (2.82)   (2.92)   (2.88)   (3.13)   (1.80)
                         Table 3: Fama & French Three-Factor alphas for Characteristic-sorted Portfolios

     This table reports Fama&French three-factor alphas of long-short portfolios sorted on the characteristics we describe in Section IV with standard errors in
     parentheses and t-statistics. The sample period is July 1963 to June 2015.

                                A2ME         AT        ATO       BEME          Beta         C          CTO           D2A       DPI2A
                    αF F 3      0.28      −0.56        0.13       0.68      −0.73         0.44         0.12         0.50      −0.83
                    SE          (0.17)     (0.19)     (0.14)     (0.13)      (0.20)      (0.12)       (0.15)       (0.18)      (0.13)
                    T-stat      1.69      −2.88        0.91       5.16      −3.65         3.50         0.81         2.86      −6.61



                                 E2P        FC2Y      Free CF    Idio vol   Investment     Lev         LME        Lturnover     NOA
                    αF F 3      0.12       0.41        0.39     −0.22       −0.94        −0.45       −1.19          0.02      −0.86
                    SE          (0.18)     (0.18)     (0.16)     (0.23)      (0.14)      (0.13)       (0.23)       (0.17)      (0.12)
                    T-stat      0.66       2.32        2.44     −0.94       −6.58        −3.47       −5.22          0.11      −7.19




60
                                  OA         OL        PCM         PM          Prof         Q       Rel to High     RNA         ROA
                    αF F 3     −0.55       0.36        0.42       0.01        0.39       −0.67       −0.55          0.06      −0.06
                    SE          (0.11)     (0.16)     (0.11)     (0.22)      (0.13)      (0.12)       (0.29)       (0.15)      (0.19)
                    T-stat     −5.07       2.20        3.83       0.07        3.05       −5.41       −1.86          0.37      −0.30



                                 ROE        r12−2      r12−7       r2−1       r36−13       S2P        SGA2M        Spread       SUV
                    αF F 3     −0.12       1.03        0.80     −2.35       −0.41         0.54         0.86         0.25       1.80
                    SE          (0.19)     (0.29)     (0.20)     (0.25)      (0.21)      (0.15)       (0.18)       (0.23)      (0.15)
                    T-stat     −0.62       3.58        3.91     −9.60       −1.97         3.59         4.71         1.08      12.01
                                          Table 4: Selected Characteristics in Nonparametric Model

     This table reports the selected characteristics from the universe of thirty-six firm characteristics we discuss in Section IV for different numbers of knots, the
     sample size, and in-sample Sharpe ratios of an equally-weighted hedge portfolio going long stocks with the highest predicted returns and shorting stocks with lowest
     predicted returns. q indicates the size percentile of NYSE firms. The sample period is July 1963 to June 2014 unless otherwise specified.

      Firms                              All             All             All         Size > q10      Size > q20     Size > q50          All            All
      Sample                             Full            Full            Full           Full            Full           Full          1963-1990      1991-2014
      Knots                               14               9              19              9               9             4                9               9
      Sample Size                     1,073,060       1,073,060       1,073,060       764,475         607,416        318,674          416,980        656,080
      # Selected                          15              19              15             11               7             7                 8             17
      Sharpe Ratio                       2.98            3.02            3.00           2.19            1.81           1.63             2.87           2.93
      Characteristics   # Selected       (1)             (2)             (3)            (4)             (5)             (6)             (7)             (8)
      A2ME                  5          A2ME            A2ME            A2ME                                                           A2ME            A2ME
      AT                    4           AT              AT              AT                                                                             AT
      BEME                  1                                                                                         BEME
      Beta                  4           Beta           Beta             Beta                                                                           Beta
      C                     1                            C
      D2A                   5          D2A              D2A            D2A             D2A                                                            D2A




61
      E2P                   5           E2P             E2P             E2P            E2P                                                             E2P
      FC2Y                  4          FC2Y            FC2Y            FC2Y                                                                           FC2Y
      Free CF               1                         Free CF
      Idio vol              4          Idio vol       Idio vol        Idio vol                                                                       Idio vol
      LME                   7           LME            LME             LME             LME             LME                             LME            LME
      Lturnover             6         Lturnover      Lturnover       Lturnover       Lturnover                                       Lturnover      Lturnover
      OA                    1                                                           OA
      Rel to High           8        Rel to High     Rel to High     Rel to High    Rel to High     Rel to High     Rel to High     Rel to High     Rel to High
      RNA                   1                                                                                                                          RNA
      r12−2                 7          r12−2           r12−2           r12−2           r12−2                           r12−2          r12−2           r12−2
      r12−7                 3                          r12−7                                           r12−7           r12−7
      r2−1                  8           r2−1            r2−1            r2−1            r2−1            r2−1           r2−1            r2−1            r2−1
      r36−13                7          r36−13          r36−13          r36−13          r36−13          r36−13                         r36−13          r36−13
      SGA2M                 7         SGA2M           SGA2M           SGA2M           SGA2M           SGA2M           SGA2M                          SGA2M
      Spread                2                         Spread                                                                                         Spread
      SUV                   8           SUV             SUV             SUV            SUV             SUV             SUV             SUV             SUV

      Never selected: ATO, CTO, DPI2A, Investment, Lev, NOA, OL, PCM, PM, Prof, Q, ROA, ROE, S2P
                            Table 5: Out-of-Sample Sharpe Ratios

This table reports out-of-sample (oos) Sharpe Ratios of hedge portfolios going long the 10% of stocks with highest
predicted returns and shorting the 10% of stocks with lowest predicted return for different sets of firms, out-of-sample
periods, number of interpolation points, the nonparametric and linear models, and equally- and value-weighted
returns. q indicates the size percentile of NYSE firms. We perform model selection from July 1963 until the
months before start of the out-of-sample prediction.

                               (1)             (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)               (6)
 Firms                         All             All              All              All              All               All
 oos period                1991-2014        1991-2014        1991-2014       1991-2014         1991-2014        1991-2014
 Knots                          9               9                9                9                9                 9
 Sample Size                656,067          656,067          656,067         656,067           656,067          656,067
 Model                         NP              NP             Linear           Linear        Linear-trans           NP
 # Selected                     8               8                21              21                27               21
 Model for Selection           NP              NP             Linear           Linear        Linear-trans         Linear
 Sharpe Ratio                 3.42             1.24             2.26            1.01              2.43             2.40
 Weighting                   Equal            Value            Equal           Value             Equal            Equal

                               (7)             (8)              (9)             (10)              (11)             (12)
 Firms                         All         Size > q10       Size > q10           All              All               All
 oos period                1991-2014        1991-2014        1991-2014       1975-2014         1991-2014        1991-2014
 Knots                          9               9                9                4                4                14
 Sample Size                656,067          462,321          462,321         963,112           656,067          656,067
 Model                       Linear            NP             Linear             NP               NP                NP
 # Selected                     8               5                20               9                14                7
 Model for Selection           NP              NP             Linear             NP               NP                NP
 Sharpe Ratio                 2.23             1.33             0.93            3.30              3.16             3.28
 Weighting                   Equal            Equal            Equal           Equal             Equal            Equal




                                                       62
                    Online Appendix:
       Dissecting Characteristics Nonparametrically
              Joachim Freyberger, Andreas Neuhierl, and Michael Weber
                                  Not for Publication


I    Data
This section details the construction of variables we use in the main body of the paper
with CRSP and Compustat variable names in parentheses and the relevant references.
Unless otherwise specified, we use balance-sheet data from the fiscal year ending in year
t − 1 for returns from July of year t to June of year t + 1 following the Fama and French
(1993) timing convention.

     A2ME: We follow Bhandari (1988) and define assets-to-market cap as total assets
(AT) over market capitalization as of December t-1. Market capitalization is the product
of shares outstanding (SHROUT) and price (PRC).

    AT Total assets (AT) as in Gandhi and Lustig (2015).

     ATO: Net sales over lagged net operating assets as in Soliman (2008). Net operating
assets are the difference between operating assets and operating liabilities. Operating
assets are total assets (AT) minus cash and short-term investments (CHE), minus
investment and other advances (IVAO). Operating liabilities are total assets (AT), minus
debt in current liabilities (DLC), minus long-term debt (DLTT), minus minority interest
(MIB), minus preferred stock (PSTK), minus common equity (CEQ).

     BEME: Ratio of book value of equity to market value of equity. Book equity
is shareholder equity (SH) plus deferred taxes and investment tax credit (TXDITC),
minus preferred stock (PS). SH is shareholders’ equity (SEQ). If missing, SH is the
sum of common equity (CEQ) and preferred stock (PS). If missing, SH is the difference
between total assets (AT) and total liabilities (LT). Depending on availability, we use
the redemption (item PSTKRV), liquidating (item PSTKL), or par value (item PSTK)
for PS. The market value of equity is as of December t-1. The market value of equity is
the product of shares outstanding (SHROUT) and price (PRC). See Rosenberg, Reid,
and Lanstein (1985) and Davis, Fama, and French (2000).

     Beta: We follow Frazzini and Pedersen (2014) and define the CAPM beta as
product of correlations between the excess return of stock i and the market excess return
and the ratio of volatilities. We calculate volatilities from the standard deviations of
daily log excess returns over a one-year horizon requiring at least 120 observations. We
estimate correlations using overlapping three-day log excess returns over a five-year
period requiring at least 750 non-missing observations.


                                           1
    C: Ratio of cash and short-term investments (CHE) to total assets (AT) as in
Palazzo (2012).

     CTO: We follow Haugen and Baker (1996) and define capital turnover as ratio of
net sales (SALE) to lagged total assets (AT).

     D2A: Capital intensity is the ratio of depreciation and amortization (DP) to total
assets (AT) as in Gorodnichenko and Weber (2016).

    DPI2A: We define the change in property, plants, and equipment following
Lyandres, Sun, and Zhang (2008) as changes in property, plants, and equipment
(PPEGT) and inventory (INVT) over lagged total assets (TA).

     E2P: We follow Basu (1983) and define earnings to price as the ratio of income
before extraordinary items (IB) to the market capitalization as of December t-1. Market
capitalization is the product of shares outstanding (SHROUT) and price (PRC).

    FC2Y: We define fixed costs to sales following D’Acunto, Liu, Pflueger, and Weber
(2016) as ratio of selling, general, and administrative expenses (XSGS), research and
development expenses (XRD), and advertising expenses (XAD) to net sales (SALE).

     Free CF: Cash flow to book value of equity is the ratio of net income (NI),
depreciation and amortization (DP), less change in working capital (WCAPCH), and
capital expenditure (CAPX) over the book-value of equity defined as in the construction
of BEME (see Hou et al. (2011)).

      Idio vol: Idiosyncratic volatility is the standard deviation of the residuals from a
regression of excess returns on the Fama and French (1993) three-factor model as in Ang,
Hodrick, Xing, and Zhang (2006). We use one month of daily data and require at least
fifteen non-missing observations.

     Investment: We define investment as the percentage year-on-year growth rate in
total assets (AT) following Cooper, Gulen, and Schill (2008).

   Lev: Leverage is the ratio of long-term debt (DLTT) and debt in current liabilities
(DLC) to the sum of long-term debt, debt in current liabilities, and stockholders’ equity
(SEQ) following Lewellen (2015).

   LME: Size is the total market capitalization of the previous month defined as price
(PRC) times shares outstanding (SHROUT) as in Fama and French (1992).

   LTurnover: Turnover is last month’s volume (VOL) over shares outstanding
(SHROUT) (Datar, Naik, and Radcliffe (1998)).

    NOA: Net operating assets are the difference between operating assets minus

                                            2
operating liabilities scaled by lagged total assets as in Hirshleifer, Hou, Teoh, and Zhang
(2004). Operating assets are total assets (AT) minus cash and short-term investments
(CHE), minus investment and other advances (IVAO). Operating liabilities are total
assets (AT), minus debt in current liabilities (DLC), minus long-term debt (DLTT),
minus minority interest (MIB), minus preferred stock (PSTK), minus common equity
(CEQ).

    OA: We follow Sloan (1996) and define operating accruals as changes in non-cash
working capital minus depreciation (DP) scaled by lagged total assets (TA). Non-cash
working capital is the difference between non-cash current assets and current liabilities
(LCT), debt in current liabilities (DLC) and income taxes payable (TXP). Non-cash
current assets are current assets (ACT) minus cash and short-term investments (CHE).

    OL: Operating leverage is the sum of cost of goods sold (COGS) and selling, general,
and administrative expenses (XSGA) over total assets as in Novy-Marx (2011).

    PCM: The price-to-cost margin is the difference between net sales (SALE) and costs
of goods sold (COGS) divided by net sales (SALE) as in Bustamante and Donangelo
(2016).

     PM: The profit margin is operating income after depreciation (OIADP) over net
sales (SALE) as in Soliman (2008).

     Prof: We follow Ball, Gerakos, Linnainmaa, and Nikolaev (2015) and define
profitability as gross profitability (GP) divided by the book value of equity as defined
above.

     Q: Tobin’s Q is total assets (AT), the market value of equity (SHROUT times PRC)
minus cash and short-term investments (CEQ), minus deferred taxes (TXDB) scaled by
total assets (AT).

    Rel to High: Closeness to 52-week high is the ratio of stock price (PRC) at the
end of the previous calendar month and the previous 52 week high price defined as in
George and Hwang (2004).

     RNA: The return on net operating assets is the ratio of operating income after
depreciation to lagged net operating assets (Soliman (2008)). Net operating assets are
the difference between operating assets minus operating liabilities. Operating assets are
total assets (AT) minus cash and short-term investments (CHE), minus investment and
other advances (IVAO). Operating liabilities are total assets (AT), minus debt in current
liabilities (DLC), minus long-term debt (DLTT), minus minority interest (MIB), minus
preferred stock (PSTK), minus common equity (CEQ).

     ROA: Return-on-assets is income before extraordinary items (IB) to lagged total
assets (AT) following Balakrishnan, Bartov, and Faurel (2010).

                                            3
    ROE: Return-on-equity is income before extraordinary items (IB) to lagged
book-value of equity as in Haugen and Baker (1996).

    r12−2 : We define momentum as cumulative return from 12 months before the return
prediction to two months before as in Fama and French (1996).

    r12−7 : We define intermediate momentum as cumulative return from 12 months
before the return prediction to seven months before as in Novy-Marx (2012).

    r2−1 : We define short-term reversal as lagged one-month return as in Jegadeesh
(1990).

     r36−13 : Long-term reversal is the cumulative return from 36 months before the
return prediction to 13 months before as in De Bondt and Thaler (1985).

    S2P: Sales-to-price is the ratio of net sales (SALE) to the market capitalization as
of December following Lewellen (2015).

   SGA2S: SG&A to sales is the ratio of selling, general and administrative expenses
(XSGA) to net sales (SALE).

   Spread: The bid-ask spread is the average daily bid-ask spread in the previous
months as in Chung and Zhang (2014).

     SUV: Standard unexplained volume is difference between actual volume and
predicted volume in the previous month. Predicted volume comes from a regression
of daily volume on a constant and the absolute values of positive and negative returns.
Unexplained volume is standardized by the standard deviation of the residuals from the
regression as in Garfinkel (2009).




                                           4
                                           Table A.1: Selected Characteristics in Nonparametric Model

    This table reports the selected characteristics from the universe of thirty-six firm characteristics we discuss in Section IV for different numbers of knots, the
    sample size, and in-sample Sharpe ratios of an equally-weighted hedge portfolio going long stocks with the highest predicted returns and shorting stocks with lowest
    predicted returns. q indicates the size percentile of NYSE firms. The sample period is July 1963 to June 2014 unless otherwise specified.

             Firms                            Size > q10   Size > q10      Size > q20      Size > q50        All              All         Size > q10
             Sample                              Full         Full            Full            Full        1963-1990        1991-2014      1991-2014
             Knots                                14            4              4                9             4                 4              9
             Sample Size                       764,475      764,475         607,416         318,674        416,980          656,080        462,321
             # Selected                            9           15              13               4             14               23              8
             Sharpe Ratio                        2.04         2.21            2.08            1.45           2.89             3.01           1.89
             Characteristic   # Selected         (1)           (2)             (3)            (4)             (5)             (6)             (7)
             A2ME                 2                                                                         A2ME             A2ME
             AT                   1                                                                                           AT
             Beta                 2                                                                          Beta             Beta
             C                    1                                                                                            C
             CTO                  1                                                                                          CTO
             D2A                  2                           D2A                                                             D2A
             E2P                  5              E2P           E2P            E2P                                             E2P            E2P
             FC2Y                 2                           FC2Y                                                           FC2Y




5
             Free CF              1                                                                                         Free CF
             Idio vol             2                                                                         Idio vol        Idio vol
             Investment           2                                        Investment                     Investment
             LME                  6             LME           LME             LME                            LME             LME             LME
             Lturnover            6           Lturnover     Lturnover       Lturnover                      Lturnover       Lturnover       Lturnover
             NOA                  1                           NOA
             OA                   3                            OA              OA                            OA
             PCM                  2                           PCM             PCM
             PM                   1                                                                                            PM
             Profitability        1                                                                                       Profitability
             Rel to High          6          Rel to High   Rel to High     Rel to High                    Rel to High     Rel to High     Rel to High
             RNA                  2                           RNA                                                             RNA
             r12−2                6             r12−2        r12−2           r12−2           r12−2          r12−2            r12−2
             r12−7                3                          r12−7           r12−7                                           r12−7
             r2−1                 7              r2−1         r2−1            r2−1           r2−1            r2−1             r2−1           r2−1
             r36−13               6             r36−13       r36−13          r36−13                         r36−13           r36−13         r36−13
             SGA2M                7            SGA2M        SGA2M           SGA2M           SGA2M          SGA2M            SGA2M          SGA2M
             Spread               2                                                                        Spread           Spread
             SUV                  7             SUV           SUV             SUV            SUV             SUV              SUV            SUV

             Never selected: ATO, BEME, DPI2A, Lev, OL, Q, ROA, ROE, S2P
