NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

URBAN WATER DISINFECTION AND MORTALITY DECLINE IN DEVELOPING
COUNTRIES
Sonia R. Bhalotra
Alberto Diaz-Cayeros
Grant Miller
Alfonso Miranda
Atheendar S. Venkataramani
Working Paper 23239
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23239

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2017, Revised August 2018

We thank Marcella Alsan, Sebastian Bauhoff, John Briscoe, Jenna Davis, Günther Fink, Julio
Frenk, Steve Luby, Jaime Sepulveda, Dean Spears, and Dan Smith for helpful comments and
suggestions. We are grateful for excellent research assistance provided by Nina Brooks, Neesha
Joseph, Satadru Mukherjee, Jenna Sherry, and Sonja Swenson. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Sonia R. Bhalotra, Alberto Diaz-Cayeros, Grant Miller, Alfonso Miranda, and
Atheendar S. Venkataramani. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Urban Water Disinfection and Mortality Decline in Developing Countries
Sonia R. Bhalotra, Alberto Diaz-Cayeros, Grant Miller, Alfonso Miranda, and Atheendar
S. Venkataramani
NBER Working Paper No. 23239
March 2017, Revised August 2018
JEL No. H41,I18,J11
ABSTRACT
Historically, improvements in municipal water quality reduced mortality substantially in wealthy
countries. However, water disinfection has not produced equivalent benefits in developing
countries today. We investigate this puzzle by analyzing a large-scale municipal water
disinfection program in Mexico that increased water chlorination coverage from 55% to 90%
within 18 months. On average, the program reduced childhood diarrheal disease mortality rates
by 50%. However, age (degradation) of water pipes and inadequate sanitation infrastructure
attenuated these benefits substantially, ranging from no decline in cities with the worst
infrastructure to 80% in those with the best – a decline consistent with historical experience.

Sonia R. Bhalotra
Department of Economics and ISER
University of Essex
Wivenhoe Park
Colchester C04 3SQ
United Kingdom
srbhal@essex.ac.uk

Alfonso Miranda
Centro de Investigacion y Docencia Economicas
(CIDE)
Carretera México-Toluca
3655 Col. Lomas de Santa Fe 01210
México, DF México
alfonso.miranda@cide.edu

Alberto Diaz-Cayeros
Freeman Spogli Institute for
International Studies
616 Serra St, C149
Stanford, CA 94305
albertod@stanford.edu

Atheendar S. Venkataramani
Massachusetts General Hospital
Harvard Medical School
50 Staniford St
Boston, MA 02114
atheenv@upenn.edu

Grant Miller
CHP/PCOR
Stanford University
117 Encina Commons
Stanford, CA 94305-6019
and NBER
ngmiller@stanford.edu

1. Introduction
Historically, improvements in the quality of municipal drinking water made
important contributions to population health in today’s wealthy countries. Late nineteenth
and early twentieth century investments in water purification led to substantial reductions
in urban mortality in a number of countries, including Japan, France, Sweden, the United
States, and the United Kingdom – in some cases, virtually eliminating waterborne disease
(Cain and Rotella 2001; Cutler and Miller 2005; Ferrie and Troesken 2008; Ketzenbaum
and Rosenthal 2014; Knutsson 2016; Koppaka 2011; Ogasawara and Inoue 2015; Preston
and van de Walle 1978). These disinfection technologies were often introduced into
relatively new municipal water systems with good quality pipes and sufficient supply to
deliver water at full pressure without interruption (Melosi 2000).
Despite century-old knowledge about the benefits of water disinfection
(Turneaure and Russell 1901), diarrheal diseases due to poor water quality remain
prevalent in many low- and middle-income countries today. Worldwide, diarrhea is the
second leading cause of child mortality (Liu et al. 2012; Vos et al. 2015) as well as a
leading cause of morbidity (roughly 1.7 billion episodes per year) (Fischer Walker et al.
2013b). This disease burden persists despite the fact that cities in developing countries
are using many of the same disinfection technologies that were historically successful
(Bain et al. 2014; Ercumen et al. 2015; Gadgil 1998).
This study seeks to assess the effectiveness of water disinfection in developing
countries, focusing on the case of Mexico – and importantly, to identify factors that limit
the realization of their full potential. Recent literature on improving water quality in lowand middle-income countries has generally focused on interventions that are either small

2

in scale or target rural populations with limited water system infrastructure (Arnold et al.
2013; Arnold and Colford 2007; Clasen and Haller 2008; Duflo et al. 2015; Gruber et al.
2013; Kremer et al. 2011; Zwane and Kremer 2007). However, the urban population is
projected to reach nearly 2.5 billion worldwide by 2050 (United Nations Population
Division 2014), and the rapid growth of cities will require larger-scale interventions
focused on municipal water supply (Brown, Keath and Wong 2009; Fotso et al. 2007;
McDonald et al. 2014; United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) 2006). The two
studies (of which we are aware) examining interventions to improve urban water quality
on a large scale are Galiani, Gertler, and Schargrodsky (2005), who show that
privatization of municipal water companies in Argentina led to significant reductions in
child mortality from water-borne diseases, and Greenstone and Hanna (2014), who find
null effects of environmental regulation on water pollution in Indian cities. Rather than
focus on ownership or regulation, we focus specifically on disinfection technology that is
a cornerstone of urban water provision.
Improving urban water quality in developing countries on a large scale with
proven disinfection technologies is difficult for many interrelated reasons. First,
municipal water systems in many low- and middle-income countries are older, and thus
subject to degradation. Pipe breaks and breaches allow even clean water to become
contaminated (or re-contaminated) by bacterial pathogens in the surrounding soil (Lee
and Schwab 2005; Shaheed et al. 2014). Low or intermittent water pressure in pipe
networks can further reduce the efficacy of chlorination by increasing the degree of recontamination (Bhutta et al. 2013; Ercumen et al. 2015; Jeandron et al. 2015; Kumpel

3

and Nelson 2013; Tokajian and Hashwa 2003).1 Both problems are compounded by the
fact that repairing degraded infrastructure (or building new distribution networks) may be
prohibitively expensive, and financing mechanisms (either through domestic capital
markets or partnerships with multinational organizations) may be unavailable (Crocker
and Masten 2002; Cutler and Miller 2006; Gadgil 1998; Masten 2011; United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) 2006). Second, improvements in water quality may
not be effective without complementary investments in sanitation (Alsan and Goldin
Forthcoming; Duflo et al. 2015). Third, the provision of improved water may weaken
private incentives for protective health behaviors. Such compensatory behavior holds the
potential to crowd-out the health benefits of water disinfection (Bennett 2012; Keskin,
Shastry and Willis 2015).
A central contribution of our paper is that we study a massive nation-wide
program to chlorinate municipal water systems across the entire country of Mexico
within a single year. Moreover, because conditions across Mexico’s municipalities varied
widely at the time of implementation, we are able to isolate key factors governing
program success (and failure) in improving health. Named Programa Agua Limpia
(henceforth, PAL), this program was launched in 1991 in response to a cholera epidemic
that swept rapidly through Central and South America (Gutierrez et al. 1996; Sepulveda
et al. 2007; Sepulveda, Valdespino and Garcia-Garcia 2006).2 Within eighteen months,

1

Unlike other disinfection technologies (like filtration, for example), residual chlorine remains in water
from point of treatment to point of consumption. However, low or intermittent water pressure (on which
data are not systematically available) increases the risk of recontamination as stagnant organic matter in the
water supply effectively absorbs and reduces circulating chlorine levels. We thank Steve Luby for alerting
us to this point.
2
Notably, the baseline burden of diarrheal disease in Mexico around this time rivaled that of modern lowincome countries. For example, data from the Global Burden of Disease project demonstrate that there were
900 deaths per 100,000 post-neonates (1-12 month olds) in Mexico in 1990. In low-income countries the

4

the number of localities disinfecting their water increased dramatically, from 250 to
15,000, and the share of Mexico’s population receiving disinfected water rose from 55%
to 90% (CONAGUA 1994). Importantly, clean water coverage was achieved without
expanding existing piped water infrastructure or sewage networks.
To estimate the impact of PAL on child mortality across Mexico, we use detailed
municipal-level mortality statistics by age and cause. While there was little variation in
the timing of PAL implementation across regions, we are able to distinguish program
effects on diarrheal disease deaths from potentially correlated omitted trends by
using difference-in-difference approaches in which the “control diseases” are those not
directly influenced by water quality. To further strengthen the identification of PAL
program effects, we also estimate triple difference specifications, comparing changes in
waterborne vs. control disease deaths across small- and medium-sized urban areas vs.
large cities (population>500,000). This approach exploits the fact that PAL targeted
small- and medium-sized population centers because water in larger cities was already
chlorinated. In doing so, it also accounts for (minor) cholera prevention and treatment
activities other than chlorination that were common across smaller towns and large cities
– including legal restrictions on wastewater irrigation, hygiene campaigns, provision of
Oral Rehydration Therapy (ORT), and general disease surveillance (CONAGUA 1994;
Sepulveda et al. 2006).3
These different approaches yield substantively similar results. In general, our
estimates suggest that PAL was associated with a 50% reduction in diarrheal disease

corresponding rate in 1990 was 1,300 per 100,000 and 500 per 100,000 in 2015. See
http://ghdx.healthdata.org/gbd-results-tool.
3
In practice water system chlorination was the overwhelming focus of the program (CONAGUA 1994).

5

mortality rates among children under age 5, averting more than 28,000 deaths per year
between 1991 and 1995 alone. These reductions were concentrated in the targeted smalland medium-sized cities. We estimate a cost per life year saved by PAL of $1,100 (2015
USD). This suggests that the program was highly cost-effective by any standard.4 Our
results are also robust to using different transformations of mortality rates, mortality
counts rather than rates, different event study windows, and the inclusion of state-year
fixed effects.
Motivated by the contrasting experience of wealthy countries in history and
developing countries today, we then study municipal-level variation in program effects to
investigate the circumstances under which large-scale municipal water disinfection in
developing countries can be successful. First, we find that reductions in diarrheal disease
mortality rates were not larger in urban municipalities with greater baseline piped water
coverage rates. Because more extensive systems in Mexico are generally older, this result
is consistent with engineering concerns about recontamination through degraded, aged
infrastructure (Lee and Schwab 2005; Mazari-Hiriart et al. 2005; Tulchinsky et al. 2000)
and reduced chlorine efficiency due to irregular water pressure and outages (Ashraf et al.
2017; Ercumen et al. 2015; Kumpel and Nelson 2013; Kumpel and Nelson 2014) – and
we provide suggestive direct evidence in support of this hypothesis. Second, we find that
the health benefits of clean piped water were greater in municipalities with more
extensive sewage infrastructure. This finding is consistent with emerging evidence of

4

These estimates likely underestimate the true cost-effectiveness of PAL for two reasons. First, due to
limitations in available cost data, we are only able to consider the period 1991-1995, but the health benefits
of PAL presumably accrued far beyond this period. Second, recent studies show that clean water may have
important effects on time allocation, financial transactions, and long-run human capital accumulation
(Ashraf et al. 2017; Bhalotra and Venkataramani 2015a), but our calculation focuses entirely on survival
benefits.

6

complementarities between water disinfection and sanitation in the economics literature
(Alsan and Goldin Forthcoming; Duflo et al. 2015), although it stands in contrast with
null results found in the epidemiology literature (Fewtrell et al. 2005).
Simulations using the results suggest that childhood diarrheal disease mortality
rates would have declined by 86% in urban areas nationwide if all municipalities had
sewage coverage and new piped water infrastructure equivalent to the best performers in
our sample – and at the cost of $641 per life year saved. Notably, this degree of mortality
decline is consistent with the historical health benefits of municipal water disinfection in
developed countries.
Finally, we also use detailed household survey data to study if compensatory
behavioral responses to water system disinfection played a role in attenuating program
effects. We find that households in states benefitting more from PAL reduced their
spending on bottled water, soaps, and detergents – private health investments that may
substitute for clean piped water (Bennett 2012; Keskin et al. 2015). Notably, these
reductions in household spending occurred only among households in small and mediumsized cities – precisely the areas targeted by PAL. Although we are unable to quantify
the extent to which indirect health decrements due to these behavioral responses reduce
program benefits, the degree of behavioral crowd-out appears to be far from complete.
Overall, our results have two broad policy implications. First, the average effects
that we estimate for childhood waterborne deaths are large, suggesting that despite
misaligned incentives and political manipulation that plague many state programs
(Galiani, Gertler and Schargrodsky 2005; Greenstone and Hanna 2014), there is at least

7

the potential for state-led initiatives to be impactful.5 Better understanding the political
and organizational circumstances under which this is possible is a critical area for future
research. Second, our finding that the effectiveness of urban water disinfection depends
heavily on infrastructure quality – which is generally poor in developing countries –
suggests a potential role for improvements in financing and access to capital – through
private-public partnerships or innovations in local public finance, for example (Crocker
and Masten 2002; Cutler and Miller 2006).
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides background on
Mexico’s clean water reform, Programa Agua Limpia, and Section 3 describes our data.
Section 4 presents changes in waterborne disease death rates associated with PAL,
Section 5 examines the circumstances under which public water quality investments are
most effective, and Section 6 examines behavioral responses to program impacts.
Section 7 presents estimates of the cost-effectiveness of PAL, and Section 8 then
concludes.

2. The History of Programa Agua Limpia in Mexico
As in many developing countries, infectious diseases have historically been
responsible for most of Mexico’s burden of disease among children. During the 1980s,
diarrheal diseases and acute respiratory infections were the two leading causes of child
death, and diarrhea alone was responsible for nearly a quarter of deaths under age 5
(Gutierrez et al. 1996). Diarrheal mortality was concentrated in the poorer southern

5

In fact, the average treatment effects we estimate are larger than found in Galiani, Gertler, and
Schargrodsky (2005), who find that privatization led to an 8% decrease in child diarrheal disease mortality
on average (26% in the poorest areas).

8

region of Mexico (Figure 1), with rates in small and medium sized towns nearly twice as
high as those in cities.6
In 1991, a cholera pandemic emerged in Chile and Peru and quickly spread
through South and Central America (Medina 1991; Ries et al. 1992; Sepulveda et al.
2006). In an effort to limit its spread across Mexico, the Mexican Ministry of Health and
the newly created National Water Commission (Comision Nacional del Agua,
CONAGUA) launched Programa Agua Limpia (PAL, or the National Clean Water
Program) in April 1991 (Sepulveda et al. 2007; Sepulveda et al. 2006). PAL was in
principle a multi-faceted campaign that included: (1) chlorination of previously untreated
water sources; (2) restrictions on the use of wastewater for irrigation (an important
component of Chile’s efforts against cholera (Medina 1991)); (3) health education
campaigns targeting both the general population and health care providers; and (4)
expansion of the availability of Oral Rehydration Therapy (ORT).7
Despite these multiple components, in practice, chlorination of municipal
drinking water was the centerpiece of the program (CONAGUA 1994; World Bank
1994). Because larger cities (those with more than 500,000 inhabitants) already had
established chlorination and filtration systems, PAL chlorination efforts targeted small
and medium sized cities. In contrast, other (minor) program components were not
specifically targeted to these areas and implemented more broadly (Sepulveda et al.
2006). Within 6 months of PAL’s launch, the fraction of Mexico’s population with

6

Averaging over 1985-1990, the child diarrheal mortality rate in municipalities predominantly containing
small towns and medium-sized cities was 7.76 deaths per 1,000 live births. In large cities (>1 million
population), the corresponding mortality rate was 4.48 per 1,000 live births.
7
Prior to the cholera pandemic, Mexico’s primary approach to controlling diarrheal diseases emphasized
treatment with ORT, which we discuss below, and clinical case management (Frenk et al. 2003)

9

chlorinated piped drinking water rose from 55% (almost exactly the percentage of the
population living in large, previously chlorinated metropolitan areas) to 85%. By 1994,
this figure exceeded 90% (Figure 2).8
Achieving these gains required a vast expansion of municipal water disinfection
through existing water pipe infrastructure. Nationwide, the number of water treatment
plants grew from 250 to nearly 15,000, the number of residual chlorine monitoring
stations expanded from 200 to over 100,000 sites, and treatment capacity (the volume of
chlorinated water per unit time) doubled. In addition, to improve water quality in areas
without piped water coverage, chloride tablets were disseminated to households
(Sepulveda et al. 2006) and quality monitoring for commercial bottled water and ice was
expanded (CONAGUA 1994), although these efforts were secondary relative to
disinfection of water at the source.9

8

Because implementation began in medium-size cities and then expanded to smaller towns, the increase in
population coverage between 1991 and 1992 was much steeper than the corresponding increase in number
of localities treated. Beginning in 1993, population coverage rose more slowly, but the number of localities
treated continued to rise at the previous rate.
9
Similarly, other components of PAL received substantially less emphasis and are also less likely to have
had a meaningful impact on diarrheal disease mortality. For example, legal restrictions reduced the amount
of farmland irrigated with wastewater (World Bank 1994). However, only a very small fraction of farmland
was irrigated with wastewater prior to PAL (~0.1%) (CONAGUA 1994). Even if these crops were widely
distributed, they are likely to have been in large cities as well as in small and medium-sized towns. Thus,
we are able to account for this component of the policy in our triple difference models – see Section 4.1.
Efforts to modify hygienic behavior included use of radio and television to disseminate messages about
hand-washing and other sanitary practices (Sepulveda et al. 2006). However, experiences from other lowand middle-income settings suggest that their impact on diarrheal disease mortality is likely to be small,
particularly in comparison with water system disinfection (Ahuja, Kremer and Zwane 2010; Dupas 2011).
In addition to PAL-related efforts, two other potentially relevant programs are Programa Nacional de
Solidaridad (PRONASOL), a nationwide anti-poverty program implemented between 1989-1994, and
Programa Nacional de Agua Potable, Alcantarillado y Saneamiento (PAPAZU), for which Mexico received
a $300 million loan from the World Bank to expand access to potable water, sanitation, and sewage in the
early 1990s (The World Bank 1995). However, these programs are unlikely to confound our analysis.
PRONASOL-related potable water investments were generally focused in rural areas (Diaz-Cayeros and
Magaloni 2003), which we exclude from our analysis. PAPAZU was small in scope: the 3.2 million
individuals benefitting from PAPAZU (The World Bank 1995) represents only a fraction of the 30 million
individuals who gained access to chlorinated water in the first year of PAL. PAPAZU activities were also
concentrated in states (Estado de Mexico, Guanjanato, and Sonora) that had relatively lower burdens of
diarrheal disease. Removing these states in our main regression models does not change our results.

10

Prior work on PAL hints at large program effects. Gutierrez et al. (1996),
Velazquez et al. (2004), and Sepulveda et al. (2006) show sharp declines in childhood
diarrheal disease mortality rates beginning in 1991. Focusing on morbidity, Gutierrez et
al. (1996) analyze changes in aggregate morbidity rates, showing that the average number
of annual episodes of diarrheal disease morbidity among children decreased from 4.6 to
2.2 between 1990 and 1993. Similarly, Velazquez et al. (2004) show that morbidity
declined by over 63% during the period 1990-1995. However, these studies essentially
only describe national trends over time.

3. Data
3.1 Data
Our core analyses use data from three sources: the Mexican Vital Statistics, the
10% sample of the 1990 Mexican Population Census, and the Encuesta Nacional de
Ingresos y Gastos de los Hogares (National Survey of Income and Expenditure, ENIGH).
Mexican Vital Statistics. We use mortality data for neonates (age 0-1 months),
post-neonates (1-12 months), and children (ages 1-4) from the Mexican Ministry of
Health. The vital statistics contain individual-level records of every certified death in the
country.10 Each death record contains information about the cause of death (coded using
the International Classification of Diseases, 9th Edition, or ICD-9), age at death, and

Finally, PAPAZU project reports reveal that many of the projects initiated as part of PAPAZU were
deemed “out of compliance,” and thus potentially of lower quality (The World Bank 1995).
10
Certified deaths are all deaths that are brought to the attention of the National Statistics Office, Health
Ministry, Judiciary, Military, and funeral directors. Certification, which includes coding of cause of death,
is provided by an individual with a license to do so (typically a physician, nurse, or Health Ministry
representative).

11

municipality of death. Municipalities are the next administrative division below the state
(analogous to U.S. counties).
We aggregate individual-level deaths for children under the age of 5 into
municipality-cause-year cells for all municipalities and years between 1985 and 1995.
Given our focus on PAL, we create a category for infectious diarrheal diseases using
three-digit codes from the International Classification of Diseases, Ninth Revision (ICD9).11 To convert diarrheal death counts into child (under-5), post-neonatal (1-12 months),
and neonatal (0-1 month) mortality rates, we use data on the number of live births in each
municipality and year.12 We compute average diarrheal mortality rates in the preintervention period (1985-1990) and trim the top and bottom 2.5% of municipalities in
the distribution of this baseline rate (to account for outliers due to small population sizes).
We also repeat our estimation using the full sample death counts instead of death rates,
finding similar results (see Section 4.1 below).
A note about the quality of Mexico’s vital statistics is also warranted. As in many
developing countries, there are important concerns about under-reporting of deaths,
particularly in poorer regions and among young children (Hernandez et al. 2012; LozanoAscencio 2008; Tome et al. 1997).13 Corrections for under-reporting and

11

We used ICD-9 codes 001-009 to identify deaths from infectious diarrhea. These codes cover intestinal
infectious diseases and include cholera (001), typhoid and paratyphoid (002), salmonella infections (003),
shigellosis (004), food poisoning (005), amoebiasis (006), protozoan causes (such as giardia and
cryptosporidiosis, 007), infections due to other organisms (such as rotavirus and other viruses, 008), and
presumed intestinal infection due to an ill-defined cause.
12
We obtained municipality-year data on live births from the Instituto Nacional de Estadistica y
Geographia (INEGI http://en.www.inegi.org.mx/proyectos/registros/vitales/natalidad/). To compute
mortality rates, we used a direct method (UNICEF et al. 2007) and divided the number of child deaths for a
given cause-municipality-year by the number of live births in the same municipality-year (scaled to reflect
the number of deaths per 1,000 live births).
13 Hernandez et al. (2012) show that infant and child deaths may be underreported by as much as 20% in a
sample of low human development index municipalities in 2008. However, it is important to note that in
many instances birth certification might also underreport those children. In this case, the counts in the

12

misclassification of deaths were made by the Ministry of Health from 1980 onwards, and
these data have been used in other prominent studies, albeit at levels of aggregation
above the municipality level (Barham 2011; Cutler et al. 2002; Foster, Gutierrez and
Kumar 2009; Gonzalez and Quast 2011). In part because of these efforts, Mexico’s Vital
Registration system is now considered one of the best in the developing world in terms of
completeness and quality (Mathers et al. 2005). We cannot rule out the possibility that
some degree of underreporting remains, but for this to bias our results, underreporting
and/or misclassification must have changed sharply in 1991, and differentially for
diarrheal diseases relative to control diseases. 14
1990 Mexican Population Census. We use the population census (a) to identify
relevant municipalities (i.e., those targeted by PAL or those used for comparison) and (b)
to obtain municipal characteristics for estimating heterogeneous PAL program effects.
Using individual-level information on urban versus rural residence in a 10% sample of
Mexico’s 1990 population census (Minnesota Population Center 2015), we compute the
proportion of each municipality’s population living in rural areas (defined by the
Mexican national statistical agency as towns with fewer than 2,500 inhabitants). We
excluded from our sample 970 (of 2,394) fully rural municipalities for two reasons. First,
PAL’s chlorination efforts were concentrated in small- and medium-sized urban areas.

numerator and the denominator of reported mortality rates are under-counts and, in general, it is difficult to
sign any resulting bias in the rates.
14
The direction of any bias in the estimated treatment effect is a priori unclear. If improvements in
measurement occurred across the board, then our use of differences with respect to control diseases will
help account for bias from measurement error. However, it may be that recording of diarrheal disease
mortality in particular improved with the introduction of PAL (via investments in diarrheal disease
recognition and surveillance). This would bias downward our estimates of mortality rate changes associated
with PAL.

13

Second, as Section 2.1 notes, rural areas were targeted by other policies (and so
excluding these areas removes their influence from our analysis).
To analyze heterogeneous effects of PAL across municipalities, we use
household-level data from the 1990 census to create aggregated municipal-level measures
of the share of households with piped water and the share of households with septic
system connections in their dwelling (a measure of sanitation coverage). Additionally, we
create measures of average earned income among adults; the fraction of adults
completing secondary schooling; and the fraction of the population speaking an
indigenous language. We use the 1960 and 1990 census microdata to compute measures
of piped water system age.
Encuestas Nacional de Ingresos y Gastos de los Hogares (National Survey of
Income and Expenditure, ENIGH). To study behavioral responses to PAL, we use the
ENIGH, a nationally representative income and expenditure survey. These data include
detailed information about expenditures on bottled water, soaps, and detergents, which
we combine into a single category. We use the 1989, 1992, and 1994 waves, which are
the only waves falling within our study period.
Table 1 shows descriptive statistics for all variables used in our analyses.
3.2. Graphical Evidence
Figure 3 shows trends in child (under age 5) mortality rates from diarrheal
diseases and “control” diseases between 1985 and 1995 in urban municipalities using
unadjusted data. We use two sets of control diseases to assess the sensitivity of our results
to the choice of control illnesses. These are respiratory infections and non-infectious
childhood diseases, respectively. The controls satisfy the condition that they are

14

quantitatively important infectious causes of child mortality and are not directly
influenced by water quality. We discuss the control diseases in more detail in Section 4.1.
There is a downward trend in diarrheal disease mortality rates among children
under-5 prior to 1991, which is widely attributed to Mexico’s Oral Rehydration Therapy
(ORT) program that began in November 1984 (Gutierrez et al. 1996; Mota-Hernandez
and Velasquez-Jones 1985; Sepulveda et al. 2006). However, coincident with the
implementation of PAL, in 1991, the decline becomes distinctly more rapid and
pronounced. In contrast, there is no such trend break in mortality rates from the control
diseases.15,16 Importantly, trends in diarrheal and respiratory disease mortality rates prior
to PAL were quite similar. Appendix Figure 1 shows trends over a longer period of time
(1979-1997), and again the trend break in diarrhea-related mortality rates relative to
control disease mortality rates remains clear.

4. Water Disinfection and Diarrheal Disease Mortality Rates
4.1. Empirical Strategy
To formally estimate the relationship between PAL and mortality rates among
children under-5 (altogether, as well as separately for neonates (0-1 month), post-

15
We formally test for a structural break between 1985-1995 in a longer series of data (1979-1997,
Appendix Figure 1) using the Quandt Likelihood Ratio test (Quandt 1960). This test treats as agnostic the
exact break point in a time series and calculates the F-statistic on different user specific break points
window. The largest F-statistic across tests of different time points is used to identify the break point. For
diarrheal diseases, examining each year between 1987-1994 as potential break points, the test identifies a
break in 1991, coincident with the start of PAL (F = 11.16, p = 0.004). We do not find evidence of a
statistically significant break over the same period for either set of control diseases.
16
Notably, in the years just prior to PAL, the narrowing gap between diarrheal and non-diarrheal disease
deaths appears to be driven by a slight rise in control disease death rates. We speculate that this slight
increase may be related to Mexico’s 1989-1990 measles epidemic. Mexico experienced a significant rise in
measles attack rates as part of a broader regional pandemic in 1989-1990 (Katz et al. 2004). While we do
not include measles mortality in either of our control disease sets, it is still possible that measles may
account for the 1989-1990 uptick in these diseases given its association with respiratory diseases,
congenital conditions, and skin infections (Orenstein, Perry and Halsey 2004).

15

neonates (1-12 months), and children ages 1-4), we test for differential trend breaks in
diarrheal disease mortality rates in 1991 (when PAL was implemented) relative to two
sets of control diseases which should not be directly affected by PAL.17 One includes
acute upper and lower respiratory infections, including viral bronchitis and pneumonia.
We choose these diseases because they were the second-leading cause of child mortality
in Mexico prior to PAL18 and because they share several common risk factors with
diarrheal diseases (respiratory infections are spread through oral droplets and diarrheal
diseases are spread by fecal-oral contamination). Particularly helpful for identification is
the fact that respiratory diseases are more sensitive to water quantity (which affords
opportunities for preventive handwashing and thus breaking the droplet contamination
cycle), while diarrheal diseases are more sensitive to water quality, which is the focus of
PAL (Ahuja et al. 2010) – poor drinking water quality is not a direct risk factor for
respiratory infections (Fischer Walker et al. 2013b).
Nonetheless, if diarrheal diseases weaken immune systems, raising the likelihood
of contracting respiratory infections (Ashraf et al. 2017; Ashraf et al. 2013; Fischer
Walker et al. 2013a; Sedgwick and MacNutt 1910), then using respiratory diseases – or
infectious diseases in general – as control diseases may underestimate changes in
mortality rates associated with PAL. For this reason, we also estimate models using a
control group of diseases that are less likely to co-vary with diarrhea (i.e., are biomedically more ‘distant’).19 These are perinatal causes (low birth weight, birth trauma,

17

A similar strategy was employed by Jayachandran, Lleras-Muney and Smith (2010) in their work on
antibiotic therapy in the United States. Closer to our study, Galiani et al. (2005) use non-diarrheal causes of
mortality as a falsification test in their study of water service privatization in Argentina.
18
ICD-9 codes 460-466 and 480-487, respectively.
19
Co-dependence between diarrheal diseases and these more bio-medically distant controls is also possible
if, for example, falling diarrheal disease mortality raises the returns to health behaviors and investments

16

congenital infections) and congenital anomalies, for all of which poor water quality is not
a direct risk factor (Embrey et al. 2004; Pruss-Ustun et al. 2008).20
We focus our analysis on municipality-year diarrheal mortality rates in a window
around program implementation, 1985-1995 (Appendix Table 2 shows that our
substantive results are robust to expanding our study period). We begin by estimating
event study specifications of the general form:

2334

(1) Mdjt = αd +!562374 "# (&('()**ℎ,)-) × &(0,)* = #)) +
2334

!562374 85 (&(0,)* = #)) + λj + edjt

Here, Mdjt represents the inverse hyperbolic sine transformation of the mortality rate for
disease class d in municipality (or state) j and year t.21 1(Diarrhea) is a dummy variable
denoting whether or not the cause of death is diarrheal disease (sensitive to water quality,
and hence the program intervention) versus a control disease group (not sensitive to water
quality); Year is a dummy variable denoting observations in year t; and

j

represent

municipality fixed effects. The parameters of interest are captured by the vector "#, which
yield the average differential percentage change in the diarrheal disease mortality rate vs.
the control disease mortality rate in year t relative to the baseline year (in this

more generally, which would potentially reduce the risk of all of the control diseases (Dow, Philipson and
Sala-i-Martin 1999). However, again, this would imply that our estimates are conservative.
20
ICD-9 codes are as follows: congenital anomalies (ICD9 codes 740-759); perinatal causes (low birth
weight, birth trauma, congenital infections, neonatal jaundice, etc: ICD9 codes 764-779).
21
Formally, the inverse hyperbolic sine transform of some variable, y, is ln(y + 9(: ; + 1) ). Estimates
obtained using this transformation can be interpreted in the same manner as those obtained using a natural
logarithm transformation of the dependent variable, with the advantage of being defined at zero (Burbridge,
Magee and Robb 1988).

17

specification, 1985). We estimate this equation for overall under-5 mortality rates as well
as for disaggregated age intervals (neonates 0-1 months, infants 1-12 months, and
children 1-4 years old).22 To relax the assumption that the error terms are independent
and identically distributed (i.i.d.) within municipalities over time, we consistently cluster
the standard-errors at the municipality level (Bertrand, Duflo and Mullainathan 2004).
Then, to estimate average program effects of PAL during the study period
(accounting for any disease-specific pre-trends), we use parametric specifications of the
following form:

(2) Mdjt = β0 + β1 (1(Diarrhead) × 1(Postt) × Yeart )) + β2 (1(Diarrhead × 1(Postt )) + β3
2334

(1(Diarrhead) × Yeart) + β4 &(Diarrhead) + !562374 8# (&(0,)* = #)) +

j

+ edjt

Here, 1(Post) is a dummy variable for post-PAL years (1991 and later), and all other
variables are defined as before. The parameters of interest are β1 and β2, which measure
trend and level breaks starting in 1991 for diarrheal disease mortality rates relative to
control disease mortality rates. The trend and level breaks are net of pre-existing trends in
diarrheal disease mortality rates relative to control diseases (captured by β3); mortality
trend breaks and intercept shifts common to all diseases (flexibly absorbed by year fixed
effects); and time invariant differences between diarrheal and control disease mortality
rates (captured by β4).

22
This model effectively restricts pre-trends and breaks to be identical across each of the component
control diseases which we sum together in forming our broader control disease groups. Thus, we
additionally estimated versions of this model (as well as the more parametric formulations below), allowing
for each of the component control diseases to have their own pre-trends, level, and trend breaks. This did
not have any substantive impact on the findings.

18

As we note in Section 2.1, other less intensive prevention and treatment measures
were also introduced around 1991. These components, which were substantially smaller
in scope than chlorination, included legal restrictions on wastewater irrigation, hygiene
campaigns, some provision of Oral Rehydration Therapy (ORT), and general disease
surveillance (CONAGUA 1994; Sepulveda et al. 2006). We would therefore expect
estimates in equations (1) and (2) to largely reflect benefits of chlorinated water.
However, to isolate the role of chlorination further, we also estimate the following tripledifference specification:

(3) Mdjt = γ0 + γ1 (1(Diarrhead) × 1(Smalld) × 1(Postt)) +
γ2 (&(Diarrhead ) × 1(Smalld) × 1(Postt) × Yeart) + ∑IJ ?( (2 A*(BC, DE#,*)F#(GEH) +
∑34 ?( (5 'GLMC, DE#,*)F#(GEH) +
2334

∑22
2P ?( (2 N(E,)* A,*OH)+!562374 8# (&(0,)* = #)) + λj + edjt

where 1(Smalld) is a dummy variable denoting municipalities encompassing or contained
within ‘cities’ with a population less than 500,000 (as enumerated in the 1990 population
census),23 and all other variables are defined as before.24 The key parameters of interest
are γ1 and γ2, which capture level and trend breaks in diarrheal disease mortality rates

23

An individual’s town of residence in the 1990 census was divided into population sizes of 1-2,499,
2,500-14,999, 15,000-99,999, 100,000-499,999, and 500,000 and above. We calculated the fraction of
individuals living in towns of 500,000 or more in each municipality. Any municipality that had a non-zero
fraction living in such towns was coded as a large area, and the small area dummy is simply the inverse. Of
note, 52% of the enumerated 1990 census population lived in larger areas, which is similar to the
percentage of individuals with access to chlorinated water pre-PAL (55%, see Figure 2).
24
The additional triple interactions terms (with subscripts omitted) are 1(Diarrhea) × 1(Small) × Year and
1(Small) × 1(Post) × Year. The additional double interactions are 1(Diarrhea) × 1(Small;, 1(Diarrhea) ×
Year; 1(Diarrhea) × 1(Post); 1(Small) × Year;, and 1(Small) × 1(Post). The single terms are 1(Diarrhea)
and 1(Small). 1(Year), and 1(Post) × Year are subsumed by year fixed effects.

19

relative to control disease mortality rates in small- and medium-size municipalities
relative to large cities.25 Importantly, because chlorination explicitly targeted small- and
medium-sized cities, these estimates are more likely to distinguish the effects of
chlorination from any potential effects of other more minor PAL components (not
differentially targeted by city size).26
We also conduct several additional robustness tests. First, we introduce state-year
fixed effects into our specification to flexibly control for any time-variant state-level
interventions or processes that may bias our results. Second , we estimate our models
using death counts rather than mortality rates. Third, we repeat our estimation using a
longer time window (1979-1997).
4.2. Results
Figure 4 plots coefficient estimates obtained by estimating Equation (1) for
under-5, neonatal (0-1 months), post-neonatal (1-12 months), and child mortality rates
(ages 1-4 years) by event year. Consistent with the unadjusted graphs (Figure 3), Figure
4 shows some undulation in diarrheal disease mortality rates relative to the control
diseases beginning in 1985 (with the implementation of Mexico’s ORT program) – and
then a discrete, markedly more rapid decline with the implementation of PAL in 1991,
continuing throughout post-implementation years. The presence of modest pre-existing
trends, particularly in the case of the respiratory disease controls, highlights the
importance of conditioning on disease-specific mortality rate trends and motivates the
parameterization of Equation (2).

25

Note that these models control for the full set of disease-municipality size specific pre-existing trends.
In addition, using large cities as controls may also allow us to net out the potential influence of other
smaller programs such as PANAZA, which targeted large cities.
26

20

Table 2 then reports estimates from Equation (2) by age group. In each age
interval, we find statistically significant level and trend breaks in diarrheal disease
mortality relative to both sets of control diseases, and these breaks coincide with the
introduction of PAL. Specifically, across all models, the estimate for “1(Diarrhea)
×Year” (third row) shows that diarrhea mortality was declining before PAL, and the
coefficient on “1(Diarrhea) × 1(Post) ×Year ” (second row) shows a near doubling of
this rate after 1991.
Overall, Table 2 shows a sharp divergence in mortality rate trends between
diarrheal diseases and control diseases that began in 1991 following the rapid
implementation of PAL. For under-5 mortality rates, specifications using the respiratory
controls (Panel A, first column) imply a 58% reduction in diarrheal disease mortality
rates by 1995. The corresponding reduction using non-infectious childhood diseases as
controls (Panel B, first column) is 54%.27 These estimates suggest that over 28,000 deaths
were averted among children under age 5 between 1991 and 1995 as a result of PAL.
Estimates for neonatal, post-neonatal, and 1-4 mortality rates imply similar declines
(columns 2-4, Table 2).28
Table 3 reports estimates from Equation (3), exploiting an additional difference
between the targeted small- and medium-size municipalities relative to larger cities. The
first two rows show triple-difference estimates of level and trend breaks (γ1 and γ2,

To calculate this, we multiplied the coefficient on the trend break, 1(Diarrhea) × &(Post) ×Year, by 4
(as 1995 is four years after the start of PAL) and added this to the coefficient denoting the level break
(1(Diarrhea) × &(Post)).
28
Using non-infectious childhood disease controls, the estimates for imply 0-1 month olds imply 41%
decline, a 51% decline for 1-12 month olds, and a 34% decline for 1-4 year olds (Panel A, second-fourth
columns, respectively). Using respiratory disease controls, the respective declines for these ages groups
was 53%, 32%, and 15% (Panel B, second-fourth columns). We note that it is not surprising that we find
large declines for neonates (0-1 month olds), for whom infectious diarrheal diseases are in fact a major
cause of death (Liu et al. 2012).
27

21

respectively) associated with PAL. These estimates imply a 37% and 48% reduction in
diarrheal mortality rates among children under age 5 in specifications using respiratory
and non-respiratory controls, respectively. These estimates are substantively similar (and
statistically equivalent) to the double-difference estimates in Table 2, confirming our a
priori understanding that other peripheral components of PAL were not important
contributors to the decline in diarrheal disease death rates among children.29
4.3. Extensions and Robustness
The substantive results in Table 2 are robust the inclusion of state-year fixed
effects, which absorb any time-varying state-level policies (Appendix Table 1); modelling
death counts instead of death rates (using a negative binomial model – see Appendix
Table 2); and using a longer study window (Appendix Table 3).30 Finally, we also
examine if areas that experienced larger declines in diarrheal disease mortality rates also
experienced larger increases (or declines) in migration, which may bias our estimates, but
we find no evidence of differential migration (see Appendix Table 4 and associated notes
for further details).

5. Under What Circumstances is Municipal Water Disinfection Effective?
The previous section demonstrates large average treatment effects of PAL. Given
mixed experiences with water system chlorination/disinfection in many developing
countries, which contrasts with the more systematically positive historical experience of

29

The 95% CI of the implied effect in the triple difference specification using respiratory infections as a
control disease (8-59%) overlap with those from the double difference specification (40-76%).
30
Models using the longer-time series employ death counts, given restrictions on data availability on live
births in prior years. The estimates (Appendix Table 3) suggest larger reductions (63% and 74% using nonrespiratory and respiratory controls, respectively), likely reflecting the greater difficulty in tightly
controlling for pre-trends in the extended time series.

22

wealthy countries, we next investigate the circumstances under which chlorination can be
most effective. We focus on heterogeneity by coverage of municipal water pipe
infrastructure, which delivers drinking water to households (and, importantly, chlorinated
drinking water under PAL). In general, we would expect to find a positive relationship
between pipe network coverage and PAL program effects. However, we find null effects,
and we subsequently consider the attenuating role of water system age, positing that older
water systems may have been more degraded (and hence less effective in providing clean
water). We also examine potential complementarities between PAL chlorination efforts
and sanitation infrastructure coverage.
5.1. Empirical Strategy
To examine heterogeneous program effects, we first estimate municipalityspecific program effects (DIDj). To do so, we subtract the difference in diarrheal diseases
mortality rates before and after PAL from the same difference in non-infectious
childhood control disease mortality rates, accounting for pre-PAL trends in both disease
groups.31
We then relate these to municipality-level infrastructure – specifically, piped
water coverage and sewage infrastructure coverage – using data from the 1990 population
census. We begin by estimating regressions of the form:

31
Specifically, we first compute the inverse hyperbolic sine transformation of mortality rates and then
compute the pre-trend between 1985 and 1991. We then subtract the predicted values from the postintervention (transformed) mortality rates for each municipality-disease group. We use the non-infectious
disease controls given that diarrheal diseases may influence the risk of contracting respiratory infections
(see Section 4). We then subtract the pre-intervention means from the de-trended post-intervention mean.
Note that this is similar to estimating Equation 2 for each municipality j and then subtracting and using
estimates of β1j and β2j to compute the percent change in diarrheal mortality rates in the pre- and post-PAL
periods (after removing changes in control disease mortality and disease-specific pre-trends). Our results
are similar in magnitude (and statistically indistinguishable) even when we account for differences in
municipality-disease pre-PAL trends.

23

(4)

DIDj = QP + Q2 (Piped Waterj) + Q; (Sewagej) + QJ (R:H#,O ST,U ) + V(Xj) + ej

where DID is the municipality specific program effect; Piped Water Coverage and
Sewage Coverage represents the fraction of households in the 1990 census reporting
having a piped water and sewage connection, respectively; and System age is a proxy for
the age of the water pipe infrastructure. Xj denotes a vector of municipality specific
characteristics (percentage of adults completing secondary schooling, percent indigenous
population, and the natural logarithm of average household earnings). We control for
these variables to account for possible unmeasured confounders that may jointly
influence municipality-specific treatment effects and water and sanitation infrastructure
variables. We also assess the sensitivity of our findings to the inclusion of baseline
diarrheal disease mortality rates and state-year fixed effects to further account for
differences in the disease environment and time-varying state-level policies.32 We
estimate specifications using both the full sample and a restricted sample of small- and
medium-sized cities (to focus more precisely on areas in which chlorination was
introduced).
Equation (4) models the differential effect of chlorination under PAL according to
pre-intervention measures of infrastructure. The coefficient estimates can be interpreted

32
Another potential confounder could be political targeting and capacity. For example, the relationship
between municipality governance and national policymakers could influence the allocation of transfers and
infrastructure development, a phenomenon that has been well-studied in Mexico (Diaz-Cayeros, Estevez
and Magaloni 2016). However, Fried and Venkataramani (2016) find no relationship between PAL
treatment effects and the pre-PAL municipality governor’s political party.

24

as interactions between PAL and each pre-intervention attribute. An advantage of this
approach is that it allows us to examine several interactions simultaneously.
5.2. Results
Table 4 reports estimates from Equation (4), both for the full sample and a
restricted sample of municipalities with fewer than 500,000 people (which were targeted
by PAL). Overall, we find no meaningful relationship between piped water coverage and
mortality decline under PAL: the estimates are small and not statistically different from
zero. These – and the other estimates described below – are also insensitive to controlling
for baseline diarrheal mortality and state fixed effects (Appendix Table 5).
These results may help to explain the discordance between the historical
experiences of wealthy countries and those of contemporary developing countries. One
possible explanation for the insignificant relationship between piped water coverage and
PAL program effect size is that more extensive municipal water systems are older (Office
of Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) 2006; Oswald Spring 2011;
Vasquez et al. 2009). Water system age is correlated with the degree of infrastructure
degradation in many countries (Larsen et al. 2016; Lee and Schwab 2005; Moe and
Rheingans 2006). Consequently, age-related pipe breaks, intermittent water pressure, and
resulting recontamination from the surrounding soil may have undermined the full
potential health benefits of the PAL (Ercumen, Gruber and Colford 2014; Kumpel and
Nelson 2013; Mazari-Hiriart et al. 2005). A substantial literature on Mexico suggests that
older municipal water systems are more prone to infrastructure failure and fecal

25

contamination (Adler 2015; Lee and Schwab 2005; Mazari-Hiriart et al. 2005; World
Bank 1994).33
Because systematic data on water system age, direct measures of degradation, and
water pressure (including pressure fluctuations) are not generally available for any
country in the world,34 including Mexico, this hypothesis is difficult to test directly. To
do so, we construct a proxy measure for water system age by calculating the ratio of
piped water coverage in the 1960 census to coverage in the 1990 census. Assuming that
pre-existing piped water systems were not updated, which is reasonable in the Mexican
context (Secretaria de Medio Ambiente y Recursos Naturales 2013), higher ratios imply
older water systems. Consistent with this view, Figure 5 shows that this measure of preexisting piped water coverage was positively associated with pipe breaks per kilometer in
2005 in a sample of 16 municipal systems (the most complete data on pipe break density
available).35
We then assess the relationship between our measure of water system age and
piped water coverage in 1990. Figure 6 shows that areas with older water systems did in
fact have greater piped water coverage in 1990. Figure 7 then plots the non-parametric
relationship between our measure of water system age and municipality-specific PAL

33

For example, a recent government report estimates that 30-50% of drinking water nationwide may be lost
due to pipe age, poor pressure control, and degraded materials (Secretaria de Medio Ambiente y Recursos
Naturales 2013). This illustrates how infrastructure-driven deficits in the completeness of disinfection and
increases in recontamination risk are widespread.
34
The best available database for worldwide municipal water system characteristics is maintained by the
International Benchmarking Network for Water and Sanitation Utilities (IB-NET, http://www.ib-net.org/).
This database includes information on total water system output and usage, infrastructure quality (including
pipe breaks), and tariffs for a number of local water systems. We searched this database for information on
Mexican utilities. However, data were only available for a small number of utilities and only for 2005 and
onwards. Moreover, these utilities were predominantly in major cities, where PAL was less active. We use
these data in some suggestive analyses (see below), but their incompleteness precludes more definitive
investigation.
35
The correlation coefficient between the two variables is 0.41, p=0.11.

26

program effects. In general, municipalities with older water systems experience smaller
declines in mortality under PAL, suggesting a potentially important role for water system
age (and degradation) in limiting the benefits of water system chlorination.
Columns 3 and 4 of Table 4 show that this relationship persists in multivariate
parametric regression models.36 The estimates from column 4 imply that municipalities
with the oldest water infrastructure (by our proxy measure) experienced smaller PAL
program effects. Moving from the newest to oldest ventile of water pipe age in our
sample is associated with a 32 percentage point reduction in the PAL treatment effect.
Thus, the role of water system age and accompanying degradation may be substantial in
limiting the potential of water chlorination interventions.
Complementarity with Sanitation Infrastructure. Table 4 shows a positive
relationship between sanitation coverage at the municipal level and mortality decline
under PAL. This suggests complementarity between water disinfection and sanitation
efforts, a pattern consistent with recent work on Massachusetts during the nineteenth
century (Alsan and Goldin Forthcoming) and quasi-experimental findings from
contemporary India (Duflo et al. 2015). Using the estimates in the fourth column of Table
4, an interventile increase in municipal sewage coverage (from 0% to 75% of the
population) was associated with a 57 percentage point greater decline in diarrheal disease
mortality rates under PAL. These results suggest that inadequate sanitation could also
substantially limit the benefits water system disinfection in developing countries.
Heterogeneity and Comparisons with Historical Experience: Finally, we use
estimates from Table 4 (column 4) to predict treatment effects for counterfactual

36

The sample sizes for these regressions are smaller due to the small sampling frame (1.5%) in the 1960
IPUMS census micro data.

27

scenarios with varying levels of infrastructure. Specifically, we predict post-intervention
declines in diarrheal disease mortality using a range of feasible values for piped water
system age and sewage coverage. Figure 8 shows these results across the distribution of
our proxy for water pipe age. The blue point estimates and shaded regions depict
predictions for water systems in the bottom ventile of observed sewage coverage, while
water systems at the top ventile are shown in red.
Importantly, our estimates suggest that Mexican municipalities in the highest
ventile of both water pipe age and sewage coverage would have experienced an 80%
decline in diarrheal mortality, averting nearly 31,000 child deaths between 1991-1995.
This large decline generally comparable to historical experiences in developed countries
– suggesting that infrastructure quality may play a central role in explaining why
contemporary disinfection efforts in many developing countries are less successful. (By
contrast, our results strikingly also suggest that mortality would not have declined at all
municipalities in the lowest ventile of water pipe age and sewage coverage).

6. Behavioral Responses
In this section, we study the behavioral responses of households to public
investments in municipal water quality. As with poor quality infrastructure, compensating
behavioral responses may also attenuate the ultimate benefits of municipal water
disinfection (and may have been less important historically, prior to widespread
knowledge about bacteriology, when wealthy countries first began disinfecting their
water) (Bennett 2012; Dow et al. 1999; Keskin et al. 2015).
6.1. Empirical Strategy

28

Because the ENIGH surveys are nationally representative repeated cross-sections
that do not sample the same municipalities over time, we study behavioral responses to
PAL at the state-level using the following approach:

(5)

Yijt = "P + "2 (1(Postt ) × Base_Diarrheaj) + "; (1(Postt ) × Base_Controlj)
+ W Xijt + XY + Z5 + uijt,

where Yijt is the inverse hyperbolic sine transform of total spending on mineral/purified
water and soaps/detergents in household i, state j, and time t; Base_Diarrhead is the
average under-5 diarrheal disease mortality rate during the four years prior to PAL;
1(Postt ) is a binary indicator = 1 if the survey year was after PAL was initiated (1991 or
thereafter); Xijt is a vector of individual and household characteristics (age of household
head and the natural logarithm of household income); and λj and θt represent state and
year fixed effects (respectively).37 Negative estimates of "2 , the key parameter of
interest, would reflect compensatory behavioral responses under PAL. Although we do
not have direct measures of hygienic behaviors, our assumption, which is supported by

37

This strategy was introduced by Card (1992) and has recently been used in a number of health-related
studies (Bhalotra and Venkataramani 2015b; Bleakley 2007, 2010; Cutler et al. 2010). Identification in this
“continuous differences-in-differences” model comes from exploiting the sudden introduction of PAL
(captured by Post) combined with variation across states in potential benefits from the program. The
premise is that program impacts are larger in regions in which the disease burden is larger prior to
introduction of the program, or that the program generates convergence in disease rates. We formally test
for convergence in diarrheal mortality graphically and by estimating the following:
Mijt = α0 + α1 (1(Postt) × Base_Diarrheaj + λj + θ t + uijt,
where Mijt = the municipality-specific diarrhea mortality rate and the other variables are as defined for
Model 5 in the main text. An estimate of α1 > 0 is consistent with convergence. This model assesses
absolute convergence. Estimating the same model using the logarithm of the mortality rate provides
evidence of relative convergence. We find evidence of convergence in child diarrhea mortality (Appendix
Figure 2 and Appendix Table 6).

29

the epidemiology literature (Kamm et al. 2014; Pickering et al. 2010), is that household
spending on disinfectants and clean water from alternative sources is a reasonable marker
for sanitary behaviors that reduce diarrheal disease risk.
6.2. Results
Table 5 reports estimates from Equation (4). In our full sample, we find small,
negative, and imprecise estimates of compensatory behavioral responses (estimates of

1

shown in column 1). However, among households living in small and medium cities, the
areas targeted by PAL, we find a statistically significant negative relationship with
household spending on soap, disinfectants, and bottled water (column 2). Specifically,
moving from the worst performing quartile of states in the pre-program distribution of
diarrhea mortality rates to the top quartile is associated with a 6.7% decrease in spending
on these goods.38 We find no statistically significant behavioral responses among
households in large cities which had disinfected water prior to PAL (column 3).39
These results provide evidence of significant compensatory behavioral responses
to PAL (or “crowd-out”). However, although we are unable to distinguish the
independent health decrement associated with them from the direct health benefits of
PAL, the fact that we nonetheless find large reductions in diarrhea mortality rates under
PAL implies that the degree of crowd-out is far from complete.

38

This effect appears to be driven primarily by soap and detergent purchases, with null findings for mineral
and purified water purchases. Appendix Table 7 provides further details.
39
Further, we find that impacts within these small and medium sized towns and cities were only seen for
households with both sanitation and piped water access and not for households with only piped access or
neither amenity (few households have sanitation access without piped water access). While these estimates
(available upon request) are imprecisely estimated, the pattern of coefficients is consistent with the
complementarity between disinfection and sanitation noted in Section 5.

30

7. Cost Effectiveness
We have shown that PAL was associated with large reductions in diarrheal
disease mortality, but a natural question is whether this was worth the expense relative to
alternative uses of these public funds. To calculate the cost per child death averted and
the cost per life year saved, we use the estimates from Table 2 for total under-5 mortality
rates (using non-respiratory controls). We focus on the period 1991-1995 given that we
know the total cost of the program over this time frame: PAL cost approximately U.S. $1
billion over this period (or $1.86 billion in 2015 dollars).40 Of course, the health benefits
of PAL presumably continued accruing after 1995. Depending on the costs of ongoing
maintenance and operation of chlorination facilities, our results may understate the costeffectiveness of the program.41
For each year between 1991 and 1995, we calculate the differential reduction in
diarrheal disease mortality rates using the estimates for the level shift (Diarrhea×Post)
and trend break (Diarrhea×Post×Year). We multiply these estimated rate changes by the
average number of live births in small and medium-sized towns in each year prior to PAL
to recover the implied number of averted deaths. We then sum the implied number of
averted deaths across years 1991-1995. Overall, the implied cost per death averted under
PAL was $65,981 (Table 6).
Assuming that individuals surviving childhood would have lived to the age of 60
(conservative given that the average life expectancy at the time of the policy was 71
40

Personal communication with Dr. Jaime Sepulveda, Mexico’s Vice-Minister of Health from 1991 to
1994.
41
Another reason our estimates may be conservative is that we do not account for additional program
benefits beyond life years saved. For example, other work demonstrates robust short run benefits of water
infrastructure on short-run financial transactions (Ashraf et al, 2017) and time allocations and long-run
benefits of infant exposure to PAL on cognitive outcomes and schooling for girls (Bhalotra and
Venkataramani 2015a).

31

years), the cost per life year saved was $1,100. Estimates using the upper 95% CI of our
estimates imply a cost per life year saved of $1,577 (or $900 using the lower 95% CI).
We also use the estimates from Table 4 to assess cost-effectiveness in settings for the
counterfactual scenario in which all municipalities have good quality infrastructure (i.e,
equivalent to the top ventile of the pipe age proxy and sewage coverage observed in our
sample). The 80% decline in diarrheal disease mortality predicted for this scenario,
implying nearly 34,000 averted child deaths between 1991-1995, would cost $900 per life
year saved.

8. Discussion and Conclusion
Despite the widespread adoption of effective water disinfection technology
worldwide over the last century, poor water quality remains a key challenge in low- and
middle-income countries. The sources of this problem likely extend beyond weak
governance and regulation. In particular, existing urban water and sanitation
infrastructure in developing countries are old and degraded – a challenge that is now
being exacerbated by rapid urbanization (United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) 2006). Identifying underlying technological factors that alter the returns to
disinfection is thus critical to maximize the potential of large-scale water quality
initiatives in the future.
Mexico’s Programa Agua Limpia provides an unusual contemporary opportunity
to study the potential of state-funded municipal water disinfection on a national scale.
On average, we find that the program successfully reduced childhood diarrheal disease
mortality rates by 50%. Moreover, we find that PAL was highly cost-effective, with a

32

cost per life year saved of $1,100. However, while some areas experienced large
reductions, others enjoyed little health benefit. We also find evidence of compensatory
reductions in household hygiene investments, but the degree of crowd-out is far from
complete.
To identify additional investments that may be necessary for municipal water
disinfection to realize its full potential, we also examine the conditions under which PAL
was effective. Studying municipal-level variation across the entire country, we find
evidence suggesting that water system age, and associated degradation, may play an
important role (because recontamination is more likely in degraded systems with
intermittent water pressure, for example). We also find evidence of meaningful
complementarities between water disinfection and pre-existing sewage infrastructure.
Maximizing the returns to large-scale water quality interventions may require concurrent
investments in repairing degraded water pipes and in sewage infrastructure. Overall, we
emphasize the complexity of contemporary urban water and sanitation challenges in
developing countries – and the need for more research on how to improve the safety of
municipal drinking water.

33

References
Adler, D. 2015. "The war for Mexico's water." in Foreign Policy.
Ahuja, A., M. Kremer, and A.P. Zwane. 2010. "Providing safe water: Evidence from
randomized evaluations." Annual Review of Resource Economics 2:237-256.
Alsan, M.and C. Goldin. Forthcoming. "Watersheds in infant mortality: The role of
effective water and sewerage infrastructure, 1880 to 1915." Journal of Political
Economy.
Arnold, B., C. Null, S.P. Luby, L. Unicomb, C. Stewart, K.G. Dewey, T. Ahmed, S.
Ashraf, G. Christensen, T. Clasen, H.N. Dentz, L.C.H. Fernald, R. Haque, A.E. Hubbard,
P. Kariger, E. Leontsini, A. Lin, S.M. Njenga, P.A. J, P.K. Ram, F. Tofail, P.K. Winch,
and J.M. Colford. 2013. "Cluster-randomised controlled trials of individual and combined
water, sanitation, hygiene and nutritional interventions in rural Bangladesh and Kenya:
the WASH Benefits study design and rationale." BMJ Open 3:e003476
doi:003410.001136/bmjopen-002013-003476.
Arnold, B.F.and J.M. Colford. 2007. "Treating water with chlorine at point-of-use to
improve water quality and reduce child diarrhea in developing countries: A systematic
review and meta-analysis." American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene
76(2):354-364.
Ashraf, N., E. Glaeser, A. Holland, and B. Millet Steinberg. 2017. "Water, health and
wealth." NBER working Paper No. 23807.
Ashraf, S., M.H. Huque, M. Agboatwalla, and S.P. Luby. 2013. "Effect of recent
diarrheal episodes on risk of pneumonia in children under the age of 5 years in Karachi,
Pakistan." International Journal of Epidemiology 42(1):194-200.
Bain, R., R. Cronk, J. Wright, H. Yang, T. Slaymaker, and J. Bartram. 2014. "Fecal
contamination of drinking-water in low- and middle-income countries: A systematic
review and meta-analysis." PLoS Medicine 11(5):e1001644.
doi:1001610.1001371/journal.pmed.1001644.
Barham, T. 2011. "A healthier start: the effect of conditional cash transfers on neonatal
and infant mortality in rural Mexico." Journal of Development Economics 94:74-85.
Bennett, D. 2012. "Does clean water make you dirty? Water supply and sanitation in the
Philippines." Journal of Human Resources 47(1):146-173.

34

Bertrand, M., E. Duflo, and S. Mullainathan. 2004. "How much should we trust
differences-in-differences estimates?" Quarterly Journal of Economics 119(1):249-275.
Bhalotra, S.and A.S. Venkataramani. 2015a. "Human capital and infectious disease:
Gender differences in investments and outcomes." Mimeo, University of Essex.
—. 2015b. "Shadows of the Captain of the Men of Death: Early life health interventions,
human capital, and institutions." Mimeo, University of Essex.
Bhutta, Z.A., J.K. Das, N. Walker, A. Rizvi, H. Campbell, I. Rudan, and R.E. Black.
2013. "Interventions to address deaths from childhood pneumonia and diarrhoea
equitably: what works and at what cost?" Lancet 381(9875):1417-1429.
Bleakley, H. 2007. "Disease and Development: Evidence from Hookworm Eradication in
the American South." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 122(1):73-117.
—. 2010. "Malaria Eradication in the Americas: A Retrospective Analysis of Childhood
Exposure." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 2:1-45.
Brown, R.R., N. Keath, and T.H. Wong. 2009. "Urban water management in cities:
Historical, current, and future regimes." Water Science and Technology 59(5):847-855.
Burbridge, J.B., L. Magee, and A.L. Robb. 1988. "Alternative transformations to handle
extreme values of the dependent variable." Journal of the American Statistical
Association 83(401):123-127.
Cain, L.P.and E.J. Rotella. 2001. "Death and spending: Urban mortality and municipal
expenditure on sanitation." Annales de Demographie Historique 1(101):139-154.
Cameron, A.C., J.B. Gelbach, and D. Miller. 2008. "Boostrap-based improvements for
inference with clustered errors." Review of Economics and Statistics 90(3):414-427.
Card, D. 1992. "Using regional variation in wages to measure the effects of the federal
minimum wage." Industrial and Labor Relations Review 46(1):22-37.
Clasen, T.and L. Haller. 2008. "Water quality interventions to prevent diarrhoea: Cost
and cost-effectiveness."
CONAGUA. 1994. "Informe, 1989-1994." Mexico City, Mexico: Comision Nacional Del
Agua.

35

Crocker, K.and S. Masten. 2002. "Prospects for private water provision in developing
countries: Lessons from 19th century America." in Thirsting for Efficiency: The
Economics and Politics of Urban Water Reform, edited by M. Shirley. London: Elsevier.
Cutler, D., W. Fung, M. Kremer, M. Singhal, and T. Vogl. 2010. "Early-Life Malaria
Exposure and Adult Outcomes: Evidence from Malaria Eradication in India." American
Economic Journal: Applied Economics 2:72-94.
Cutler, D., F. Knaul, R. Lozano, O. Mendez, and B. Zurita. 2002. "Financial crisis, health
outcomes and ageing: Mexico in the 1980s and 1990s." Journal of Public Economics
84(2):279-303.
Cutler, D.M.and G. Miller. 2005. "The role of public health improvements in health
advances: The twentieth-century United States." Demography 42(1):1-22.
—. 2006. "Water, water everywhere: Municipal finance and water supply in American
cities." Pp. 153-184 in Corruption and Reform: Lessons from America's Economic
History, edited by E. Glaeser and C. Goldin. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Diaz-Cayeros, A., F. Estevez, and B. Magaloni. 2016. The Political Logic of Poverty
Relief: Electoral Strategies and Social Policy in Mexico. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Diaz-Cayeros, A.and B. Magaloni. 2003. "The politics of public spending - Part II. The
Programa Nacional de Solidaridad (PRONASOL) in Mexico." in World Development
Report Background Paper. Washington D.C.: World Bank.
Dow, W.H., T.J. Philipson, and X. Sala-i-Martin. 1999. "Longevity complementarities
under competing risks." American Economic Review 89(5):1358-1371.
Duflo, E., M. Greenstone, R. Guiteras, and T. Clasen. 2015. "Toilets can work: Short and
medium run health impacts of addressing complementarities and externalities in water
and sanitation." NBER Working Paper No. 21521.
Dupas, P. 2011. "Health behavior in developing countries." Annual Review of Economics
3:425-449.
Embrey, M., P. Hunter, J. Sellwood, P. Wyn-Jones, S.L. Percival, and R. Chalmers. 2004.
Microbiology of Waterborne Diseases. San Diego and London: Elseview.
Ercumen, A., B. Arnold, E. Kumpel, Z. Burt, I. Ray, K. Nelson, and J.M. Colford. 2015.
"Upgrading a piped water supply from intermittent to continuous delivery and association

36

with waterborne illness: A matched cohort study in urban India." PLoS Medicine
12(10):e1001892. doi: 1001810.1001371/journal.pmed.1001892.
Ercumen, A., J.S. Gruber, and J.M. Colford. 2014. "Water distribution system
deficiencies and gastrointestinal illness: A systematic review and meta-analysis."
Environmental Health Perspectives 122(7):651-660.
Ferrie, J.P.and W. Troesken. 2008. "Water and Chicago's mortality transition, 18501925." Explorations in Economic History 45:1-16.
Fewtrell, L., R.B. Kaufmann, D. Kay, W. Enanoria, L. Haller, and J.M. Colford. 2005.
"Water, sanitation, and hygiene interventions to reduce diarrhoea in less developed
countries: a systematic review and meta-analysis." Lancet Infectious Diseases 5(1):42-52.
Fischer Walker, C., J. Perin, J. Katz, J.M. Tielsch, and R.E. Black. 2013a. "Diarrhea as a
risk factor for acute lower respiratory tract infections among children in low income
settings." Journal of Global Health 3(1):doi: 10.7189/jogh.7103.010402.
Fischer Walker, C., I. Rudan, H. Nair, E. Theodoratou, Z.A. Bhutta, K.L. O'Brien, H.
Campbell, and R.E. Black. 2013b. "Global burden of childhood pneumonia and
diarrhoea." Lancet 381(9875):1405-1416.
Foster, A., E. Gutierrez, and N. Kumar. 2009. "Voluntary compliance, pollution levels,
and infant mortality in Mexico." American Economic Review 99(2):191-197.
Fotso, J.-C., A.C. Ezeh, N.J. Madise, and J. Ciera. 2007. "Progress towards the child
mortality millenium development goal in urban sub-Saharan Africa: The dynamics of
population growth, immunization, and access to clean water." BMC Public Health
7(218):doi:10.1186/1471-2458-1187-1218.
Frenk, J., J. Sepulveda, O. Gomez-Dantes, and F. Knaul. 2003. "Evidence-based health
policy: Three generations of reform in Mexico." The Lancet 362(9396):1667-1671.
Fried, B.J.and A. Venkataramani. 2016. "Does saving lives win votes? Evaluating the
electoral consequences of a water disinfection program in Mexico." Mimeo, Brandeis
University.
Gadgil, A. 1998. "Drinking water in developing countries." Annual Review of Energy and
Environment 23:253-286.
Galiani, S., P. Gertler, and E. Schargrodsky. 2005. "Water for life: The impact of the
privatization of water services on child mortality." Journal of Political Economy
113(1):83-120.
37

Gonzalez, F.and T. Quast. 2011. "Macroeconomic changes and mortality in Mexico."
Empirical Economics 40(2):305-319.
Greenstone, M.and R. Hanna. 2014. "Enviromental regulations, air and water pollution,
and infant mortality in India." American Economic Review 104(10):3038-3072.
Gruber, J.S., F. Reygadas, B. Arnold, I. Ray, K. Nelson, and J.M. Colford. 2013. "A
stepped wedge, cluster-randomized trial of a household UV-disinfection and safe storage
drinking water intervention in rural Baja California Sur, Mexico." American Journal of
Tropical Medicine and Hygiene 89(2):238-245.
Gutierrez, R., R. Tapia-Conyer, H. Guiscafre, H. Reyes, H. Martinez, and J. Kumate.
1996. "Impact of oral rehydration and selected public health interventions on reduction of
mortality from childhood diarrhoeal diseases in Mexico." Bulletin of the World Health
Organization 74(2):189-197.
Hernandez, B., D. Ramirez-Villalobos, M.B. Duarte, A. Corcho, G. Villareal, A.
Jimenez, and L.M. Torres. 2012. "Subregistro de defunciones de menores y certificación
de nacimiento en una muestra representativa de los 101 municipios con más bajo índice
de desarrollo humano en México." Salud Publica de Mexico 54(4):393-400.
Jayachandran, S., A. Lleras-Muney, and K.V. Smith. 2010. "Modern medicine and the
twentieth century decline in mortality: Evidence on the impact of sulfa drugs." American
Economic Journal: Applied Economics 2(2):118-146.
Jeandron, A., J.M. Saidi, A. Kapama, M. Burhole, F. Birembano, T. Vandevelde, A.
Gasparrini, B. Armstrong, S. Cairncross, and J.H.J. Ensink. 2015. "Water supply
interruptions and suspected cholera incidence: A time-series regression in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo." PLoS Medicine 12(10):e1001893.
doi:1001810.1001371/journal.pmed.1001893.
Kamm, K., D. Feikin, G. Bigogo, G. Aol, A. Audi, A. Cohen, M. Shah, J. Yu, R.
Breiman, and P.K. Ram. 2014. "Tropical Associations between presence of handwashing
stations and soap in the home and diarrhea and respiratory illness in children less than
five years old in rural western Kenya and International Health." Tropical Medicine and
International Health 19(4):398-406.
Katz, S.L., J.I. Santos, M.A. Nakamura, M.V. Godoy, P. Kuri, C.A. Lucas, and R.T.
Conyer. 2004. "Measles in Mexico, 1941-2001: interruption of endemic transmission and
lessons learned." Journal of Infectious Diseases 189(Suppl 1):S243-S250.
Keskin, P., G.K. Shastry, and H. Willis. 2015. "Water quality awareness and
breastfeeding: evidence of health behavior change in bangladesh." Review of Economics
and Statistics Forthcoming.
38

Ketzenbaum, L.and J.-L. Rosenthal. 2014. "Income versus sanitation: Mortality decline
in Paris, 1880-1914." PSE Working Paper.
Knutsson, D. 2016. "The effect of introducing clean piped water on mortality in
Stockholm: 1850-1872." Mimeo, Stockholm University.
Koppaka, R. 2011. "Ten great public health achievements: Worldwide, 2001-2010."
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 60(24):814-818.
Kremer, M., J. Leino, E. Miguel, and A.P. Zwane. 2011. "Spring cleaning: Rural water
impacts, valuation, and property rights institutions." Quarterly Journal of Economics
126(1):145-205.
Kumpel, E.and K. Nelson. 2013. "Comparing microbial water quality in an intermittent
and continuous piped water supply." Water Research 47(14):5176-5188.
Kumpel, E.and K.L. Nelson. 2014. "Mechanisms affecting water quality in an
intermittent piped water supply." Environmental Science and Technology 48:2766-2775.
Larsen, T.A., S. Hoffman, C. Luthi, B. Truffer, and M. Maurer. 2016. "Emerging
solutions to the water challenges of an urbanizing world." Science 352(6288):928-933.
Lee, E.J.and K.J. Schwab. 2005. "Deficiencies in drinking water distribution systems in
developing countries." Journal of Water and Health 3:109-127.
Liu, L., H.L. Johnson, S. Cousens, J. Perin, S. Scott, J.E. Lawn, I. Rudan, H. Campbell,
R. Cibulskis, M. Li, C. Mathers, and R.E. Black. 2012. "Global, regional, and national
causes of child mortality: An updated systematic analysis for 2010 with time trends since
2000." The Lancet 389(9832):9-15.
Lozano-Ascencio, R. 2008. "Is it possible to improve the death registries in Mexico?"
Gaceta Medica de Mexico 144(6):525-533.
Masten, S. 2011. "Public utility ownership in 19th-century America: the "aberrant" case
of water." Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 27(3):604-654.
Mathers, C.D., D. Fat, M. Inoue, C. Rao, and A. Lopez. 2005. "Counting the dead and
what they died from: an assessment of global status of cause of death data." Bulletin of
the World Health Organization 83:171-177.
Mazari-Hiriart, M., Y. Lopez-Vidal, S. Ponce-de-Leon, J.J. Calva, F. Rojo-Callejas, and
G. Castillo-Rojas. 2005. "Longitudinal study of microbial diversity and seasonality in the
39

Mexico City metropolitan area water supply system." Applied and Environmental
Microbiology 71(9):5129-5137.
McDonald, R.I., K. Weber, J. Padowski, M. Florke, C. Schneider, P.A. Green, T.
Gleeson, S. Eckman, B. Lehner, D. Balk, T. Boucher, G. Grill, and M. Montgomery.
2014. "Water on an urban planet: Urbanization and the reach of urban water
infrastructure." Global Environmental Change 27:96-105.
Medina, E. 1991. "Epidemia de cólera en Chile; 1991." Revista medica de Chile
119(8):943-956.
Melosi, M. 2000. The Sanitary City: Urban Infrastructure in America from Colonial
Times to the Present. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press.
Minnesota Population Center. 2015. Integrated Public Use Microdata Series,
International: Version 6.4. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota.
Moe, C.L.and R.D. Rheingans. 2006. "Global challenges in water, sanitation and health."
Journal of Water and Health 4(S1):41-57.
Mota-Hernandez, F.and L. Velasquez-Jones. 1985. "Aspectos estrategicos para la
implementacion de un Programa Nacional para la rehidratacion oral en la diarrea."
Boletin Medico del Hospital Infantil de Mexico 42(8):463-465.
Office of Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD). 2006. "Water management
policy brief for the Mexican Project." Mexico: Office of Economic Cooperation and
Development, Enviromental Directorate,.
Ogasawara, K.and T. Inoue. 2015. "Public health improvements and mortality in early
twentieth-century Japan." Mimeo, Tokyo Institute of Technology.
Orenstein, W.A., R.T. Perry, and N.A. Halsey. 2004. "The clinical significance of
measles: a review." Journal of Infectious Diseases 189(Suppl 1):S4-S16.
Oswald Spring, U. 2011. "Water resources in Mexico: scarcity, degradation, stress,
conflicts, management, and policy." edited by H.G. Brauch. Heidelberg: Springer.
Pickering, A.J., A.B. Boehm, M. Mwanjali, and J. Davis. 2010. "Efficacy of waterless
hand hygiene compared with handwashing with soap: a field study in Dar es Salaam,
Tanzania." American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene 82(2):270-278.
Preston, S.H.and E. van de Walle. 1978. "Urban French mortality in the Nineteenth
Century." Population Studies 32:275-297.
40

Pruss-Ustun, A., R. Bos, F. Gore, and J. Bartram. 2008. Safer water, better health: cost,
benefits, and sustainability of interventions to protect and promote health. Geneva:
World Health Organization.
Quandt, R.E. 1960. "Test of the hypothesis that a linear regression system obeys two
separate regimes." Journal of the American Statistical Association 55(290):324-330.
Ries, A.A., D.J. Vugia, L. Beingolea, A.M. Palacios, E. Vasquez, J.G. Wells, N. Garcia
Baca, D.L. Swerdlow, M. Pollack, N.H. Bean, L. Seminario, and R.V. Tauxe. 1992.
"Cholera in Piura, Peru: A modern urban epidemic." Journal of Infectious Diseases
166(6):1429-1433.
Secretaria de Medio Ambiente y Recursos Naturales. 2013. "Programa Nacional Hidrico,
2014-2018." Tlalpan, Mexico: Secretaria de Medio Ambiente y Recursos Naturales,.
Sedgwick, W.T.and J.S. MacNutt. 1910. "On the Mills-Reincke phenomenon and Hazen's
theorem concerning the decrease in mortality from disease other than typhoid fever
following the purification of public water-supplies." Journal of Infectious Diseases
7(4):489-564.
Sepulveda, J., F. Bustreo, R. Tapia, J. Rivera, R. Lozano, G. Olaiz, V. Partida, M.D.
Garcia, and J.L. Voldespino. 2007. "Improvement of child survival in Mexico: The
diagonal approach." Salud Publica de Mexico 49:S110-S125.
Sepulveda, J., J. Valdespino, and L. Garcia-Garcia. 2006. "Cholera in Mexico: The
paradoxical benefits of the last pandemic." International Journal of Infectious Diseases
10(1):4-13.
Shaheed, A., J. Orgill, M.A. Montomgery, M.A. Jeuland, and J. Brown. 2014. "Why
"improved" water sources are not always safe." Bulletin of the World Health
Organization 92:283-289.
The World Bank. 1995. "Project Completion Report, Mexico: Water Supply and
Sanitation Sector Project (Loan 3271-ME)." in Environment and Urban Development
Division Country Dept II - Latin America and the Caribbean Region: The World Bank.
Tokajian, S.and F. Hashwa. 2003. "Water quality problems associated with intermitted
water supply." Water Science and Technology 47(3):229-234.
Tome, P., H. Reyes, C. Pina, L. Rodriguez, and G. Gutierrez. 1997. "Characteristics
associated with the under-registration of deaths in the state of Guerreo, Mexico." Salud
Publica de Mexico 39(6):523-529.

41

Tulchinsky, T.H., E. Burla, M. Clayman, C. Sadik, A. Brown, and S. Goldberger. 2000.
"Safety of community drinking-water and outbreaks of waterborne enteric disease: Israel,
1976-97." Bulletin of the World Health Organization 78(12):1466-1473.
Turneaure, F.E.and H.L. Russell. 1901. Public Water-Supplies: Requirements, Resources,
and the Construction of Works. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
UNICEF, WHO, The World Bank, and UN Population Division. 2007. "Levels and
Trends of Child Mortality in 2006: Estimates Developed by the Inter-Agency Group for
Chold Mortality Estimation." New York.
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). 2006. "Beyond Scarcity: Power,
Poverty, and the Global Water Crisis, Human Development Report 2006." New York.
United Nations Population Division. 2014. "World urbanization prospects: the 2014
revision, highlights (ST/ESA/SER.A/352)." United Nations.
Vasquez, W.F., P. Mozumder, J. Hernandez-Arce, and R.P. Berrens. 2009. "Willingness
to pay for safe drinking water: Evidence from Parral, Mexico." Journal of Environmental
Management 90(11):3391-3400.
Velazquez, F.R., H. Garcia-Lozano, E. Rodriguez, Y. Cervantes, A. Gomez, M. Melo, L.
Anaya, J.C. Ovalle, J. Torres, B.D. De Jesus, C. Alvarez-Lucas, T. Breuer, O. Munoz,
and P. Kuri. 2004. "Diarrhea morbidity and mortality in Mexican children: Impact of
rotavirus disease." Pediatric Infectious Disease Journal 23(10):S149-S155.
Vos, T., R.M. Barber, B. Bell, A. Bertozzi-Villa, S. Biryukov, I. Bollinger, and et al.
2015. "Global, regional, and national incidence, prevalence, and years lived with
disability for 301 acute and chronic diseases and injuries in 188 countries, 1990-2013: A
systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2013." The Lancet 386:743800.
World Bank. 1994. "Staff Appraisal Report, Mexico, Second Water Supply and
Sanitation Sector Project." World Bank.
Zwane, A.P.and M. Kremer. 2007. "What works in fighting diarrheal diseases in
developing countries? A critical review." World Bank Research Observer 22(1):1-24.

42

Figure 1: Pre-Intervention Under-5 Diarrheal Mortality Rates Across Mexican
Municipalities (1985-1990 average)

Notes: Map plots average diarrheal mortality rates per 1,000 live births over the period 1985-1990
for children under the age of 5 by municipality. Darker colors reflect higher average preintervention diarrheal mortality rates. Data to construct map were obtained from the Mexico
Ministry of Health, Vital Statistics.

Figure 2: Chlorination Coverage under Programa Agua Limpia

Notes: Figure plots the share of the population (blue) and number of localities (red) covered by
chlorinated water between April 1991 and December 1995. The sharp uptick in the population
share covered between April 1991 and December 1991 was coincident with the introduction of
Programa Agua Limpia (PAL). Data were obtained from CONAGUA (1994).

43

10
5

Under 5 Mortality

15

Figure 3: National Trends in Under-5 Mortality Rates by Cause

1985

1987

1989

1991

1993

1995

Year
Non-Infectious Childhood
Diarrheal Infections

Respiratory Infections

Notes: Figure plots the average trends in mortality rates for diarrheal disease and the two sets of
control diseases – respiratory infections and non-infectious childhood diseases – for non-rural
municipalities the study period 1985-1995. Visually, we note a trend break in the diarrheal
mortality series in 1991, coincident with the start of PAL. This break was confirmed
econometrically using the Quandt Likelihood Ratio test (F = 11.16, p = 0.004) applied to a longer
time series (1979-1997, see Appendix Figure 1; specifically, we assessed for the presence of
breaks between 1985-1995). No statistically significant break was found for the control diseases
(for non-infectious childhood diseases, the identified break year was 1995 (F = 0.86, p = 0.37) and
for respiratory disease, the break year was 1987 (F = 2.06, p = 0.17). Data source: Ministry of
Health, Vital Statistics.

44

Figure 4: Event Study Coefficient Plots
A
B
Under 5, Respiratory Controls

0
-1

-1

-.8

-.8

-.6

-.6

-.4

-.2

Coef

-.2
-.4

Coef

0

.2

.2

.4

.4

.6

.6

Under 5, Non-Infectious Controls

1985

1986

1987

1988

1989

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1985

1986

1987

1988

1989

Year

C

1992

1993

1994

1995

0-1 Months, Non-Infectious Controls
.6
.4

.6

.2

.4

Coef

-.4

-.2

0

.2
0
-.2
-1

-1

-.8

-.8

-.6

-.6

-.4

Coef

1991

D

0-1 Months, Respiratory Controls

1985

1986

1987

1988

1989

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1985

1995

1986

1987

1988

1989

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1994

1995

Year

Year

E

F

1-12 Months, Respiratory Controls

-.2
-.8

-.8

-.6

-.6

-.4

-.4

-.2

Coef

0

0

.2

.2

.4

.4

.6

.6

1-12 Months, Non-Infectious Controls

-1

-1

Coef

1990

Year

1985

1986

1987

1988

1989

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

Year

1985

1986

1987

1988

1989

1990

Year

45

1991

1992

1993

G

H

.4
.2
0
-.2

Coef

-1

-.8

-.6

-.4

-.2
-1

-.8

-.6

-.4

Coef

0

.2

.4

.6

1-4 Years, Non-Infectious Controls

.6

1-4 Years, Respiratory Controls

1985

1986

1987

1988

1989

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

Year

1985

1986

1987

1988

1989

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

Year

Notes: Panels A-H plot estimates of the Diarrhea × Year coefficients ("#) from Equation 1 using either
respiratory (left panel) infectious diseases or non-infectious childhood diseases (right panel) as controls.
Panels A and B plot estimates for all children under age 5 and the remaining panels examine specific age
subgroups (neonatal and post-neonatal refer to 0-1 month-olds and 1-12 month-olds, respectively).
Coefficients are denoted by the dots and the vertical line and whiskers denote the 95% confidence interval
of the estimates. The dashed line is a predicted trend line calculated using pre-1991 coefficients, which we
extend across the time series. The solid line is the trend line for the 1991-1995 coefficients. The gap
between the two can be interpreted as the PAL treatment effect.

46

2
0
-2

Ln(Pipe Breaks/Km)

4

6

Figure 5: Relationship Between Water System Age and Pipe Breaks

0

.2

.4

.6

.8

1

Piped Water Share 1960/1990

Notes: Scatter plot of logged pipe breaks per kilometer in 16 municipal water systems (distributed across
11 states) in 2005 against the ratio of households with access to piped water in (1960/1990), which we use
as a proxy for system age. Data on pipe breaks were obtained from the International Benchmarking
Network for Water and Sanitation Utilities (IB-NET, http://www.ib-net.org/). The best-fit line reveals a
positive correlation between these variables (r = 0.41, p=0.11).

Figure 6: Water System Age and 1990 Population Coverage

Notes: LOWESS smoothed plots (with 95% CI) of municipality specific ratios of household piped water
coverage between 1960 and 1990 (our proxy for water system age) against coverage in 1990. The positive
slope of the plot suggests that systems with higher population coverage pre-PAL may also have been older
and, therefore, dilapidated. Figure 5 directly makes the case for the latter point, linking the 1960/1990
access ratio to pipe breaks in 2005.

47

Figure 7: PAL Program Effects and Water System Age

Notes: LOWESS smoothed plots (with 95% CI) of municipality specific differences-indifferences estimates and the ratio of piped water coverage between 1960 and 1990 (our proxy for
water system age).

.25
0
-.25
-.5
-.75
-1

% PAL-attributable Decline

.5

Figure 8: Infrastructure Quality and Heterogeneous Effects of PAL

.7

.6

.5

.4

.3

.2

.1

0

Pipe System Age
Lowest Ventile Sewage

Highest Ventile Sewage

Notes: Predicted PAL treatment effects and confidence intervals for different infrastructure
regimes based on regressions in column (4) of Table 4. Predictions calculated over the 90th-10th
percentile interval of pipe water system age (based on the piped water share proxy variable, Xaxis) for both the bottom (light grey) and top (dark grey) deciles of sewage coverage (6% and
73%, respectively) in the sample. The bottom right of the graph reflects predicted estimates for
municipalities in the highest decile of both sewage coverage and water system age.

48

Table 1: Descriptive Statistics
Mean

Pre-PAL
S.D.

N

Mean

Post-PAL
S.D.

N

Mean

Full Sample
S.D.

N

Vital Statistics Data (1985-1995, Municipality Level)
Under-5 Diarrheal Mortality Rate

10.8

10.4

8,424

5.2

5.9

7,020

8.2

9.7

15,444

Control Diseases
Under-5 Non-Infectious Childhood Disease Mortality Rate
Under-5 Respiratory Mortality Rate

8.3
10.4

7.7
9.3

8,358
8,376

7.7
8.8

6.4
6.6

6,965
6,980

8.0
9.6

7.8
8.2

15,323
15,356

0.80
0.60
5.3
43628
5,012,389

0.18
0.26
1.38
16471
8,497,095

1,314
1,314
1,314
1,314
1,314

1428
45.05
0.86
0.49
0.25
0.12
0.15
0.60

1113.15
15.43
0.35
0.50
0.43
0.33
0.35
0.50

11,176
11,176
11,176
11,176
11,176
11,176
11,176
11,176

810.11
44.58
0.86
0.51
0.24
0.13
0.13
0.53

1360.57
15.39
0.34
0.50
0.43
0.34
0.34
0.50

22,558
22,558
22,558
22,558
22,558
22,558
22,558
22,558

1015.022
44.74
0.86
0.50
0.24
0.13
0.13
0.55

1316.469
15.41
0.34
0.50
0.43
0.33
0.34
0.50

33,734
33,734
33,734
33,734
33,734
33,734
33,734
33,734

Municipality Characteristics, 1990 Census
% HH with Access to Piped Water
% HH with Access to Sewage
% Adults Completing Secondary Schooling
Average Per Capita Earnings (Pesos, 1000)
Population
ENIGH Data (1989, 1992, 1994 waves; Individual Level)
Total Expenditure on Sanitation Goods (Peso)
Household Head Age
Household Head Gender (=1 if Male)
Household Head Less then Primary (=1)
Primary Complete (=1)
Secondary Complete
Diploma or Above
Household with Piped Water (=1)

Notes: Descriptive statistics for non-rural municipalities, divided by pre-PAL (data from prior to 1991) and post-PAL (data from 1991 or thereafter). Vital
Statistics data reflect weighted under-5 deaths per 1000 live births, with the sample size denoting municipality-year observations. Diarrheal diseases denote
infectious diarrhea (ICD9 codes 001-009). Non-infectious childhood diseases comprise of the sum of death rates from congenital anomalies (ICD9 codes 740759), perinatal causes (low birth weight, birth trauma, congenital infections, neonatal jaundice, etc: ICD9 codes 764-779). Respiratory diseases consist of the sum
of death rates from acute upper and lower respiratory infections (ICD9 codes 60-466, 480-487 respectively). Death statistics are weighted by the mean number of
live births in each municipality between 1985-1991. Municipality characteristics from 1990 (taken as a pre-PAL baseline) were computed using the IPUMS 1990
Census 10% micro data (Minnesota Population Center, 2015), aggregated (using appropriate weights) to the municipality level. The piped water variable reflects
the percentage of households in a municipality with access to piped water either at their home or via a public tap. The sewage variable reflects the percentage of
households with on premises access to a sewage system. The earnings variable is the mean total annual household earned income in 1990 pesos (the large
numbers reflect significant currency devaluation over the 1980s-early 1990s). Finally, the ENIGH data are taken from the 1989, 1992, and 1994 waves of the
Encuestas Nacional de Ingresos y Gastos de los Hogares, a national household income and consumption survey. The sanitation goods variable reflects the total
amount spent in the prior month on soaps, detergents, and bottled or purified water. We combine these into a single class to reduce the number of zeros, since we
used logged expenditures in our empirical models.

49

Table 2: Differences-in-Differences Models: Diarrheal Relative to Control Disease Trend Breaks Pre-Post PAL

1(Diarrhea)*1(Post)

Panel A - Respiratory Infections Control
Under-5 Years 0-1 Months
1-12 Months
1-4 Years
-0.0883
-0.0509
-0.116
0.0123
(0.0374)
(0.0384)
(0.0332)
(0.0312)

Panel B - Non-Infectious Childhood Diseases Control
Under-5 Years 0-1 Months 1-12 Months
1-4 Years
-0.143
-0.0570
-0.259
-0.144
(0.0368)
(0.0367)
(0.0279)
(0.0240)

1(Diarrhea)*1(Post)*Year

-0.124
(0.0137)

-0.12
(0.0134)

-0.0513
(0.0111)

-0.0412
(0.0101)

-0.102
(0.0132)

-0.0884
(0.0130)

-0.0635
(0.0103)

-0.0487
(0.00864)

1(Diarrhea)*Year

-0.0369
(0.00780)

-0.0299
(0.00786)

-0.0343
(0.00684)

-0.0331
(0.00677)

-0.0208
(0.00793)

-0.0172
(0.00774)

-0.0346
(0.00664)

-0.0264
(0.00598)

1(Diarrhea)

0.0382
(0.0356)

-0.131
(0.0361)

0.195
(0.0300)

0.202
(0.0278)

0.546
(0.0354)

0.0150
(0.0356)

1.219
(0.0296)

0.734
(0.0270)

N
R-squared

30,800
0.42

30,800
0.37

30,800
0.47

30,800
0.37

30,833
0.42

30,833
0.39

30,833
0.49

30,833
0.41

% Decline by 1995 Due to PAL

-58%

-53%

-32%

-15%

-55%

-41%

-51%

-34%

Notes: Estimates of Equation 2 in the main text. Robust standard errors, correcting for clustering at the municipality level, are provided in parenthesis. All
models include municipality and year fixed. Each column represents a separate regression, with the panel header denoting the control diseases used and the
column header the specific age group over which the inverse hyperbolic sine transformation of mortality was calculated for the dependent variable. 1(Diarrhea)
=1 denotes diarrheal mortality rates, while 1(Diarrhea) = 0 denotes the control disease (see Table 1 notes for details). Post = 1 if the year of observation is 1991
or thereafter. The level (1(Diarrhea) × 1(Post)) and trend (1(Diarrhea)× #(Post) ×Year) break estimates are in bold. The coefficients on 1(Diarrhea) ×Year
pick up pre-existing trends in the diarrheal disease series relative to the control diseases. Pre-trends and level and trend breaks for the control diseases are picked
up the year fixed effects
The sample size reflects the number of municipality-years. The final row, % Decline by 1995 Due to PAL is calculated by adding the coefficient on the level
break to four times that on the trend break (since 1995 is 4 years after PAL). The year variable is rescaled such that 1991 = 0 and increments above and below are
denoted by positive and negative integers.

50

Table 3: Triple Difference Models: Diarrheal Disease Mortality × Post-intervention
× Small (Targeted) vs Large Municipality
Respiratory
Control

Non-Infectious
Childhood
Diseases Control

1(Diarrhea)*1(Post)*1(Small)

0.0659
(0.0593)

0.0524
(0.0639)

1(Diarrhea)*1(Post)*1(Small)*Year

-0.109
(0.0207)

-0.139
(0.0221)

N
R-squared

30,800
0.43

30,767
0.44

% Decline by 1995 Due to PAL

-37%

-50%

Notes: Estimates of Equation 3 from the main text. Robust standard errors, correcting for clustering at the
municipality level, are in parenthesis. All models include municipality and year fixed effects. Each column
is a separate regression and reflects estimates of Equation 3 in the main text. Specifically, we include a
third difference - municipality size - in these models. Size is captured by a binary indicator denoting
municipalities with populations < 500,000 = 1. Those larger already generally chlorinated water systems in
place. While only 97 municipalities in the sample are contained in large urban areas > 1,000,000 people
(Small = 0), they accounted for 52% of the population in 1990 - almost exactly the proportion of the
population who had access to disinfected water prior to PAL (Figure 2). 00 The final row, % Decline by
1995 Due to PAL is calculated by adding the coefficient on the level break to four times that on the trend
break (since 1995 is 4 years after PAL). The year variable is rescaled such that 1991 = 0 and increments
above and below are denoted by positive and negative integers.

51

Table 4: Determinants of Municipality-Specific Program Effects
Full Sample

Excluding
Large Cities

Full Sample

Excluding
Large Cities

% HH with Access to Piped Water

-0.561
(0.326)

-0.606
(0.341)

-0.693
(0.336)

-0.761
(0.353)

% HH with Access to Sewage System

-0.136
(0.305)

-0.114
(0.318)

-0.0686
(0.310)

-0.0431
(0.323)

0.359
(0.227)

0.434
(0.252)

1,041
0.020

968
0.020

Piped Water Coverage Ratio (1960/1990)

N
R-squared

1,041
0.017

968
0.017

Notes: Estimates of Equation 4 in the main text. All models are at the municipality level and are weighted
by municipality population. The dependent variable is the municipality specific PAL treatment effect. We
restrict the sample to the 5th-95th percentile of this variable in order to reduce the influence of outliers. The
first and third columns include all observations meeting the stated criteria. In the second and fourth
columns, we remove all municipalities within, or that contain, cities with >500,000 (see main text), as these
areas already had high penetrance of chlorinated water prior to PAL. All models include municipality level
controls from the 1990 census, including the % of population completing secondary education, average
logged household income, and % indigenous population. Robust standard errors are in parenthesis.
Appendix Table 6 demonstrates the robustness of the findings to the inclusion of baseline diarrheal disease
mortality rates (averaged between 1986-1990) and state fixed effects.

52

Table 5: Behavioral Responses: Expenditures on Soaps, Detergents, Bottled Water

Full Sample

Small/Medium
Sized Cities

Large Cities

1(Post)*Base Diarrhea

-0.011
(0.013)
[0.52]

-0.017
(0.0074)
[0.13]

-0.0004
(0.025)
[0.97]

N
R-squared

32,119
0.87

21,385
0.89

10,734
0.82

Notes: Estimates of Equation 4 from the main text. Robust standard errors, correcting for clustering at the
state level, are in parenthesis. Each column represents a separate regression, with the column header
denoting the specific sub-sample of interest. Because there are only 32 states, we additionally compute
cluster wild bootstrap-t corrected p-values for the coefficient of interest (Cameron et al., 2008), which are
provided in the square brackets. The dependent variable is the inverse hyperbolic sine transformation of
expenditures on soaps, detergents, and bottled/mineral water. All models include controls Post×Baseline
Respiratory Disease, age, sex, and education of the household head, household size, and logged household
total income, as well as state and survey rear FE. The main coefficient of interest is on 1(Post) ×Base
Diarrhea, where Baseline Diarrhea is the average under-5 diarrheal mortality rate over 1988-1990. To
interpret the results, focusing on the second column an interquartile decrease in diarrheal mortality (about 4
deaths per 1,000 live births) was associated with a 6.7% decrease in soap, detergent, and bottled water
expenditures. Appendix Table 8 breaks down the estimates in the second column by soaps and detergents
versus bottled/mineral water, respectively.

53

Table 6: Cost Effectiveness

Estimate
Point
Lower 95% CI
Upper 95% CI

Under-5 Deaths
Averted
28190

Program Cost
(2015 USD)
1.86 billion

Cost/Death Averted
(2015 USD)
65981

Cost/Life Year
Saved (2015 USD)
1100

19654
34437

1.86 billion
1.86 billion

94637
54012

1577
900

Notes: 2.2 million live births occurred each year between 1985-1990 in small and medium-sized
municipalities. We use this figure, the pre-intervention average baseline mortality rate, and estimates from
Col 2 of Table 2 to calculate the number of under-5 deaths averted each year between 1991-1995. We do
this using both the point estimates from the model, as well as the lower and upper 95% CI. The column
"Under-5 Deaths Averted" displays these estimates. The total program cost over this period comes from
administrative sources. The cost per death averted is simply the total cost/# of deaths averted. To calculate
Cost/Life Year Saved, we assume each under-5 child whose death was averted would (conservatively) live
to the age of 60 (and so we multiply the numbers in the penultimate column by 60 to get the numbers in the
last column). All costs are expressed in 2015 USD.

54

APPENDIX
Urban Water Disinfection and Mortality Decline in Developing Countries

Sonia R. Bhalotra
Alberto Diaz-Cayeros
Grant Miller
Alfonso Miranda
Atheendar S. Venkataramani

55

2
1.5
1

Ln(Under 5 Mortality)

2.5

Appendix Figure 1: National Trends in Under-5 Deaths by Cause, 1979-1997

1979

1981

1983

1985

1987

1989

1991

1993

1995

1997

Year
Non-Infectious
Diarrheal Infections

Respiratory Infectious

Source: Mexican Vital Statistics. Unlike Figure 3, we plot (logged) number of deaths instead of
deaths rate here because municipality specific live births were not available prior to 1985.

20
10
0

Under 5 Mortality

30

Appendix Figure 2: Convergence in Diarrheal Mortality Rates

1985

1987

1989

1991

1993

1995

Year
1
3

2
4

Source: Mexican Vital Statistics. Figure plots trends in under-5 diarrheal mortality rates by
quartile of (state) pre-intervention diarrheal mortality (calculated as the average over 1988-1990).
The figure demonstrates rapid convergence starting in 1991.

56

Appendix Table 1: DID Trend Break Models: Inclusion of State-Year FE

1(Diarrhea)*1(Post)

Non-Infectious
Respiratory
Childhood Disease
Infection Control
Control
-0.086
-0.143
(0.037)
(0.036)

1(Diarrhea)*1(Post)*Year

-0.121
(0.013)

-0.101
(0.013)

N
R-squared

30,800
0.50

30,767
0.49

-57%

-55%

% Decline by 1995 Due to PAL

Notes: Estimates of Equation 2 from the main text. Models are identical to those presented in
Table 2 except here we include state-year level fixed effects. The final row, % Decline by 1995
Due to PAL is calculated by adding the coefficient on the level break to four times that on the
trend break (since 1995 is 4 years after PAL). The year variable is rescaled such that 1991 = 0 and
increments above and below are denoted by positive and negative integers. See Table 2 notes for
further details.

Appendix Table 2: DID Trend Break Models: Annual Death Counts

1(Diarrhea)*1(Post)

-0.0509
(0.0206)

Non-Infectious
Childhood Disease
Control
-0.0860
(0.0250)

1(Diarrhea)*1(Post)*Year

-0.134
(0.009)

-0.101
(0.0010)

N

30,800

30,767

-59%

-49%

Respiratory
Infection Control

% Decline by 1995 Due to PAL

Notes: This table is identical to Table 2 in the main text except here we data on death counts
between 1985-1995. We use a negative binomial model to model the number of deaths, and
present incidence rate ratios (IRR), which we use to calculate the percent relative decline in
diarrheal deaths. Robust standard errors, correcting for clustering at the municipality level, in
parenthesis.

57

Appendix Table 3: DID Trend Break Models: Municipalities, 1979-1997

Respiratory
Infection Control
-0.203
(0.0215)

Non-Infectious
Childhood
Disease Control
0.00509
(0.0219)

-0.136
(0.00543)

-0.158
(0.00563)

N
R-squared

51,870
0.77

51,870
0.78

% Decline by 1995 Due to PAL

-75%

-64%

1(Diarrhea)*1(Post)

1(Diarrhea)*1(Post)*Year

Notes: Estimates of Equation 2 from the main text. This table is identical to Table 2 in the main
text except here we use data from 1979-1997, instead of restricting the sample to 1985-1995. The
dependent variable is the inverse hyperbolic sine transform of the number of deaths under age 5
(we do not examine mortality rates since municipality specific births data was not available during
the early part of the time period). Robust standard errors, correcting for clustering at the
municipality level, are in parenthesis.

58

Appendix Table 4: Diarrheal Mortality Decline and In-Migration
(1)

(2)

(3)

∆Diarrhea

0.13*
(0.07)

0.055
(0.057)

0.082
(0.065)

N
R-squared

627
0.018

627
0.14

627
0.23

BaseDiar

-0.10**
(0.047)

-0.033
(0.043)

-0.042
(0.042)

N
R-squared

627
0.02

627
0.14

627
0.23

Controls
Municipality SES (Education)
State FE

No
No

Yes
No

No
Yes

Notes: To assess potential non-random migration as a function of exposure to PAL, we use data
from the public use 1995 Mexican Population Census Microdata, a representative 1.5% sample
which allows us to identify individuals who lived in a different municipality 5 years prior to
survey (i.e., pre-PAL, which was in 1991). In prior censuses, only interstate migration is
identifiable. The identity of the municipality the individual moved from is not known, though the
current municipality of residence is recorded. Focus on reproductive age adults (i.e., men and
women ages 18-40), we can construct the in-migration rate for each municipality (in our data we
can identify nearly 700 municipalities). On average, the share of individuals living in a given
municipality who migrated from elsewhere over the preceding 5-year period was 11.1%. To assess
whether in-migration responded to changes in diarrheal disease environment, we estimated models
of the following form:
Migrationij = α0 + α1 (DDiarrheaj) + X(i)(j) + uijt
And:
Migrationij = α0 + α1 (BaseDiarj) + X(i)(j) + uijt
Here, i represents the municipality and j the state. Migrationij is the proportion of individuals in a
given county in 1995 who lived in another county 5 years prior; DDiarrheaj is the change in
under-5 diarrheal disease mortality in the post versus pre-periods; BaseDiarj is pre-intervention
baseline diarrheal mortality rate change; and X(i)(j) represent municipality specific, preintervention controls and/or state-fixed effects. The first regression assesses whether in-migration
changed as a function of the degree of decline in diarrheal mortality. The second regression
leverages the insight that areas with higher pre-intervention diarrheal mortality rates gained more
from PAL (see Section 6 and Appendix Table 6). In models without municipality controls and
state fixed effects (col 1), we find that areas with larger declines in diarrheal mortality, or stood to
gain more from PAL, actually had lower proportions of in-migrants. The estimates suggest that the
average drop in diarrheal mortality pre-post PAL was associated with a 1.3% pt decrease in the
proportion of in-migrants. However, once we control for municipality education or state fixed
effects (col 2 and 3, respectively), these associations disappear entirely. We conclude that nonrandom migration is unlikely to be driving our findings.

59

Appendix Table 5: Heterogeneity Analysis, Robustness to Additional Covariates
Full Sample

Exclude Large
Exclude Large
Full Sample
Cities
Cities

Full Sample

Exclude Large
Exclude Large
Full Sample
Cities
Cities

% HH with Access to Piped Water

-0.142
(0.304)

-0.112
(0.317)

-0.0694
(0.309)

-0.0366
(0.322)

0.228
(0.357)

0.260
(0.375)

0.277
(0.364)

0.305
(0.381)

% HH with Access to Sewage System

-0.548
(0.326)

-0.599
(0.340)

-0.689
(0.336)

-0.763
(0.353)

-0.752
(0.413)

-0.784
(0.435)

-0.856
(0.421)

-0.893
(0.444)

0.386
(0.227)

0.46
(0.253)

0.326
(0.238)

0.364
(0.264)

Piped Water Coverage Ratio (1960/1990)

Additional Controls
Baseline Diarrheal Mortality
State Fixed Effects
N
R-squared

Yes
No

Yes
No

Yes
No

Yes
No

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

1,041
0.020

968
0.020

1,041
0.023

968
0.023

1,041
0.059

968
0.059

1,041
0.061

968
0.061

Notes: Models are identical to those presented in Table 4, except here we additionally adjust for
pre-PAL average diarrheal mortality between 1986-1990 (first four columns) and state fixed
effects (last four columns).

60

Appendix Table 6: Convergence
(3)
Level
-0.246
(0.0446)

(4)
IHSine
-0.00799
(0.00286)

Base Diarrhea*Year

-0.0576
(0.0120)

-0.00609
(0.00152)

1(Post)*Base Diarrhea*Year

-0.0426
(0.00801)

0.000134
(0.000494)

15,444
0.73

15,444
0.67

1(Post)*Base Diarrhea

N
R-squared

(1)
Level
-0.596
(0.0215)

15,444
0.72

(2)
IHSine
-0.0194
(0.00440)

15,444
0.69

Notes: Estimates provided are versions of the model:
Mijt = α0 + α1 (Postt × Base_Diarrheaj) + λj + θ t + uijt
where Mijt = the municipality-specific mortality rate, Base_diarrhea refers to the baseline under-5
diarrheal mortality rate (average for each municipality over 1986-1990), Post = 1 for years 1991
and thereafter, and the remainder of the variables reflect state and year fixed effects. Estimating
using logged mortality rates as the dependent variable evidence of relative convergence, whereas
estimates using levels recover absolute convergence. A negative coefficient on post*base (and
would imply convergence. Columns 3 and 4 decompose this convergence into a level and trend
break. The 1985-1995 state-level sample is used for all regressions (N reflects the number of stateyears).

61

Appendix Table 7: Behavioral Responses, Disaggregated by Spending Category
Soaps+Detergents

Bottled/Mineral
Water

1(Post)*Base Diarrhea

-0.023
(0.009)
[0.08]

0.018
(0.020)
[0.45]

N
R-squared

21,385
0.88

21,385
0.11

Notes: Models are identical to those estimated in Col 2 of Table 5 except here we disaggregate
spending on soaps and detergents from bottled or mineral water. Robust standard errors, correcting
for clustering at the state level, are in parenthesis. Each column represents a separate regression,
with the column header denoting the specific sub-sample of interest. Because there are only 32
states, we additionally compute cluster wild bootstrap-t corrected p-values for the coefficient of
interest (Cameron et al., 2008), which are provided in the square brackets. All dependent variables
are transformed by the inverse hyperbolic sine.

62

