NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE ECONOMICS OF NON-MARITAL CHILDBEARING AND THE “MARRIAGE
PREMIUM FOR CHILDREN”
Melissa S. Kearney
Phillip B. Levine
Working Paper 23230
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23230

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2017

The authors are very grateful to Riley Wilson and Fernando Saltiel for outstanding research
assistance. We also thank Brad Hershbein, Joe Price, Tom DeLeire, Andy Cherlin, and David
Ribar for helpful comments. An edited version of this paper will be forthcoming in Annual
Review of Economics, DOI: 10.1146/annurev-economics-063016-103749. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Melissa S. Kearney and Phillip B. Levine. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Economics of Non-Marital Childbearing and The “Marriage Premium for Children”
Melissa S. Kearney and Phillip B. Levine
NBER Working Paper No. 23230
March 2017
JEL No. I3,J1,J12,J13
ABSTRACT
A large literature exists on the impact of family structure on children’s outcomes, typically
focusing on average effects. We build on this with an economic framework that has
heterogeneous predictions regarding the potential benefit for children of married parents. We
propose that the gains to marriage from a child’s perspective depend on a mother’s own level of
resources, the additional net resources that her partner would bring, and the outcome-specific
returns to resources. Data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics are consistent with the
heterogeneous predictions of this framework. In terms of high school completion or avoiding
poverty at age 25, the “marriage premium for children” is highest for children of mothers with
high school degrees and mothers in their early/mid-20s. For the more advanced outcomes of
college completion or high income at age 25, the marriage premium is monotonically increasing
with observed maternal age and education.

Melissa S. Kearney
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
3105 Tydings Hall
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
kearney@econ.umd.edu
Phillip B. Levine
Department of Economics
Wellesley College
106 Central Street
Wellesley, MA 02481
and NBER
plevine@wellesley.edu

Kearney and Levine
Marriage Premium for Children, p. 1
I. Introduction
For much of U.S. history, a married-couple family constituted the primary unit of social
and economic life for individuals. Married couples birthed and raised children, pooled resources
of time and money, and provided for each other into old age. But, this relationship has been
breaking down for decades, particularly in the context of childrearing.1 By 2014, over 40 percent
of births in the U.S. took place outside marriage. The rate is particularly high among certain
population subgroups: 71 percent among African-Americans, 71 percent among women under age
25, and 62 percent among women with a high school degree or less education.2 This reflects a
dramatic shift over the past 50 years. In 1960, only five percent of children were born to
unmarried mothers.
One reason the high-level of non-marital childbearing is an economic issue is because
numerous studies show that children raised in single-parent homes fare worse on a number of
educational and economic dimensions as compared to children raised in homes with two married
biological parents. Conditional on other family and parental characteristics, children who grow up
with an unmarried mother have lower levels of educational attainment and higher levels of teen
childbearing, among other outcome differences (e.g., McLanahan and Sandefur; 1994;
McLanahan 1997; Hoffman, Foster, and Furstenberg, 1993; Amato 2005). As adults, they have

1

In this paper, we do not explicitly consider the question of what is responsible for driving the rise in nonmarital childbearing. Ellwood and Jencks (2004) provide an overview of the theoretical and empirical
literature on the rise in non-marital childbearing. They note that traditional economic models have
highlighted four potential factors: (i) male earnings (e.g., Wilson and Neckerman, 1986), (ii) female
earnings, (iii) the sex ratio, and (iv) public assistance (e.g., Moffitt, 2001). Recent work by Shenov (2015)
explores the rise of female relative wages as an explanation for the decline in marriage rates. Ellwood and
Jencks (2004) summarize the main noneconomic explanations that have been advanced as including (i)
gender role conflict; (ii) limited confidence and personal efficacy; (iii) altered attitudes and social norms;
and (iv) technological and legal change (e.g., Akerlof, Yellen, and Katz, 1996). Lundberg and Pollak
(2007) provide a thorough review of how the American family has changed between 1960 and 2006.
2
We calculated these statistics based on data available from the CDC WONDER Online Database,
accessed June 20, 2016.

Kearney and Levine
Marriage Premium for Children, p. 2
lower levels of employment, lower levels of income, higher rates of non-marital parenting, and
higher rates of incarceration (e.g., Hill, Holzer, and Chen, 2009; DeLeire and Lopoo, 2014;
Lehrman, Price, and Wilcox, 2016).3 Though none of these studies completely surmounts the
identification challenge inherent in identifying whether the differences are due to marriage, per se,
rather than associated unobservable resources or parental characteristics, the strength of the
association and its robustness to a myriad of controls for observable factors is at least strongly
suggestive of a causal relationship.4
The academic literature and policy conversation about non-marital childbearing, however,
generally does not distinguish across different instances of non-marital childbearing. Having a
child outside of marriage for a 19-year old woman without a high school degree presumably has
different implications than it does for a 25-year old with some college, or a 35-year old college
graduate. To put it differently, the advantage that marriage would bring to these children is likely
to be different across circumstances. Perhaps older and more educated unmarried mothers are able
to provide sufficiently for their children alone, such that their children do not suffer any sort of
disadvantage in terms of long-term economic outcomes. Perhaps the men who father children
with younger, less-educated women are of sufficiently low income and parenting “quality” that
such a marriage would not appreciably improve a child’s long-term economic prospects.5

3

Recent work in economics has considered whether the incidence of single-mother households is related to
racial and gender gaps in behavioral and educational outcomes. Hill, Holzer, and Chen (2009) explore the
extent to which racial differences in family structure might explain racial gaps in education, employment,
and incarceration outcomes. Autor et al. (2015) and Bertrand and Pan (2013) suggest that the growing
gender gap in behavioral and educational outcomes for children is at least partially explained by the
relative disadvantage of boys who grow up in single-mother homes.
4
Hill, Holzer, and Chen (2009) and Lopoo and DeLeire (2014) provide excellent reviews of the literature
on family structure and children’s outcomes.
5
Sawhill and Thomas (2002) offer evidence to the contrary; they find that simulated marriages between
single-mothers and men with similar characteristics would appreciably reduce child poverty rates.

Kearney and Levine
Marriage Premium for Children, p. 3
In this paper, we consider the notion of a “marriage premium for children” through the
lens of economics, focusing on potential resources and returns. We introduce this term as a
shorthand label for the difference in outcomes between children who are born to married parents
as compared to a single-mother. We maintain an empirical focus on mother’s marital status at
birth mainly for analytical convenience, although a mother’s marital status at birth is highly
predictive of the family structure a child will experience during his/her childhood in the U.S. We
define resources to be those relevant to child development, including parental income, wealth, and
time, among other things.6
The documented advantage for children, on average, from two-parent homes is consistent
with a model where resources are higher, on average, in married, two-parent households. Not only
does having two married parents in the household increase the total level of resources by virtue of
having two resident parents present, this family structure capitalizes on economies of scale in a
household and enables spouses to specialize across market work, home production, and child
rearing, as in Becker’s seminal model (1981). A straightforward extension of this reasoning
indicates that the relative advantage to a child coming from having married parents will vary with
maternal circumstances in systematic ways. To be sure, the observed advantage for children is
also consistent with a positive selection story: conditional on observables, individuals who have
children within marriage might possess inherent, unobservable qualities that benefit child

6 There are a variety of mechanisms beyond income through which children might benefit from living in a
married-parent home. Many academic articles have reviewed potential mechanisms, including in an
overview piece by Ribar (2015). Studies that have attempted to investigate how much of the disadvantage
observed for children from single-parent homes is due specifically to lower household income generally
find that the direct effect of income is an important part of the story, but not the full explanation, though
this remains an open question. See, for example, McLanahan and Sandefur, 2004; Hill, Holzer, and Chen,
2009; DeLeire and Lopoo, 2014; Lehrman, Price, and Wilcox, 2016. Low levels of income and singleparenthood are often associated with other stress factors that are directly harmful to children’s
development, such as residential instability, maternal stress, and less positive parenting practices (cf.,
Mayer, 1997; Kalil et al, 1998; Furstenberg et al, 1999).

Kearney and Levine
Marriage Premium for Children, p. 4
development. While we do not discount the role of selection, we are interested in developing a
resource-based model that has predictions about when the benefits of a married household may be
particularly large from the perspective of the child.
We propose that the gains to marriage from the perspective of a child will depend on (a)
the mother’s own level of resources, (b) the additional resources that her marriage would bring to
the household, and (c) the returns to those additional resources. The resource gain will depend on
the nature of marriage markets and the resources of the mother’s partner. The return to resources
will depend on the nature of the particular production function for outcomes, which will vary
across outcome type. This set of factors and interactions among them will generate heterogeneous
marriage premiums for children born to mothers with different characteristics and for different
types of outcomes. For example, for some women, a partner’s additional contributions are not
sufficient to alter children’s outcomes. While for other women, a partner’s contributions are not
necessary. For instance, even if a teen mother married the father of her child, their combined
resources might not be sufficient to equip their child to attain higher levels of education. In
contrast, a highly educated older mother might have sufficient resources as a single mother such
that her child suffers no relative disadvantage when it comes to educational attainment.
We explore these relationships empirically, motivated by our proposed marriage premium
framework. We rely mainly on data from the Panel Survey of Income Dynamics. This data source
allows us to observe adult outcomes for children born in the 1960s, 1970s, and 1980s. We
consider two types of long-term outcomes for children. First, we consider “primary” outcomes,
which are those that are commonly achieved, such as graduating from high school and having
income above the federal poverty threshold at age 25. Second, we consider “advanced” outcomes,
which are achieved by fewer people, such as graduating from college and having “high” income
(above 400 percent of the federal poverty threshold at age 25). We use these data to estimate

Kearney and Levine
Marriage Premium for Children, p. 5
descriptive relationships between these outcomes and mother’s age at time of child’s birth and
level of education, with the goal of documenting patterns of the marriage premium for children
across mother’s characteristics and outcomes. We do not attempt to identify empirically a causal
relationship between marriage as a family structure and children’s outcomes; rather, we explore
systematic patterns of marital gaps in children’s outcomes by baseline maternal characteristics.
The patterns we observe for being out of poverty by age 25 and graduating from high
school suggest that the marriage premium takes an inverted U-shaped pattern along the
dimensions of maternal age and education. For the youngest and least educated mothers, as well
as for the oldest and most educated mothers, there does not appear to be a large marriage premium
for children. The greatest marriage premium occurs in the middle of the maternal age and
education distribution. This is consistent with the predictions of our model given assortative
mating and reasonable expectations about the return to resources for these primary outcomes. The
potential resource gain from marriage is not sufficient at the low end, and is unnecessary at the
high end, to increase substantially a child’s probability of avoiding poverty or completing high
school. For mothers in their early to mid-20s and those with a high school degree, marriage is
associated with the largest differences in these two outcomes.
For the advanced outcomes of graduating from college and having a high level of income
at age 25, the observed marriage premium increases monotonically with maternal age and
education. This is also consistent with the predictions of our model given assortative mating and
reasonable expectations about the return to resources for an advanced outcome. In the case of
these harder-to-obtain outcomes, it appears that marriage is associated with an increasingly higher
likelihood for children up to the highest levels of observed maternal age and education. In a final
empirical consideration, we consider the extent to which differences in household income explain

Kearney and Levine
Marriage Premium for Children, p. 6
the observed premium for both types of outcomes. The data suggest that household income at
birth is only partially responsible for these gaps.
II. The “Marriage Premium for Children”: A Conceptual Framework
In this section, we present a conceptual framework for thinking about a marriage premium
for children as a function of underlying resources and returns to resources. To define terms and
notation, let us denote α to be the difference in outcomes between children raised in a household
headed by married parents as compared to a single mother. Specifically, we propose that the
marriage premium for children (will depend crucially on three elements: (a) the mother’s own
level of resources, (b) the additional resources that marriage would bring to the household, and (c)
the returns to those additional resources.
We denote a mother’s and father’s own level of resources as Rm and Rf and total household
resources as Rt: Rt = Rm + Rf. We use the term “resources” broadly to signify the range of positive
inputs that parents bring to a child’s experience. This includes financial resources and parental
time, but also includes additional elements such as social and professional networks, positive
parenting practices, physical and mental well-being, and home life stability, among others. For
unmarried mothers, we impose an expositional simplification such that total household resources
are fully captured by mother’s own resources (Rt = Rm), which is inclusive of any resources she
obtains on behalf of her child, whether through her own earnings or time, through government
support, through her network of family and friends, etc. If the mother were to marry the father of
the child and co-reside, household resources would increase by the net level of resources the

Kearney and Levine
Marriage Premium for Children, p. 7
father brings to the household (beyond what he would contribute as a non-resident, unmarried
father), Rf.7
A. Assortative Mating
The potential resource gain that marrying the father of a child would bring to the
household depends on the father’s level of resources. That gain will depend on the nature of the
market for sexual partners and marriage (which we take to be the same). In the United States,
there is a high degree of assortative mating, such that individuals tend to partner with and marry
individuals of a similar socioeconomic status (SES) (cf. Schwartz, 2010). We incorporate this into
our model by treating resource level as isomorphic to SES and assuming assortative mating based
on relative resource position.
In a highly stylized version of assortative mating, women and men match based on their
percentile in some underlying resource distribution. If the underlying male and female resource
distributions were equal, then assortative mating of the type we have described would result in a
doubling of potential household resources if the parents were to marry. That is, Rm at the 25th
percentile of the distribution among mothers plus Rf at the 25th percentile of the distribution
among fathers would double Rt. These observations lead to the following proposition relevant for
thinking about how marriage would heterogeneously increase resources available to a child:

7

We abstract from the situation of cohabitation among unmarried parents in the model. As a practical
matter, in the United States, the situation for children of cohabiting parents tends to fall somewhere in
between the more common situations of unmarried/non-cohabiting parents and married parents, but it is
generally understood to involve much higher rates of family instability as compared to married families.
Manning (2015) reviews the issue of cohabitation and child well-being. She notes that more children born
to cohabiting parents see their parents break up by age five, as compared to children born to married
parents. Only one out of three children born to cohabiting parents remains in a stable family through age
12, in contrast to nearly three out of four children born to married parents. She further reports that children
born to cohabiting parents experience nearly three times as many family transitions as those born to
married parents (1.4 versus 0.5).

Kearney and Levine
Marriage Premium for Children, p. 8
Proposition 1: Given assortative mating, the absolute resource gain from marriage (Rt - Rm = Rf)
is increasing in mother’s own resources (Rm): d(Rt-Rm)/dRm >0.

B. Production Functions for Children’s Outcomes
The production function for child outcomes dictates how beneficial the additional
resources that a married father brings to the household are for a child’s development and
ultimately adult outcomes. Let us assume that the production of positive child outcomes (e.g.,
educational attainment) responds positively to parental resources such that higher levels of Rt (as
inputs) produce increased levels of child educational and socioeconomic achievement (as
outcomes, or output.)8 For simplicity, we introduce the notion of two types of outcomes: primary
and advanced outcomes. Primary outcomes consist of those that one might reasonably consider
first order markers of economic success. The majority of individuals would achieve these:
progressing at grade for age through school, avoiding a teen birth, completing high school, and
living above the poverty line as an adult. Advanced outcomes consist of outcomes achieved by a
smaller minority of individuals. Such outcomes would include gaining admittance to a selective
college, completing a college degree, and obtaining a high paying job.

8

A number of authors have attempted to produce credible estimates of the causal relationship between
family income and child outcomes using exogenous variation in family income. See, for example,
Oreopoulos et al (2008); Dahl and Lochner (2011); Milligan and Stabile (2007), and Loken (2010). Loken,
Mogstad, and Wiswall (2012) estimate nonlinear IV and FE models relating family income to child
outcomes. Their analysis uses administrative registry data for the entire population of Norway, with
information on children’s educational attainment and IQ as adults as well as their family income during
childhood. They instrument for family income with regional and time variation in the initial discovery of
oil in Norway. They find an increasing, concave relationship between family income and children’s
outcomes. They observe that previous studies based on linear estimators understate the beneficial effect of
family income for children because they assign little weight to the large marginal effects at lower levels of
income. This econometric point is related to, albeit distinct from, the conceptual point we make below
about heterogeneity in the returns to additional parental resources.

Kearney and Levine
Marriage Premium for Children, p. 9
The return r to the resource gain that comes from marriage (through the addition of Rf to
the household) will lead to an improvement in child outcomes y as determined by the relationship
between the outcome and overall resource level. Let us call this production function q. Figure 1A
plots the relationship between total household resources Rt and a primary (p) and advanced (a)
outcome. Though we assume simple functional forms qp and qa for illustrative purposes, the main
feature of the figure is that the production function (expressed as a probability function) for the
advanced outcome falls to the right of the probability function for the primary outcome. As a
father’s additional resources are brought into a household headed by a mother with fewer
resources (a younger or less educated mother), the probability that the child achieves a primary
outcome is increased. The total resource level, however, is still too low for an appreciable change
in the likelihood of achieving the advanced outcome. The additional resources from that marriage
would have to be extensive to have an impact on an advanced outcome.
In contrast, when a father’s additional resources are brought into a household headed by a
mother with more resources (for instance, an older or more educated mother), primary outcomes
are unlikely to be affected. The mother herself is likely to have sufficient resources to enable her
children to achieve that outcome. Her children would benefit by becoming more likely to achieve
an advanced outcome if marriage occurs. These observations lead to the following propositions:

Proposition 2: For primary outcomes, the children of lower resourced mothers will experience
the largest relative benefit from marriage, as long as fathers have non-negligible resources to
contribute to the household.
Proposition 3: For advanced outcomes, the children of higher resourced mothers will experience
the largest relative benefit from marriage.

Kearney and Levine
Marriage Premium for Children, p. 10
C. Marriage Premium for Children
Building on the notation introduced so far, and combining the insights from Propositions
1, 2, and 3, we can write an expression for the marriage premium to children as follows:
.
This expression indicates that the marriage premium  is a function of the return to resources for
a given outcome (ry) interacted with the difference in total household resources that would result
from marriage (Rt-Rm), conditional on the baseline level of resources a mother brings to the
household in the non-marital situation.
We have presented this model in terms of a generic “resource” that is essentially
isomorphic to income and increases in maternal age and education. An obvious extension of the
model would be to consider different types of resources. For example, one could model the
marriage premium as a function of separate resources such as income, parental time, and family
stability, and make assumptions about whether these resources operate as complements or
substitutes. Another straightforward adaptation would be to specify the marriage premium as
being net of certain resources, for example, a marriage premium net of income effects. We offer
this framework as a basic model that can be readily extended and adapted for more nuanced
considerations of the relationship between parents’ marital status and children’s outcomes.
III. Marriage Gaps in Maternal Characteristics and Baseline Resource Levels
The above discussion emphasized the systematic ways we would expect the marriage
premium for children to vary with maternal characteristics and outcome type. Before exploring
the heterogeneity in outcomes directly, we provide a preliminary, descriptive look at the data. We
first confirm that maternal marital status at the time of a child’s birth is highly predictive of a
child’s family structure at age 14. We then document average marriage gaps in maternal

Kearney and Levine
Marriage Premium for Children, p. 11
characteristics, household resources, and children’s outcomes and how they have changed over
time.
In terms of maternal characteristics, we focus on mother’s age and education, with the
presumption that older, more-educated mothers offer higher levels of parental resources.9 As
supporting evidence, we calculate from the 2014 American Community Survey that among
women with children age 5 or under who work more than 1500 hours per year, those age 35 and
over have median annual earnings of $50,000 in 2013 compared to $18,000 for those under age
25. Similarly, college educated mothers in this group earn 2.4 times as much as those with a high
school degree, $55,000 relative to $23,000. In addition, research has documented that more
educated mothers spend more time with their children (Guryan, Hurst, and Kearney, 2008) and
are more likely to alter the composition of that time to suit children's developmental needs (Kalil,
Ryan, and Corey, 2012).
We rely primarily on data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) for this and
subsequent analyses. The PSID is a nationally representative, family-based dataset that first
sampled over 18,000 respondents in 1968. Since then, the survey has followed all of the original
participants and all of those who joined their families, including children. The most recent data
available at the time of this analysis is from 2013. In these data, we observe maternal
characteristics at the time of birth (marital status, age, education, and income) and subsequent
outcomes for the children (poverty status, high school completion, and college completion).
Because we are interested in observing children’s long-term outcomes, we examine the
experiences of children born during the 1960s, 1970s, and 1980s. An on-line data appendix details
how we construct our analysis sample and variables from the PSID. We augment our PSID

9

Miller (2009) offers evidence in support of this presumption.

Kearney and Levine
Marriage Premium for Children, p. 12
analysis with additional data on births from the 1980 and 2014 Vital Statistics Natality files to
document characteristics of mothers for two cohorts, and observe how maternal characteristics
have changed over time. The issue of drawing lessons from earlier cohorts to the experience of
today’s children is something we return to in our final discussion section.
A. Transitions in Family Structure
In our analysis, we focus on mother’s marital status at birth. This coincides with our
emphasis on the impact of non-marital childbearing, but it also is a strong predictor of subsequent
living arrangements for children. This can be seen in Table 1, where we examine children’s living
circumstances at age 14 with their mother’s marital status at birth. We separately examine
children born between 1960 and 1979 from those born between 1980 and 1999 (14 years old in
2013, the last year data availability) to gauge the extent of changes over time. Consistent with
trends documented elsewhere, the bottom row indicates that fewer children were born to married
mothers in the more recent period: 76 percent, down from 83 percent. It also shows that births to
cohabiting parents rose over that interval, from 2 percent in the earlier period to 7.7 percent of
births in the more recent cohort.10
These data indicate that initial family structure at birth is strongly persistent to age 14.
Among children born between 1980 to 1999, 75 percent of those born to married mothers are still
living in a household comprised of married parents and 65 percent of those born to a single
mother are living in a mother only household at age 14. Only 12 percent of children born to
single mothers see their parents married at age 14. Being born to cohabiting parents is a less
persistent family structure, as has been well-documented elsewhere (see, for example, the review
by Manning, 2015). Among children born to cohabiting parents (7.7 percent of children in the

10

Manning (2015) reports that nearly one-quarter of children born today are to cohabiting parents.

Kearney and Levine
Marriage Premium for Children, p. 13
more recent cohort), 28 percent are living with married parents, 33 percent are living with mother
only, and 9 percent are living with mother and stepfather at age 14.
B. Mother’s Characteristics at the Time of Birth
Our next set of analyses use Vital Statistics natality data to document age and education
distributions of marital and non-marital births. These analyses are motivated by the notion that
older, more educated mothers are likely to have higher level of resources as compared to younger,
less-educated mothers. We look separately at births occurring in 1980 and 2014. The Vital
Statistics data include virtually the universe of births in the United States. Figures 2A (1980) and
2B (2014) reveal clearly that the age distribution of married mothers skews to the right as
compared to the age distribution of unmarried mothers. In 2014, the modal age of a married
mother is 31, as compared to 22 for unmarried births. Mothers were younger in 1980, with the
modal age being 25 among married mothers and 19 among unmarried mothers. Looking over
time, the data also reveal a reduction in teen childbearing and an increase in childbearing during
ages 30 to 44 among all mothers.
To the extent that older and more educated parents bring greater resources to a household,
the older ages of mothers in more recent years would imply improved outcomes for all children.
But, the gap in mother’s modal age between marital and non-marital births has actually jumped
from 6 years to 9 years. As much as the universal increase in mother’s age could improve
outcomes for all, it could also increase the marriage premium for children (if greater maternal age
implies higher levels of parenting resources).
We observe a similar pattern in Figures 3A and 3B, which plot the education distribution
of mothers by marital status. Married mothers tend to be more highly educated than mothers who
give birth outside of marriage. In 2014, the modal married mother was a college graduate: 45.8
percent of married mothers have a college degree or higher. Only 7.2 percent of mothers who are

Kearney and Levine
Marriage Premium for Children, p. 14
unmarried at the time of birth have a college degree or higher. The modal unmarried mother at the
time of birth is a high school graduate (36 percent). Only 8.5 percent of married mothers have less
than a high school degree, as compared to 25 percent of unmarried mothers. As shown in Figure
3A, the 1980 education distributions of both sets of mothers are shifted to the left, with many
fewer mothers having a college degree at the time of giving birth and many more having less than
a high school degree. Interestingly, the gains in education have been greater among married
mothers than among unmarried mothers, so that even though all mothers are more educated now,
married mothers are relatively more educated in 2014 than in 1980.
Table 2 reports similar statistics using PSID data, breaking up children into those born to
married and unmarried mothers in the 1968-1989 and 1990-2013 windows. Again, education and
maternal age are greater for married mothers, rising over time for both married and unmarried
mothers, but rising more for married mothers. The data also reveal that a married mother is
extremely unlikely to live with her own mother, but it is reasonably common for an unmarried
mother. This could reflect her greater need for support, but also greater resources available for her
children than if she lived alone.
C. The Resource Gap at the Time of Birth
The remainder of Table 2 provides summary statistics of family income as a direct
measure of the resource gap at the time of birth. Here we see that household income at birth is
greater for children born to married mothers and the gap in absolute terms is growing over time.
For the cohort born between 1990 and 2013, median household income (in year 2013 dollars) is
$74,497 for married mothers and $36,575 for unmarried mothers, which is a difference of
$37,922. For the earlier cohort, the income advantage of married households was $23,973. The
data also show that many more children born to unmarried mothers lived in poverty at the time of
birth in both periods; roughly 30 percent of the later cohort and more than 40 percent of the

Kearney and Levine
Marriage Premium for Children, p. 15
earlier cohort. In both periods, less than 10 percent of children born to married parents lived in
poverty at the time of birth.
We also examine differences in the percentage of childhood (through age 16) spent in
poverty. We distinguish children by birth cohorts 1968 to 1979 and 1980 to 1997 and restrict the
sample to those births who have reached age 16 by the 2013 date of the last available survey.
Children born to married parents, on average, spend just over 90 percent of their childhood years
out of poverty, for both cohorts. Children born to an unmarried mother, on the other hand, spend
around 60 percent of their child above the poverty line, for both cohorts.
Data from the American Time Use Survey (ATUS) from 2003 through 2014 indicate a
resource gap between children born to married and unmarried parents in terms of parental hours
spent per week on childcare (not reported in a table).11 We look at parents’ reported time with
children and focus on children under age 5. Married mothers spend 18 hours per week caring for
their young children compared to 14.9 hours per week for unmarried mothers. Married fathers
also spend an additional 1.4 hours per week, on average, caring for their children (9.8 hours per
week compared to 8.4 hours per week). These gaps are not measured at the time of birth, as our
preceding measures of resources have been, but the correlations over time for pre-school age
children are likely to be very high. These average differences reveal that young children of
married parents generally spend more time with their parents as compared to children of
unmarried parents.12

11

Time spent caring for children is defined as the sum of time spent by parents on basic, educational and
recreational childcare. The full sample includes all individuals between the ages of 18 and 55 who report at
least one child under the age of 5. The resulting sample includes 8,615 mothers and 6,093 fathers. Means
are calculated using fixed demographic weights adjusted to equally represent each day of the week within
subgroups.
12 This finding is consistent with the results of a study by Kalil, Ryan, and Shor (2014) that uses the 1997 PSID
Child Development Supplement to examine time investment in children across six family structures. The authors

Kearney and Levine
Marriage Premium for Children, p. 16
D. Outcome Gaps Associated with Maternal Marital Status
Consistent with the documented fact of children being born to unmarried mothers having
fewer resources in their households, the data also indicate that they experience inferior
educational and labor market outcomes relative to those children born to married mothers. Table 3
displays these patterns, which relies on data from the PSID, and confirm those reported in
previous studies (as cited above). In our analysis, we examine four specific outcomes: being out
of poverty at age 25, completing high school by age 2013, having household income over 400
percent of the poverty level at age 25 (to indicate high income), and completing college by age
25. We separate children into cohorts by birth decade to examine trends over time. In all cases,
outcomes for children with parents who were married at birth are better in these dimensions than
children with unmarried parents at birth.
One notable pattern in these data is that recent birth cohorts show a larger marriage
premium in the likelihood of college completion as compared to earlier cohorts. Children born to
unmarried mothers increased their likelihood of completing college from 5.9 to 11.3 percent
between the 1960s and 1980s birth cohorts. Children born to married mothers, however, increased
their likelihood from 21.8 to 40.7 percent, resulting in about a doubling of the gap between the
two groups (from 15.9 to percentage points 29.4). On the other hand, the marriage premium in
rates of high school graduation fell slightly. The gap likelihood of being above the poverty
threshold rose and then fell, ending up back at its original level.
These patterns are consistent with the predictions of our conceptual model of a
heterogeneous marriage premium. Rising out of poverty and graduating from high school are

document that children receive more total care-giving time in married biological parent families than in single mother
homes, because households receive little time investment from their nonresident biological fathers.
13
The PSID data does not allow us to consistently separate GED recipients from traditional high school graduates. As
such, this measure captures high school graduation or its equivalent.

Kearney and Levine
Marriage Premium for Children, p. 17
primary outcomes within that framework while having a high income and graduating college are
advanced outcomes. Increases in parental resources over time are only going to have an impact if
a substantial share of some group is below that threshold and is lifted over the bar because of the
additional resources brought to the household through marriage. For a primary outcome, a young
single-mother might not have sufficient resources to clear that bar on her own, but marriage has
the potential to bring additional resources that would raise children over the poverty threshold (as
in Thomas and Sawhill, 2002). Older, more educated mothers are likely to have enough resources
to avoid poverty even without the additional resources of a spouse.
For an advanced outcome, however, combined resources from marriage potentially
increase total household resources by a large amount for a highly educated mother, given she is
likely to have fathered a child with a high-resource man (through assortative mating). College
completion rates increase with family income.14 It therefore makes sense that marriages
associated with a greater base level of resources from the mother and relatively large resource
gains from the father will be associated with increasingly high rates of college attendance, and
children from lower-resourced households will fall further behind.
IV. EXPLORING HETEROGENEITY
Our model also has predictions regarding the impact of marriage on mothers with different
levels of resources. For primary outcomes, we hypothesize that the marriage premium for children
has the shape of an inverted U, at first increasing and then decreasing, as mother’s resources
increase. For advanced outcomes, we anticipate that a marriage premium for children will exist at
higher maternal resource levels. In this section, we report the results of an analysis designed to

14

Bjorklund-Young (2016) reports that data from the Education Longitudinal Survey – a nationally representative
sample of students who were high school sophomores in 2002 – indicate that among students from the lowest quartile
of family income, college completion rates are 14 percent, as compared to 60 percent among students from the top
quartile of family income.

Kearney and Levine
Marriage Premium for Children, p. 18
explore whether descriptive data are consistent with those hypotheses. As we have done
throughout the paper, we focus on maternal age and education as indicative of maternal resource
level.
A. Descriptive Relationship between Maternal Marital Status and Children’s Outcomes
In Tables 4 and 5, we report results of an analysis focusing on the same children’s
outcomes as reported in Table 3, except here we distinguish mothers by their age and educational
attainment at the time of childbearing. All statistics reported are relevant sample means computed
from the PSID; we are not attempting to isolate causal findings; rather we explore heterogeneity
in raw marriage premiums.
The first thing to notice in Tables 4 and 5 is that for all four outcomes, there is a marriage
premium observed for all maternal age and education categories. This is noteworthy, given that
one might have suspected older and more educated mothers would have sufficient own resources
such that the children of married mothers would not experience an advantage in outcomes relative
to the children of unmarried women. The data indicate that is not the case. This result is consistent
with previous studies that report the results of regression analyses that control for maternal age
and education and still find disadvantages associated with single-motherhood.
The patterns in the data are also consistent with the predictions of the model. For the
primary outcomes of being out of poverty and graduating from high school, we see the inverted
U-shaped pattern of the marriage premium for children. Table 4 shows that women between the
ages of 20 and 24 have children who receive the greatest observed marriage premium for these
outcomes. That premium is lower for children of younger and older mothers. Table 5 shows that
women with a high school degree or some college have the greatest observed marriage premium
in terms of avoiding adult poverty and graduating from high school. Children of high school
dropouts and college graduates have lower premiums, albeit still positive.

Kearney and Levine
Marriage Premium for Children, p. 19
We see a different pattern when it comes to the advanced outcomes of college completion
and having income above 400 percent of the federal poverty threshold (our measure of high
income). In Table 4 we see that the marriage premium for advanced outcomes is increasing with
maternal age. The children of married mothers age 30 and over are 20.7 percentage points more
likely to graduate from college as compared to the children of unmarried mothers in that age
group (37.2 percent compared to 16.5 percent). There is a positive age gradient in children’s rates
of college graduation for married and unmarried mothers, but the gradient is steeper for the
children of married mothers. Among the children of unmarried mothers, the percent who
complete college by age 25 increases from 6.6 percent to 16.5 percent, moving from teen mothers
to mothers age 30 and over. Among the children of married mothers, the percent who complete
college by age 25 increases from 13.1 percent to 37.2 percent. A similar pattern holds for the
advanced outcome.
Table 5 reveals a similar story: the marriage premium is also increasing with maternal
education. The children of married mothers with a college degree are 28.4 percentage points more
likely to graduate from college as compared to the children of unmarried mothers with a college
degree (57 percent versus 28.6 percent). This gap is consistent with the predictions of our model,
though we readily acknowledge the possibility that some of this might reflect unobserved
selection, meaning that unmarried, college-educated mothers might be more negatively selected
than less-educated unmarried mothers on other resource dimensions. As with maternal age, there
is a positive education gradient for both sets of mothers, such that higher levels of maternal
education are associated with higher rates of college graduation among children, but the gradient
is steeper for the children of married mothers. Among the children of unmarried mothers, the
percent who complete college by age 25 increases from 4.9 percent to 28.6 percent, a nearly sixfold increase from the least to most educated mothers. Among the children of married mothers,

Kearney and Levine
Marriage Premium for Children, p. 20
the percent who complete college by age 25 increases from 7.4 percent to 57 percent, a nearly
eight-fold increase.
B. Multivariate Relationship between Maternal Marital Status and Children’s Outcomes
We extend this analysis by estimating regression models that parameterize these statistics
and control for the impact that other demographic factors might play in the relationship between
mother’s marital status and children’s outcomes. Specifically, we estimate models where the
dependent variables are the same poverty and educational outcomes we have been using
throughout this analysis. The key explanatory variables are interaction terms between maternal
marital status at birth of child and cubic indicators of either mother’s age or years of education at
birth. The demographic variables we control for include child’s gender, race, ethnicity, and year
of birth. We also estimate a separate set of models including average family income in early
childhood (through age five).15 Including this variable can provide an indication of the extent to
which this one measure of resources can “explain” any marriage premium for children that we
observe in the data.16 Another important reason to determine the role played by income is to
understand the extent to which government transfers could potentially play a role in alleviating
the outcome deficits faced by children in single-parent households (cf. Lerman, Price, Wilcox,
2016).
We summarize the results of this analysis, focusing specifically on maternal age at birth of
child, in Figures 4A-4D and Figures 5A-5D. Both sets of figures consider each of our four
outcomes (poverty status, high school completion, high income status, and college completion;
the only difference is that the second set of figures adjust for average family income in early

15

Appendix Tables 1A and 1B report the full set of regression results.
We note that adding these variables does not satisfy any reasonable standard of identifying a causal
impact. We interpret the results from these analyses as regression-adjusted descriptive statistics.
16

Kearney and Levine
Marriage Premium for Children, p. 21
childhood (ages 0-5). In these figures, we plot the simulated marriage premium for children (the
predicted difference in children’s outcomes between those born to married and unmarried parents)
as a function of their mother’s age when they were born. The patterns are non-linear because our
regression model includes cubic age interactions with maternal marital status.17 The dotted lines
represent 95 percent confidence intervals, constructed using the delta method. We repeat this
analysis for mother’s educational attainment; due to space constraints, those results are reported
in Appendix Figures 1A-1D and 2A-2D.18
Figure 4A examines the marriage premium for children when the specific child outcome is
having family income above the poverty threshold at age 25. It is consistent with the inverted-U
shaped pattern that we hypothesized earlier for a primary outcome and that our earlier descriptive
analysis foreshadowed. In fact, for the very youngest mothers and the oldest mothers in this
sample, the confidence interval for the marriage premium for children extends to near zero in
terms of poverty status. The marriage premium is highest at age 24; children born to married
mothers at that age are 15 percentage points more likely to be above the poverty threshold at age
25 compared to children of unmarried mothers.
Note that controlling for demographics has a large impact on the estimated marriage
premium for children. In Table 4, those children born to married mothers between the ages of 20
and 24 were 22.6 percentage points more likely to have incomes above the poverty line at age 25.
Controlling for demographics as in Figure 4A substantially reduces that gap. Doing so, though,
has little impact on the inverted U-shaped pattern of the marriage premium for children. In fact,
17

We estimate these models using all available data for mothers between the ages of 14 and 45. In the
figures, though, we only report simulation results of the marriage premium for children for mothers
between the ages of 17 and 35. The reason for this is that there are very few marital births younger than
age 17 or non-marital births over age 35. This leads to very imprecise estimates at these ages with standard
error bands that are much wider than those between ages 17 and 35 and that always include zero.
18
Appendix tables A1 and A2 present the regression results themselves that were used to generate these
figures.

Kearney and Levine
Marriage Premium for Children, p. 22
for children born to mothers under age 18 or over age 32, the estimated marriage premium in
terms of children’s subsequent poverty outcomes are small and not statistically significant once
we control for demographics. These controls introduce something like a level shift down in the
profile without altering the general shape of the profile itself.
Figure 4B displays similar patterns for high school completion. The peak age is 22 for the
marriage premium for children measured in this way. No statistically significant impact is
estimated for those under age 18 or over age 28. The similarity in patterns between Figures 4A
and 4B are what we would expect from our model since both represent primary outcomes.
Figures 4C and 4D plot the marriage premium for the advanced outcomes of graduating
from college by age 25 or having income greater than 400 percent of the federal poverty threshold
at age 25. Consistent with the pattern reported in Table 4, we see that this manifestation of the
marriage premium is monotonically increasing in mother’s age until the late 20s and then
asymptotes to around a 15 to 20 percentage point differential. The magnitude of these estimates
varies little after including demographic controls. Children born to older women (presumably
with greater resources) continue to benefit in the form of this advanced outcome when their
mothers are married.19 We also explore heterogeneity in the marriage premium for boys and girls,
and find the estimates are slightly larger for boys, but we cannot statistically distinguish between
the two. For this reason we only examine the pooled impact in the remaining analysis.
Figures 5A through 5D repeat this analysis, but control for family income at birth as well
as demographic characteristics.20 Interestingly, for the two primary outcomes (poverty status and
high school completion), the premium to children associated with marriage does not appear to be

19

If we instead use a continuous measure of log income at age 25 as the outcome of interest, we also see a monotonic
increase in the observed marriage premium along the dimensions of maternal age and education.
20
Following Lopoo and Deleire (2014) and Lerman, Price, and Wilcox (2016) we control for income by dividing our
measure of income by the square root of the household size, to account for economies of scale.

Kearney and Levine
Marriage Premium for Children, p. 23
accounted for by a simple control for average family income in early childhood. The patterns and
levels displayed in Figures 5A and 5B are very similar to those reported in Figures 4A and 4B,
respectively. The finding that controlling for family income in early childhood does not
appreciably change the estimate marriage premium might indicate that other resources associated
with marriage are driving the observed premium. Such resources might include greater family
stability, more total parental time, lower levels of maternal stress, among others. It could also be
that average family income during early childhood is not a sufficient proxy for family income
over a child’s life, such that a more comprehensive measure of income would indicate that family
income is indeed an important factor in explaining the marriage premium.
In terms of the advanced outcomes, average family income during early childhood seems
to be an important contributing factor in determining college completion, but it does not have
much of an impact on the estimated premium for having a high income at age 25. Although the
pattern in Figure 5C (for college completion) is very similar to Figure 4C, the marriage premium
to children asymptotes to a lower value, 15 percentage points rather than 20 percentage when
adjusted for family income.
V. DISCUSSION
Numerous empirical studies written across social science disciplines indicate that children
raised in married biological parent households tend to do better on a host of outcomes, both
during childhood and into adulthood, as compared to children raised by an unmarried mother.
Given that marital status is not randomly assigned to an individual, a precise causal estimate of
marriage per se remains elusive. Nonetheless, as we noted at the outset, the strength of the
association and its robustness to a myriad of controls is at least strongly suggestive of a causal
relationship. In this paper, we label this observed difference as the “marriage premium for

Kearney and Levine
Marriage Premium for Children, p. 24
children.” When viewed through the lens of economics, it becomes clear that such a premium
could be both explained and anticipated by an economic consideration of potential resources.
The academic literature and policy conversation about non-marital childbearing has
generally not distinguished across different categories of non-marital childbearing. We have
proposed a framework for evaluating non-marital childbearing and children’s outcomes that has
clear heterogeneous predictions. Specifically, we propose that the marriage premium in terms of
children’s outcomes will depend on a mother’s own level of resources, the nature of marriage
markets and the additional resources a spouse would bring to the household, and the relevant
production function for a specific outcome. Using data from the Panel Study of Income
Dynamics (PSID), we find that the predictions of our framework are consistent with the patterns
in the data.
We distinguish children’s later-life outcomes into those that are primary (high school
graduation and not living in poverty) from those that are advanced (college graduation and having
a high income). For primary outcomes, the data indicate the largest marriage premiums for
children of women who give birth in their early- to mid-20s and for children of high school
graduates. The relative marriage advantage is lower for children of mothers who are in their teens
or in their 30s, as well as for children of high school dropouts or college graduates. We interpret
these patterns as being consistent with the prediction that the incremental resources associated
with marriage are too small to have much of an impact for young and less educated mothers, and
not necessary at the high end, to substantially increase the likelihood of obtaining a primary
outcome. Interestingly, for advanced outcomes, the marriage premium is monotonically
increasing with observed maternal age and education. This suggests that even for mothers with a
high level of own resources, the additional resources brought into a married household have a

Kearney and Levine
Marriage Premium for Children, p. 25
sizeable impact on the likelihood that a child graduates from college and achieves a high level of
adult income.
The conceptual framework and descriptive empirical evidence of this paper imply that it is
important to distinguish across maternal circumstances when evaluating the issue of non-marital
childbearing and children’s outcomes. They also have implications for thinking about recent
trends toward higher rates of non-marital fertility among older and more educated women. In
previous decades, non-marital childbearing was quite uncommon except among women in their
teens and among those without a high school degree. However, in recent decades we have
witnessed a dramatic rise in non-marital childbearing among women with a high school degree
and women in their 20s. Our results from PSID data on cohorts born during the 1960s, 1970s, and
1980s suggest that this is precisely where the marriage premium is largest for children.
The extent to which these results hold lessons for predicting heterogeneity in the marriage
premium for children being born to unmarried mothers today will depend on how maternal
resources, marriage markets, father resources, and the production function of child outcomes have
changed. The key takeaway from our framework and empirical results is that the marriage
premium depends crucially on resource context. We have focused on the economic resources that
fathers would bring to marriage. This is related to a leading explanation for the high rates of nonmarital childbearing among less educated and minority women: the notion that there is a dearth of
“marriageable men” in certain segments of the population, generally understood to mean men
who would bring economic stability (Wilson 1987; Wilson and Neckerman, 1986). In recent
decades, the economic position of the median male in terms of education and earnings has
declined, relative to both earlier cohorts (Greenstone and Looney, 2011) and contemporaneous
women (Autor and Wasserman, 2013). The declines in employment and earnings have been
especially pronounced among men with high school degrees (Autor and Wasserman, 2013;

Kearney and Levine
Marriage Premium for Children, p. 26
Kearney and Hershbein 2015). If part of the reason that rates of non-marital childbearing have
increased among women with high school degrees is that there has been an erosion in the
economic prospects of the men with whom they partner21, then the marriage premium their
children would enjoy is likely to be lower than the premiums we have found among earlier
cohorts.
As this discussion highlights, the economic causes of non-marital childbearing are likely
related to the resulting economic consequences of non-marital childbearing. Empirically
separating out these causes and effects is a challenging task. Much more research is needed into
the complex issue of non-marital childbearing and what it implies for the economic well-being of
affected children. The framework and empirical results we have put forth in this paper
demonstrate the importance of focusing on heterogeneous effects related to potential household
resources.

21

A new paper by Cherlin, Ribar, and Yasktake (2016) provides evidence from the National Longitudinal Survey of
Youth, 1997 cohort, supporting this hypothesis.

Kearney and Levine
Marriage Premium for Children, p. 27
REFERENCES
Akerlof, George A., Janet L. Yellen and Michael L. Katz. 1996. “An Analysis of Out-of-Wedlock
Childbearing in the United States,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 111 (2): pp. 277-317.
Amato, Paul R. 2005. The impact of family formation change on the cognitive, social, and
emotional well-being of the next generation. The Future of Children 15(2): 75-96.
Autor, David, David Dorn, and Gordon Hanson. 2015. The Labor Market and the Marriage
Market: How Adverse Employment Shocks Affect Marriage, Fertility, and Children’s Living
Circumstances. MIT Working Paper.
Autor D, Wasserman M. 2013. Wayward Sons: The Emerging Gender Gap in Labor Markets and
Education. Third Way.
Becker GS. 1981. A Treatise on the Family. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Bertrand Marianne and Jessica Pan. 2013. The Trouble with Boys: Social Influences and the
Gender Gap in Disruptive Behavior. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 5(1): 3264.
Bjorklund-Young, Alanna. 2016. Family Income and the College Completion Gap. Johns
Hopkins Institute for Education Policy, on-line commentary:
http://education.jhu.edu/edpolicy/commentary/collegegradgap (accessed July 15, 2016).
Cherlin, Andrew, David Ribar, and Suzumi Yasutake. 2016. “Non-marital first births, marriage,
and income inequality,” American Sociological Review: pp. 1-22.
Dahl, Gordon B., and Lance Lochner. 2011. The Impact of Family Income on Child
Achievement: Evidence from the Earned Income Tax Credit. American Economic Review 2012,
102(5): 1927–1956
DeLeire T, Lopoo LM. 2014. Family Structure and the Economic Wellbeing of Children during
Youth and Adulthood. Social Science Research. 43(1): 30-44.
Ellwood DT, Jencks C. 2004. The Spread of Single-Parent Families in the United States since
1960. In The Future of the Family, ed. D. Moynihan, L. Rainwater, T. Smeeding. New York:
Russell Sage. 25-65 pp.
Ellwood DT, Jencks C. 2004. The Uneven Spread of Single-Parent Families: What Do We
Know? Where Do We Look for Answers?. In Social Inequality, ed. K. Neckerman. New York:
Russell Sage. 3-78 pp.
Furstenberg, Frank F. Jr., Thomas D. Cook, Jacquelynne S. Eccles, Glen H. Elder Jr., and Arnold
Sameroff. 1999. Managing to Make It: Urban Families and Adolescent Success. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.

Kearney and Levine
Marriage Premium for Children, p. 28
Greenstone M, Looney A. 2011. Have Earnings Actually Declined? Brookings Institute: The
Hamilton Project. http://www.hamiltonproject.org/papers/have_earnings_actually_declined/
Guryan, Jonathan, Erik Hurst, and Melissa S. Kearney. 2008. “Parental Education and Parental
Time with Children,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 22(3): 23-46.
Hershbein B, Kearney M. 2015. Profiles of Change: Employment, Earnings, and Occupations
from 1990-2013. Brookings Institute: The Hamilton Project.
http://www.hamiltonproject.org/papers/profiles_of_change_employment_earnings_occupations_1
990-2013
Hill CJ, Holzer HJ, Chen. 2009. Against the Tide: Household structure, opportunities, and
outcomes among white and minority youth. Kalamazoo, MI: W.E. Upjohn Institute for
Employment Research.
Hoffman SD, Foster EM, Furstenberg FF. 1993. Re-evaluating the Costs of Teenage
Childbearing. Demography. 30(1): 1-13.
Kalil Ariel, Spencer M, Spieker S, Gilchrist L. 1998. Effects of family living arrangements and
quality of relationships on the mental health of low-income adolescent mothers. Family Relations.
47: 433-441.
Kalil, Ariel, Rebecca Ryan, and Michael Corey. 2012. “Diverging destinies; maternal education
and the development gradient in time with children. Demography 49(4):1361-83.
Kalil, Ariel, Rebecca Ryan, and Elise Chor. 2014. Time Investments in Children across Family
Structures,” Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science 654: 150–68.
Lerman R, Price J, Wilcox WB. 2016. Family Structure and Economic Success across the Life
Course. Mimeo.
Løken, Katrine V. 2010. Family Income and Children’s Education: Using the Norwegian Oil
Boom as a Natural Experiment. Labour Economics 17 (1): 118–29.
Løken, Katrine V., Magne Mogstad, and Matthew Wiswall. 2012. What Linear Estimators Miss:
The Effects of Family Income on Child Outcomes. American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics.
Lundberg S, Pollak RA. 2007. The American Family and Family Economics. Journal of
Economic Perspectives, American Economic Association. 21(2): 3-26.
Manning, Wendy. 2015. Cohabitation and Family Well-Being, Future of Children 25(2): 51-66.
Mayer SE. 1997. Income, Employment and the Support of Children. In Indicators of Children's
Well-being, ed. R. Hauser, B Brown, W. Prosser. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.

Kearney and Levine
Marriage Premium for Children, p. 29
Mayer SE. 1997. Trends in the Economic Well-being and Life Chances of America's Children. In
The Consequences of Growing Up Poor, ed. J. Brooks-Gunn, G. Duncan. New York: Russell
Sage Foundation.
Mayer SE. 1997. What Money Can't Buy: Family Income and Children's Life Chances.
Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press.
McLanahan S, Sandefur G. 1994. Growing up with a single parent: What hurts, What helps?
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
McLanahan S. 1997. Parent Absence or Poverty: Which Matters More?. In Consequences of
Growing Up Poor, ed. G. Duncan, J. Brooks-Gunn. New York: Russell Sage Foundation. 35-48
pp.
McLanahan S. 2004. Diverging Destinies: How Children Fare Under the Second Demographic
Transition. Demography. 41(4): 607-627.
Miller, Amalia R. 2009. Motherhood Delay and the Human Capital of the Next Generation.
American Economic Review 99(2): 154-158.
Milligan, Kevin, and Mark Stabile. 2007. The Integration of Child Tax Credits and Welfare:
Evidence from the Canadian National Child Benefit Program. Journal of Public Economics 91
(1–2): 305–26.
Moffitt, Robert. 2001. “Welfare Benefits and Female Headship in U.S. Time Series.” in eds.
Lawrence L. Wu and Barbara Wolf, Out of Wedlock: Causes and Consequences of Nonmarital
Fertility. New York: Russell Sage Foundation: pp. 143-172.
Oreopoulos, Philip, Marianne Page, and Ann Huff Stevens. 2008. The Intergenerational Effects of
Worker Displacement. Journal of Labor Economics 26 (3): 455–83.
Ribar, David C. 2015. “Why Marriage Matters for Child Well-Being.” Future of Children 25(2):
pp. 11-27.
Schwartz, Christine R. 2010. “Earnings Inequality and the Changing Association between
Spouses’ Earnings.” American Journal of Sociology 115 (5): 1524-1557.
Shenhav, Na’ama. 2016. “What Women Want: Family Formation and Labor Market Responses to
Marriage Incentives.” Job Market Paper. U.C. Davis Mimeo.
Thomas, Adam and Isabel Sawhill . 2002. For richer or for poorer: Marriage as an antipoverty
strategy. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management. 21: 587–599.
Thomas, Adam and Isabel Sawhill. 2005 For Love and Money: The Impact of Family Structure
on Family Income. Future of Children 15(2): 57-74.

Kearney and Levine
Marriage Premium for Children, p. 30
Wilson, William Julius and Katherine Neckerman. 1986. Poverty and Family Structure: The
Widening Gap between Evidence and Public Policy Issues. In: Danziger S, Weinberg D Fighting
Poverty: What Works and What Doesn't. Cambridge: Harvard University Press ; 1986. pp. 232259.
Wilson, William Julius. The Truly Disadvantaged: The Inner City, the Underclass, and Public
Policy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press; 1987.

Kearney and Levine
Marriage Premium for Children, p. 31

Table 1: Family Structure Transition Rates between Birth and Age 14
Family Structure at Birth: Born 1960-1979
Family Structure
at Age 14
Married
Parents
Cohabiting
Parents
Mother and
Stepfather
Mother
Only
Other

Family Structure at Birth: Born 1980-1999

Married
Parents
80.5

Cohabitating
Parents
39.5

Mother
Only
15.1

Married
Parents
74.9

Cohabitating
Parents
27.9

Mother
Only
11.6

0.4

17.4

2.9

0.6

10.9

1.2

6.7

3.1

12.1

7.1

9.1

9.1

9.0

16.3

62.9

12.0

33.3

64.9

3.4

23.7

6.9

5.4

18.8

13.2

Percent in
82.8
2.0
15.1
76.1
7.7
15.9
Category
Notes: An observation is a child born in the stated years in the PSID Family structure at birth is based on data from
the first survey after the child was born. Living with “Mother Only” includes living with mother and grandparents.
“Other” includes living with the father only or with neither parent. Each observation is weighted by the mother’s
individual level PSID sampling weight for personal characteristics and by the household PSID sampling weight for
household level measures.

Kearney and Levine
Marriage Premium for Children, p. 32
Table 2. Mother and Household Characteristics in Year of First Birth, PSID Data
1st Birth 1968-1989

Mother’s Characteristics
Age at Birth
Years of Education
Mother Living with Parents
Household Income at Birth
Median Income (2013$)
Percent Not in Poverty

1st Birth 1990-2013

Married

Not
Married

Gap
(M-NM)

Married

Not Married

Gap
(M-NM)

25.4
13.6
3.0

21.2
12.6
44.0

4.1
1.0
-41.0

28.5
14.7
3.1

22.2
13.0
38.6

6.3
1.7
-35.5

$49,772
92.4

$25,800
58.8

$23,973
33.5

$74,497
92.6

$36,575
70.6

$37,922
22.0

HH Income in Childhood
Median Income, Ages 0-5
(2013$)
$54,677
$24,561
$30,116
$77,090
$33,406
$43,684
Percentage of Years Not in
Poverty, Ages 0-5
90.6
54.0
36.5
91.1
62.7
28.5
Median Income, Ages 0-16
(2013$)
$64,651
$28,848
$35,803
$82,454
$35,430
$47,024
Percentage of Years Not in
Poverty, Ages 0-16
90.9
57.2
33.7
91.4
63.6
27.8
Observations
6,126
2,232
--4,983
3,620
--Notes: Household income is reported in 2013$ where adjustments have been made using the personal consumption
expenditures price index. Income between ages 0-16 is the child’s annual household averaged over all available years
between the ages of 0 and 16, with the median reported. Also see notes to Table 1.

Kearney and Levine
Marriage Premium for Children, p. 33

Table 3. Children’s Long-term Outcomes by Child’s Year of Birth and
Mother’s Marital Status at Birth
Gap
Number of
Married
Not Married
(M-NM)
Observations

All Sample Years
Born 1960-1969
Born 1970-1979
Born 1980-1989

All Sample Years
Born 1960-1969
Born 1970-1979
Born 1980-1989

All Sample Years
Born 1960-1969
Born 1970-1979
Born 1980-1989

All Sample Years
Born 1960-1969
Born 1970-1979
Born 1980-1989

91.6
91.0
93.3
90.6

Percent not in Poverty at 25
72.6
19.0
74.0
17.0
69.6
23.7
74.1
16.5

6,444
2,288
2,016
2,140

88.1
86.9
89
88.4

Percent HS Degree by 20
78.1
10
74.7
12.2
78.2
10.8
78.8
9.6

8,225
2,610
2,502
3,113

39.7
38.4
41.4
39.5

Percent Over 400% of Poverty Level at 25
15.9
23.9
17.1
21.3
12.6
28.8
17.5
22

6,444
2,288
2,016
2,140

29.9
21.8
28
40.7

Percent College Degree by 25
9.5
20.4
5.9
15.9
8.1
19.9
11.3
29.4

6,847
2,307
2,095
2,445

Notes: An observation is a child born in the stated years in the PSID. Each observation is weighted by the child’s
individual level PSID sampling weight in the year the outcome is observed.

Kearney and Levine
Marriage Premium for Children, p. 34
Table 4. Children’s Long-Term Outcomes by Mother’s Marital Status and
Age at Birth of Child
Gap
Number of
Married
Not Married
(M-NM)
Observations

Mother <20 at birth
Mother 20-24 at birth
Mother 25-29 at birth
Mother 30+ at birth

Mother <20 at birth
Mother 20-24 at birth
Mother 25-29 at birth
Mother 30+ at birth

Mother <20 at birth
Mother 20-24 at birth
Mother 25-29 at birth
Mother >29 at birth

Mother <20 at birth
Mother 20-24 at birth
Mother 25-29 at birth
Mother 30+ at birth

86.9
91.7
93.4
91.2

Percent not in Poverty at 25
71.7
15.2
69.1
22.6
74.9
18.5
75.1
16.1

907
2,127
1,794
1,533

81.0
87.6
89.7
88.7

Percent HS Degree by 20
74.1
6.9
77.3
10.3
81.8
7.9
80.2
8.5

1,174
2,667
2,286
1,981

24.1
32.8
46.2
43.9

Percent Over 400% of Poverty Level at 25
12.6
11.5
15.0
17.8
22.3
23.9
19.0
24.9

907
2,127
1,794
1,533

13.1
21.9
34.5
37.2

Percent College Degree by 25
6.6
6.5
5.8
16.1
15
19.5
16.5
20.7

954
2,241
1,914
1,645

Notes: An observation is a child born between 1960 and 1989 in the PSID. Each observation is weighted by the
child’s individual level PSID sampling weight in the year the outcome is observed.

Kearney and Levine
Marriage Premium for Children, p. 35
Table 5. Children’s Long-Term Outcomes by Mother’s Marital Status and
Mother’s Level of Education
Gap
Number of
Married
Not Married
(M-NM)
Observations

Less than High School
High School Degree
Mother Some College
Mother College Degree

Less than High School
High School Degree
Mother Some College
Mother College Degree

Less than High School
High School Degree
Mother Some College
Mother College Degree

Less than High School
High School Degree
Mother Some College
Mother College Degree

81.1
90.9
93.8
95.7

Percent not in Poverty at 25
64.8
16.3
73.7
17.2
76.0
17.9
80.5
15.2

1,143
2,499
1,629
1,162

73.6
87.7
90.7
93.0

Percent HS Degree by 20
67.9
5.6
78.5
9.3
82.9
7.7
88.8
4.2

1,485
3,140
2,145
1,434

15.5
37.4
40.9
54.1

Percent Over 400% Poverty Level at 25
8.6
6.9
16.5
20.9
17.7
23.2
29.1
25.0

1,143
2,499
1,629
1,162

7.4
18.0
31.1
57.0

Percent College Degree by 25
4.9
2.5
4.8
13.2
13.8
17.3
28.6
28.4

1,212
2,620
1,745
1,259

Notes: An observation is a child born between 1960 and 1989 in the PSID. Each observation is weighted by the
child’s individual level PSID sampling weight in the year the outcome is observed.

Kearney and Levine
Marriage Premium for Children, p. 36

Figure 1A: Hypothetical Impact of Total Household Resources
on Probability of Achieving Outcome

Figure 1B: Marriage Premium for Children

Kearney and Levine
Marriage Premium for Children, p. 37

Kearney and Levine
Marriage Premium for Children, p. 38

Kearney and Levine
Marriage Premium for Children, p. 39
Figure 4: Mother's Age at Birth of Child and the Marriage Premium for Children
(no income controls)
A. Out of Poverty at Age 25

B. High School Degree by Age 20

C. Over 400% of the Poverty Line

D. College Degree by Age 25

Notes: Difference in predicted probability obtained from regression specifications reported in Appendix Table 1, controlling for gender, race, ethnicity, year of
birth. Ninety-five percent confidence intervals are plotted in dashed lines (standard errors were obtained using the Delta Method).
Source: Authors’ calculations using data from the PSID.

Kearney and Levine
Marriage Premium for Children, p. 40

Figure 5: Mother's Age at Birth of Child and the Marriage Premium for Children
(with income controls)
A. Out of Poverty at Age 25

B. High School Degree by Age 20

C. Over 400% of the Poverty Line

D. College Degree by Age 25

Notes: Difference in predicted probability obtained from regression specifications reported in Appendix Table 2, controlling for gender, race, ethnicity, year of
birth. Ninety-five percent confidence intervals are plotted in dashed lines (standard errors were obtained using the Delta Method).
Source: Authors’ calculations using data from the PSID.

Kearney and Levine
Marriage Premium for Children, p. 41
APPENDIX TABLES AND FIGURES

Appendix Table A1.
Mother's Age at Birth of Child and the Marriage Premium for Children Regression coefficients,
(No Income Controls)
Not In Poverty
at 25

Married at Birth
Married*Mother Age
Married*Mother Age2
Married*Mother Age3
Mother Age
Mother Age2
Mother Age3
Constant

-1.4754
(1.0391)
0.1669
(0.1189)
-0.0054
(0.0044)
0.0001
(0.0001)
-0.0677
(0.1125)
0.0022
(0.0042)
-0.0000
(0.0000)
1.4118
(0.9737)

HS Degree
By Age 20

Over 400 %
Poverty Level at
25

No Income Controls
-1.8588**
-2.8024**
(0.8446)
(1.1948)
0.2281**
0.2991**
(0.0976)
(0.1365)
-0.0087**
-0.0100**
(0.0036)
(0.0050)
0.0001**
0.0001*
(0.0000)
(0.0001)
-0.1198
-0.1913
(0.0875)
(0.1173)
0.0053
0.0077*
(0.0033)
(0.0043)
-0.0001*
-0.0001*
(0.0000)
(0.0001)
1.6429**
1.7711*
(0.7404)
(1.0146)

College Degree
by Age 25

-1.4551*
(0.7954)
0.1507
(0.0926)
-0.0046
(0.0035)
0.0000
(0.0000)
-0.1061
(0.0666)
0.0045*
(0.0026)
-0.0001*
(0.0000)
0.9378*
(0.5436)

Observations
6,346
8,082
6,346
6,740
Notes: Outcomes weighted by PSID weights corresponding to the year the outcome is observed. Sample restricted to children born between 1960
and 1989, whose mothers were between 14 and 45 with non-missing education. Controls include gender, household race, and year of birth fixed
effects. Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

Kearney and Levine
Marriage Premium for Children, p. 42

Appendix Table A2. Mother's Age at Birth of Child and the Marriage Premium for Children
Regression coefficients, Average Childhood Household Income Controls
Not In Poverty
at 25

Married at Birth
Married*Mother Age
Married*Mother Age2
Married*Mother Age3
Mother Age
Mother Age2
Mother Age3
Average HH Inc from 0-5/√HH Size
Constant

-1.0235
(1.1223)
0.1154
(0.1280)
-0.0035
(0.0047)
0.0000
(0.0001)
-0.0027
(0.1215)
-0.0004
(0.0045)
0.0000
(0.0001)
0.0214***
(0.0033)
0.8576
(1.0557)

HS Degree
By Age 20

Over 400 %
Poverty Level at
25

Income Controls
-2.2504**
-2.5108*
(0.9184)
(1.2915)
0.2792***
0.2670*
(0.1068)
(0.1476)
-0.0107***
-0.0089*
(0.0040)
(0.0054)
0.0001***
0.0001
(0.0000)
(0.0001)
-0.1392
-0.1216
(0.0966)
(0.1285)
0.0060
0.0050
(0.0037)
(0.0047)
-0.0001*
-0.0001
(0.0000)
(0.0001)
0.0192***
0.0599***
(0.0031)
(0.0069)
1.7617**
1.1017
(0.8118)
(1.1120)

College Degree
by Age 25

-1.1106
(0.8269)
0.1070
(0.0973)
-0.0030
(0.0037)
0.0000
(0.0000)
-0.0482
(0.0717)
0.0021
(0.0029)
-0.0000
(0.0000)
0.0563***
(0.0055)
0.4087
(0.5775)

Observations
5,180
6,748
5,180
5,514
Notes: Outcomes weighted by PSID weights corresponding to the year the outcome is observed. Sample restricted to children born between 1960
and 1989, whose mothers were between 14 and 45 with non-missing education. Average household income is computed as the average income
between 0 and 5, scaled by the square root of the household size to account for economies of scale. Other controls include gender, household race,
and year of birth fixed effects. Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

Kearney and Levine
Marriage Premium for Children, p. 43

Appendix Table A3. Mother's Education and the Marriage Premium for Children
Regression coefficients, No Income Controls
Not In Poverty
at 25

Married at Birth
Married*Mother’s Education
Married*Mother’s Education2
Married*Mother’s Education3
Mother’s Education
Mother’s Education2
Mother’s Education3
Constant

-0.2292
(0.4622)
0.0674
(0.1497)
-0.0036
(0.0149)
0.0000
(0.0005)
-0.1806
(0.1456)
0.0168
(0.0145)
-0.0004
(0.0004)
1.3017***
(0.4507)

HS Degree
By Age 20

Over 400 %
Poverty Level at
25

No Income Controls
-0.2073
0.0999
(0.6629)
(0.3287)
0.0624
-0.0792
(0.1941)
(0.1101)
-0.0041
0.0111
(0.0179)
(0.0116)
0.0001
-0.0004
(0.0005)
(0.0004)
-0.1673
-0.0059
(0.1865)
(0.0911)
0.0184
-0.0004
(0.0172)
(0.0099)
-0.0005
0.0001
(0.0005)
(0.0003)
1.0945*
0.2363
(0.6405)
(0.2659)

College Degree
by Age 25

0.5435**
(0.2675)
-0.2033**
(0.0914)
0.0214**
(0.0097)
-0.0006*
(0.0003)
0.0716
(0.0779)
-0.0108
(0.0085)
0.0005*
(0.0003)
-0.0073
(0.2232)

Observations
6,346
8,082
6,346
6,740
Notes: Outcomes weighted by PSID weights corresponding to the year the outcome is observed. Sample restricted to children born between 1960
and 1989, whose mothers were between 14 and 45 with non-missing education. Controls include gender, household race, and year of birth fixed
effects. Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

Kearney and Levine
Marriage Premium for Children, p. 44

Appendix Table A4. Mother's Education and the Marriage Premium for Children
Regression coefficients, Average Childhood Household Income Controls
Not In Poverty
at 25

Married at Birth
Married*Mother’s Education
Married*Mother’s Education2
Married*Mother’s Education3
Mother’s Education
Mother’s Education2
Mother’s Education3
Average HH Inc from 0-5/√HH Size
Constant

3.1812
(2.6609)
-0.7213
(0.6544)
0.0572
(0.0526)
-0.0015
(0.0014)
0.7636
(0.6411)
-0.0559
(0.0515)
0.0014
(0.0014)
0.0157***
(0.0030)
-2.7951
(2.6064)

HS Degree
By Age 20

Over 400 %
Poverty Level at
25

Income Controls
-1.9022
2.0334
(2.0747)
(2.0171)
0.5290
-0.5401
(0.5165)
(0.5366)
-0.0449
0.0469
(0.0422)
(0.0461)
0.0012
-0.0013
(0.0011)
(0.0013)
-0.3720
0.6714
(0.5011)
(0.5172)
0.0411
-0.0541
(0.0409)
(0.0444)
-0.0013
0.0015
(0.0011)
(0.0012)
0.0135***
0.0537***
(0.0028)
(0.0070)
1.5238
-2.6269
(2.0137)
(1.9500)

College Degree
by Age 25

0.4520
(1.4976)
-0.1601
(0.4017)
0.0157
(0.0347)
-0.0004
(0.0010)
-0.0249
(0.3843)
-0.0003
(0.0331)
0.0001
(0.0009)
0.0379***
(0.0046)
0.1976
(1.4420)

Observations
5,180
6,748
5,180
5,514
Notes: Outcomes weighted by PSID weights corresponding to the year the outcome is observed. Sample restricted to children born between 1960
and 1989, whose mothers were between 14 and 45 with non-missing education. Average household income is computed as the average income
between 0 and 5, scaled by the square root of the household size to account for economies of scale. Other controls include gender, household race,
and year of birth fixed effects. Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

Kearney and Levine
Marriage Premium for Children, p. 45

Appendix Figure 1: Mother's Education and the Marriage Premium for Children
(no income controls)

Notes: Difference in predicted probability obtained from regression specifications reported in Appendix Table 3, controlling for gender, race, ethnicity, year of
birth. Ninety-five percent confidence intervals are plotted in dashed lines (standard errors were obtained using the Delta Method).
Source: Authors’ calculations using data from the PSID.

Kearney and Levine
Marriage Premium for Children, p. 46

Appendix Figure 1: Mother's Education and the Marriage Premium for Children
(with income controls)

Notes: Difference in predicted probability obtained from regression specifications reported in Appendix Table 4, controlling for gender, race, ethnicity, year of
birth. Ninety-five percent confidence intervals are plotted in dashed lines (standard errors were obtained using the Delta Method).
Source: Authors’ calculations using data from the PSID.

Kearney and Levine
Marriage Premium for Children, p. 47
PSID Data Appendix

The Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) is composed of several panel and crosssectional datasets collected at either the household or individual level. We combine information
from several of these datasets to identify characteristics of individual’s mothers and family
setting and link these measures to individuals. Each individual in the PSID is uniquely identified
by two variables: the 1968 family interview number and the 1968 person number. Household
members and children who enter the household or are born after 1968 are retroactively assigned
to the family 1968 interview number and given a 1968 person number.
Using the PSID Family History, Parent Identification, we construct a crosswalk linking
an individual to their mother’s and father’s 1968 interview number and person number. Next
using the PSID Family History, Marriage History, we identify the year and month all marriages
begin and end as well as the 1968 interview number and person number of the spouse. For our
analysis, we restrict this marriage history to all women in the sample, and merge this history onto
an individual’s record. Using the individual’s month and year of birth we are able to identify the
mother’s marital status at the child’s birth, and for any age thereafter by comparing their age to
the mother’s marriage history.
Using the household level data, we construct a household level dataset that includes
various measures of household income and the head of household race for each year. This
household level information is then merged onto the individual level panel using the yearly
interview number and year. For most of our analysis, we collapse the data to one observation per
person to examine the individual’s outcome at a given age (20 or 25). When collapsing the data,
we preserve the individual sampling weights at each age for which we observe an outcome, and

Kearney and Levine
Marriage Premium for Children, p. 48
in all of our analysis use the weights that correspond to the age at which the outcome is
measured. Below we provide a table describing the source variables and construction of our key
variables.

Appendix Table 5. Key Variables Constructed from the PSID
Variable measure
Mother Married at
Birth

Source Variables
MH10, MH11, MH13, MH14, MH15, MH16

Construction
Using the year and month of
marriages, divorces, and
separations, we compare the
birth of each individual to the
timing of their mother’s
marriage history
Constructed similar to “mother
married at birth”, but uses the
individual’s date of birth and
year of birth to determine the
status at age 14.
Constructed similar to “mother
married at birth”, but also
condition on the spouse’s id
matching the biological father’s
id

Mother Married
Age 14

Month and Year of Marriage, Divorce, and Separation
MH10 MH11 MH13 MH14 MH15 MH16

Mother Married to
Biological Father
at Birth age 14

Month and Year of Marriage, Divorce, and Separation
Spouse ID and Biological Father ID
MH10 MH11 MH13 MH14 MH15 MH16 MH7 MH8 PID19
PID20

Modal Year of
Birth

Year of Birth
ER30404 ER30434 ER30468 ER30503 ER30540 ER30575
ER30611 ER30647 ER30694
ER30738 ER30811 ER33106 ER33206 ER33306 ER33406
ER33506 ER33606 ER33706
ER33806 ER33906 ER34006 ER34106 ER34206

Because there are some entry
errors or the year of birth is not
always reported, we assign the
modal year of birth as the year
of birth

Age

Modal year of birth, Survey Year, and Survey date

We construct age as the date of
survey minus the date (month
and year) of birth.

Mother’s age at
birth

ER32011

Mother’s

Completed Schooling

We subtract the mother’s year
of birth from the individual’s
modal year of birth to construct
the age at birth
In long panel form, we identify

Notes
Individuals who are born to mothers not in the
sample will not have a mother’s marriage
history. They are excluded from our analysis.

Interview and person numbers are not always
provided for the individual’s father. In those
cases, we code the mother as married, but
father unknown. These individuals are
included in most marriage analyses, but
excluded from transition analyses.

The completed schooling variables are

Kearney and Levine
Marriage Premium for Children, p. 1
educational
attainment

ER30010 ER30052 ER30076 ER30100 ER30126 ER30147
ER30169 ER30197 ER30226
ER30255 ER30296 ER30326 ER30356 ER30384 ER30413
ER30443 ER30478 ER30513
ER30549 ER30584 ER30620 ER30657 ER30703 ER30748
ER30820 ER33115 ER33215
ER33315 ER33415 ER33516 ER33616 ER33716 ER33817
ER33917 ER34020 ER34119
ER34230

the maximum education ever
reported by the mother. In
general, we use this measure,
although we also have
constructed the mother’s
maximum educational
attainment before the birth.
This is then merged on to each
individual’s record using the
mother’s ID

different before and after 1985. Prior to 1985,
years of schooling is only reported for
individuals who are no longer in school and
under 25. After 1985, the variable is recorded
only for individuals 16 and over who are no
longer in school. For this reason we prefer the
maximum schooling ever reported. The PSID
does not differentiate between HS diploma
and GED at the individual level.

Living with
Mother/Father

Parent ID
PID4 PID5 PID19 PID20

Mother and Father ID is not provided for
every individual. For most of our analysis we
restrict our sample to children whose parents’
IDs are known.

Family Status

Mother married (to biological father) at birth (age 14),
Living with Mother, Living with Father

Household Head
Race Indicators

Race
V181 V801 V1490 V2202 V2828 V3300 V3720 V4204
V5096 V5662 V6209 V6802 V7447 V8099 V8723 V9408
V11055 V11938 V13565 V14612 V16086 V17483 V18814
V20114
V21420 V23276 ER3944 ER6814 ER9060 ER11848
ER15928 ER19989
ER23426 ER27393 ER40565 ER46543 ER51904 ER57659
Ethnicity
V11937 V13564 V14611 V16085 V17482
V18813 V20113 V21419 V23275 ER3941 ER6811
ER9057 ER27392 ER40564 ER46542 ER51903 ER57658

Using the 1968 interview and
person number of each person
living in an individual’s
interview unit, we match to see
if the mother or father is living
in the same household.
Using the mother’s marital
status at birth (or a given age)
and “Living with Mother”/
“Living with Father” we can
identify if the child is living
with one, both, or neither
parent, and if the parents are
married
We define unique race groups
from the household head’s race:
Non-Hispanic White, NonHispanic Black, Hispanic, NonHispanic Other, and Missing
Race

Family Income last
year

Household Income
V81 V529 V1514 V2226 V2852 V3256 V3676 V4154

This household level variable
specifies the total household

Prior to 1985, there were 5 recorded
categories: White, Black, Spanish-American,
Other, and Missing. After 1985 there were
two separate race and ethnicity variables.
After 1985, we classify anyone who indicates
a Hispanic ethnicity as Hispanic, and record
them according to their race if no ethnicity is
specified.
Only the ethnicity of the head of household
(and sometimes his wife) is indicated. For
simplicity we assign the head’s race to all
individuals in the household.
This variable is available in all survey years.
The exact transfers included in this variable

Kearney and Levine
Marriage Premium for Children, p. 2
V5029 V5626 V6173
V6766 V7412 V8065 V8689 V9375 V11022 V12371
V13623 V14670 V16144
V17533 V18875 V20175 V21481 V23322 ER4153 ER6993
ER9244 ER12079
ER16462 ER20456 ER24099 ER28037 ER41027 ER46935
ER52343 ER58152
Family Income

Adjusted Family
Income

Average Income in
Childhood

In Poverty at 5

H&W taxable income
V76, V518, V1205, V1906, V2507, V3060, V3472, V3872,
V4386, V5297, V5796, V6408, V6998, V7590, V8283,
V8891, V10277, V11419, V12818, V13920, V14935,
V16435, V17851, V19151, V20451, V21959, ER4146,
ER6986, ER9237, ER12069, ER16452, ER20449, ER24100,
ER27953, ER40943, ER46851, ER52259, ER58060
Other members taxable income
V79, V521, V1222, V1924, V2525, V3078, V3490, V3891,
V4406, V5318, V5817, V6428, V7033, V7625, V8318,
V8926, V10382, V11561, V12968, V14070, V15085,
V16585, V18001, V19301, V20601, V22373, ER4150,
ER6990, ER9241, ER12073, ER16456, ER20453, ER24102,
ER28009, ER40999, ER46907, ER52315, ER58124
Family Income, Household size

Family Income

In Poverty at 25
No HS Degree by
20

Completed Education

income in the previous year.

vary from year to year.

This variable is constructed by
assigning the family income
from the following survey to
the previous year
This is constructed by adding
the head and wife’s taxable
income, and all other household
member’s taxable income

After 1997, when the survey became biennial,
this variable is not available.

We divide household income
by family size and then average
over all years available when
the child was between 0-5.
We combine the family income
measure with the Census
Bureau’s annual poverty cutoffs
for each family size to compute
the poverty level at age 25
Analogous to “in poverty at 5”

We censor household size to 9, in order to
match provided poverty cutoffs.

Using the completed education
variables in the panel, we
identify the maximum years
attained by age 20 and flag an

Taxable income is consistently measured
across all survey years and included in the
total family income measure used above.

Kearney and Levine
Marriage Premium for Children, p. 3

No College Degree
by 25

Completed Education

Individual Weights

ER33430 ER33546 ER33637 ER33740 ER33848 ER33950
ER34045 ER34154 ER34268 ER30019 ER30042 ER30066
ER30090 ER30116 ER30137 ER30159 ER30187 ER30216
ER30245 ER30282 ER30312 ER30342 ER30372 ER30398
ER30428 ER30462 ER30497 ER30534 ER30569 ER30605
ER30641 ER30686 ER30730 ER30803
ER30864 ER33119 ER33275 ER33318

individual as no degree if it is
below 12.
Using the completed education
variables in the panel, we
identify the maximum years
attained by age 25 and flag an
individual as a college graduate
if it is 16 or greater.
Sample weight constructed by
the PSID

