NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INTANGIBLE CAPITAL AND MEASURED PRODUCTIVITY
Ellen R. McGrattan
Working Paper 23233
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23233

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2017

For helpful comments, I thank David Andolfatto, Anmol Bhandari, Max Croce, Sebastian Di
Tella, Fatih Guvenen, Kyle Herkenhoff, Berthold Herrendorf, Ayse Imrohoroglu, Loukas
Karabarbounis, Finn Kydland, Albert Marcet, Juan Pablo Nicolini, Monika Piazzesi, Ed Prescott,
Erwan Quintin, Peter Rupert, Raul Santaeulalia-Llopis, Martin Schneider, Pedro Teles, Chris
Tonetti, Yuichiro Waki, and seminar participants at the Bank of Portugal, Carnegie Mellon,
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, Sciences Po, Stanford,
Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona, and University of Queensland for helpful comments. I thank
Joan Gieseke for editorial assistance. Materials for replication of all results are available at http://
users.econ.umn.edu/ erm. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily
those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, the Federal Reserve System, or the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Ellen R. McGrattan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Intangible Capital and Measured Productivity
Ellen R. McGrattan
NBER Working Paper No. 23233
March 2017
JEL No. D57,E32,O41
ABSTRACT
Because firms invest heavily in R&D, software, brands, and other intangible assets—at a rate
close to that of tangible assets—changes in measured GDP, which does not include all intangible
in- vestments, understate the actual changes in total output. If changes in the labor input are more
precisely measured, then it is possible to observe little change in measured total factor
productivity (TFP) coincidentally with large changes in hours and investment. This
mismeasurement leaves business cycle modelers with large and unexplained labor wedges
accounting for most of the fluctuations in aggregate data. To address this issue, I incorporate
intangible investments into a multi-sector general equilibrium model and parameterize income
and cost shares using data from an updated U.S. input and output table, with intangible
investments reassigned from intermediate to final uses. I employ maximum likelihood methods
and quarterly observations on sectoral gross outputs for the United States over the period 1985–
2014 to estimate processes for latent sectoral TFPs—that have common and sector-specific
components. Aggregate hours are not used to estimate TFPs, but the model predicts changes in
hours that compare well with the actual hours series and account for roughly two-thirds of its
standard deviation. I find that sector-specific shocks and industry linkages play an important role
in accounting for fluctuations and comovements in aggregate and industry-level U.S. data, and I
find that the model’s common component of TFP is not correlated at business cycle frequencies
with the standard measures of aggregate TFP used in the macroeconomic literature.

Ellen R. McGrattan
Department of Economics
University of Minnesota
4-101 Hanson Hall
1925 4th St S
Minneapolis, MN 55455
and NBER
erm@umn.edu

Materials for replication are available at users.econ.umn.edu/~erm

1. Introduction
This paper sheds light on a measurement issue that confounds analyses of key macrodata
during economic booms and busts. Because firms invest heavily in R&D, software, brands, and
other intangible assets—at a rate close to that of tangible assets—changes in GDP, which does
not include all intangible investments, understate the actual changes in total output. As a result,
it is possible to observe large changes in hours and investment coincidentally with little change
in measured total factor productivity. In other words, innovation by firms—which is fueled in
large part by their intangible investments—may be evident “everywhere but in the productivity
statistics.”1 Here, I use theory and recently revised U.S. national accounts to more accurately
estimate U.S. total factor productivity (TFP) at both the aggregate and industry levels.
I develop a dynamic multi-sector general equilibrium model and explicitly incorporate intangible investment. Multiple sectors are needed to account for the vast heterogeneity in intangible
investment rates across industries. To parameterize income and cost shares, I start with the 2007
benchmark input-output table and take advantage of the fact that the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) now includes expenditures on intellectual property products—software, R&D, mineral
exploration, and entertainment, literary, and artistic originals—as part of investment rather than
as part of intermediate inputs. I additionally reassign several categories of intermediate inputs that
are under consideration for future inclusion in the BEA fixed assets, including computer design
services, architectural and engineering services, management consulting services, advertising, and
marketing research.
Firms in the model economy have access to two production technologies: one for producing
new tangible goods and services and another for producing new intangible capital goods and
services. Tangible capital is assumed to be a rivalrous input, but intangible capital is assumed
to be a nonrivalrous input, since knowledge can be used simultaneously in producing consumer
goods and services and creating new ideas. I explicitly model industry linkages that occur through
purchases of intermediate inputs and through purchases of new tangible or intangible investment
goods. Business cycle fluctuations in the model are assumed to be driven by shocks to industry and

1

Robert Solow remarked that the computer age could be seen everywhere but in the productivity statistics
(“We’d better watch out,” New York Times Book Review, July 12, 1987, p. 36.)

2

aggregate TFP, the impact of which depends on details of the industry input-use and capital-use
linkages.
Because the model includes intangible capital stocks that cannot be accurately measured, it is
not possible to use observations on factor inputs and outputs to directly measure the TFP series,
as has been done in earlier work (see, for example, Horvath (2000)). Instead, I use maximum
likelihood methods to estimate stochastic processes for the latent TFP—that are assumed to have
both sector-specific components and a common component—using data on gross outputs for major
industries from the BEA and per capita hours for several intangible-intensive industries from the
Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) over the period 1985:1–2014:4. I run external tests of the theory
using observations not used in the estimation and then derive model predictions for the latent TFP
and intangible investment series via the Kalman smoother.
A key test of the theory is its predictive performance for fluctuations in aggregate U.S. hours
and sectoral comovements in hours for all major industries, data not used to estimate the model
parameters. I find that the model’s predicted aggregate hours track U.S. hours much better than
the simplest one-sector model without intangible investments.2 The model predicts three sizable
booms over the 1985–2014 sample period and then a bust. Moreover, the standard deviation of the
model’s predicted hours series is 65 percent of the actual series, as compared to 9 percent in the
one-sector version without intangible investments. This implies much less scope for an unexplained
labor wedge. I also find significant comovement of sectoral hours because of the model’s inputoutput linkages. Computing principal components for sectoral hours, I find that the variance
accounted for by the first component is 56 percent in U.S. data and 69 percent in the model.
After verifying that the model does well in predicting U.S. hours, I put it to use to derive
theoretically consistent summary statistics and time paths for latent TFP shocks and intangible
investments. I first decompose the variances of U.S. data used in the maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) to determine the relative importance of idiosyncratic and common TFP shocks
and to assess the role of input-output linkages. I do this in two ways: by computing the variance

2

The one-sector, no-intangible version of the model is the prototype model of Chari, Kehoe, and McGrattan
(2007, 2016), who use it to show that large labor wedges are needed to account for fluctuations in U.S. hours.

3

decomposition of the ergodic distribution and by decomposing predicted growth rates in the technology boom of the 1990s and the Great Recession. I find that sector-specific shocks and industry
linkages play an important role in accounting for fluctuations in the aggregate and industry-level
gross outputs. Then I construct model time series for investments and TFP processes with the
Kalman smoother. I find that the model’s common component of TFP is not correlated at business
cycle frequencies with the standard measures of TFP used in the macroeconomic literature. In the
case of investment, I find different time series properties for tangibles and intangibles: intangible
investments vary less over the business cycle than tangible investments and lag the cycle by several
quarters.
Finally, I extend the model to allow for financial market disturbances, as in Jermann and
Quadrini (2012), who show that time-varying labor wedges can arise from a tightening of firms’
financing conditions during recessions. In the extension, firms face a cost of adjusting dividends and
must use costly external finance to fund new projects. Firms prefer debt to equity because of its
tax advantage, but borrowing is limited by enforcement constraints that are subject to stochastic
financing shocks. Here, I use industry-level data from Compustat to construct time series for ratios
of tangible capital to output and debt to output, which are both needed to derive estimates of
the shocks to the enforcement constraints. When I feed the shocks into the extended model, I
find that the implied labor wedges are smaller and less volatile than the wedge in Jermann and
Quadrini’s (2012) one-sector model, and, as a result, financial shocks have only a small impact on
real activity. A key difference here is the inclusion of intangible investments and the assumption
that only tangible capital is financed externally.
Previous theoretical work related to this paper has either abstracted from intangible capital
or been more limited in scope. Long and Plosser (1983) analyzed a relatively simple multi-sector
model, arguing that firm- and industry-level shocks could generate realistic aggregate fluctuations.
Horvath (1998, 2000) and Dupor (1999) extended their model and studied the nature of industry
linkages to determine if independent productivity shocks could in fact generate much variation in
aggregate variables. Parameterizing the model to match the input-output and capital-use tables
for the 1977 BEA benchmark, Horvath (2000) found that the multi-sector model with only sectoral
shocks is able to account for many patterns in U.S. data about as well as a one-sector model driven

4

by aggregate shocks. More recently, Foerster, Sarte, and Watson (2011) did a full structural factor
analysis of the errors from the same multi-sector model and found that significant variation in
quarterly data is explained by sectoral shocks. However, they used industrial production data,
which covers only about 20 percent of total production in the United States. Neither Horvath
(2000) nor Foerster et al. (2011) distinguished tangible and intangible investments. McGrattan
and Prescott (2010) did distinguish the different investments but focused only on aggregate data
for a specific episode, namely, the technology boom of the 1990s. Furthermore, they did their
analysis well before the BEA completed the comprehensive revision introducing the category of
intellectual property products.
Previous empirical work has documented that intangible investments are large and vary with
tangible investments over the business cycle. For example, Corrado, Hulten, and Sichel (2005,
2006) estimate that intangible investments made by businesses are about as large as their tangible investments.3 McGrattan and Prescott (2014) use firm-level data and show that intangible
investments are highly correlated with tangible investments such as plant and equipment.
This paper is also related to a burgeoning business cycle literature in search of new sources
of shocks and new sources of propagation following the Great Recession of 2008–2009.4 During
the downturn, GDP and hours fell significantly, but TFP fell only modestly and quickly recovered,
rising in 2009 when real activity was still well below trend. These observations have led many to
conclude that the Great Recession was inherently different and certainly not consistent with the
predictions of real business cycle theories in which resources are allocated efficiently and fluctuations are driven by changes in TFP. But the one-sector real business cycle model is still used as
the benchmark model for business cycle research.5 This paper proposes a new and significantly
improved real business cycle benchmark.
3

4

5

For more details on measurement of intangible investments in the national accounts, see recent surveys in
the BEA’s Survey of Current Business (U.S. Department of Commerce, 1929–2016). For more details on
measurement of R&D investments, see National Science Foundation (1953–2016). For details on entertainment,
literary, and artistic originals, see Soloveichik and Wasshausen (2013).
For example, in the recent literature, business cycles are driven by shocks to capital quality (Gertler and
Kiyotaki (2010), Gourio (2012), Bigio (2015)), enforcement or collateral constraints (Jermann and Quadrini
(2012), Khan and Thomas (2013)), agents’ beliefs (Angeletos and La’O (2013)), news about future productivity
(Karnizova (2012), Chen and Song (2013)), and second moments (Azzimonti and Talbert (2014), Bachmann
and Bayer (2014), Bloom, Floetotto, Jaimovich, Saporta-Eksten, and Terry (2016), Schaal (2017)). If cycles
are driven by productivity shocks, the source of propagation is different from that in standard real business
cycle models. See, for example, Boissay, Collard, and Smets (2016).
The main references are Kydland and Prescott (1982), Hansen (1985), and Prescott (1986).

5

The model is described in Section 2. Estimation techniques and parameter estimates are
described in Section 3. Section 4 summarizes the results. Section 5 concludes.

2. Model
A stand-in household supplies labor to competitive firms and, as the owner of the firms,
receives the dividends. A government has certain spending obligations that are financed by various
taxes on households and firms. Firms produce final goods for households and the government
and intermediate inputs for other businesses. The only sources of fluctuations in the economy are
stochastic shocks to firm productivities.
The economy has J sectors. Firms in sector j maximize the present value of dividends {Djt }
paid to their shareholders. I assume that firms in each sector j produce both tangible goods and
services, Yj , and intangible investment goods and services, XIj . The technologies available are as
follows:
Yjt = KT1 jt

θj

(KIjt )

XIjt = KT2 jt

θj

(KIjt )

φj

Q 

1
Mljt

γlj 

1
1
Zjt
Hjt

(2.1)

Q 

2
Mljt

γlj 

1−θj −φj −γj

2
2
Zjt
Hjt

1−θj −φj −γj

(2.2)

l

φj

l

and depend on inputs of tangible capital KT1 j , KT2 j , intangible capital KIj , intermediate inputs
1
2
{Mljt
}, {Mljt
}, and hours Hj1 , Hj2 . These production technologies are hit by stochastic technology
1
2
shocks, Zjt
and Zjt
, that could have a common component and sector-specific components. The

specific choices for the stochastic processes are discussed below.
The maximization problem solved by firms in sector j on behalf of their owners (households)
that discount after-tax future earnings at the rate ̺t is given by
max E0

∞
X

(1 − τd ) ̺t Djt ,

t=0

subject to
Djt = Pjt Yjt + Qjt XIjt − Wjt Hjt −

P

l

Plt Mljt −

P

l

Plt XT ljt −

− τp {Pjt Yjt + Qjt XIjt − Wjt Hjt − (δT + τk ) Pjt KT jt
X
X
Qlt XIljt } − τk Pjt KT jt
Plt Mljt −
−
l

l

6

P

l

Qlt XIljt

(2.3)

KT jt+1 = (1 − δT ) KT jt +
KIjt+1 = (1 − δI ) KIjt +
1
2
Mljt = Mljt
+ Mljt
.

ζ

XTljljt

Q

l

Q

l

(2.4)

ν

lj
XIljt

(2.5)
(2.6)

Dividends are equal to gross output Pj Yj +Qj XIj less wage payments to workers Wj Hj , purchased
P
P
intermediate goods l Pl Mlj , new tangible investments l Pl XT lj , new intangible investments
P
l Ql XIlj , and taxes. New investment goods and services are purchased from other sectors and
used to update capital stocks as in (2.4) and (2.5). Taxes are levied on accounting profits at rate
τp and on property at rate τk .
Households choose consumption Ct and leisure Lt to maximize expected utility:
max E0

∞
X

β

t=0

t

h

(Ct /Nt ) (Lt /Nt )

ψ

i1−α

− 1 / (1 − α) Nt

(2.7)

with the population equal to Nt = N0 (1 + gn )t . The maximization is subject to the following
per-period budget constraint:
(1 + τc )

P

j

Pjt Cjt +

≤ (1 − τh )

P

j

P

Vjt (Sjt+1 − Sjt )

j

Wjt Hjt + (1 − τd )

P

j

Djt Sjt + Ψt ,

(2.8)

where Cj is consumption of goods made by firms in sector j which are purchased at price Pj , Hj
is labor supplied to sector j which is paid Wj , and Dj are dividends paid to the owners of firms
in sector j who have Sj outstanding shares that sell at price Vj . Taxes are paid on consumption
purchases (τc ), labor earnings (τh ), and dividends (τd ). Any revenues in excess of government
purchases of goods and services are lump-sum rebated to the household in the amount Ψ.
The composite consumption and leisure that enter the utility function are given by
Ct =

σ−1

hP

σ
j ωj Cjt

Lt = Nt −

P

j

σ
i σ−1

Hjt .

(2.9)
(2.10)

Notice that here, I use a constant elasticity of substitution function for consumption and a linear
function for hours. As owners of the firm, the household’s discount factor is the relevant measure
for ̺t in (2.3):
̺t = β t Uct / [Pt (1 + τc )] ,
7

(2.11)

P
1−σ 1/(1−σ)
where Pt is the aggregate price index given by Pt = [ j ωjσ Pst
]
.
The resource constraints for tangible and intangible goods and services are given as follows:
Yjt = Cjt +
XIjt =

P

l

P

l

XT jlt +

XIjlt ,

P

l

Mjlt + Gjt

(2.12)
(2.13)

where Yj and XIj are defined in (2.1) and (2.2), respectively. The model economy is closed and,
therefore, there is no term for net exports.6
I assume that the logs of the sectoral TFP processes are equal to the sum of a sector-specific
i
component Z̃jt
and a common component Zt with factor loading λj , that is,

i
i
log Zjt
= log Z̃jt
+ λj log Zt

(2.14)

i
i
i
log Z̃jt
= ρij log Z̃jt−1
+ ηjt

(2.15)

log Zt = ρ log Zt−1 + υt ,

(2.16)

i
i i
i k
i
where Eηjt
= 0, Eηjt
ηjt−1 = 0, Eηjt
ηlt = 0 if j 6= l Eυt = 0, Eυt υt−1 = 0, and Eυt ηjt
= 0. In

other words, the shocks to TFP are correlated within a sector but not across sectors or time and
not with the common TFP component.7
An approximate equilibrium for the model economy can be found by applying a version of
Vaughan’s (1970) method to the log-linearized first-order conditions of the household and firm
maximization problems. The solution can be summarized as an equilibrium law of motion for the
logged and detrended state vector x, namely:
xt+1 = Axt + Bεt+1 ,

Eεt ε′t = I,

(2.17)

where xt = [~kT t , ~kI t , ~z1t , ~z2t , zt , 1]′ is a (4J +2)×1 state vector, ~kT t is the J ×1 vector of logged
and detrended tangible capital stocks, ~kI t is the J ×1 vector of logged and detrended intangible
capital stocks, ~z1t is the J ×1 vector of logged and detrended sectoral TFPs for production of final
6
7

In the empirical implementation, net exports will be included with intermediate and final domestic purchases.
One exception is the government sector (NAICS 92). I assume that shocks to production in NAICS 92 are
independent of all other shocks. If I assume otherwise, then the common shock parameter estimates depend
importantly on increases in gross output in this sector during the Great Recession, the source of which is
unlikely to be a boom in TFP.

8

goods and services, ~z2t is the J ×1 vector of logged and detrended sectoral TFPs for production
of new intangible investments, and zt is the logged and detrended common shock. The variables
are detrended by dividing first by the growth in population (1 + gn )t and then by the growth in
technology, which I denote by (1 + gz )t . The last element of xt is a 1, which is used for constant
terms. The vector εt is a 2J + 1 vector of normally distributed shocks. Elements of the vector Bεt
i
are the shocks ηjt
and υt in (2.15)-(2.16). Thus, the only nonzero off-diagonal elements of B are

the parameters governing correlations between TFP shocks to tangible and intangible production
within the same sector.
In the next section, I discuss the estimation of the model’s parameters.

3. Parameters
Here, I describe how to parameterize income and cost shares using the 2007 benchmark BEA
input-output use table and how to estimate processes for components of the sectoral TFPs, namely,
1
2
{Zjt
} and {Zjt
}, using data from the BEA and BLS. The remaining parameters, which are also

described below, are those related to preferences, growth rates, depreciation, and tax rates and are
not critical to the main results.

3.1. Income and Cost Shares
The starting point for my analysis is the input-output use table published by the BEA, which
records intermediate purchases by commodity and industry, final purchases by commodity and
final user, and payments to factors by industry. For the analysis below, I use data for the 15 major
industries: (1) agriculture, forestry, fishing, and hunting (NAICS 11); (2) mining (NAICS 21); (3)
utilities (NAICS 22); (4) construction (NAICS 23); (5) manufacturing (NAICS 31-33); (6) wholesale
trade (NAICS 42); (7) retail trade (NAICS 44-45); (8) transportation and warehousing (NAICS 4849); (9) information (NAICS 51); (10) finance, insurance, real estate, rental and leasing (NAICS
52-53); (11) professional and business services (NAICS 54-56); (12) educational services, health
care, and social assistance (NAICS 61-62); (13) arts, entertainment, recreation, accommodation,
and food services (NAICS 71-72); (14) other services except government (81); and (15) public
administration (NAICS 92).
9

In the model, intermediate purchases are represented as a J × J matrix with element (l, j)
given by Pl (Mlj1 + Mlj2 ) for commodity l purchased by firms in industry j. These intermediate
purchases—as a share of gross industry output Pj Yj + Qj XIj in industry j—are used to parameterize the intermediate shares, {γlj }, in (2.1) and (2.2).8 Before computing intermediate shares
with the BEA’s input-output data, I first recategorize intermediate expenses for several commodities under professional and business services—commodities that national accountants are considering recategorizing—to final uses. Specifically, I move expenses for computer design services,
architectural and engineering services, management consulting services, advertising, and marketing research out of the intermediate inputs matrix and into the capital-use table for intangible
investments described below.
In the model, final purchases are computed as the sum of private and public consumption,
tangible investments, and intangible investments. In consumption, I include the nondurable goods
and services categories from the BEA’s personal consumption expenditures and government consumption. Expenditure shares for these goods and services are governed by the choice of {ωj }
in (2.9), which I set to align the theoretical and empirical shares.9 In investment, I include the
BEA’s government investment categories as well as the durable goods component of personal consumption expenditures, with an imputed service flow for durable and government capital added to
consumption services.
Tangible and intangible investments, like intermediate purchases, are used by different industries. Tangible investment purchases are represented as a J × J capital-use matrix with element
(l, j) given by Pl XT lj for commodity l purchased by firms in industry j. Intangible investment
purchases are also represented as a J × J capital-use matrix with element (l, j) given by Ql XIlj
for commodity l purchased by firms in industry j. Detailed investment data from the BEA are
used to construct these matrices.10 I include fixed investment in equipment and structures—both
public and private—and changes in inventories with tangible investment, and I include the new
8

When estimating the shares, taxes on imports and production are first subtracted from industry value added
and final uses to be consistent with the theory.

9

Consumer spending on the public administration “commodity” is allocated in a pro rata way to spending of
all other commodities.

10

The BEA has not yet published an official capital-use table for the 2007 benchmark input-output accounts. I
was able to do so using detailed investment data available for the BEA fixed asset tables and the help of David
Wasshausen at the BEA.

10

BEA category of intellectual property products (IPP)—both public and private—with intangible
investment.11 The IPP category includes expenditures on software, mineral exploration, research
and development (R&D), and entertainment, literary, and artistic originals. Some of this spending
is done by firms in-house (and is what the BEA calls own-account). For this spending, I reassign
the commodity source to the own industry, which is more in line with the theory. To the IPP
spending, I add the reallocated intermediate expenditures on professional and business services.
In the case of consumer durable equipment, I assume it is a manufactured commodity used by the
real estate industry. In the case of software and books, I assume these are information commodities
used by the real estate industry. Once I have the capital-use matrices, I can set the parameters ζlj
and νlj using the spending shares for tangible investment and intangible investment, respectively.12
To compute factor shares, I use the value added components in the BEA’s 2007 input-output
table. Three components of value-added are reported for industry data: compensation, taxes
on production and imports, and gross operating surplus. The labor income share for industry j
is compensation Wj Hj divided by industry gross output less taxes on production and imports.
For the capital income shares, I need to infer how much of the operating surplus results from
tangible investment and how much from intangible investment. I use total spending on tangible
and intangible investments to infer this split, by iteratively solving the model and adjusting the
shares to ensure a match. When complete, I have estimates for the capital income shares {θj , φj }.
The results of the calculations are summarized in Table 1. Part A shows the capital income
shares, {θj , φj }, and consumption expenditure shares, {ωj }. Notice that in four industries—
manufacturing, wholesale trade, information, and professional and business services—the share
on intangible capital in production is larger than the share on tangible capital. Part B shows the
implied intermediate input shares, {γlj }. The first row and column headers indicate the commodity
and industry NAICS category, respectively, which in turn correspond to the 15 major industries
listed above. These shares provide one measure of the industry linkages. The capital-use tables
provide another. Part C shows the shares for the tangible capital-use table, {ζlj }, and Part D
shows the shares for the intangible capital-use table, {νlj }. Notice that many rows in Part C have
11

This category of investment was added in the 2013 comprehensive revision of the accounts.

12

The economy is closed and does not have a rest-of-world sector. Thus, I reallocate net exports to the domestic
categories of intermediates, consumption, and investment. I do so in a pro rata way.

11

only zeros because the commodities produced are neither structures nor equipment. Commodities
categorized under construction (NAICS 23) and manufacturing (NAICS 31-33) are the main sources
of tangible investment goods. In the case of intangible investments, commodities categorized under
information (NAICS 51) and professional and business services (NAICS 54-56) are most important.
In the BEA data, scientific R&D is listed under NAICS 5417, but much of this is specific to other
commodities (e.g., chemical manufacturing) and has been reassigned accordingly (see Appendix A
for more details). For this reason, there are nonzero shares on the diagonal of the matrix ν that
would be zeros if I were to use the BEA commodity assignments.
The shares in Table 1 are held fixed when estimating TFP processes, which I turn to next.

3.2. Shock Processes
Estimates of the parameters governing the shock processes are found by applying maximum
likelihood to the following state space system:
xt+1 = Axt + Bεt+1
yt = Cxt ,

(3.1)
(3.2)

where the elements of xt are defined above (see (2.17)) and assumed to be unobserved, and yt are
quarterly U.S. observations for the period 1985:1-2014:4.
I assume that there are shocks to TFP in the production of all tangible goods and services,
but not in the production of all intangible goods and services. Production of intangible goods and
services is concentrated in three industries, namely, manufacturing, information, and professional
1
and business services. To identify the sectoral TFP shocks to tangible production, Zjt
, and factor

loadings on the common shock, λj , I use data on gross outputs for the private industries and
aggregate gross output.13 I use gross outputs, rather than data on value added, because there
are no issues with the classification of spending as intermediate or final, which has changed over
the postwar period.14 Because the standard deviation of the common TFP shock and the factor
13

Both data and model series are deflated before shocks are estimated. I do not estimate TFP shocks for the
public administration sector (NAICS 92) because stimulus spending during the Great Recession shows up as
positive TFP shocks.

14

As a robustness check, I also worked with IRS business receipts, which are an important source of information
for constructing gross outputs and are available beginning in the 1920s for many major and minor industries.

12

loadings are not separately identifiable, I normalize the standard deviation of the common TFP
shock and set it equal to 0.01.
For the three intangible-intensive sectors, I use additional data to identify the processes for
2
TFP in the production of new intangible investment goods, Zjt
. Specifically, I use hours of work for

three intangible-intensive industry subsectors, namely, computer and electronic products, broadcasting and telecommunications, and advertising, which are 3-digit industries under manufacturing,
information, and professional and business and services, respectively.15 Because the hours in these
industries account for only 10 percent, I can use the model’s prediction for aggregate hours as an
external check on the model. Given the failure of the standard one-sector model without intangibles to account for large fluctuations in hours, a comparison of hours is a particularly important
test of the new theory.
The model time period is quarterly, but time series on gross outputs by industry are only
available annually before 2005. Therefore, before estimating parameters for the shock processes,
I use a Kalman filter to compute forecasts of quarterly gross outputs.16 The idea is to use other
available quarterly data by industry and construct quarterly forecasts for the series of interest,
namely, gross outputs. Specifically, I use quarterly estimates of the BEA’s national income by
industry, quarterly estimates of the BLS’s employment by industry, and annual estimates of the
BEA’s gross outputs. Both the national income and gross output data are divided by the GDP
deflator.17 Doing this yields 15 series of quarterly gross outputs for 14 private industries and
aggregate gross output. Adding data on hours for the intangible-intensive subsectors implies that
the vector yt in (3.2) has 18 elements, which are used to estimate the 18 TFP processes.
One final step before the TFP processes can be estimated is to set the initial state x0 in
(3.1). Here, I do not use the steady-state values because there are differing growth trends in
U.S. industry data. For example, relative to an economy-wide trend, manufacturing has been
slowing and information has been growing. Thus, I choose x0 in such a way that initial investments

15

Another possible data source is gross outputs for the subsectors. However, measurement issues arise because
significant intangible investment may be done in-house and is thus not included in gross output.

16

See Harvey (1989) for more information on the Kalman filter and Appendix B for details of my application.

17

To do the forecasting, I first remove trends by applying the filter in Hodrick and Prescott (1997) (with a
smoothing parameter of 1600 for the quarterly series and 100 for the annual series). Once I have quarterly
estimates I add the low-frequency Hodrick-Prescott trend back to the forecasted time series.

13

do not jump. This is easy to do in two steps. I start by setting x0 equal to the steady state and
then use the model’s prediction for the first period state, x̂1 , as the new initial condition. Given
the observable series, yt , and initial conditions for the state, x0 , I again apply the methods in
Harvey (1989) to estimate the parameters of the stochastic TFP processes, which appear in the
coefficients A and B in (3.1).
The results of the estimation are shown in Table 2. The four sets of estimates are: the factor
i 2
loadings λj , serial correlation coefficients ρij , standard deviations of shocks, E(ηjt
) , and correla1
2
tions between tangible shocks ηjt
and intangible shocks ηjt
in the intangible-intensive industries.

The factor loadings vary significantly across industries, with a loading of −2.9 for utilities and a
loading of 2.2 for finance, insurance, and real estate. Serial correlation coefficients are all high and,
in some cases, fixed during estimation at the upper bound of 0.995. Standard deviations of sectoral
shocks are all significantly different from zero and in many cases are much larger than the standard
deviation of the common shocks (which is normalized at 0.01). Finally, the correlations between
shocks to tangible production and shocks to intangible production are significantly different from
zero in two of the three cases, with a positive correlation in information and a negative correlation
in professional and business services.

3.3. Other parameters
The remaining parameters are those related to preferences, growth in population and technology, depreciation, and taxes.
For preferences, I set α = 1, ψ = 1.2, and β = 0.995. Annual growth in population (gn ) and
technology (gz ) is 1 and 2 percent, respectively. Annual depreciation is set at 3.2 percent and is
assumed to be the same for all types of capital.18 Tax rates are based on IRS and national account

18

One issue that arises in models with intangible capital is the lack of identification of all parameters. For
example, there are insufficient data to estimate both capital shares and depreciation rates, even in the case of
R&D assets that are now included in both the BEA’s national income and product accounts (NIPA) and the
fixed asset tables. The BEA uses estimates of intangible depreciation rates to calculate the return to R&D
investments and the capital service costs, which are used in capitalizing R&D investments for their fixed asset
tables. Unfortunately, as the survey of Li (2012) makes clear, “measuring R&D depreciation rates directly is
extremely difficult because both the price and output of R&D capital are generally unobservable.” Li discusses
different approaches that have been used to estimate industry-specific R&D depreciation rates, finding that
a wide range of estimates even within narrow categories. She concludes that “the differences in their results
cannot be easily reconciled” (see Li (2012), Table 2). I conduct sensitivity analysis to ensure that the main
results are not affected by the choice.

14

data and are as follows: τc = 0.065, τd = 0.144, τh = .382, τp = 0.33, and τk = 0.003. For the
results below, these rates are held constant.

4. Results
In this section, I present the main empirical findings. First, I find that the model driven only by
productivity shocks is successful in generating large fluctuations in aggregate hours and significant
comovement of sectoral hours. Second, I find that sector-specific productivity shocks account for a
significant fraction of the observed time series and that industry linkages play an important role in
generating business cycles. Third, I characterize the cyclical properties of the latent TFP processes
and intangible investments and find important differences between the model’s predictions and
measures of TFP and investment typically used in the macroeconomic literature. Finally, in an
extension of the model that includes financing constraints and financial shocks, I find that the
quantitative results are not significantly changed (see Appendix A for data sources used).

4.1. Predictions for Hours of Work
An important test of any business cycle model is its ability to generate aggregate fluctuations in
hours of work in line with observations. The simplest one-sector real business cycle model without
any intangible investment—which is the benchmark model used in the literature—fails this test
spectacularly when compared to U.S. data. Here, I find that the multi-sector real business cycle
model with intangible investments does much better in generating variable hours and also generates
comovement in sectoral hours in line with U.S. data.
For the benchmark, I set S = 1 and φs = 0. This version of the model generates results similar
to the model of Prescott (1986). In this case, I use the Solow residual as an estimate of the model’s
one TFP series. The Solow residual is real GDP divided by real fixed assets raised to a power (in
this case, one-third) times aggregate hours raised to a power (in this case, two-thirds).19 I assume
the logarithm of the Solow residual is a first-order autoregressive process that can be estimated

19

The NIPA data do include some intangible investments and the fixed assets do include some intangible capital.
Stripping them out does not affect the main results for the one-sector benchmark model.

15

using ordinary least squares. Given the estimates and an initial condition for the process, I can
simulate a path for TFP and feed it into the model’s equilibrium decision functions.
The result for the hours decision is plotted in Figure 1A along with actual U.S. per capita
hours. As the figure shows, the predicted series does not track the U.S. series and varies much
less over the business cycle, barely rising during the technology boom and barely falling during the
Great Recession. The standard deviation of the predicted series relative to the actual series is 9
percent. Why does it vary so little? The answer is that measured TFP—which in this case is the
Solow residual—does not fluctuate very much over the cycle in my sample period.
In the multi-sector model, predictions of the model’s state xt and all decision variables—which
are functions of the state—are found by applying a Kalman smoother that conditions on all of the
observations, {yt }, that is, x̂t = E[xt |y1 , . . . , yT ]. Here, the variables of interest are sectoral and
aggregate hours, which are not included in the vector yt when estimating the TFP shocks but are
observable. In Figure 1B, I plot the multi-sector model’s predicted per capita hours along with
actual U.S. hours. The figure shows that the predicted hours track actual hours much better than
the simplest one-sector model. The model predicts three sizable booms and then a bust, and the
standard deviation of the model series is 65 percent of the actual series. This leaves much less
room for an unexplained labor wedge.
In Table 3, I report results for predicted hours by sector, which in the case of the model is the
sum of hours in tangible and intangible production. The first column compares the correlations of
predicted and actual logged hours after applying a Hodrick-Prescott filter to remove low frequencies.
With three exceptions, I find positive correlations between the predicted and actual series. If I
take a weighted average, using industry shares of hours as weights, I find the average is over 50
percent, which is high. In information and professional business and services, the correlations are
over 90 percent.20
Next I investigate the model’s predictions for the comovement of hours across sectors, which
are known to comove positively in U.S. data. As Hornstein and Praschnik (1997) have shown,
including input-output linkages can improve the performance of business cycle models in predicting
20

The high estimates for the intangible-intensive sectors are not a result of including hours in the observer
equation because I only include hours of subsectors within these major industries when estimating the shock
processes.

16

positive comovements of sectoral labor inputs. The measure of comovement that I use is based
on a principal components analysis (PCA). The idea is to transform the data by constructing
uncorrelated “components” that are linear combinations of the data, with the first component
accounting for the maximal variance. The first component should account for a large fraction of
the overall variance if the series positively comove. The coefficients in the linear mapping from
data to components are the factor loadings and are bounded between −1 and 1.
Table 3 reports the main findings of the analysis. Specifically, I report the factor loadings
for the model hours and the U.S. hours by industry along with the percentage of the variance
attributed to the first principal component. Not surprisingly, the predicted and actual factor
loadings are similar for sectors with a high correlation between the predicted and actual hours.
What is more surprising is the fact that the model’s first component accounts for close to 70 percent
of the variance in the model time series, which is even higher than the 56 percent estimate for the
U.S. data.
This comovement could be the result of the input-output linkages, or it could be the case that
the common component of TFP accounts for most of the variance in the data used to estimate
the shock processes. I turn next to a variance decomposition of the observed time series to further
investigate the role of the input-output linkages across sectors.

4.2. Variance Decompositions
Two conceptually different variance decompositions are computed. First, I decompose the
variances of the observed time series yt in (3.2) using the ergodic distribution of the model based on
the updated input-output table and the estimated shock processes. Second, I decompose aggregate
gross output during the technology boom of the 1990s and the Great Recession of 2008–2009. For
both, I find that sectoral shocks and input-output linkages are quantitatively important features
of the model.
In Table 4, I report the variance decomposition for the model’s ergodic distribution. The rows
correspond to the gross outputs for the major private industries and hours for three subsectors of
the intangible-intensive industries.21 The columns in Table 4 correspond to the shocks. The first
21

The government sector is not listed, since I imposed restrictions on the shocks in this sector.

17

column is the total variance that is due to sectoral shocks. This variance is split between own-sector
1
2
shocks (due either to Zjt
or Zjt
for industry j) and other-industry shocks. The last column is the

variance that is due to the common TFP shock. Notice first that sectoral shocks are quantitatively
important for every industry. In all cases, the variance due to sectoral shocks is at least as high
as 60 percent. Industries most affected by the common shock are retail trade and many of the
services. Another noteworthy feature of the results is the contribution of other industry shocks.
For many sectors, the contribution is sizable, indicating that input-output linkages are playing an
important role in propagating shocks. In fact, in 6 industries the contribution of other-industry
shocks is greater than that of the own-industry shocks, and in 10 industries it is greater than
the common shock. Only in the case of mining is the variance in gross output nearly all due to
own-industry shocks.22
One issue with the variance decomposition in Table 4 is the fact that the 1985–2014 sample
exhibits significant trends, which will bias these estimates. Most likely, the trends imply more
weight on sectoral shocks and less weight on common shocks. Thus, as an alternative summary
of the variance decomposition, I decompose the growth rates of gross output in two episodes: the
1990s technology boom and the Great Recession.
The results are shown in Table 5. Here the rows correspond to the source of shocks. The
columns report the change in aggregate gross output growth attributable to shocks from each
source. There are two periods and, therefore, two estimates for each period. The table shows that
the common TFP shock accounts for roughly 60 percent of the increase in total gross output over
the period 1991:4 to 2000:3 and 40 percent of the decline over the period 2007:4 to 2009:3. As
expected, these estimates are higher than the contributions for the ergodic distribution but still
imply a large role for sectoral shocks and industry linkages. Which sectors play an important role
depends on the episode. In the technology boom, shocks to TFP in information; finance, insurance,
and real estate; and professional and business services are important for the business cycle. In the
Great Recession, shocks to manufacturing TFP are important.
The variance decompositions of the observed data indicate a clear rejection of the one-sector

22

Foerster, Sarte, and Watson (2011) decompose industrial production data, which cover mining, manufacturing,
and some utilities. They find that half of the variation in these data is due to sector-specific shocks.

18

real business cycle benchmark model in favor of the new multi-sector model. Next I investigate
the properties of the key latent factors: intangible investments and total factor productivities that
are central to this new benchmark model.

4.3. Properties of Latent Variables
A Kalman smoother is applied to the model in order to construct predictions for the state xt
in (3.1) as well as prices and decisions that are functions of the state. In this section, I discuss
i
the properties of the total factor productivities {Zt , Zjt
} and the intangible investments XIjt . I

consider the full sample and then look more closely at these time series during the Great Recession.
In Table 6, I report the cyclical properties over the full sample, 1985:1–2014:4 for the latent
variables after first logging and detrending them with the filter of Hodrick and Prescott (1997).
The first column reports the standard deviation relative to gross output. The first row shows that
the common TFP in the model has a standard deviation that is 80 percent of total output. The
sectoral TFPs, which are listed next, vary at least as much over the business cycle as the common
TFP. For some industries such as mining and utilities, the variation in sectoral TFP is much larger.
Recall from Table 4 that these industries are barely affected by the common shock. The standard
deviations relative to gross output for the intangible investments are listed in the last three rows
of Table 6 for the intangible-intensive industries. The ratios are in the range of 1.5 to 1.8, which
is about half as variable as the predictions for tangible investment in the standard real business
cycle model without intangible investments.23
Correlations with gross outputs at leads and lags are reported in the last five columns of Table
6. The common TFP and most of the sectoral TFPs are procyclical, with the highest correlation
occurring contemporaneously. There are some notable exceptions. TFPs in information and other
services are close to acyclical, and TFP in education, health, and social services is countercyclical.
Intangible investments are all procyclical, but they lag the cycle by one or two quarters.
A closer examination of the time series during the Great Recession provides further insight
into the properties of the latent variables. In Figure 2, I compare the time series of the model’s
predicted common TFP shock to two standard measures of aggregate TFP used in the literature.
23

For example, Kydland and Prescott (1982) estimate a ratio of 3.6.

19

The series are logged and linearly detrended, but other low frequencies are not filtered out. I
standardize the series by first subtracting the 2007:4 value and then dividing by the standard
deviation of the series over the full sample.
The first widely used measure of TFP, which is plotted in panel A of Figure 2, is the Solow
residual—the same series used to generate the hours prediction in Figure 1A. As the figure shows,
the Solow residual falls rapidly at the start of the recession and rapidly returns to the long-run
trend by mid-2009, exactly when the Great Recession is declared over by the National Bureau of
Economic Research. Over the remaining years, there is slower growth and TFP falls relative to
the long-run trend. In contrast, the model predicts that growth in the common TFP slows at the
start of the recession and then recovers in 2009, but TFP remains on a lower long-run trend.
A second widely used measure of TFP is plotted in Figure 2B along with the model prediction.
Here, I plot the utilization-adjusted TFP series of Fernald (2012), which is based on the methodology of Basu, Fernald, and Kimble (2006) that uses observed hours growth to adjust TFP for
unobserved variation in labor effort and the workweek of capital. A comparison of the two panels
shows that the timing of Fernald’s (2012) series and the Solow residual is completely different
in 2008 and 2009. The Solow residual falls dramatically below trend and then recovers, whereas
Fernald’s (2012) series falls modestly and then rises above the long-run trend. After 2010, both
gradually fall relative to the long-run trend, but neither resemble the model’s prediction over the
sample.
Although neither of the two widely used TFP measures behaves like the model’s prediction
during the Great Recession, they are more correlated at low frequencies over the full sample. For
example, the correlation between the model’s common TFP and the Solow residual is 73 percent
over the period 1985 to 2014. The correlation between the model’s common TFP and Fernald’s
(2012) TFP is 40 percent over the same period. If I instead apply the filter of Hodrick and Prescott
(1997) to all of the series, I find a correlation of 9 percent between the model TFP and the Solow
residual and a correlation of 31 percent between the model TFP and Fernald’s (2012) TFP.
Figure 3 shows results for tangible and intangible investment during the Great Recession. In
both panels, I plot U.S. tangible investment, which is real gross private domestic investment less

20

investment in intellectual property products divided by population and geometric growth in technology. This series is not used to estimate the TFP shock processes and therefore provides another
external check of the model’s predictive capabilities. In panel A, I plot the model’s theoretical
P
analogue for the U.S. tangible investment series, namely,
j XT jt , and in panel B, I plot the
P
model’s prediction for intangible investment, namely, j XIjt . To make the data and model series
comparable, I set all equal to 100 in 2007:4 (although the model series are similar in magnitude).

Figure 3A shows that the model does surprisingly well in predicting the sharp reduction in
tangible investment during the Great Recession and a slow recovery. The model predicts a more
delayed fall in 2008 but by 2008 is roughly 40 percent below trend, which is what was observed in
U.S. data. Furthermore, although investment recovers more quickly in the U.S. data, both series
are still well below trend by 2015. In contrast, intangible investment shown in Figure 3B falls
more gradually and by only 20 percent by 2015. The pattern of decline for intangible investment
is similar to the pattern of decline in the common TFP shown in Figure 2.
The results thus far assume that resources are allocated efficiently and fluctuations are driven
by changes in total factor productivities. Next, I introduce financial shocks that may have played
some role in exacerbating the recession in 2008–2009.

4.4. Extension with Financial Shocks
In this section, I extend the model to include capital market imperfections along the lines of
Jermann and Quadrini (2012). I assume, as they do, that firms finance investment using both debt
and equity, with debt preferred to equity because of its tax advantage. The main difference is that
here I work with a multi-sector version of the model, whereas they work with a representative firm.
I find little change in the quantitative results reported in Sections 4.1–4.3.
For the extension, the definition of dividends in (2.3) must be modified to include a new term,
namely, Bjt+1 /Rbjt − Bjt on the right-hand side, where Bjt is the debt of firms in sector j at time
t, Rbjt = 1 + rt (1 − τbj ) is the effective gross interest rate for firms in sector j, rt is the net interest
rate paid to lending households, and τbj is the tax benefit. Additionally, firms in Jermann and
Quadrini (2012) raise funds to finance working capital, which can easily be diverted. Assume that
loans to firms in sector j are denoted by ljt . With probability ξjt , the lender can recover the loan,
21

implying that the firms are subject to the following enforcement constraints:


Bjt+1
ξjt Pjt+1 KT jt+1 −
≥ ljt ,
1 + rt

(4.1)

where Pjt+1 KT jt+1 is the value of the capital that can be partially liquidated in the case of default.
If I assume, as Jermann and Quadrini (2012) do, that the size of the loan is equal to current-period
output, then I replace ljt by Pjt Yjt + Qjt XIjt . This then is an adaptation of the constraint in
Jermann and Quadrini (2012), who abstract from multiple sectors and intangible capital.
The enforcement constraint in (4.1) has almost no real impact without an additional feature
introduced by Jermann and Quadrini (2012) into their model, namely, a cost for paying dividends
over and beyond the payout itself. In other words, Djt in equation (2.3) is replaced by
ϕ (Djt ) = Djt + κj Djt − D̄j

2

.

If κj = 0, shocks to ξjt can be offset by changes in dividend payouts. Firms would not choose to use
costly external finance and pay dividends. If κj > 0, dividend payouts are costly and adjustment
is slower, implying that shocks to ξjt can have a real impact on output, investment, and hours.
The impact on real activity depends on how tightly the enforcement constraint in (4.1) binds
over the cycle, which is measured by fluctuations in the constraint’s multiplier. From the perspective of firms maximizing dividends, this multiplier puts a wedge between the wages paid to
workers and their marginal product because the wages must be financed through borrowing. In
equilibrium, this wedge has the same effect as a time-varying tax on labor, that is, time variation
in τh in (2.8). A tightening of the constraint in recessions is isomorphic to increasing the tax rate.
In the spirit of business cycle accounting, the financial friction manifests itself as a time-varying
labor wedge (see Chari et al. (2007)). A time-varying labor wedge, if it comoves with the business
cycle, is needed to help reconcile the difference between predicted and actual hours shown in Figure
1A.
To quantify the full impact of these constraints, I recompute an equilibrium for the extended
model using parameters of Section 3. Several additional parameters are needed. I set κj = 0.146
and τbj = 0.35 for all industries j to be consistent with Jermann and Quadrini’s (2012) parameterization. For the financial shocks, I use firm-level data from Compustat for tangible investments,
22

debt, and output, which I aggregate by industry.24 Tangible capital stocks are computed with
the Compustat investments using the perpetual inventory method. As in Jermann and Quadrini
(2012), I assume the enforcement constraints bind and use equation (4.1) and the Compustat data
to derive time paths for the financial shocks ξjt .25 I find that the time paths of ξjt are positive
over the sample for only four of the major industries: mining, manufacturing, transportation and
warehousing, and leisure and hospitality. Thus, I assume that firms in these four industries borrow
to finance new investment, whereas all others use retained earnings. After computing the equilibrium, I have a new state space system with additional states in xt (namely, Bjt , ξjt ) and additional
observations in yt (namely, ξjt ). Applying a Kalman smoother to this new state space system, I
recompute all of the statistics in Tables 3–7 and Figures 1–3.
I find little change in any of my earlier results. To understand why, it helps to look at the
implied labor wedges, which in this model are equal to the multipliers on (4.1) times the derivatives
of the full dividend payment ϕ′ (Dj ) for all industries j with external financing.26 These labor
wedges are reported in Table 7 for the extended model and Jermann and Quadrini’s (2012) onesector model. Five statistics are reported: mean, minimum, maximum, standard deviation, and
correlation with total output.27 What is most relevant is the variability of the series, which can
be measured by comparing the minimum and maximum of the range or the standard deviation.
Significant volatility of the wedge is needed to account for the high variability of U.S. hours of work.
Furthermore, the correlation with output needs to be negative to generate procyclical predictions
for hours.
In the case of the extended multi-sector model, Table 7 shows that the industry labor wedges
are not large, volatile, or countercyclical in any sector. In fact, the implied labor wedge derived
from Jermann and Quadrini’s one-sector model is higher, varies more, and is countercyclical.
One possible reason for the difference in properties is the parameterizations used for each model.

24
25
26
27

I updated the data used in Larrain and Yogo (2008). See Appendix A for details.
The assumption that the constraints are always binding can be verified.
Most of the variation in the wedges is due to changes in the multiplier, not changes in the dividend payments.
In deriving time series for shocks in the one-sector model of Jermann and Quadrini (2012) I follow their
procedure of removing linear trends from the capital-to-output and debt-to-output ratios, and I am able to
replicate all of their results. In the multi-sector model, I do not remove trends from these ratios, which are
assumed to be stationary.

23

Jermann and Quadrini (2012) use a high capital share, higher than that implied by the capitaloutput ratios in the data they use. Higher capital shares imply lower values for the financial
shocks in (4.1), which in turn implies that the constraints are looser. To test this idea, I recompute
the Jermann and Quadrini model with a lower capital share and a higher mean for the financial
shock, which are chosen to be consistent with the data they use. More specifically, I set the
capital share equal to 0.22, down from 0.36 in the original parameterization, and I set the mean
of the financial shock to 0.41, up from 0.16 in the original parameterization. For this alternative
parameterization, the labor wedge is significantly smaller, less volatile, and less correlated with
output. In this alternative case, the standard deviation of predicted hours is 24 percent of the
standard deviation of U.S. hours, which is significantly lower than the estimate of 47 percent
for their original parameterization and closer to the estimate of 9 percent for the one-sector real
business cycle model shown in Figure 1A.
In summary, the time-varying labor wedges arising from a tightening of firms’ financing conditions do not vary sufficiently in the extended model to have much of an impact on real activity,
and therefore the results are quantitatively similar to the frictionless baseline.

5. Conclusion
In the recent comprehensive revision of the national accounts, the BEA has greatly expanded
its coverage of intellectual property products. In this paper, I expand the coverage further and
use a multi-sector general equilibrium model to quantify the impact of including these products,
which I refer to as intangible investments, in both the theory and the measures of TFP. I find
that updating both—both the theory and the data—is quantitatively important for analyzing
fluctuations in aggregate and industry-level U.S. data and provides a new benchmark model for
business cycle research.

24

A. Data Appendix

In this appendix, I report all data sources for this project. Original data and replication files
are available at my website: users.econ.umn.edu/∼erm/data/sr545.
• Input-output shares
◦ The main source of data for the shares is the BEA. I start with the detailed BEA inputoutput use table before redefinitions at producer value for the 2007 benchmark, which
tracks transactions for 389 commodities. The BEA table has not yet published a capitaluse table for this benchmark, so I construct two capital-use tables—one for structures
and equipment and another for intellectual property products—using detailed data underlying the fixed asset tables, which are available by industry and by investment type.
I assign all custom and own-software and R&D to the investing industry (rather than to
information and professional and business services as the BEA does). I add intermediate
purchases of computer systems design services, architectural, engineering, and related
services, specialized design services, management consulting services, environmental and
other technical consulting services, advertising, public relations, and related services, and
marketing research to the capital-use table for intellectual property products. I add consumer durables and inventories to the capital-use tables. I include public spending with
appropriate categories of private spending. I allocate net exports to domestic categories
in a pro rata way. (The code setupio.m replicates construction of the shares.)
• Time series for maximum likelihood estimation
◦ Gross outputs, all major industries: data for nominal gross outputs are available from
the BEA annually for all years of my sample and quarterly after 2005. Series are divided
by population and by the GDP deflator, and quarterly forecasts are computed for years
prior to 2005 with the procedure outlined in Appendix B. The auxiliary quarterly data
used for the forecasting are national incomes by major industry from the BEA’s national
income and product accounts and employment by major industry from the BLS’s Current
Employment Survey (CES). Both the national income and gross output data are divided
by the GDP deflator.
◦ Hours per capita, three minor industries: series are constructed with employment data
from the CES and hours per employee data from the BLS’s labor productivity and cost
(LPC) database, which is available for 817 industries. Per capita hours are total employees
times hours per employee divided by the noninstitutional population ages 16 to 64.
• Time series for external validation
◦ Sectoral hours per capita, major industries: series are constructed in the same way as the
minor industries noted above.
◦ Aggregate hours per capita: the series for the aggregate economy is computed using the
same procedure as in Cociuba, Prescott, and Ueberfeldt (2009), who start with total
civilian hours from the BLS’s Current Population Survey, add estimates for military
hours, and divide by the noninstitutional population ages 16 to 64.
◦ Tangible investment: the series is gross private domestic investment less investment in
25

intellectual property products, deflated by the GDP deflator and divided by the noninstitutional population ages 16 to 64.
• Total factor productivity series
◦ Solow residual: the series is the BEA’s real GDP measure divided by the BEA’s total
fixed assets raised to the power 1/3 and total hours defined above raised to the power 2/3.
Total fixed assets are available annually and are log-linearly interpolated to construct a
quarterly time series for TFP.
◦ Fernald’s (2012) utilization-adjusted TFP: updated frequently by Fernald and available
at his website at the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.
• Compustat data for extension with financial shocks
◦ Debt to output ratio: firm-level data for debt are aggregated to the industry level and
divided by industry sales. I follow Larrain and Yogo’s (2008) procedure to compute total
debt, which is the sum of long-term debt, current liabilities, other liabilities, minority
interest, and deferred and investment tax credit. The market value of long-term debt is
found by imputing a market structure of bonds for each firm and then a price for each
maturity based on the Moody’s Baa corporate bond yield.
◦ Capital to output ratio: capital is computed using the perpetual inventory method with
gross investment equal to capital expenditures plus acquisitions less sales of property,
plant, and equipment and an annual depreciation rate of 3.2 percent. The series is aggregated to the industry level and divided by industry sales.

26

B. Quarterly Forecasts
In this appendix, I describe the procedure used to construct quarterly forecasts for time series
that are only available annually for part of my sample.
Let Zt be the variable of interest, which is available annually. Let Xt be variables that are
available quarterly and are used to make quarterly forecasts of Zt , which I will call Ẑt . The first
step in deriving a forecast is to estimate A and B of the following state space system via maximum
likelihood:
xt+1 = Axt + Bǫt+1
yt = Ct xt ,
where xt = [Xt , Ẑt , Xt−1 , Ẑt−1 , . . . , Xt−n , Ẑt−n ]′ for some choice n ≥ 4, yt = [Xt , Zt ]′ , and ǫt are
normally distributed shocks. The coefficients in this case are given by:
a1
I

0
A=
 .
 ..


0

a2
0
I
..
.

...
...
...
..
.

0

...


aj
0

0 ,
.. 
. 
0

 
b
0
 
0
B=
.
 .. 
0



0 0
0
... 0 0
0
 I

0 1/4 0 1/4 . . . 0 1/4 0
Ct =



[I 0 0 0 ... 0 0 0 ...]

...
...



if t is 4th quarter
otherwise.

Once I have parameter estimates, (Â,B̂), I construct forecasts in all quarters given the full
sample of data, namely, Ẑt = E[Zt |y1 , ..., yT ], by first applying the Kalman filter and then applying
the Kalman smoother. (See Harvey (1989) for more details on the Kalman filter and smoother.)

27

References
Angeletos, George-Marios and Jennifer La’O. 2013. “Sentiments.” Econometrica 81(2): 739–779.
Azzimonti, Marina and Matthew Talbert. 2014. “Polarized Business Cycles.” Journal of Monetary
Economics 67: 47–61.
Bachmann, Rüdiger and Christian Bayer. 2014. “Investment Dispersion and the Business Cycle.”
American Economic Review 104(4): 1392-1416.
Basu, Susanto, John G. Fernald, and Miles S. Kimball. 2006. “Are Technology Improvements
Contractionary?” American Economic Review 96(5): 1418–1448.
Bigio, Saki. 2015. “Endogenous Liquidity and the Business Cycle.” American Economic Review
105(6): 1883–1927.
Bloom, Nicholas, Max Floetotto, Nir Jaimovich, Itay Saporta-Eksten, and Stephen J. Terry. 2016.
“Really Uncertain Business Cycles.” Working Paper, Stanford University.
Boissay, Frédéric, Fabrice Collard, and Frank Smets. 2016. “Booms and Banking Crises.” Journal
of Political Economy 124(2): 489–538.
Brinca, Pedro, Chari, V.V., Patrick J. Kehoe, and Ellen R. McGrattan. 2016. “Accounting for
Business Cycles,” in J. Taylor and H. Uhlig (eds.), Handbook of Macroeconomics, Vol. 2, 1013–
1063 (Amsterdam: Elsevier).
Chari, V.V., Patrick J. Kehoe, and Ellen R. McGrattan. 2007. “Business Cycle Accounting.”
Econometrica 75(3): 781–836.
Chen, Kaiji and Zheng Song. 2013. “Financial Frictions on Capital Allocation: A Transmission
Mechanism of TFP Fluctuations.” Journal of Monetary Economics 60(6): 683–703.
Cociuba, Simona, Edward C. Prescott, and Alexander Ueberfeldt. 2009. U.S. Hours and Productivity Behavior Using CPS Hours Worked Data. Mimeo, Arizona State University.
Corrado Carol, Charles R. Hulten, and Daniel E. Sichel. 2005. “Measuring Capital and Technology:
An Expanded Framework,” in C. Corrado, J. Haltiwanger, and D. Sichel (eds.), Measuring
Capital in the New Economy, 11-46 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).
Corrado, Carol A., Charles R. Hulten, and Daniel E. Sichel. 2006. “Intangible Capital and
Economic Growth,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series, 2006–24, Divisions of Research
and Statistics and Monetary Affairs, Federal Reserve Board, Washington, DC.
Dupor, Bill. 1999. “Aggregation and Irrelevance in Multi-Sector Models.” Journal of Monetary
Economics 43(2): 391–409.
Fernald, John G. 2012. “A Quarterly, Utilization-Adjusted Series on Total Factor Productivity.”
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper 2012-19.
Foerster, Andrew T., Pierre-Daniel G. Sarte, and Mark W. Watson. 2011. “Sectoral versus
28

Aggregate Shocks: A Structural Factor Analysis of Industrial Production.” Journal of Political
Economy 119(1): 1–38.
Gertler, Mark and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki. 2010. “Financial Intermediation and Credit Policy in
Business Cycle Analysis,” in B. M. Friedman and M. Woodford (eds.), Handbook of Monetary
Economics, Vol. 3A, 547–599 (Amsterdam: North-Holland).
Gourio, Francois. 2012. “Disaster Risk and Business Cycles.” American Economic Review 102(6):
2734–66.
Hansen, Gary D. 1985. “Indivisible Labor and the Business Cycle.” Journal of Monetary Economics 16(3): 309–327.
Harvey, Andrew C. 1989. Forecasting, Structural Time Series Models and the Kalman Filter
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).
Hodrick, Robert J. and Edward C. Prescott. 1997. “Postwar U.S. Business Cycles: An Empirical
Investigation.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 29(1): 1–16.
Hornstein, Andreas and Jack Praschnik. 1997. “Intermediate Inputs and Sectoral Comovement in
the Business Cycle.” Journal of Monetary Economics 40(3): 573–595.
Horvath, Michael. 1998. “Cyclicality and Sectoral Linkages: Aggregate Fluctuations from Independent Sectoral Shocks.” Review of Economic Dynamics 1(4): 781–808.
Horvath, Michael. 2000. “Sectoral Shocks and Aggregate Fluctuations.” Journal of Monetary
Economics 45(1): 69–106.
Jermann, Urban and Vincenzo Quadrini. 2012. “Macroeconomic Effects of Financial Shocks.”
American Economic Review 102(1): 238–271.
Karnizova, Lilia. 2012. “News Shocks, Productivity and the U.S. Investment Boom-Bust Cycle,”
B.E. Journal of Macroeconomics 12(1): 1-48.
Khan, Aubhik and Julia K. Thomas. 2013. “Credit Shocks and Aggregate Fluctuations in an
Economy with Production Heterogeneity.” Journal of Political Economy 121(6): 1055–1107.
Kydland, Finn E. and Edward C. Prescott. 1982. “Time to Build and Aggregate Fluctuations.”
Econometrica 50(6): 1345–1370.
Larrain, Borja and Motohiro Yogo. 2008. “Does Firm Value Move Too Much to be Justified by
Subsequent Changes in Cash Flow?” Journal of Financial Economics 87(1): 200–226.
Li, Wendy C. Y. 2012. “Depreciation of Business R&D Capital.” Mimeo, Bureau of Economic
Analysis.
Long, John B., Jr., and Charles I. Plosser. 1983. “Real Business Cycles.” Journal of Political
Economy 91(1): 39–69.

29

McGrattan, Ellen R., and Edward C. Prescott. 2010. “Unmeasured Investment and the Puzzling
U.S. Boom in the 1990s.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2(4): 88–123.
McGrattan, Ellen R., and Edward C. Prescott. 2014. “A Reassessment of Real Business Cycle
Theory.” American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 104(5): 177–182.
National Science Foundation. 1953–2016. National Patterns of R&D Resources (Washington, DC:
National Science Foundation).
Prescott, Edward C. 1986. “Theory Ahead of Business Cycle Measurement.” Federal Rerserve
Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review 10(4): 9–22.
Schaal, Edouard. 2017. “Uncertainty and Unemployment.” Econometrica, forthcoming.
Soloveichik, Rachel, and David Wasshausen. 2013. “Copyright-Protected Assets in the National
Accounts,” Mimeo, Bureau of Economic Analysis.
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis. 1929–2016. Survey of Current
Business (Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office).
Vaughan, David R. 1970. “A Nonrecursive Algebraic Solution for the Discrete Riccati Equation.”
IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control AC-15: 597–599.

30

Table 1. Input-Output Table Shares by Major Industrya
A. Capital and Consumption Shares
Capital Sharesb
Tangible
(θj )

Intangible
(φj )

Consumption
Shares
(ωj )

Agriculture (11)

.301

.006

.006

Mining (21)

.546

.024

.000

Utilities (22)

.379

.042

.025

Construction (23)

.167

.082

.000

Manufacturing (31-33)

.162

.196

.146

Wholesale Trade (42)

.126

.149

.048

Retail Trade (44-45)

.130

.078

.110

Transportation & Warehousing (48-49)

.147

.024

.027

Information (51)

.200

.238

.041

Finance, Insurance & Real Estate (52-53)

.412

.036

.250

Professional & Business Services (54-56)

.063

.174

.022

Education, Health & Social Services (61-62)

.076

.032

.201

Leisure & Hospitality (71-72)

.138

.065

.084

Other Services (81)

.132

.053

.039

Public Administration (92)

.137

.048

.001

Industry (NAICS)

See notes at the end of the table.

31

Table 1. Input-Output Table Shares by Major Industrya (cont.)
B. Intermediate Goods and Services (γlj )

From: \ To:

11

21

22

23

31-33

42

44-45

48-49

51

52-53

54-56

61-62

71-72

81

92

11

.205

.000

.000

.001

.033

.001

.001

.000

.000

.000

.000

.000

.007

.000

.001

21

.003

.069

.107

.005

.037

.000

.000

.003

.000

.001

.000

.000

.001

.001

.004

22

.015

.011

.014

.003

.013

.006

.014

.008

.003

.018

.005

.011

.018

.008

.009

23

.007

.017

.019

.000

.002

.001

.003

.005

.002

.025

.001

.001

.003

.006

.019

31-33

.178

.073

.071

.243

.264

.030

.033

.154

.050

.011

.042

.076

.118

.079

.094

42

.071

.015

.016

.044

.047

.029

.017

.030

.012

.003

.008

.021

.022

.016

.014

44-45

.001

.000

.001

.058

.002

.001

.004

.005

.000

.002

.001

.001

.007

.008

.000

48-49

.033

.023

.067

.018

.022

.047

.053

.123

.015

.007

.015

.010

.014

.009

.018

51

.001

.002

.006

.003

.004

.012

.013

.007

.141

.016

.023

.016

.011

.017

.026

52-53

.045

.032

.052

.023

.015

.086

.126

.093

.050

.212

.088

.136

.097

.159

.040

54-56

.010

.040

.045

.011

.042

.085

.059

.046

.040

.068

.088

.068

.082

.039

.038

61-62

.001

.000

.000

.000

.000

.000

.002

.000

.000

.000

.000

.012

.002

.003

.005

71-72

.001

.002

.010

.002

.003

.005

.003

.004

.021

.010

.018

.011

.025

.006

.009

81

.004

.003

.005

.005

.008

.017

.011

.024

.016

.013

.014

.013

.015

.015

.015

92

.000

.000

.002

.000

.001

.011

.006

.022

.003

.002

.003

.003

.007

.003

.003

See notes at the end of the table.

32

Table 1. Input-Output Table Shares by Major Industrya (cont.)
C. Tangible Capital Flow Sharesb (ζlj )

From: \ To:

11

21

22

23

31-33

42

44-45

48-49

51

52-53

54-56

61-62

71-72

81

92

11

.084

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

21

.002

.763

.003

.003

.002

.001

.001

.020

.001

.000

.002

.001

.001

.001

0

22

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

23

.154

.054

.431

.058

.165

.228

.477

.261

.320

.329

.205

.430

.574

.496

.699

31-33

.510

.123

.379

.629

.593

.468

.350

.470

.454

.558

.531

.381

.285

.337

.247

42

.129

.031

.096

.160

.124

.191

.089

.119

.115

.016

.135

.097

.072

.086

.040

44-45

.037

.009

.027

.045

.035

.034

.025

.034

.033

.007

.038

.027

.020

.024

0

48-49

.029

.007

.022

.036

.028

.027

.020

.045

.026

.004

.030

.022

.016

.019

.006

51

.008

.002

.006

.009

.007

.007

.005

.007

.008

.001

.008

.006

.004

.005

0

52-53

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

.066

0

0

0

0

0

54-56

.049

.012

.036

.060

.047

.045

.033

.045

.043

.020

.051

.036

.027

.032

.008

61-62

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

71-72

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

81

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

92

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

See notes at the end of the table.

33

Table 1. Input-Output Table Shares by Major Industrya (cont.)
D. Intangible Capital Flow Sharesb (νlj )

From: \ To:

11

21

22

23

31-33

42

44-45

48-49

51

52-53

54-56

61-62

71-72

81

92

11

.029

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

21

0

.191

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

22

0

0

.118

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

23

0

0

0

.028

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

31-33

0

0

0

0

.731

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

42

0

0

0

0

0

.224

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

.005

44-45

0

0

0

0

0

0

.093

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

48-49

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

.091

0

0

0

0

0

0

.000

.112

.148

.107

.024

.027

.047

.086

.094

.621

.192

.044

.047

.197

.065

.030

52-53

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

.568

0

0

0

0

0

54-56

.859

.661

.778

.948

.247

.734

.824

.817

.386

.240

.956

.613

.793

.669

.794

61-62

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

.340

0

0

0

71-72

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

.011

0

0

81

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

.266

0

92

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

.170

51

a

The underlying data for the shares in the table is the BEA benchmark input output table for 2007.

b

Tangible investments are structures and equipment. Intangible investments are intellectual property products, as defined by the BEA, and intermediate inputs that
are reassigned to final uses. See Appendix B for a list of reassigned categories.

34

Table 2. MLE Parameter Estimates, 1985:1–2014:4a

Parameter
Estimate

Standard
Error

Agriculture

−1.303

0.0025

Mining

−1.197

0.0005

Utilities

−2.874

0.0087

Construction

1.427

0.0147

Manufacturing

0.942

0.0054

Wholesale Trade

0.712

0.0063

Retail Trade

0.761

0.0071

Transportation & Warehousing

1.168

0.0093

Information

1.547

0.0105

Finance, Insurance & Real Estate

2.202

0.0164

Professional & Business Services

0.703

0.0091

Education, Health & Social Services

0.192

0.0123

Leisure and Hospitality

0.542

0.0067

Other Services

0.611

0.0093

Utilities

0.974

0.0124

Retail Trade

0.984

0.0136

Information, tangible

0.995

0.0020

Information, intangible

0.989

0.0003

Finance, Insurance & Real Estate

0.987

0.0030

Professional & Business Services

0.995

0.0035

Education, Health & Social Services

0.976

0.0061

Leisure and Hospitality

0.963

0.0163

Other Services

0.957

0.0125

Statistic
Factor loadings:b

Serial correlation coefficients:c

See notes at the end of the table.

35

Table 2. MLE Parameter Estimates, 1985:1–2014:4 (cont.)

Parameter
Estimate

Statistic

Standard
Error

Shock standard deviations:
Agriculture

0.138

0.0157

Mining

0.330

0.0386

Utilities

0.326

0.0272

Construction

0.038

0.0046

Manufacturing, tangible

0.072

0.0129

Manufacturing, intangible

0.080

0.0044

Wholesale Trade

0.036

0.0042

Retail Trade

0.027

0.0037

Transportation & Warehousing

0.027

0.0038

Information, tangible

0.055

0.0028

Information, intangible

0.051

0.0039

Finance, Insurance & Real Estate

0.039

0.0056

Professional & Business Services, tangible

0.023

0.0009

Professional & Business Services, intangible

0.015

0.0009

Education, Health & Social Services

0.011

0.0015

Leisure and Hospitality

0.028

0.0020

Other Services

0.037

0.0013

−0.138

0.1508

0.154

0.0601

−0.302

0.0941

Shock correlations:
Manufacturing
Information
Professional & Business Services
a

The table reports estimates of factor loadings λj , serial correlation coefficients ρij , standard deviations of ηji ,
1 and η 2 . In manufacturing, information, and professional and business services,
and correlations between ηjt
jt
1
2 are referenced as “tangible” and “intangible,” respectively.
parameters related to ηjt and ηjt

b

In order to identify the factor loadings λj , the standard deviation of the common shock υt was fixed at 0.01.

c

An upper bound of 0.995 was imposed on serial correlation coefficients for the common TFP process and for
TFP processes in industries not listed.

36

Table 3. Cyclical Properties of Predicted and Actual Sectoral Hoursa

Major Industry

Correlation,
Predicted and
Actual

Predicted

Actual

Agriculture

25

31

10

Mining

65

24

23

Utilities

−8

30

7

Construction

76

9

33

Manufacturing

89

31

33

Wholesale Trade

48

29

33

Retail Trade

55

24

32

Transportation & Warehousing

65

30

33

Information

96

17

24

Finance, Insurance & Real Estate

27

−10

24

Professional & Business Services

95

27

33

Education, Health & Social Services

−4

−30

9

−52

−24

31

Other Services

52

27

25

Summary statisticsb

51

69

56

Leisure and Hospitality

a

PCA First Factor Loadings

For both the model and data, hours series are logged and detrended using the filter of Hodrick and Prescott
(1997) and then scaled by their standard deviations. PCA stands for principal component analysis.

b

The summary statistic in the first column is the weighted average correlation for all industries, with weights
equal to shares of sector hours in total hours. The second and third columns are the percentage variances of
the first principal component in the model and the data, respectively.

37

Table 4. Variance Decomposition of Ergodic Distribution, 1985:1–2014:4

Sector-specific
Total

Own
Industry

Other
Industry

Common
Shock

Agriculture

96.4

61.8

34.6

3.6

Mining

99.9

98.8

1.2

0.1

Utilities

98.8

61.9

37.0

1.2

Construction

77.9

39.2

38.7

22.1

Manufacturing

91.5

75.7

15.8

8.5

Wholesale Trade

81.5

32.5

16.8

18.6

Retail Trade

60.0

27.5

32.5

40.0

Transportation & Warehousing

70.6

29.7

40.9

29.4

Information

74.1

49.4

24.7

25.9

Finance, Insurance & Real Estate

64.7

9.0

55.7

35.3

Professional & Business Services

73.5

57.8

15.7

26.5

Education, Health & Social Services

67.4

8.6

58.9

32.6

Leisure and Hospitality

65.1

10.2

54.9

34.9

Other Services

62.5

20.4

42.2

37.5

Computer & Electronic Products

90.9

80.3

10.6

9.1

Broadcasting & Telecommunications

78.5

49.8

28.8

21.5

Advertising

63.8

42.0

21.8

36.2

Observable
Gross outputs:

Hours:

a

These results are based on the estimated state space system in (3.1)-(3.2).

38

Table 5. Decomposition of Changes in Gross Output in the
Technology Boom and the Great Recessiona
Technology
Boom

TFP shocks
Common

Great
Recession

7.1

−6.9

Agriculture

−0.8

0.0

Mining (21)

0.2

−1.2

Utilities
Construction

0.4
0.2

−1.0
−1.0

Manufacturing

−3.8

−5.9

Wholesale Trade

−0.5

−0.5

Retail Trade

−0.3

−0.4

Transportation & Warehousing

−0.5

−0.2

Information

1.6

−0.2

Finance, Insurance & Real Estate

3.6

−0.8

Professional & Business Services

4.2

0.9

Education, Health & Social Services

0.1

0.4

Leisure and Hospitality

0.2

−0.1

Other Services

0.0

0.0

11.5

−16.8

Sectoral:

Total change (%)
a

Percent changes are computed over the periods 1991:4–2000:3 and 2007:4–2009:3, respectively.

39

Table 6. Cyclical Properties of Latent TFPs and Intangible Investmentsa

Variable
Common TFP

Std. Deviation Cross-Correlation with Gross Output at Lag
Relative to
Gross Output −2
−1
0
1
2
0.8

0.76

0.84

0.86

0.76

0.59

8.8

0.09

0.15

0.15

0.10

0.02

Mining

23.8

0.27

0.54

0.69

0.69

0.55

Utilities

16.9

0.16

0.36

0.51

0.57

0.53

Construction

2.1

0.47

0.46

0.44

0.38

0.24

Manufacturing

4.9

0.72

0.86

0.87

0.71

0.45

3.2

−0.04

0.04

0.17

0.34

0.49

Wholesale Trade

1.6

0.25

0.42

0.51

0.47

0.33

Retail Trade

1.5

0.48

0.37

0.18

−0.08

−0.32

Transportation & Warehousing

1.5

0.22

0.42

0.60

0.72

0.68

Information

2.1

−0.05

−0.02

−0.00

0.01

0.03

2.6

0.25

0.47

0.62

0.64

0.55

Finance, Insurance & Real Estate

2.1

0.68

0.65

0.53

0.38

0.27

Professional & Business Services

1.2

0.00

0.08

0.17

0.26

0.33

0.8

−0.04

0.05

0.18

0.38

0.54

Education, Health & Social Services

0.8

−0.59

−0.65

−0.65

−0.62

−0.56

Leisure & Hospitality

0.9

0.16

0.21

0.28

0.33

0.31

Other Services

1.2

−0.29

−0.23

−0.14

−0.05

0.00

Manufacturing

1.8

0.32

0.53

0.70

0.81

0.83

Information

1.5

0.32

0.53

0.70

0.75

0.72

Professional & Business

1.7

0.51

0.67

0.79

0.85

0.83

Sectoral TFPs
Agriculture

Computer & Electronic Products

Broadcasting & Telecomm.

Advertising

Intangible investments:

a

Series are first logged and detrended using the filter of Hodrick and Prescott (1997). For cross-correlations,
the variable at date t is correlated with gross output at date t − k, where k is given in the column heading.

40

Table 7. Properties of Implied Labor Wedges in Models with Financial Shocks
Standard Correlation
Minimum Maximum Deviation with Output

Mean
Extended Modela
Mining

0.021

0.008

0.033

0.006

−0.100

Manufacturing

0.006

0.003

0.007

0.001

0.489

Transportation & Warehousing

0.006

−0.002

0.010

0.002

−0.075

Leisure & Hospitality

0.008

0.000

0.016

0.003

0.040

Original parameterization

0.039

0.013

0.074

0.013

−0.389

Alternative parameterizationb

0.015

0.008

0.023

0.003

−0.292

Jermann and Quadrini (2012)

a

The model is described in Section 4.3. The labor wedge is the shadow price of the enforcement constraint
times the derivative of the dividend payout.

b

In the alternative parameterization, the capital share is lower (0.22 versus 0.36) and the mean of the financial
shock is higher (0.41 versus 0.16) than in Jermann and Quadrini (2012). These parameters are chosen so that
the average capital-output ratio and the average financial shock in the Jermann and Quadrini (2012) model is
consistent with the data that they use to construct the financial shocks.

41

Figure 1. Per Capita Hours, 1985:1{2014:4

A. One-Sector Model without Intangibles

.28

.27

.26

.25
US hours
Model hours
.24

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

B. Multi-Sector Model with Intangibles

.28

.27

.26

.25
US hours
Model hours
.24

1985

1990

1995

2000

42

2005

2010

2015

Figure 2. Aggregate TFP, 2007:4{2014:4

A. Model Prediction vs. Solow Residual

Solow residual
Model common TFP

0

-1

-2

-3
2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

B. Model Prediction vs. Fernald’s (2012) TFP
1
Fernald TFP
Model common TFP
0

-1

-2

-3
2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

43

2013

2014

2015

Figure 3. Tangible and Intangible Investment, 2007:4{2014:4

A. U.S. Tangible Investment vs. Model Prediction

100

US tangible investment
Model tangible investment

90

80

70

60

50
2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

B. U.S. Tangible vs. Model Intangible Investment

100

US tangible investment
Model intangible investment

90

80

70

60

50
2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

44

2013

2014

2015

