                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                      ASSET MISPRICING

                                          Kurt F. Lewis
                                       Francis A. Longstaff
                                        Lubomir Petrasek

                                       Working Paper 23231
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w23231


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2017




We are grateful for the comments of Dan Covitz, Yesol Huh, Sebastian Infante, Dan Li, and
seminar participants at the Federal Reserve Board and UCLA. The analysis and conclusions set
forth are those of the authors and do not indicate concurrence by other members of the research
staff or the Federal Reserve Board. All errors are our responsibility. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w23231.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Kurt F. Lewis, Francis A. Longstaff, and Lubomir Petrasek. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Asset Mispricing
Kurt F. Lewis, Francis A. Longstaff, and Lubomir Petrasek
NBER Working Paper No. 23231
March 2017
JEL No. G12

                                          ABSTRACT

We use a unique dataset of corporate bonds guaranteed by the full faith and credit of the U.S. to
test a number of recent theories about why asset prices may diverge from fundamental values.
These models emphasize the role of funding liquidity, slow-moving capital, the leverage of
financial intermediaries, and other frictions in allowing mispricing to occur. Consistent with
theory, we find there are strong patterns of commonality in mispricing and that changes in dealer
haircuts and funding costs are significant drivers of mispricing. Furthermore, mispricing can
trigger short-term margin and funding-cost spirals. Using detailed bond and dealer-level data, we
find that most of the cross-sectional variation in mispricing is explained by differences in dealer
funding costs, inventory positions, and trading liquidity measures. These results provide strong
empirical support for a number of current theoretical models.

Kurt F. Lewis                                    Lubomir Petrasek
Federal Reserve Board                            Federal Reserve System
Kurt.F.Lewis@frb.gov                             Lubomir.Petrasek@frb.gov

Francis A. Longstaff
UCLA
Anderson Graduate School of Management
110 Westwood Plaza, Box 951481
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and NBER
francis.longstaff@anderson.ucla.edu
                            1. INTRODUCTION


One of the central doctrines of modern financial theory is that the price of a
security should equal the present value of its cash flows. Recently, however, this
paradigm has been challenged by examples of asset prices that appear to diverge
from their fundamental values, particularly during financial crises and major
market events. There is a rapidly growing theoretical literature that focuses
on the role of market frictions and constraints in explaining deviations from
fundamental values. Important examples include models that consider the effects
of funding liquidity, slow-moving capital, and the capital structure of financial
intermediaries on asset prices.
     In this paper, we use a unique data set of corporate bonds explicitly guaran-
teed by the full faith and credit of the U.S. to explore the empirical implications
of a number of these models. The key advantage of this data set is that since
these bonds have the same credit risk as Treasury bonds, deviations from their
fundamental values can be observed directly by contrasting their prices with
those of comparable Treasury bonds. It is important to note that this type of
mispricing represents a violation of the law of one price in the most fundamental
sense. In particular, it implies that we could form portfolios of bonds with net
cash flows that are zero in all states of the world, but with market prices that
differ from zero—something that clearly cannot be reconciled with any stochas-
tic discount factor. Furthermore, we also have proprietary data on the funding
costs, haircuts, and inventory positions of the primary dealers making markets
in each individual bond. Thus, this panel data set is ideally suited for examining
both the time series and cross-sectional implications of these theoretical models
for asset mispricing.

     We focus on four specific empirical implications of this literature. First,
models such as Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009), Duffie (2010), and others im-
ply that deviations from fundamental values may arise when dealers face fund-
ing and capital constraints. If so, then mispricing should not be asset specific.
Rather, we would expect to observe commonality in mispricing across all as-
sets traded by the same set of dealers. Second, the availability of trading and
arbitrage capital plays a central role in many existing models such as Gromb
and Vayanos (2002), Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009), Gârleanu and Pedersen
(2011), Kondor and Vayanos (2015), and others. These models all share the
common empirical implication that changes in the cost and availability of capital
should drive changes in the deviation from fundamental value over time. Third,
models such as Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009) and Gârleanu and Pedersen
(2011) raise the possibility that asset mispricing may lead to destabilizing margin
spirals. Finally, many models imply that cross-sectional differences in mispric-

                                        1
ing should be related to differences across the financial intermediaries trading
these assets in terms of their leverage, funding costs, and capital, as well as to
differences in the search costs and other frictions faced by market participants in
trading the assets.

     We begin by documenting that there is significant and persistent mispricing
among the guaranteed corporate bonds in the data set during the 2008–2012
sample period. The overall average value of the mispricing during the sample
period is 20.07 basis points. We find, however, that there is dramatic variation
in the amount of mispricing over time as well as across bonds.
      We turn next to the four empirical implications described above. First,
we find that there is a high degree of commonality in the mispricing across the
bonds in the sample. In particular, 66 percent of the variation in mispricing is
explained by the first principal component, while 82 percent is explained by the
first three principal components. These large values provide strong support for
implications about commonality inherent in many current models. On the other
hand, however, these values also suggest that not all of the variation in mispric-
ing is common across bonds—that there is substantial remaining idiosyncratic
variation in mispricing.
     Second, we regress weekly changes in the average mispricing of the bonds in
the sample on changes in measures reflecting the margins and funding costs faced
by dealers in this market. In particular, we have data on the average haircuts
that dealers must pay to finance their inventories along with the average dealer
CDS spreads and Libor-OIS funding spreads in the market. We find that an
increase in the margin or haircut for these bonds leads to a significant increase
in mispricing. Similarly, an increase in either the CDS spread or the Libor-OIS
funding spread results in higher mispricing. These results provide direct support
for a number of theoretical models emphasizing the role that dealer funding
and capital constraints play in allowing assets to deviate from their fundamental
values.

     Third, we examine whether mispricing has the potential to be destabilizing
in the sense of allowing spirals to occur. We use a simple vector autoregression
approach to explore the relations between bond mispricing, margins, and the
funding costs of dealers in the market. We find that an increase in mispricing
leads to a short-term increase in margins, which provides support for the margin
spiral hypothesis. In addition, we find evidence that an increase in mispricing
also leads to an increase in funding costs for dealers, implying the possibility that
funding spirals may also occur.

    Fourth, we use the full panel data set of mispricings to test directly the
implications of the various models at the individual bond level. We find strong

                                         2
evidence that the cross-sectional distribution of mispricing is positively related
to the CDS spreads and haircuts for the primary dealers making markets in the
individual bonds. In addition, we find that mispricing declines significantly as
the inventory held by dealers increases. Both the outstanding amount of the
bond issue and the total trading volume are significantly related to mispricing.
In contrast, other liquidity metrics such as the effective bid-ask spread are not
significantly related to mispricing.

     A number of important lessons about asset pricing can be drawn from these
results. First, the evidence indicates that there is a high degree of commonality
in the deviations of asset prices from their fundamental values. Thus, mispricing
may represent an important source of systematic risk to investors in the financial
markets. In fact, in addition to being systematic in nature, mispricing may
actually have toxic effects on markets through its destabilizing effects on margins
and dealer funding costs. Second, the positive relation between mispricing and
dealer funding costs strongly argues that recent theories focusing on the role that
capital constraints play in asset pricing are going in the right direction. Finally,
these results provide clear evidence that asset prices can be driven by forces that
are unrelated to either cash flows or discount rates, conflicting with the classical
paradigm that asset prices are equal to the present value of their cash flows.
     This paper contributes to a growing empirical literature focusing on asset
mispricing. The paper most similar to ours is Longstaff (2004) who studies the
pricing of government-guaranteed Refcorp bonds. He finds that deviations of
Refcorp bonds from their fundamental values are related to measures of bond
market liquidity. Bai and Collin-Dufresne (2011) study the mispricing of CDS
contracts relative to corporate bonds during the financial crisis. They find that
funding risk, counterparty risk, and collateral quality are important factors in
explaining mispricing. Fleckenstein, Longstaff, and Lustig (2014) study the pric-
ing of Treasury TIPS and show that they were often severely mispriced relative
to Treasury bonds during the recent financial crisis. They find that average
mispricing is related to issuance, hedge fund flows, and mispricing in other mar-
kets. Other important work in this area includes MacKinlay and Ramaswamy
(1988), Cornell and Shapiro (1989), Amihud and Mendelson (1991), Boudoukh
and Whitelaw (1991), Kamara (1994), Grinblatt and Longstaff (2000), Basak
and Croitoru (2000) Jordan, Jorgensen, and Kuipers (2000), Mitchell, Pulvino,
and Stafford (2002), Lamont and Thaler (2003), Ofek, Richardson, and Whitelaw
(2004), Roll, Schwartz, and Subrahmanyam (2007), Brennan and Wang (2010),
and Cremers and Weinbaum (2010). This paper differs significantly from previ-
ous work by using both an extensive panel data set of mispricings and a detailed
data set about dealer funding costs and capital constraints to test directly the
empirical implications of a number of current theories about the determinants of
asset mispricing.

                                         3
     The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a brief literature review.
Section 3 discusses some of the major empirical implications of the theoretical
literature. Section 4 describes the FDIC Debt Guarantee Program. Section 5
presents the data. Section 6 describes how bond mispricing is identified. Section
7 examines the commonality in mispricing. Section 8 explores the time series
behavior of asset mispricing. Section 9 studies whether mispricing is destabiliz-
ing. Section 10 examines the cross-sectional pattern of mispricing. Section 11
presents concluding remarks.


                         2. LITERATURE REVIEW


There are many theoretical models in the literature that imply the possibility
that asset prices may diverge from fundamental values in the presence of market
frictions and financial constraints. This literature, however, is far too extensive
for us to review fully here. Instead, our objective in this section is simply to
highlight some of the major types of models that have appeared recently in this
literature. These are described individually below.


2.1 Funding Liquidity

A number of recent papers argue that disruptions in the ability of market partic-
ipants to obtain funding can lead to situations in which prices can diverge from
fundamentals. Important examples include Chowdhry and Nanda (1998) who
show that margin constraints can result in prices that move independently of
fundamentals. Gromb and Vayanos (2002) present a model in which restrictions
on cross margining place wealth related constraints on the ability of investors to
arbitrage away mispricing. Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009) present a model
in which margin constraints and changes in speculator capital can result in asset
prices diverging from fundamental values (they define market liquidity as the
absolute difference of the market price from the fundamental value). Liu and
Longstaff (2004) show that optimal trading strategies in markets with margin
constraints can allow asset mispricing to persist. Other important examples in-
clude Grossman and Vila (1992), Basak and Croitoru (2000), and Gârleanu and
Pedersen (2011).


2.2 Slow-Moving Capital

A recent paper by Duffie (2010) emphasizes the role that slow-moving capital may
play in allowing market prices to diverge from fundamentals. One way in which
this can occur is in opaque markets where trading may be delayed by search. In


                                         4
such a market, supply shocks may be associated with price impacts and reversals
as sellers offer price concessions to obtain immediacy. Important examples of the
effects of search on markets and asset pricing include Wolinsky (1990), Duffie,
Gârleanu, and Pedersen (2005, 2007), Vayanos and Tang (2007), Weill (2007),
Vayanos and Weill (2008), Duffie and Strulovici (2012), Duffie, Malamud, and
Manso (2015), and many others. Another mechanism which may lead to slow-
moving capital is if investors are not perfectly attentive to the markets at all
times. Duffie presents a model in which investor inattention can lead to both
overreactions and underreactions to supply shocks. Other important examples
of this literature include Lynch (1996), Caballero (1995), Gabaix and Laibson
(2001), Chien, Cole, and Lustig (2012).


2.3 Intermediary Capital

A rapidly growing literature focuses on the relation between asset prices and the
capital of financial intermediaries. While these papers have many similarities
with the funding liquidity literature described above, He and Krishnamurthy
(2013) argue that there are important differences between the two literatures.
In particular, the funding liquidity literature focuses on debt constraints, while
the intermediary capital literature focuses more on constraints on raising equity
capital. As one example, Kondor and Vayanos (2015) study a model in which
arbitrageurs provide liquidity to other traders who seek to hedge their portfolio
risk. The arbitrageurs’ ability to provide insurance, however, is limited by their
capital which becomes a key state variable affecting asset prices. He, Kelly, and
Manela (2016) argue that the equity capital ratio of financial intermediaries is
likewise an important state variable. In contrast, Adrien, Etula, and Muir (2014)
emphasize the role of intermediary leverage ratios. Other important examples
of this literature include Allen and Gale (2000), Xiong (2001), Kyle and Xiong
(2001), Adrien and Boyarchenko (2012), Basak and Pavlova (2013), Brunner-
meier and Sannikov (2014), and others.


2.4 Liquidity Effects

There is an extensive literature considering the impact of illiquidity on asset
prices. Key examples of research focusing on the implications of transaction
costs include Demsetz (1968), Amihud and Mendelson (1986), Boudoukh and
Whitelaw (1993), Vayanos (1998), Vayanos and Vila (1999), Acharya and Peder-
sen (2005), Amihud, Mendelson, and Pedersen (2005), Huang and Wang (2009,
2010), and others. In many of these papers, bid-ask spreads and other forms
of transaction costs drive a wedge between the fundamental cash flows of the
security and the cash flows actually received by investors. In turn, these differ-
ences have the potential to impact market prices. The effects of alternative forms

                                        5
of illiquidity on asset prices are studied in Longstaff (1995, 2004, 2009, 2016),
Pastor and Stambaugh (2003), Eisfeldt (2004), Eisfeldt and Rampini (2006), and
others. Shleifer and Vishny (1992, 2011) Coval and Stafford (2007), Coval, Jurek,
and Stafford (2009), and others discuss the impact of distressed sales of illiquid
assets on prices.


   3. EMPIRICAL IMPLICATIONS FOR ASSET MISPRICING


Rather than attempting to identify all of the empirical implications of the various
types of models described above, we focus on several key themes that appear in
the literature and that are potentially testable given the data available to us.
3.1 Is There Commonality in Mispricing?

Many of the models in the literature imply that mispricing should display com-
monalities across assets. For example, Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009) argue
that mispricing is driven by speculators’ funding liquidity or capital scarcity.
Thus, shocks to speculators’ funding constraints and their shadow cost of capital
affect all securities which, in turn, results in commonality in observed mispricing.
They identify commonality in mispricing as one of the key empirical implications
of their model. In a similar way, Duffie (2010) presents a model in which the
current and future availability of capital become state variables that may in-
troduce a common factor into the response of asset prices to supply shocks in
markets characterized by slow movement of investment capital. This theme also
appears in the intermediary capital literature. In particular, a number of the
models in this literature share the feature that the constraints faced by inter-
mediaries in obtaining capital limits their ability to absorb portfolio risk. The
direct implication of this is that the capital of financial intermediaries should
be related to asset mispricing across the markets in which these intermediaries
operate. In summary, this literature implies that asset mispricing may stem
from a common underlying source such as the cost of investment capital, rather
than asset-specific characteristics. In turn, changes in the underlying source may
translate into patterns of commonality in asset mispricing.

3.2 What Drives Asset Mispricing?
As discussed above, many models in the literature identify the cost and availabil-
ity of investment capital as key determinants of asset mispricing. For example,
Gromb and Vayanos (2002), Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009), Gârleanu and
Pedersen (2011), and many others imply that asset mispricing may be driven by
the margins and funding costs faced by market participants. Similar implications
follow directly from models that focus on the role of slow-moving capital and the

                                         6
capital constraints faced by financial intermediaries.
3.3 Is Mispricing Destabilizing?

Margins play a central role in many of the models in the funding liquidity lit-
erature described above. In particular, when speculators or intermediaries face
increasing margins, these market participants require additional investment cap-
ital to trade. Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009) model the effects of margins
on asset mispricing, and describe the possibility of destabilizing margin spirals
occurring as increases in mispricing lead to further rounds of margin tightening.
These results imply that there may be feedback effects between asset mispricing
and the margins faced by market participants. Similar effects are also possible
in other models of the effects of margins on asset pricing such as Gârleanu and
Pedersen (2011).

3.4 What Explains the Cross Section of Mispricing?
As noted above, a common theme throughout the literature is that the funding or
capital constraints experienced by dealers, arbitrageurs, or other financial inter-
mediaries may allow deviations between prices and fundamental values to occur.
A direct implication of this is that asset mispricing may be a reflection of the
constraints faced by the institutions that own or trade the asset. If various assets
are traded by different classes of investors, then it is natural that the differences
across these investors in terms of their funding and capital constraints could
map into cross-sectional variation in the mispricing of these assets. For exam-
ple, the results in Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009) suggest that cross-sectional
variation in asset mispricing may be related to cross-sectional differences in the
margins and funding costs experienced by the dealers who own or trade those
assets. Similarly, Duffie (2010) implies that the amplitude and time series pat-
tern of asset mispricing after a shock is a reflection of institutional impediments
to trade. Clearly, differences in the degree of these impediments across institu-
tions could translate into cross-sectional differences in asset mispricing. Liu and
Longstaff (2004) present a model in which the time until the final maturity or
convergence date of an asset plays a central role in determining the distribution
of asset mispricing. Finally, the literature on the effects of illiquidity identifies
a number of potential asset-specific factors that could affect asset mispricing.
Examples include bid-ask spreads and other types of transaction costs, trading
activity, the amount of the asset available in the market, dealer inventories, etc.


           4. THE FDIC DEBT GUARANTEE PROGRAM


Our approach to identifying asset mispricing is to compare the yields on corporate

                                         7
bonds that are explicitly guaranteed by the full faith and credit of the U.S.
with those of comparable U.S. Treasury bonds. This approach closely parallels
Longstaff (2004) who studied the relative pricing of Refcorp and U.S. Treasury
bonds.

     In particular, we focus on the pricing of corporate bonds that were issued
under a debt guarantee program administered by the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation (FDIC). In the wake of the failure of Lehman Brothers, and as part
of a coordinated response within the U.S. government to what was described as
the collapse of credit markets, the FDIC introduced the Temporary Liquidity
Guarantee Program on October 14, 2008. This program consisted of two parts:
the Transaction Account Guarantee Program which involved a FDIC guarantee
in full of all noninterest-bearing accounts, and the Debt Guarantee Program
which involved a guarantee of certain newly issued unsecured debt. The bonds
we consider were issued as part of the Debt Guarantee Program.
     In October of 2008, huge disruptions to credit markets had driven spreads
to record levels at a time when financial institutions had a large quantity of
unsecured debt scheduled to mature. Concerned that an inability to refinance
this existing debt would push already-strained institutions into failure, the goal
of the Debt Guarantee Program was to allow institutions to roll over senior
unsecured debt by issuing new debt in their own name, backed by a government
guarantee. The program provided a guarantee for debt issued by FDIC-insured
depository institutions as well as their parent bank holding companies.1 The
guarantee was for newly-issued debt only, and (ultimately) that debt needed to
be issued before the end of October 2009 and the guarantee expired on December
31, 2012.2

     U.S. Treasury bonds are guaranteed by the full faith and credit of the United
States. It is important to note that the FDIC guarantee is also explicitly backed
by the full faith and credit of the United States. Specifically, the FDIC’s Final
Rule issued in November 2008, states that the FDIC’s guarantee of qualifying
credit debt under the Debt Guarantee Program is subject to the full faith and
credit of the United States pursuant to Section 15(d) of the FDI Act, 12 U.S.C.
1825(d). In fact, the Master Agreement for the Debt Guarantee Program contains
1
  Savings and loan corporations with certain business models as well as other
financial entities were also allowed to use the program subject to case-by-case
approval.
2
 Both the issuance window and the end of the guarantee given here are the result
of deadline extensions that occurred in 2009. For a more detailed discussion of the
program, its initial terms and subsequent evolution, see https://www.fdic.gov/
regulations/resources/tlgp/archive.html.


                                        8
the requirement that the following text be included, exactly as written, in each
security issued under the program:

    The parties to this Agreement acknowledge that the Issuer has not opted
    out of the debt guarantee program (the Debt Guarantee Program) estab-
    lished by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) under its
    Temporary Liquidity Guarantee Program. As a result, this debt is guar-
    anteed under the FDIC Temporary Liquidity Guarantee Program and
    is backed by the full faith and credit of the United States. The details
    of the FDIC guarantee are provided in the FDICs regulations, 12 CFR
    Part 370, and at the FDICs website, www.fdic.gov/tlgp. The expiration
    date of the FDICs guarantee is the earlier of the maturity date of this
    debt or June 30, 2012.

Furthermore, the Master Agreement is explicit in describing the nature of the
guarantee: the bondholder will continue to receive timely payment of principal
and interest. That is, for the lifetime of the guarantee program, payments will
continue as scheduled regardless of the default of the issuer.3 The guarantee is
not merely against the bonds principal, the cash flows as scheduled in the bond
are guaranteed.

     Finally, we observe that the explicit full faith and credit guarantee of cor-
porate debt issued under the FDIC program was honored ex post. In particular,
the FDIC reported in its summary of the Temporary Liquidity Guarantee Pro-
gram that it fully covered the losses suffered by debtholders from the defaults
by six financial institutions that participated in the program. The total amount
of the defaulted principal and interest payments covered by the FDIC was $153
million.4


                                 5. THE DATA


A unique feature of our study is the availability of several proprietary data sets
that will allow us to test directly some of the key empirical implications identified
3
  Though allowed by the DGP, no one issued debt under the program for longer
than the guarantee period, so this guarantee was applicable through the full
lifetime of all of the bonds used in our study.
4
  The six defaulting institutions (and the par amount of defaulted debt) were
Integra Bank ($51 million), Bradford Mid-Tier Company ($2 million), Coastal
Community Bank ($3.8 million), Washington First Financial Group ($34.4 mil-
lion), the Park Avenue Bank ($20 million), and Superior Bank ($40 million).


                                         9
earlier. First, we are fortunate to have access to a private version of the Trade
Reporting and Compliance Engine (TRACE) database. This version differs from
the public version of TRACE in that it explicitly identifies the dealers involved in
each transaction and includes the actual size of each transaction.5 An important
advantage of this is that we can definitively identify the primary dealer for each
corporate bond in the sample since the TRACE data allow us to infer the trading
activity and inventory holdings for each dealer in the market. Second, we also
have access to a supervisory data set containing information about the haircuts
or funding constraints faced by each major dealer in the market. In conjunction
with the TRACE data, this provides us with detailed information about the
funding costs for both the primary dealer as well as the lead underwriter for each
of the bonds in the sample. Summary statistics for the variables described in
this section are given in Table 1.

5.1 The Corporate Bond Pricing Data
The sample of guaranteed corporate bonds consists of 63 fixed coupon bonds
issued under the Debt Guarantee Program of the FDIC and publicly traded
during the sample period from December 2008 to December 2012. As required
by the terms of the program, all of the bonds have fixed principal and bullet
maturity terms, are senior in the capital structure, and have no special features
such as call, put, sinking fund, or conversion provisions. The data source for bond
characteristics such as the bond type, issue date, outstanding amount, maturity,
and coupon rate is the Fixed Income Securities Database (FISD). We limit the
sample to bonds that make fixed semi-annual coupon payments and have at least
180 days to maturity, and thus the data used in the study concludes with trades
occurring on June 28, 2012.

     The data on secondary-market transactions and prices of these bonds are
from the private version of TRACE. This database contains all over-the-counter
trades in publicly traded U.S. corporate bonds, including those issued under the
Debt Guarantee Program.6 We compute the closing transaction price for each
trading day based on institutional sized trades with a volume of at least $100,000.
These trades account for more than 98 percent of the total trading volume.

5
 In contrast, the public version of TRACE data used in most other studies is
subject to a dissemination cap of $5 million per transaction, and all transactions
in excess of $5 million are disseminated as $5MM+.
6
 We filter out erroneous and duplicate entries using the procedure described in
Goldstein, Hotchkiss, and Sirri (2007), which removes 31 percent of TRACE
entries that are trade reversals, cancellations, exact duplicates, or inconsistent
with reporting guidelines.


                                        10
5.2 Primary Dealer Data
For each bond and for each month during the sample period, we identify the
primary dealer as the dealer with the largest inventory holdings of the bond at
the end of the previous month. The details on how the inventory holdings for
each dealer are determined are given in the Appendix.7
     Once the primary dealer for a bond is identified, we use a confidential data
set from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to identify the haircut that
the primary dealer must pay to obtain repo financing for corporate bonds. The
haircut affects the amount of outside financing the primary dealer needs to sup-
port inventory purchases and is an important determinant of the dealer’s funding
liquidity (see Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009)). This data set consists of dis-
aggregated data on haircuts on corporate bond collateral posted by individual
dealers in the tri-party repo market. The tri-party repo market is a key source of
short-term secured funding for securities dealers who typically use the market to
finance their inventory purchases (see Copeland, Duffie, Martin, and McLaugh-
lin (2012)). A third party, called a clearing bank, facilitates the settlement of
tri-party repos by transferring securities and cash from dealers to cash lenders
such as money market funds, securities lenders, and other institutional funding
providers. Cash lenders in this market generally accept a wide range of eligible
securities as collateral, and transaction terms are set for broad collateral classes
such as corporate bonds rather than for specific securities. The market value of
the securities posted as collateral customarily exceeds the amount of cash financ-
ing received from the repo counterparty by an amount called the “haircut.”
     Another important determinant of the cost of obtaining funding is the pri-
mary dealer’s credit risk as a counterparty. To measure this, we obtain daily
market prices for five-year credit default swaps (CDS) contracts on the primary
dealer. The source of this CDS data is Markit. As discussed by Duffie and Liu
(2001), Longstaff, Mithal, and Neis (2005), Blanco, Brennan, and Marsh (2005),
and many others, CDS spreads reflect the market price of insuring against the
default by the firm or entity underlying the CDS contract. Thus, an increase in
the cost of protecting against a default by the primary dealer maps directly into
an increase in the primary dealer’s cost of unsecured funding. In turn, this has
both direct and indirect effects on the primary dealer’s ability to obtain funding
(funding liquidity).

    In corporate bond markets, the lead underwriter of a bond issue often con-
7
 As a robustness check, we use an alternative definition of the primary dealer
as the dealer who handled the highest percentage of trading volume during the
previous month. The empirical results using this alternative definition are very
similar to those we report.


                                        11
tinues to function as a market maker after the bond is issued. Thus, the lead
underwriter often fulfills a role that parallels that of the primary dealer. In fact,
the lead underwriter may actually be the primary dealer for a bond issue in some
cases. In light of this, we use the data sources described above to obtain informa-
tion about the haircut and CDS spread for the lead underwriter for each of the
bonds in the sample. The lead underwriter for each bond is explicitly identified
in the FISD database and we cross-check this information with the prospectus.8
We use these measures of the funding costs of the lead underwriter in parallel
with those for the primary dealer throughout the analysis in the paper.

     Finally, we also obtain CDS spreads for the issuers of the individual bonds
in the sample from Markit. We use this information to test whether the credit
risk of the issuer is related to the mispricing of these corporate bonds. Clearly,
given the full faith and credit guarantee, the credit risk of the issuer should not
affect the pricing of these bonds.
5.3 Institutional Ownership Data

As described above, the TRACE dataset allows us to estimate the inventory
holdings of each dealer in the market for each of the bonds in the sample. We
total these inventory holding across all dealers and divide by the total amount
outstanding to measure the fraction of the bond issue held in inventory by dealers.
We also use the number of dealers holding positions in the bonds in the analysis.

     Additional data on institutional bond holdings is obtained from the eMAXX
database. This data source provides quarterly measures of the amount of each
bond in the sample that is held by institutions such as insurance companies, mu-
tual funds, public pension funds, endowment funds, and foundations. Although
the data on bond holdings does not cover the entire universe of institutional
investors (most bank holding company holdings, for example, are not repre-
sented), it provides the best available coverage for most asset manager types.
We construct two measures of institutional bond holdings based on the eMAXX
database: the number of institutional investors holding a given bond in each
quarter, and the percentage of the outstanding amount of the bond held by the
institutional investors.

5.4 Liquidity Measures

A number of metrics have been proposed to measure bond liquidity and trading
activity. In this study, we use a variety of these measures. First, we use the
outstanding amount of the bond issue as a measure of its availability or liquidity

8
 If there are multiple underwriters, the first underwriter is designated as the lead
underwriter.


                                         12
in the market. Second, we use a dummy variable that takes value one if the bond
is issued as a medium-term note, and zero otherwise. This measure controls for
the possibility that medium-term notes may be less liquid than bonds. Third,
we include the daily effective bid-ask spread computed using the TRACE data.
Fourth, we include the total trading volume for each bond which is also computed
using the TRACE data set (which includes the size of each transaction). Finally,
we compute the Amihud illiquidity measure defined as the price change per mil-
lion dollars traded. The Appendix provides a detailed description on how the
effective bid-ask spread, total trading volume, and Amihud illiquidity measure
are estimated.


   6. MISPRICING OF GUARANTEED CORPORATE BONDS


In this section, we begin by describing how mispricing of the guaranteed corpo-
rate bonds in our sample is identified. We then examine the properties of the
mispricing. To identify mispricing, we use a two-stage procedure. In the first
stage, we take the difference between the yield on a guaranteed corporate bond
and the yield on an equivalent Treasury bond. In the second stage, we subtract
from the yield spread a small component due to the difference in the state income
taxation of corporate and Treasury bonds.
6.1 The Yield Spread

We calculate the yield spread between the guaranteed corporate bonds and Trea-
sury bonds by taking the difference in the yield to maturity for the corporate
bond and the yield to maturity for a Treasury bond with the identical coupon
rate and maturity date. To determine the yields for these matching Treasury
bonds, we use the daily spot curve constructed from off-the-run fixed-coupon
Treasury securities with residual maturities of 90 days or more. The zero coupon
Treasury curve is generated using the functional form proposed by Nelson and
Siegel (1987) as extended by Svennson (1994). A detailed description of the es-
timation methodology is given in Gurkaynak, Sack, and Wright (2006). From
the fitted Treasury spot curve, we calculate the price of a Treasury bond with
the same coupon and maturity as the corporate bond and determine the yield
spread.
6.2 The State Income Tax Adjustment

As discussed in Elton, Gruber, Agrawal, and Mann (2001), corporate bonds are
subject to state income taxation while Treasury bonds are not. Thus, if the
marginal investor in these guaranteed corporate bonds is a taxable entity, then
part of the yield spread may represent the effect of the marginal state income

                                       13
tax rate on the cash flows received by the investor. Following the same line of
analysis as in Elton, Gruber, Agrawal, and Mann, the Appendix shows that the
portion of the yield spread due to the state income tax effect is simply c τs (1−τ ),
where c is the coupon rate, τs is the marginal state income tax rate, and τ is the
marginal federal income tax rate.

      Historically, the effect of state income taxes on corporate bonds has been
difficult to identify since yield spreads are also affected by the credit risk of the
issuer (see the discussion in Elton, Gruber, Agrawal, and Mann (2001)). In our
case, however, all of the corporate bonds have the same credit risk. Thus, the
effect on the marginal state income tax rate on the yield spreads of the bonds
can be estimated directly from a cross-sectional regression of yield spreads on
coupon rates. As is shown in the Appendix, the resulting estimate of τs (1 − τ ) is
0.01655. From Table 1, the average coupon rate for the bonds in the sample is
2.32 percent. Thus, the average size of the state income tax effect is only on the
order of 3.8 basis points. Given the estimated marginal state income tax effect,
we solve for the mispricing of the guaranteed corporate bonds by subtracting
0.01655 times the coupon rate of the bond from the yield spread.9

6.3 The Mispricing Estimates
Table 2 provides summary statistics for the mispricing of each of the bonds in
the sample. The average mispricing is positive and highly statistically signifi-
cant for all 63 bonds in the sample. The average mispricing across all bonds is
20.07 basis points. The median mispricing across all bonds is 14.07 basis points.
Furthermore, 91.72 percent of all mispricing estimates are positive. These re-
sults provide strong evidence that guaranteed bonds with the same cash flows as
Treasury securities trade at a significant spread to Treasuries during most of the
sample period—a clear violation of the law of one price.
     Figure 1 plots the time series of average mispricing across all bonds in the
sample. As shown, there is considerable time series variation in mispricing over
time. Average mispricing reaches a peak of roughly 200 basis points in early
2009, but then shows a declining trend during most of the sample period. By
the end of the sample period, average mispricing converges to near zero.

    A notable feature of the data, however, is the large dispersion of mispricing
across bonds at any given point in time. This is shown in Figure 2 which plots
9
 To ensure that the results are robust to the estimate of the marginal state
income tax rate, we reestimate all the time series and cross-sectional regressions
in the paper with the coupon rate (or change in the coupon rate) included as
a control. The results from these regressions are virtually identical to those we
report.


                                         14
the mispricing estimates for all of the bonds in the sample. During much of the
sample period, the cross-sectional standard deviation of mispricing is in the range
of 20 to 30 basis points. Even near the end of the sample period when average
mispricing has converged to nearly zero, we still see evidence of significant cross-
sectional dispersion in individual mispricing estimates. In subsequent sections,
we will use both the time series and cross-sectional variation in the mispricing
of these bonds to test directly the empirical implications of the models identified
earlier.


          7. IS THERE COMMONALITY IN MISPRICING?


The theoretical literature on mispricing offers two complementary perspectives.
On one hand, the theory provides a number of potential reasons why mispricing
for individual assets may occur. These include security-specific transaction costs
and other types of illiquidity. On the other hand, many of the models in the
literature such as Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009) and Duffie (2010) imply
that mispricing should display commonality across assets. In this section, we
examine how much of the variation in the mispricing of guaranteed bonds can
be attributed to common factors.

     To this end, we first compute pairwise correlations for the mispricing of
the bonds in the sample. In particular, we compute the correlation between
the mispricing of all pairs of bonds for which there are at least 100 days with
data for both bonds during the sample period. This results in a set of 1659
pairwise correlations. The average pairwise correlation is 0.74. The standard
deviation of the pairwise correlations is 0.22. The histogram of these pairwise
correlations is shown in Figure 3. As shown, the pairwise correlations follow
a bimodal distribution with one mode centered at about 0.70 and the other at
about 0.90. The vast majority of the pairwise correlations are greater than 0.50.
Just over ten percent of the bonds, however, have correlations of less than 0.50.
Furthermore, about two percent of all pairwise correlations are negative. This
distribution of mispricing correlations across the bonds in the sample suggests
that mispricing is driven by both common and bond-specific factors.

     To provide additional perspective, we also conduct a principal components
analysis based on the correlation matrix of mispricing for the bonds. In doing
this, we limit the analysis to the 58 bonds for which we have at least 100 daily
observations in common with other bonds. Table 3 summarizes the results of the
principal component analysis. The first principal component accounts for two-
thirds of the total variance, and the second principal component explains about
an additional 13 percent. Thus, a significant component of the mispricing appears


                                        15
common across bonds used in the sample. However, extending the analysis to
include as many as the first seven principal components still explains only 90
percent of the variance. This indicates that mispricing is also affected by factors
that are specific to the individual bonds.


                    8. WHAT DRIVES MISPRICING?


The previous section shows that a large proportion of the variation in mispricing
is driven by common factors, resulting in correlated movements in mispricing. In
this section, we explore the factors that drive the common variation in the time
series of average mispricing. Specifically, we estimate time series regressions
of weekly changes in average mispricing on both contemporaneous and lagged
changes in a number of market-wide variables. To calculate the weekly changes in
average mispricing, we take the difference between successive end-of-week average
mispricing values.

     As explanatory variables in the regression, we include several measures of the
funding liquidity or capital costs faced by dealers making markets in the bonds.
The first is the weighted average haircut that these dealers pay in financing their
inventory, where the weights are based on inventory holdings. As discussed in
Gromb and Vayanos (2002), Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009), and many oth-
ers, changes in the haircut directly affect the amount of capital dealers require to
function as market makers. The second variable is the Libor-OIS spread. This
spread provides a measure of the funding costs that dealers face in financing con-
tractual positions such as swaps and derivatives. The Libor-OIS spread has been
used as a proxy for dealer funding costs in a number of recent papers including
Filipovic and Trolle (2013) and Nyborg and Ostberg (2014).10 Another impor-
tant determinant of dealers’ capital costs is their credit risk as a counterparty.
To capture the impact dealers’ credit risk on their funding liquidity, we include
the weighted average CDS spread of dealers making markets in these guaranteed
bonds, where the weights are based on the inventory positions of these dealers.
The dealer CDS spread has been used as a measure of capital constraints in the
financial markets in many other studies including Gilchrist and Zakrajsek (2012)
and Copeland, Martin, and Walker (2014). Finally, motivated by the discus-
sion in Brunnermeier and Pedersen, we include a measure of market volatility
in the regressions. In particular, we use the MOVE index which reflects the im-
plied volatility of interest rates as inferred from interest rate swap options. The
Libor-OIS and MOVE index data are obtained from the Bloomberg system. Our
10
 For a detailed discussion of the Libor-OIS spread, see Schwartz (2016), and
Sundaresan, Wang, and Yang (2016).


                                        16
regressions include four lags of both the dependent variable and the explanatory
variables to allow for mean reversion in mispricing and lead-lag effects.
     Table 4 summarizes the regression results. In the first specification, we test
whether changes in corporate bond haircuts explain changes in average mispric-
ing. The results provide direct support for the funding liquidity models. In
particular, changes in mispricing are significantly positively related to both con-
temporaneous and lagged changes in haircut requirements. The economic mag-
nitude of these effects is likewise very significant. For example, a one-percentage
point contemporaneous shock to the haircut is associated with an increase in
mispricing by 4.3 basis points, and a lagged shock of the same magnitude trans-
lates into an increase in mispricing by as much as 8.8 basis points. These findings
confirm the importance of repo market frictions for mispricing.

     The next specification in Table 4 includes changes in dealers’ CDS spreads
along with haircuts. The contemporaneous changes in CDS spreads and up to
three lags are significant and positive, consistent with the theory that dealer
credit risk drives up their funding costs and increases mispricing. The contem-
poraneous coefficient estimate indicates that a one-percentage point increase in
dealer CDS spreads is associated with an increase in mispricing of 4.9 basis
points. Notably, the coefficient on haircuts remains significantly positive after
we control for dealer credit spreads, implying that frictions in secured funding
markets affect mispricing independently of dealer credit risk.

     The third specification in Table 4 includes the Libor-OIS spread among the
explanatory variables. As discussed above, the Libor-OIS spread is an important
gauge of liquidity in unsecured funding markets. The coefficient estimate on the
contemporaneous funding spread is 0.3, which is significant at the five percent
level. As we would expect if credit risk is an important determinant of unsecured
funding costs, several lags of CDS spreads become insignificant after we control
for the Libor-OIS spread, although the contemporaneous effect of CDS spreads
on mispricing remains statistically significant.

     These results do not change if we control for bond market volatility in the
last column of Table 4. Frictions in both secured and unsecured funding markets,
as measured by changes in haircuts and the Libor-OIS spread, are significantly
related to mispricing, while dealer credit risk, measured by the CDS spread,
remains significant at the 10 percent level.11

11
  As a robustness check, we also reestimate the regressions in Table 4 using only
data from the third quarter of 2009 onward to see if the results are driven pri-
marily by the “peak” of the crisis. The magnitude, signs, and significance of the
coefficients are generally similar to those reported in Table 4 (with the exception
of the results for changes in haircuts—the coefficient for the contemporaneous

                                        17
                 9. IS MISPRICING DESTABILIZING?


The Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009) model presents the possibility of desta-
bilizing spirals in asset prices perpetuated by funding pressures. Proposition 3 in
their paper asserts that such a spiral could emerge when haircuts are increasing
in non-fundamental factors of asset prices, such as liquidity premia. In the case
of a funding shock to speculators, market liquidity falls leading to a reduction
in positions by the speculator (that is, sales), which cause higher price volatility,
which leads to higher haircuts, which reinforces the need to reduce positions:
thus, the spiral.
     We think of our measure of mispricing as reflecting a non-fundamental factor
that could affect market liquidity. We examine the relationship of this variable
with other variables that could themselves represent—or have an effect on—
funding liquidity. We do this in the context of a standard reduced-form model
of endogenous interaction, the vector autoregression (VAR). Specifically, we ex-
amine a four-lag VAR of weekly-Friday average mispricing, haircuts, and the
weighted average of the CDS spreads of dealers in the corporate bond market.

     Before we begin, we note that the aggregated time series data for mispricing,
haircuts and CDS spreads series are not all stationary. For the number of obser-
vations we have on this data, an augmented Dickey-Fuller test of the hypothesis
that a variable is I(1) against the alternative that it is I(0) has a five-percent
critical value of −2.88.12 The test statistic for the mispricing series is −7.20, a
rejection of the unit root null, while the test-statistic for the haircuts series is
a borderline (near the ten percent critical value) −2.59 and the statistic for the
CDS series indicates that we fail to reject the null of a unit root at −1.99. Because
of the mix of integrated and stationary variables, we conduct the VAR analysis
in differences rather than levels for all of the variables, but show a measure of
the level effect in the figures below.
     The coefficient estimates from the VAR are given in Table 5 and show signs
of fairly quick mean reversion. As is frequently the case for financial data, the
weekly changes in the variables oscillate fairly rapidly around zero. Moving to
the impulse response functions, we examine the interaction among variables in
response to orthogonalized shocks. In each case, we begin with the response to
an orthogonalized shock to mispricing so that we can examine the model for any


change in haircuts is only significant at the ten percent level).
12
  This relatively small sample likely plays a role in these findings of unit roots,
particularly in haircuts.


                                         18
signs of mispricing’s destabilizing effects.13
     Our first set of impulse responses, shown in Figure 4, demonstrates behavior
that appears somewhat consistent with a spiral story of the kind Brunnermeier
and Pedersen (2009) propose. Before we continue, however, it is important to
note that we are not asserting that the bonds in our study necessarily follow
the spiral mechanics themselves as individual bonds. Instead, what we can ex-
amine here with aggregated time series data is the effect of shocks to this non-
fundamental factor which could likely be a component within all corporate bond
spreads.
      The top row of Figure 4 is the response of haircuts to a shock to the mis-
pricing variable. The solid blue line in each figure shows the impulse response
function, with the dotted red lines tracing out the path of the 5th and 95th quan-
tiles of the bootstrap distribution of the impulse response function. The panel
on the left of the figure is the orthogonalized response of the weekly changes
in haircuts to a one standard deviation shock in the weekly changes in average
mispricing. The panel on the right is the cumulative version of the same impulse
response function, which gives a sense of the level effect in haircuts of a perma-
nent shock to mispricing of the same magnitude.14 The bottom row of Figure
4 provides slightly weaker (statistically speaking) evidence consistent with the
other half of the spiral story by showing the response of mispricing to haircuts.
Again, the left panel shows the orthogonalized response of weekly changes in
average mispricing to a one standard deviation shock in average haircuts, with
the cumulative measure for this effect in the panel to the right. While the effects
we find are not economically large, they are directionally consistent with the idea
that a non-fundamental factor, perhaps related with market liquidity, could be
interrelated with measure of dealer funding costs in such a way that it may be
plausible to generate destabilizing dynamics, as in Brunnermeier and Pedersen
(2009).

     Figure 5 examines the relationship between mispricing and a measure of the
credit risk of dealers in the corporate bond market, their CDS spreads. Likely
due to the mitigating effects of fluctuating haircuts—which are themselves moved
by mispricing as shown above—we see in the top row of Figure 5 that a shock to
13
  The orthogonalization is accomplished simply with Cholesky decomposition
and thus the ordering of the VAR variables matters. The ordering used here was
CDS, mispricing, haircuts, and the order matters fairly little for the direction-
ality and general contours of the impulse response functions shown, though the
statistical significance somewhat varies across orderings.
14
  This was done to balance the need to conduct the VAR in changes with the
desire to see level effects.


                                         19
the average mispricing in the corporate bond market does not appear to have a
statistically recognizable effect on the credit risk of intermediaries. Interestingly,
when we look at shocks going in the other direction, that is when we examine
the effects of shocks to the perceived credit quality of the dealers in corporate
bond networks, we find that these shocks do appear to have an effect on mispric-
ing. That is, when the intermediaries in this market experience a shock to CDS
spreads that could possibly make their cost of capital or funding cost increase, it
increases the average mispricing factor. Thus, it may be possible that a shock to
the perceived credit quality of dealers in the corporate bond market could result
in the kind of deleveraging that initiates spiral-like behavior through mispricing
and haircuts as shown in Figure 4.
     To further examine funding relationships, we perform one additional analysis
by adding to the VAR the spread of three-month Libor over the three-month
overnight indexed swap (OIS) rate, a more direct measure of how counterparty
risk in unsecured funding markets increases funding costs.15 Figure 6 shows the
interplay between shocks in mispricing and shocks to this Libor-OIS spread.
The top row shows the effect of an orthogonalized shock to mispricing on these
Libor-OIS spreads, while the bottom row shows the effect of a shock to Libor-
OIS spreads on mispricing. These results, although not economically large, are
also consistent with a theory that links funding costs—in unsecured or secured
funding markets—with measures of market liquidity.


            10. WHAT EXPLAINS THE CROSS SECTION?


In this section, we test the cross-sectional implications of the various models
discussed earlier. To do this, we regress month-end mispricing on a number of
different categories of explanatory variables.

     The first category consists of bond-specific characteristics. In particular, we
include the time to maturity and the coupon rate for the bonds. We include
the time to maturity since it represents the horizon over which the final conver-
gence of the corporate bonds to their fundamental value is guaranteed. Time to
convergence plays a central role in determining the properties of potential mis-
pricing in models such as those in MacKinlay and Ramaswamy (1988) and Liu
and Longstaff (2004). We use the coupon rate as a control for potential liquidity
effects and for any residual state marginal income tax effects.

15
  Cholesky decomposition is again used for impulse response orthogonalization in
this analysis and the Libor-OIS spread variable is ordered last (CDS, mispricing,
haircuts and Libor-OIS).


                                         20
     The second category consists of the CDS spread for the issuer of the bond.
In theory, the credit risk of the issuer should not affect the pricing of the bond
given the full faith and credit risk guarantee by the U.S. We include the CDS
spread of the issuer as a control for the possibility that investors believe that
issuer credit risk still plays a factor.

     The third category consists of measures of dealer funding constraints and
capital costs. We consider two types of intermediaries for each bond: its primary
dealer (i.e., the dealer with the largest inventory holdings for the bond at the end
of the previous month), and its lead underwriter. The funding constraints of each
type of intermediary are measured in two alternative ways: the intermediary’s
CDS spread and the haircut that the intermediary pays to finance corporate
bonds in the tri-party repo market. CDS spreads measure the intermediary’s
credit risk as a counterparty, and therefore reflect the cost of unsecured funding.
Haircuts play an important role in the funding liquidity models of Gromb and
Vayanos (2002) and Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009) because they provide
a direct measure of the amount of capital an intermediary must set aside for
inventory funding.

     The fourth category consists of measures of dealer intermediation and mar-
ket demographics. In particular, we include the number of dealers that hold
positions in each bond as well as the percentage of the total amount outstand-
ing of each bond that is held in inventory by these dealers. The role that
dealer intermediation plays in asset pricing is studied in Grossman and Miller
(1988), Duffie, Gârleanu, and Pedersen (2005), He and Krishnamurthy (2013),
and Adrian, Etula, and Muir (2014). In Grossman and Miller, the equilibrium
level of mispricing if market makers supply immediacy by their continuous pres-
ence and willingness to bear inventory risk. In Duffie, Gârleanu, and Pedersen
(2005), mispricing is lower if investors can more easily find market makers who
compete with each other for order flow. In He and Krishnamurthy, financial in-
termediaries are the marginal investors who determine risk premia during crises.
In Adrian, Etula, and Muir, the value of the wealth of financial intermediaries
determines the stochastic discount factor. We also include the number of insti-
tutional investors who hold positions in excess of $100,000 in each bond as well
as the percentage of the total amount outstanding of each bond that is held by
these institutional investors. Institutional ownership plays a central role in mod-
els such as Vayanos and Wang (2005), Duffie, Gârleanu, and Pedersen (2007).
In Vayanos and Wang, liquidity concentrates endogenously in assets traded by
institutional investors, and this translates into equilibrium price differentials. In
Duffie, Gârleanu, and Pedersen (2007), mispricing is smaller when the fraction
of qualified owners is greater.

    The final category consists of liquidity measures for the individual bonds.


                                         21
These include the notional amount of the bond outstanding, the total monthly
trading volume, the effective bid-ask spread, the Amihud measure of price impact,
and an indicator that takes value one if the bond was issued as a medium-
term note, and zero otherwise. These measures are motivated by the extensive
literature on liquidity in fixed income markets, and many of these variables have
been used as liquidity proxies in previous empirical studies.16
     In the cross-sectional regressions, mispricing is measured at month end. Is-
suer and dealer credit risk, dealer haircuts, bond liquidity, and the number of
dealers are measured over the previous month, and dealer inventories are mea-
sured at the end of the previous month. The number of investors and institutional
holdings are measured at the end of the previous quarter. The regressions are
estimated with time fixed effects, and standard errors are double clustered by
issuer and time period following Thompson (2011).

     Table 6 reports the results from cross-sectional regressions of mispricing on
the explanatory variables. The first or baseline specification shows that mispric-
ing is strongly related to residual maturity, which alone explains 55 percent of the
cross-sectional variation in guaranteed bond spreads. Short-term bonds that are
guaranteed by the government are de-facto cash equivalents regardless of their
secondary market liquidity because they can be redeemed at maturity with zero
price impact or transaction costs. In addition, as discussed by Longstaff, Mithal,
and Neis (2005), short-maturity bonds may be more liquid due to institutional
demand and the existence of investment clienteles. Our findings confirm the in-
terpretation of time to convergence as an important determinant of bond mispric-
ing, consistent with MacKinlay and Ramaswamy (1988) and Liu and Longstaff
(2004). In contrast, coupon is not significantly related to mispricing, as we would
expect since mispricing has been adjusted for the state income tax effect.17

      In the second specification in Table 6, we include the issuers CDS spread
among the explanatory variables to examine whether mispricing may in part re-
flect the residual credit risk of the issuer. The coefficient estimate for the issuer’s
CDS spread is not statistically significant in this specification, and becomes zero
or slightly negative in specifications that include additional explanatory variables.
These findings confirm that issuer credit risk is not a significant determinant of
16
  For example, see Crabbe and Turner (1995), Chen, Lesmond, and Wei (2007),
and Dick-Nielsen, Feldhütter, and Lando (2012).
17
  Without the adjustment for the effect of state income taxes, the estimated
coefficient on coupon is 0.01655, significant at the one percent level–almost ex-
actly equal to the tax effect theorized by Elton, Gruber, Agrawal, and Mann
(2001). All other coefficient estimates remain essentially unchanged if we use the
unadjusted spreads in the regression.


                                          22
mispricing in the sample of guaranteed corporate bonds.
     We examine next whether bond mispricing is related to intermediary funding
constraints and capital costs. The third specification in Table 6 shows that the
lead underwriters CDS spread and the primary dealers CDS spread are both sig-
nificantly positively related to bond mispricing. A one-percentage point increase
in the lead underwriters CDS spread is associated with a 2.1 basis point increase
in mispricing, and a similar increase in the prime dealers CDS spread is associ-
ated with a 1.1 basis point increase in mispricing. In addition, a one-percentage
point increase in the haircut on corporate bond collateral posted by the primary
dealer is associated with a 0.5 basis point increase in mispricing. These findings
show that the secured and unsecured funding costs of dealer intermediaries affect
mispricing at the individual bond level, providing strong direct support for the
funding liquidity models of mispricing.

     In the fourth specification in Table 6, we test whether mispricing of individ-
ual bonds can be explained by the competitive dynamics and dealer intermedi-
ation in over-the-counter markets. The number of dealers making markets for a
bond is negatively related to its mispricing at the 10 percent significance level,
indicating that dealer intermediation reduces mispricing. The number of institu-
tional investors variable is not significant. Dealer inventory holdings are strongly
negatively related to mispricing. In particular, a ten-percentage point increase
in dealer inventory holdings (as a percentage of the outstanding amount) reduces
mispricing by 1.2 basis points. In contrast, the holdings of other institutional
investors such as insurance companies and pension or mutual funds are not a
significant factor in explaining mispricing. These results support models that
stress the importance of dealer intermediation in over-the-counter markets. For
example, in the model of Grossman and Miller (1988), the equilibrium level of
mispricing is lower if market makers supply immediacy by their continuous pres-
ence and willingness to bear inventory risk. In the model of Duffie, Gârleanu,
and Pedersen (2005), mispricing is lower if investors can more easily find market
makers who compete with each other for order flow. Our findings that bonds with
larger dealer inventories and a greater number of dealers and are less mispriced
provide empirical support for these theories.
     In the fifth specification in Table 6, we include several commonly used prox-
ies for corporate bond liquidity, such as the outstanding amount, bond type,
trading volume, bid-ask spread, and the Amihud measure. The log of the out-
standing amount is significantly negatively related to mispricing, indicating that
larger bond issues command a premium over small issues. However, the magni-
tude of the size effect is quite small; a ten percent increase in the outstanding
amount is associated with a reduction in mispricing of only -0.16 basis points
(−1.72 ∗ ln(1.10)). In addition, the log of trading volume is positively associated


                                        23
with mispricing, although the magnitude of the effect of the increase is only 0.07
basis points per ten percent change in volume. Bid-ask spreads and the Amihud
measure are not significantly related to mispricing after we control for factors
such as dealer intermediation. Notably, the variables related to dealer fund-
ing conditions and dealer intermediation such as primary dealer haircuts, CDS
spreads, and dealer inventories remain statistically and economically significant,
showing that dealer intermediaries are of first order importance in explaining
mispricing.18

     Finally, as a robustness check on the results, we reestimate the cross-sectional
regressions with both issuer fixed effects and monthly fixed effects. The regression
results are reported in Table 7. As shown, the results from these cross-sectional
regressions are very similar to those reported in Table 6.


                              11. CONCLUSION


Recent research has documented a number of cases in which securities with es-
sentially identical cash flows frequently trade at different prices. At the same
time, a number of theories have been proposed to explain these apparent viola-
tions of the law of one price. Foremost among the theoretical explanations are
dealer liquidity and funding constraints, the cost and availability of intermediary
capital, and liquidity effects along with their implications for transaction costs
and asset prices. In this paper, we use a unique data set of corporate bonds
explicitly guaranteed by the full faith and credit of the United States combined
with proprietary information on the funding costs, haircuts, and inventory posi-
tions of the primary dealers making markets in each individual bond to test the
empirical implications of these theories.

     Our analysis of guaranteed bonds shows a high degree of commonality of
mispricing of the bonds in the sample, but it also reveals that there is a substan-
tial bond-specific variation in mispricing. Further time-series tests show that the
common variation in mispricing is positively related to the average haircuts that
dealers must pay to finance their corporate bond inventories in secured funding
markets along with proxies for unsecured funding costs such as the Libor-OIS
spread and the average CDS spread of bond dealers. Mispricing also has the

18
  For robustness, we reestimate Table 6 using only data from the third quarter
of 2009 onward. The results are very consistent with those reported in Table
6. In particular, the significance of the primary dealer and lead underwriter
CDS spreads remains the same or becomes stronger, while the impact of primary
dealer haircuts weakens slightly (t-statistic drops to 1.85).


                                         24
potential to be destabilizing in the sense that increases in mispricing lead to
short-term increases in margins and dealer funding costs, although the effects
are short-lived and dissipate over a period of several weeks.

     The bonds in the sample all trade in corporate bond markets but the individ-
ual bonds are underwritten and intermediated by heterogeneous dealers. Each
of these dealers have different credit risk and access to funding, which allows
us to directly test the implications of several theoretical models. Specifically,
we find that differences in characteristics of the intermediaries trading specific
bonds in the market help to explain the differences in the levels of mispricing
across those bonds. Measures of dealer funding constraints and capital costs—
such as primary dealer CDS spreads and the haircuts they pay to finance their
inventories in tri-party repo—are positively related to mispricing at the individ-
ual bond level. Dealer inventories, the number of dealers making markets for a
certain bond, and the issue size are all negatively related to mispricing. The is-
suers credit spread and most bond-specific liquidity metrics are not significantly
related to mispricing after accounting for dealer intermediation.

     Taken together, these results provide strong support for theoretical models
in which disruptions to intermediary funding costs and capacity lead to situa-
tions in which prices diverge from fundamental value. In particular, the models
based on margin constraints, such as Chowdhry and Nanda (1998), Gromb and
Vayanos (2002), and Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009), are directly supported
by our findings that haircuts paid by primary dealers to finance inventory affect
mispricing both in the time series and in the cross-section. The implication of
Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009) that mispricing is destabilizing and that hair-
cuts and mispricing are mutually reinforcing is consistent with our finding that
increases in mispricing lead to short-term increases in haircuts and funding costs
for dealers. Shocks to dealer capital and unsecured funding costs play a similar
role as shocks to haircuts, as evidenced by the finding that primary dealer and
bond underwriter CDS spreads affect mispricing. These findings broadly sup-
port a number of theories such as Adrien, Etula, and Muir (2014) and Kondor
and Vayanos (2015) in which intermediary capital constraints affect asset prices.
We also find some support for models that emphasize the role of dealers and
dealer inventories in over-the counter markets, such as the model of Grossman
and Miller (1988) and Duffie, Gârleanu, and Pedersen (2005). Finally, the results
provide evidence that asset prices can be driven by forces that are unrelated to
either cash flows or discount rates, and may represent an important source of
systematic risk to investors since they have a high degree of commonality across
assets and are prone to potentially destabilizing dynamics.




                                       25
                              REFERENCES


Acharya, Viral V., and Lasse H. Pedersen, 2005, Asset Pricing with Liquidity
Risk, Journal of Financial Economics 77, 375-410.

Adrien, Tobias, and Nina Boyarchenko, 2012, Intermediary Leverage Cycles and
Financial Stability, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports, no. 567.
Adrien, Tobias, Erkko Etula, and Tyler Muir, 2014, Financial Intermediaries and
the Cross-Section of Asset Returns, Journal of Finance 69, 2557-2596.

Allen, Franklin, and Douglas Gale, 2000, Financial Contagion, Journal of Polit-
ical Economy 108, 1-33.

Amihud, Yakov, 2002, Illiquidity and Stock Returns: Cross-Section and Time-
Series Effects, Journal of Financial Markets 5, 31-56.
Amihud, Yakov, and Haim Mendelson, 1986, Asset Pricing and the Bid-Ask
Spread, Journal of Financial Economics 17, 223-249.

Amihud, Yakov, and Haim Mendelson, 1992, Liquidity, Maturity, and the Yields
on U.S. Treasury Securities, Journal of Finance 46, 1411-1425.
Amihud, Yakov, Beni Lauterbach, and Haim Mendelson, 1997, Market Micro-
structure and Securities Values: Evidence from the Tel Aviv Exchange, Journal
of Financial Economics 45, 365-390.
Amihud, Yakov, Haim Mendelson, and Lasse H. Pedersen, 2005, Liquidity and
Asset Prices, Foundations and Trends in Finance 1, 269-364.

Ang, Andrew, and Nicolas Bollen, 2010, Locked Up by a Lockup: Valuing Liq-
uidity as a Real Option, Financial Management 39, 1069-1095.
Bai, Jennie, and Pierre Collin-Dufresne, 2011, The CDS-Bond Basis, Working
paper, Georgetown University.

Basak, Suleyman, and Benjamin Croitoru, 2000, Equilibrium Mispricing in a
Capital Market with Portfolio Constraints, Review of Financial Studies 13, 715-
748.

Basak, Suleyman, and Domenico Cuoco, 1998, An Equilibrium Model with Re-
stricted Stock Market Participation, Review of Financial Studies 11, 309-341.
Basak, Suleyman, and Anna Pavlova, 2013, Asset Prices and Institutional In-
vestors, American Economic Review 103, 1728-1758.



                                      26
Berkman, H., and V. R. Eleswarapu, 1998, Short-Term Traders and Liquidity: A
Test Using Bombay Stock Exchange Data, Journal of Financial Economics 47,
339-355.

Blanco, Roberton, Simon Brennan, and Ian W. Marsh, 2005, An Empirical Anal-
ysis of the Dynamic Relation Between Investment-Grade Bonds and Credit De-
fault Swaps, Journal of Finance 60, 2255-2281.
Boudoukh, Jacob, and Robert Whitelaw, 1991, The Benchmark Effect in the
Japanese Government Bond Market, Journal of Fixed Income 1, 52-59.

Boudoukh, Jacob, and Robert Whitelaw, 1993, Liquidity as a Choice Variable: A
Lesson from the Japanese Government Bond Market, Review of Financial Studies
6, 265-292.

Brennan, Michael J., and Ashley Wang, 2010, The Mispricing Return Premium,
Review of Financial Studies 23, 3437-3468.
Brenner, Menachem, Rafi Eldor, and Schmuel Hauser, 2001, The Price of Options
Illiquidity, Journal of Finance 56, 789-805.

Brunnermeier, Markus, and Lasse H. Pedersen, 2009, Market Liquidity and Fund-
ing Liquidity, Review of Financial Studies 22, 2201-2238.

Brunnermeier, Markus, and Yuliy Sannikov, 2014, A Macroeconomic Model with
a Financial Sector, American Economic Review 104, 379-421.
Caballero, Ricardo, 1995, Near-rationality, Heterogeneity, and Aggregate Con-
sumption, Journal of Money Credit and Banking 27, 29-48.

Chacko, George C., Jakub W. Jurek, and Erik Stafford, 2008, The Price of
Immediacy, Journal of Finance 63, 1253-1290.
Chen, Long, David A. Lesmond, and Jason Wei, 2007, Corporate Yield Spreads
and Bond Liquidity, Journal of Finance 62, 119-149.

Chowdhry, Bhagwan, and Vikram Nanda, 1998, Leverage and Market Stability:
The Role of Margin Rules and Price Limits, Journal of Business 71, 179-210.

Cole, Hal, Yi-Li Chien, and Hanno Lustig, 2012, Is the Volatility of the Market
Price of Risk due to Intermittent Portfolio Rebalancing? American Economic
Review.
Constantinides, George M., 1986, Capital Market Equilibrium with Transaction
Costs, Journal of Political Economy 94, 842-862.

Copeland, Adam, Darrell Duffie, Antoine Martin, and Susan McLaughlin, 2012,

                                      27
Key Mechanics of the U.S. Trip-Party Repo Market, FRBNY Economic Policy
Review November, 17-28.
Copeland, Adam, Antoine Martin, and Michael Walker, 2014, Repo Runs: Evi-
dence from the Tri-Party Repo Market, Journal of Finance 69, 2343-2380.

Copeland, Thomas E., and Dan Galai, 1983, Information Effects on the Bid-Ask
Spread, Journal of Finance 38, 1457-1469.

Cornell, Bradford, and Alan C. Shapiro, 1989, The Mispricing of U.S. Treasury
Bonds: A Case Study, Review of Financial Studies 2, 297-310.
Coval, Joshua D., and Erik Stafford, 2007, Asset Fire Sales (and Purchases) in
Equity Markets, Journal of Financial Economics 86, 479-512.

Coval, Joshua D., Jakub W. Jurek, and Erik Stafford, 2009, Economic Catastro-
phe Bonds, American Economic Review 99, 628-666.
Crabbe, Leland E., and Christopher M. Turner, 1995, Does the Liquidity of
a Debt Issue Increase with its Size? Evidence from the Corporate Bond and
Medium-Term Note Markets, Journal of Finance 50, 1719-1734.
Cremers, Martijn, and David Weinbaum, 2010, Deviations from Put-Call Parity
and Stock Return Predictability, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis
45, 335-367.

Demsetz, Harold, 1968, The Cost of Transacting, Quarterly Journal of Economics
82, 33-53.

Dick-Nielsen, Jens, Peter Feldḧutter, and David Lando, 2012, Corporate Bond
Liquidity Before and After the Onset of the Subprime Crisis, Journal of Financial
Economics 103, 471-492.
Duffie, Darrell, 2010, Asset Price Dynamics with Slow-Moving Capital, Journal
of Finance 65, 1237-1267.

Duffie, Darrell, Nicolae Gârleanu, and Lasse H. Pedersen, 2005, Over the Counter
Markets, Econometrica 73, 1815-1847.

Duffie, Darrell, Nicolae Gârleanu, and Lasse H. Pedersen, 2007, Valuation in
Over-the-Counter Markets, Review of Financial Studies 20, 1865-1900.
Duffie, Darrell, and Jun Liu, 2001, Floating-Fixed Credit Spreads, Financial
Analysts Journal 57, 73-87.

Duffie, Darrell, Semyon Malamud, and Gustavo Manso, 2015, Information Per-
colation in Segmented Markets, Journal of Economic Theory 157, 1130-1158.

                                       28
Duffie, Darrell, and Bruno Strulovici, 2012, Capital Mobility and Asset Pricing,
Econometrica 80, 2469-2509.
Eisfeldt, Andrea L., 2004, Endogenous Liquidity in Asset Markets, Journal of
Finance 59, 1-30.

Eisfeldt, Andrea L., and Adriano Rampini, 2006, Capital Reallocation and Liq-
uidity, Journal of Monetary Economics 53, 369-399.

Elton, Edwin J., Martin J. Gruber, Deepak Agrawal, and Christopher Mann,
2001, Explaining the Rate Spread on Corporate Bonds, Journal of Finance 56,
247-277.
Filipovic, Damir, and Anders B. Trolle, 2013, The Term Structure of Interbank
Risk, Journal of Financial Economics 109, 707-733.

Fleckenstein, Matthias, Francis A. Longstaff, and Hanno Lustig, 2014, The TIPS-
Treasury Bond Puzzle, Journal of Finance 69, 2151-2197.

Gabaix, Xavier, and David Laibson, 2001, The 6D Bias and the Equity Premium
Puzzle, NBER Macroeconomics Annual 16, 257-312.
Gârleanu, Nicolae, and Lasse H. Pedersen, 2011, Margin-Based Asset Pricing and
Deviations from the Law of One Price, Review of Financial Studies 22, 4259-4299.

Gilchrist, Simon, and Egon Zakrajsek, 2012, Credit Spreads and Business Cycle
Fluctuations, The American Economic Review 102, 1692-1720.
Glosten, Lawrence R., and Lawrence E. Harris, 1988, Estimating the Components
of the Bid/Ask Spread, Journal of Financial Economics 21, 123-142.

Goldstein, Michael A., Edith S. Hotchkiss, and Erik R. Sirri, 2007, Transparency
and Liquidity: A Controlled Experiment on Corporate Bonds, Review of Finan-
cial Studies 20, 235-273.

Grinblatt, Mark, and Francis A. Longstaff, 2000, Financial Innovation and the
Role of Derivative Securities: An Empirical Analysis of the U.S. Treasury’s
STRIPS Program, Journal of Finance 55, 1415-1436.

Gromb, Denis, and Dimitri Vayanos, 2002, Equilibrium and Welfare in Markets
with Financial Constrained Arbitrageurs, Journal of Financial Economics 66,
361-407.
Grossman, Sanford J., and Merton H. Miller, 1988, Liquidity and Market Struc-
ture, Journal of Finance 43, 617-633.

Grossman, Sanford J., and Jean-Luc Vila, 1992, Optimal Dynamic Trading with

                                      29
Leverage Constraints, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 27, 151-
168.
Gurkaynak, Refet S., Brian Sack, and Johnathan H. Wright, 2006, The U.S.
Treasury Yield Curve: 1961 to the Present, FEDS Working Paper 2006-28.

He, Zhiguo, and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2013, Intermediary Asset Pricing, Amer-
ican Economic Review 103, 732-770.

He, Zhiguo, Bryan Kelly, and Asaf Manela, 2016, Intermediary Asset Pricing:
New Evidence from Many Asset Classes, Working Paper, University of Chicago.
Huang, Jennifer, and Jiang Wang, 2009, Liquidity and Market Crashes, Review
of Financial Studies 22, 2607-2643.

Huang, Jennifer, and Jiang Wang, 2010, Market Liquidity, Asset Prices, and
Welfare, Journal of Financial Economics 95, 107-127.
Jordan, Bradford, Randy Jorgensen, and David Kuipers, 2000, The Relative
Pricing of U.S. Treasury STRIPS, Journal of Financial Economics 46, 67-102.

Kahl, Matthias, Jun Liu, and Francis A. Longstaff, 2003, Paper Millionaires:
How Valuable is Stock to a Stockholder Who is Restricted from Selling it?, Jour-
nal of Financial Economics 67, 385-410.

Kamara, Avi, 1994, Liquidity, Taxes, and Short-Term Treasury Yields, Journal
of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 29, 403-417.
Kondor, Peter, and Dimitri Vayanos, 2015, Liquidity Risk and the Dynamics of
Arbitrage Capital, Working Paper London School of Economics.

Kyle, Albert S., and Wei Xiong, 2001, Contagion as a Wealth Effect, Journal of
Finance 56, 1401-1440.

Lamont, Owen A, and Richard H. Thaler, 2003, Can the Market Add and Sub-
tract? Mispricing in Tech Stock Carve-outs, Journal of Political Economy 111,
227-268.
Liu, Jun, and Francis A. Longstaff, 2004, Losing Money on Arbitrages: Optimal
Dynamic Portfolio Choice in Markets with Arbitrage Opportunities, Review of
Financial Studies 17, 611-641.
Longstaff, Francis A., 1995, How Much Can Marketability Affect Security Val-
ues?, Journal of Finance 50, 1767-1774.

Longstaff, Francis A., 2001, Optimal Portfolio Choice and the Valuation of Illiq-
uid Securities, Review of Financial Studies 14, 407-431.

                                       30
Longstaff, Francis A., 2004, The Flight to Liquidity Premium in U.S. Treasury
Bond Prices, Journal of Business 77, 511-526.
Longstaff, Francis. A., 2009, Portfolio Claustrophobia: Asset Pricing in Markets
with Illiquid Assets, American Economic Review 99, 1119-1144.

Longstaff, Francis A., 2016, Valuing Thinly-Traded Assets, Management Science,
forthcoming.

Longstaff, Francis A., Sanjay Mithal, and Eric Neis, 2005, Corporate Yield
Spreads: Default Risk or Liquidity? New Evidence from the Credit Default
Swap Market, Journal of Finance 60, 2213-2253.
Lynch, Anthony W., 1996, Decision Frequency and Synchronization Across
Agents: Implications for Aggregate Consumption and Asset Returns, Journal
of Finance 51, 1479-1497.
MacKinlay, A. Craig, and Krishna Ramaswamy, 1988, Index-Futures Arbitrage
and the Behavior of Stock Index Futures Prices, Review of Financial Studies 1,
137-158.

Mitchell, Mark, Todd Pulvino, Erik Stafford, 2002, Limited Arbitrage in Equity
Markets, Journal of Finance 62, 551-584.

Nelson, Charles R., and Andrew F. Siegel, 1987, Parsimonious Modeling of Yield
Curves, Journal of Business 60, 473-489.
Newey, Whitney K., and Kenneth D. West, 1987, A Simple, Positive Semi-
definite, Heteroskedasticity and Autocorrelation Consistent Correlation Matrix,
Econometrica 59, 703-708.

Nyborg, Kjell, and Per Östberg, 2014, Money and Liquidity in Financial Markets,
Journal of Financial Economics 112, 30-52.

Ofek, Eli, Matthew Richardson, and Richard Whitelaw, 2004, Limited Arbitrage
and Short Sale Restrictions: Evidence from the Options Market, Journal of
Financial Economics 74, 305-342.

Pastor, Lubos, and Robert Stambaugh, 2003, Liquidity Risk and Expected Stock
Returns, Journal of Political Economy 111, 642-685.

Roll, Richard, Eduardo Schwartz, and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, 2007, Liquid-
ity and the Law of One Price: The Case of the Futures-Cash Basis, Journal of
Finance 62, 2201-2234.

Schwartz, Krista, 2016, Mind the Gap, Working paper, University of Pennsylva-
nia.

                                      31
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny, 1992, Liquidation Values and Debt
Capacity: A Market Equilibrium Approach, Journal of Finance 47, 1343-1366.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny, 2011, Fire Sales in Finance and Macroe-
conomics, Journal of Economic Perspectives 25, 29-48.

Silber, William L., 1991, Discounts on Restricted Stock: The Impact of Illiquidity
on Stock Prices, Financial Analysts Journal 47, 60-64.

Sundaresan, Suresh, Zhenyu Wang, and Wei Yang, 2016, Dynamics of the Expec-
tation and Risk Premium in the OIS Term Structure, Working paper, Columbia
University.
Thompson, Samuel B., 2011, Simple Formulas for Standard Errors that Cluster
by Both Firm and Time, Journal of Financial Economics 99, 1-10.

Vayanos, Dimitri, 1998, Transaction Costs and Asset Prices: A Dynamic Equi-
librium Model, Review of Financial Studies 11, 1-58.

Vayanos, Dimitri, and Jean-Luc Vila, 1999, Equilibrium Interest Rate and Liq-
uidity Premium with Transaction Costs, Economic Theory 13, 509-539.
Vayanos, Dimitri, and Tan Wang, 2007, Search and Endogenous Concentration
of Liquidity in Asset Markets, Journal of Economic Theory 136, 66-104.

Vayanos, Dimitri, and Pierre-Olivier Weill, 2008, A Search-Based Theory of the
On-the-Run Phenomenon, Journal of Finance 63, 1361-1398.
Weill, Pierre-Olivier, 2007, Leaning Against the Wind, Review of Economic Stud-
ies 74, 1329-1354.

Wolinsky, Asher, 1990, Information Revelation in a Market with Pairwise Meet-
ings, Econometrica 58, 1-23.

Xiong, Wei, 2001, Convergence Trading with Wealth Effects: An Amplification
Mechanism in Financial Markets, Journal of Financial Economics 62, 247-292.




                                       32
                                   APPENDIX


A1. Estimating Dealer Inventory Holdings

We use TRACE to estimate dealer inventory. Our version of TRACE contains
dealer identifiers, allowing us to estimate inventory holdings for each dealer and
bond issue. We estimate the inventory of the jth dealer in the ith bond on day
t as the cumulative difference between its buys and sells,


            INVi,j,t = max(0, INVi,j,t−1 + BU Y si,j,t − SELLsi,j,t ).         (A1)

Dealer inventory is constrained to be nonnegative. Most negative inventory ob-
servations occur in the period following a bonds issuance and are an artifact of
primary market transactions not being recorded in TRACE. We use the dealer
inventory estimates to identify the prime dealer for each bond. Specifically, the
dealer with the largest average inventory position in a bond during the previous
month is considered as the primary dealer for the bond.
     As a robustness test, we also repeat the analysis when inventories are allowed
to be negative to accommodate the possibility of short sales. The results are not
significantly different because negative inventories tend to be small and occur
predominantly during the period immediately following bond issuance. As a
further robustness test and as an alternative to using dealer inventory, we identify
the primary dealer as the dealer who handles most of the trading volume in a
bond over the previous month. The two alternative procedures identify the same
dealer as the prime dealer 65% of the time, and the main results are not sensitive
to the procedure.

A2. Liquidity Measures

A number of metrics have been proposed to measure bond liquidity and trading
activity. We compute the daily effective bid-ask spread of the ith bond as the
volume-weighted price difference between trades in which the jth dealer sells and
buys the same bond on a given day t, acting as a principal:

                                   X                    buy
                                               sale
                         BAi,t =       wj,t (Pi,j,t − Pi,j,t ),                (A2)
                                   j


where wj,t is the jth dealers share of the trading volume for the ith bond on day
t, and Pi,j is the clean, volume-weighted price for which the jth dealer sells or
buys the ith bond on day t. We include the prices of all principal transactions
in which the dealer transacts with a non-dealer client. In a principal transaction

                                         33
the dealer trades with the client against his own inventory. By buying low and
selling high, the dealer effectively earns a bid-ask spread, which compensates him
for inventory costs, asymmetric information, and any other costs such as clearing
and settlement (e.g., Glosten and Harris, 1988). In contrast, agency transactions
are trades in which the dealer passes a bond on to the customers account from
another dealer without taking on inventory risk. Agency transactions are not
included because the dealers compensation consists of a fixed commission rather
than a bid-ask spread. We also exclude interdealer trades because they typically
involve much smaller price concessions than dealer-customer trades. To capture
the price impact of trades, we compute the Amihud (2002) illiquidity measure,
defined as the average price change per one million dollars traded, and estimated
for each transaction and averaged by trading day:

                                X 1, 000, 000       Pi,k − Pi,k−1
                  Amihudi,t =                   ×                 ,          (A3)
                                       N             Volumei,k
                                 k


where Pi,k is the price associated with kth transaction in the ith bond on day t,
and N is the total number of transactions on that day. Similar to the effective
bid-ask spread, the Amihud measure is based on dealer-customer trades. We
compute two measures of a bonds trading activity in each month: the number of
trades and turnover. We count the number of institutional-sized trades (trades
of $100,000 or larger), and compute the trading volume and turnover, defined
as the annualized ratio of the total trading volume relative to the outstanding
amount.

A3. State Income Tax Effects
Appendix C of Elton, Gruber, Agrawal, and Mann (2001) shows that the effect
of state income taxes on the yield of a one period coupon bond is proportional
to c τs (1 − τ ) (using our notation). To extend their analysis to longer matu-
rity bonds, consider a N year Treasury bond with coupon rate c that trades at
par. Recall that the yield to maturity on a coupon bond trading at par is the
coupon rate of the bond. Now consider a N year guaranteed corporate bond with
the same coupon rate c, but which is subject to state income taxes. From an
investor’s after-tax perspective, the corporate bond is equivalent to a Treasury
bond which pays a coupon of only c (1 − τs (1 − τ )). Thus, for small values of
the marginal state income tax rate, the difference in yields between the bonds
can be closely approximated by c τs (1 − τ ).

    Given this representation of the state income tax effect, we can now esti-
mate the value of τs (1 − τ ) directly from a simple cross-sectional regression.
Specifically, we regress yield spreads described in Section 6.1 on an intercept
and the coupon rate for the bonds in a simple time series panel regression. The

                                       34
coefficient on the coupon rate provides a direct estimate of the marginal state
income tax rate τs (1 − τ ). The estimated regression coefficient is 0.01655, which
is statistically significant with a t-statistic of 2.76 based on the Newey and West
(1987) estimator of the covariance matrix.




                                        35
               200
               150
Basis Points
               100
               50
               0




                     2009            2010            2011             2012
                                                 Date



                Figure 1. Average Mispricing. This figure plots the average mis-
                pricing of the guaranteed bonds over time. Average mispricing for a
                given date is computed by taking the average over all bonds in the
                sample on that date and is measured in basis points.




                                                36
               200
               150
               100
Basis Points
               50
               0
               −50




                     2009             2010             2011              2012
                                                  Date



                Figure 2. Mispricing of Individual Bonds. This figure plots the
                mispricing of the individual guaranteed bonds over time. Mispricing is
                measured in basis points.




                                                 37
             400
             300
Frequency

             200
             100
             0




                   −0.4    −0.2     0.0     0.2     0.4      0.6     0.8     1.0

                          Pairwise Correlation of Bond Mispricing



            Figure 3. Distribution of Correlations. This figure plots the his-
            togram of the pairwise correlations between the mispricing of the bonds
            in the sample.




                                              38
                                                          Effect of Mispricing on Haircuts

                                       Impulse Response                                      Cumulative Impulse Response




                                                                              0.06
                    0.04




                                                                              0.04
                    0.02
Percentage Points

                    0.00




                                                                              0.02
                    −0.02




                                                                              0.00
                    −0.04




                                                                              −0.02
                            0          5             10         15                    0           5              10        15

                                            Period                                                      Period

                                                          Effect of Haircuts on Mispricing
                                       Impulse Response                                      Cumulative Impulse Response
                    1.5




                                                                              1.5
                    1.0




                                                                              1.0
                    0.5
Basis Points

                    0.0




                                                                              0.5
                    −0.5




                                                                              0.0
                    −1.0




                            0          5             10         15                    0           5              10        15

                                            Period                                                      Period




                                Figure 4. Impulse Response Functions for Mispricing and
                                Haircuts. The upper two graphs plot the impulse and cumulative
                                impulse response functions showing the effect of mispricing on haircuts.
                                The lower two graphs plot the impulse and cumulative impulse response
                                functions showing the effect of haircuts on mispricing.



                                                                        39
                                                    Effect of Mispricing on CDS

                                 Impulse Response                                 Cumulative Impulse Response
               3




                                                                     4
               2




                                                                     3
               1




                                                                     2
Basis Points

               0




                                                                     1
               −1




                                                                     0
               −2




                                                                     −1
               −3




                                                                     −2
                      0          5             10       15                 0           5              10        15

                                      Period                                                 Period

                                                    Effect of CDS on Mispricing
                                 Impulse Response                                 Cumulative Impulse Response
               1.5




                                                                     2.5
                                                                     2.0
               1.0




                                                                     1.5
               0.5
Basis Points




                                                                     1.0
               0.0




                                                                     0.5
               −0.5




                                                                     0.0
               −1.0




                      0          5             10       15                 0           5              10        15

                                      Period                                                 Period




                          Figure 5. Impulse Response Functions for Mispricing and CDS
                          Spreads. The upper two graphs plot the impulse and cumulative im-
                          pulse response functions showing the effect of mispricing on dealer CDS
                          spreads. The lower two graphs plot the impulse and cumulative im-
                          pulse response functions showing the effect of dealer CDS spreads on
                          mispricing.


                                                                40
                                                    Effect of Mispricing on LIBOR−OIS

                                 Impulse Response                                   Cumulative Impulse Response




                                                                        3.0
               0.6




                                                                        2.5
               0.4




                                                                        2.0
Basis Points




                                                                        1.5
               0.2




                                                                        1.0
               0.0




                                                                        0.5
               −0.2




                                                                        0.0
                      0          5             10          15                 0          5              10        15

                                      Period                                                   Period

                                                    Effect of LIBOR−OIS on Mispricing
                                 Impulse Response                                   Cumulative Impulse Response
               1.0




                                                                        2.0
                                                                        1.5
               0.5
Basis Points




                                                                        1.0
               0.0




                                                                        0.5
               −0.5




                                                                        0.0




                      0          5             10          15                 0          5              10        15

                                      Period                                                   Period




                          Figure 6. Impulse Response Functions for Mispricing and
                          Libor-OIS Spreads. The upper two graphs plot the impulse and
                          cumulative impulse response functions showing the effect of mispricing
                          on the Libor-OIS spread. The lower two graphs plot the impulse and cu-
                          mulative impulse response functions showing the effect of the Libor-OIS
                          spread on mispricing.


                                                                   41
                                                             Table 1

Summary Statistics for Cross Sectional Explanatory Variables. This table presents summary statistics for the explanatory variables
used in the cross sectional regressions for the mispricing of individual bond issues. for individual bond issues. The columns denoted 5%,
50%, and 95% represent the 5th, 50th, and 95th percentiles of the distribution. N denotes the number of observations. The sample period is
December 1, 2008 to December 26, 2012.



      Variable                                           Mean        St. Dev.           5%           50%           95%          N


      Maturity in Years                                   1.75            0.78        0.62           1.68          3.04       1727
      Coupon Rate (%)                                     2.32            0.55        1.38           2.15          3.25       1727
      Bond Price                                        102.01            1.07      100.43         101.94        103.93       1727
      Issuer CDS Spread (bps)                           167.00           94.00       66.00         147.00        372.00       1727
      Lead Underwriter CDS Spread (bps)                 180.00           84.00       84.00         159.00        372.00       1727
      Prime Dealer CDS Spread (bps)                     174.00           78.00       79.00         154.00        355.00       1646
      Lead Underwriter Haircut (%)                        6.31            1.00        4.85           6.22          7.89       1727
      Prime Dealer Haircut (%)                            6.02            1.11        4.30           5.85          7.90       1646
      Number of Dealers                                  24.99           12.57        7.00          23.00         48.00       1727
      Number of Investors                                54.80           29.92       10.00          53.00        109.00       1727
      Dealer Inventory (%)                               13.29            8.13        1.79          12.59         26.35       1727
      Institutional Holdings (%)                         15.45            8.40        4.44          13.52         32.76       1727
      Amount Outstanding ($ MM)                        2625.32         1779.26      500.00        2250.00       6000.00       1727
      Monthly Trading Volume ($ MM)                     325.71          408.63       17.16         181.52       1119.41       1727
      Bid-Ask Spread                                      0.07            0.06        0.01           0.06          0.19       1727
      Amihud Measure                                      0.19            0.44        0.00           0.06          0.79       1727
                                                                Table 2

Summary Statistics for Guaranteed Bond Yield Spreads. This table presents summary statistics for the yields spreads of the guaranteed
bonds in the sample. Size is denoted in billions of dollars. 5%, 50%, and 95% denote the 5th, 50th, and 95th percentiles of the distribution. N
denotes the number of observations. The sample period is December 1, 2008 to December 26, 2012.



      Issuer                Coupon Maturity                        Mean        St. Dev           5%         50%          95%         N


      American Express               3.150   12–2011               12.83          16.93       −2.32        10.32        27.99       411
      Bank of America Corp.          2.100   04–2012               21.33          22.18       −0.64        15.74        79.12       643
      Bank of America Corp.          3.125   06–2012               24.56          28.19        0.61        15.66        86.26       736
      Bank of America Corp.          2.375   06–2012               16.84          16.99       −2.83        13.37        49.20       487
      Bank of America, NA            1.700   12–2010               18.65          25.40       −4.98         7.47        69.47       337
      Bank of the West               2.150   03–2012               18.78          17.85       −1.64        14.97        56.05       263
      Citibank                       1.625   03–2011                9.75          10.33       −4.92         8.35        24.85       167
      Citibank                       1.500   07–2011               12.74          10.26       −3.78        12.81        28.24       236
      Citibank                       1.375   08–2011               10.72           9.83       −3.81        10.32        25.40       280
      Citibank                       1.250   09–2011                8.42           8.96       −4.13         6.95        22.59       227
      Citibank                       1.250   11–2011               10.52           8.04       −0.58         9.74        24.17       212
      Citibank                       1.875   05–2012               17.82          12.55        0.37        15.93        40.23       399
      Citibank                       1.875   06–2012               16.66          12.62       −2.27        15.39        37.31       278
      Citigroup                      1.375   05–2011               12.84          10.75       −4.51        11.60        30.04       244
      Citigroup                      1.250   06–2011               12.12          10.94       −5.58        14.48        25.76       131
      Citigroup                      2.875   12–2011               26.76          30.61        0.01        17.17        88.69       572
      Citigroup                      2.000   03–2012               20.06          17.80       −2.10        15.54        51.80       340
      Citigroup                      2.125   04–2012               22.77          22.13       −0.19        17.02        80.30       651
      Citigroup                      2.125   07–2012               14.81          11.18       −2.43        13.40        35.43       425
      Citigroup                      1.875   10–2012               15.14          11.27       −3.14        15.23        33.74       570
      Citigroup                      1.875   11–2012               12.86          10.20       −3.71        13.09        30.04       430
      Citigroup                      2.250   12–2012               14.10          10.96       −4.25        14.07        30.64       605
      General Electric               1.625   01–2011               20.14          21.39       −0.31        10.33        64.04       323
      General Electric               1.800   03–2011               16.11          17.88       −3.52        11.20        56.24       341
      General Electric               3.000   12–2011               26.73          30.42        0.83        17.32        89.93       615
      General Electric               2.250   03–2012               19.14          18.91       −0.64        15.03        59.77       498
      General Electric               2.200   06–2012               23.32          22.99        0.26        17.41        82.34       678
      General Electric               2.000   09–2012               13.29          10.72       −3.68        12.89        31.06       533
      General Electric               2.450   12–2012               14.62          13.74        2.42        11.90        44.51         9
                                       Table 2 Continued


Issuer              Coupon Maturity         Mean      St. Dev        5%    50%       95%       N


Goldman Sachs        1.700   03–2011        13.94          16.50   −1.33    8.20    51.00     256
Goldman Sachs        1.625   07–2011        19.07          20.74   −3.97   14.47    70.74     469
Goldman Sachs        2.150   03–2012        17.23          17.90   −1.57   13.37    62.31     325
Goldman Sachs        3.250   06–2012        24.21          27.44    0.26   15.84    82.47     740
HSBC                 3.125   12–2011        23.47          28.10   −1.24   13.53    87.71     526
John Deere           2.875   06–2012        22.05          23.55   −0.75   14.40    81.54     681
JP Morgan Chase      2.625   12–2010        21.02          29.04   −2.37    8.10    87.04     342
JP Morgan Chase      1.650   02–2011        16.11          17.89   −2.85    9.31    54.71     296
JP Morgan Chase      3.125   12–2011        25.11          30.69    0.71   14.34    84.31     614
JP Morgan Chase      2.200   06–2012        19.36          18.20   −0.29   15.36    66.84     559
JP Morgan Chase      2.125   06–2012        23.12          23.59   −1.09   16.41    78.70     607
JP Morgan Chase      2.125   12–2012        11.97          11.16   −3.73   10.77    29.29     728
Keybank              3.200   06–2012        22.83          25.63   −2.26   15.32    80.90     600
Morgan Stanley       2.900   12–2010        22.61          30.87   −1.71   10.20    83.60     351
Morgan Stanley       2.000   09–2011        21.73          27.54   −2.17   11.66    86.40     476
Morgan Stanley       3.250   12–2011        25.98          32.09   −0.32   14.70    89.78     553
Morgan Stanley       2.250   03–2012        19.38          19.04   −0.85   14.88    61.82     424
Morgan Stanley       1.950   06–2012        21.21          21.98   −0.49   15.32    77.93     568
NY Community Bank    3.000   12–2011        37.30          37.38   −0.52   22.35   109.19     291
NY Community Bank    2.550   06–2012        19.48          28.34   −3.05   12.94   108.46      29
Oriental Bank        2.750   03–2012        40.33          38.16    3.86   25.60   110.30      29
PNC                  1.875   06–2011        26.47          29.58   −5.35   18.06    86.35     243
PNC                  2.300   06–2012        22.22          23.83   −1.55   14.79    81.21     647
Regions Bank         2.750   12–2010        23.92          30.96   −2.23   10.09    93.78     278
Regions Bank         3.250   12–2011        26.43          32.09   −1.22   15.86    98.56     552
Sovereign Bank       2.750   01–2012        27.69          30.55   −0.23   16.29    94.61     418
Sovereign Bank       2.500   06–2012        29.69          29.06   −3.11   19.87    89.56     159
State Street         1.850   03–2011        13.81          16.20   −5.12    9.35    47.50     250
State Street         2.150   04–2012        18.64          19.89   −2.03   14.69    60.95     517
Suntrust             3.000   11–2011        24.99          29.21   −1.15   16.24    88.04     517
US Bancorp           2.250   03–2012        16.76          17.17   −3.51   13.60    53.87     409
US Bancorp           1.800   05–2012        15.05          11.76   −2.78   13.78    35.74     314
Wells Fargo          3.000   12–2011        22.95          25.72   −0.07   15.24    74.83     585
Wells Fargo          2.125   06–2012        14.45          13.29   −3.26   11.86    37.03     488

All                                         20.07          23.13   −1.77   14.07    76.35   26482
                                       Table 3

Commonality in Mispricing. This table presents the results from a principal components anal-
ysis of mispricing for the 58 bonds with more than 100 observations during the sample period.
Percentage denotes the percentage of total variation explained by the indicated principal compo-
nent. Cumulative denotes the cumulative percentage of total variation explained using the indicated
number of principal components.




          Principal Component                        Percentage             Cumulative


          1                                                66.13                  66.13
          2                                                12.47                  78.60
          3                                                 3.52                  82.12
          4                                                 2.87                  84.99
          5                                                 2.13                  87.12
          6                                                 1.63                  88.75
          7                                                 1.35                  90.10
                                                                   Table 4
Results from the Time Series Regression of Weekly Changes in Average Mispricing on Explanatory Variables. This tables
reports summary statistics for the regressions of the weekly change in average mispricing on the indicated variables. The t-statistics are based
on the Newey-West (1980) estimator of the covariance matrix (four lags). The superscripts ∗ and ∗∗ denote significance at the ten-percent and
five-percent levels, respectively. The sample period is weekly from December 2008 to December 2012.


   Variable                     Lag          Coeff.     t-stat         Coeff.     t-stat         Coeff.     t-stat        Coeff.      t-stat


   Intercept                                −0.918      −2.75∗∗       −0.997      −3.05∗∗       −0.942     −3.07∗∗        −0.909     −3.00∗∗

   Change   in   Mispricing     1           −0.468      −3.64∗∗       −0.525      −4.30∗∗       −0.480     −5.30∗∗        −0.468     −5.26∗∗
   Change   in   Mispricing     2           −0.260      −2.95∗∗       −0.310      −3.97∗∗       −0.283     −3.40∗∗        −0.284     −3.41∗∗
   Change   in   Mispricing     3           −0.102      −1.34         −0.133      −2.10∗∗       −0.120     −1.53          −0.129     −1.59
   Change   in   Mispricing     4           −0.051      −1.09         −0.052      −1.02         −0.122     −2.08∗∗        −0.124     −1.89∗

   Change   in   Haircut        0             4.308       2.57∗∗        4.455      2.63∗∗         6.130      2.52∗∗        5.982       2.46∗∗
   Change   in   Haircut        1             2.158       1.07          1.844      0.98           4.699      1.54          4.416       1.51
   Change   in   Haircut        2             2.832       1.38          2.298      1.25           4.277      1.70∗         4.046       1.66∗
   Change   in   Haircut        3             8.804       4.48∗∗        8.661      4.43∗∗         9.731      4.10∗∗       10.249       4.03∗∗
   Change   in   Haircut        4             1.208       0.74          2.401      1.49           3.941      2.19∗∗        4.069       2.00∗∗

   Change   in   CDS   Spread   0                                       0.048      2.43∗∗         0.041      2.15∗∗        0.037       1.85∗
   Change   in   CDS   Spread   1                                       0.037      2.09∗∗         0.025      1.62          0.023       1.40
   Change   in   CDS   Spread   2                                       0.033      2.33∗∗         0.015      1.08          0.014       0.96
   Change   in   CDS   Spread   3                                       0.039      2.65∗∗         0.027      1.69∗         0.028       1.71∗
   Change   in   CDS   Spread   4                                       0.026      1.39           0.025      1.47          0.023       1.35

   Change   in   Libor-OIS      0                                                                0.309      2.31∗∗         0.311      2.01∗∗
   Change   in   Libor-OIS      1                                                                0.157      1.13           0.145      1.13
   Change   in   Libor-OIS      2                                                                0.113      0.81           0.115      0.69
   Change   in   Libor-OIS      3                                                               −0.373     −2.10∗∗        −0.351     −1.94∗
   Change   in   Libor-OIS      4                                                                0.021      0.19           0.001      0.01

   Change   in   Volatility     0                                                                                         −0.007     −0.18
   Change   in   Volatility     1                                                                                          0.024      0.69
   Change   in   Volatility     2                                                                                         −0.001     −0.03
   Change   in   Volatility     3                                                                                         −0.003     −0.08
   Change   in   Volatility     4                                                                                          0.044      1.12


   Adjusted R2                                           0.267                    0.328                     0.371                     0.368
   Number of Observations                                  182                      182                       182                       182
                                                              Table 5
Results from the Vector Autoregressions. This table reports summary statistics from vector autoregressions for weekly changes in
average mispricing, haircuts, and dealer CDS spreads. Average mispricing is expressed in dollars per $100 notional amount. Average haircut
is expressed as a percentage of the notional amount of the bond. Average CDS spread is expressed in basis points. The superscripts ∗ and
∗∗
   denote significance at the ten-percent and five-percent levels, respectively. The sample period is weekly from December 2008 to December
2012.


                                                  Change in Mispricing           Change in Haircut             Change in CDS Spread

     Variable                      Lag             Coeff.       t-stat            Coeff.      t-stat             Coeff.        t-stat


     Intercept                                    −0.991        −3.09∗∗            0.001        0.11              0.026         0.02

     Change   in   Mispricing      1              −0.495        −7.23∗∗           0.005        2.27∗∗            0.175          0.55
     Change   in   Mispricing      2              −0.314        −4.93∗∗          −0.003       −1.70∗             0.221          0.75
     Change   in   Mispricing      3              −0.108        −2.03∗∗           0.002        1.44              0.291          1.19
     Change   in   Mispricing      4              −0.065        −1.23             0.000        0.08             −0.270         −1.12

     Change   in   Haircut         1                1.939        0.79            −0.175       −2.30∗∗           18.052          1.60
     Change   in   Haircut         2                1.883        0.76            −0.034       −0.44             −5.435         −0.48
     Change   in   Haircut         3                7.825        3.23∗∗          −0.005       −0.06            −16.861         −1.51
     Change   in   Haircut         4                0.890        0.37            −0.157       −2.09∗∗          −16.785         −1.51

     Change   in   CDS   Spread    1                0.031        1.86∗            0.001        1.10             −0.185         −2.43∗∗
     Change   in   CDS   Spread    2                0.032        1.90∗           −0.001       −1.47              0.047          0.61
     Change   in   CDS   Spread    3                0.035        2.05∗∗          −0.001       −1.71∗            −0.015         −0.20
     Change   in   CDS   Spread    4                0.024        1.40             0.001        1.71∗            −0.137         −1.77∗


     Adjusted R2                                                0.287                         0.133                            0.047
     Number of Observations                                       182                           182                              182
                                                                  Table 6
Results from the Cross Sectional Regression of Mispricing on Explanatory Variables. This tables reports summary statistics for
the cross sectional regressions of bond-specific mispricing on the indicated variables. Time to maturity is in years. Coupon rate is expressed
as a percentage. Issuer, lead underwriter, and prime dealer CDS spreads are measured in basis points. Inventory denotes the total inventory
holdings of dealers as a percentage of the size of the bond issue. Institutional holdings are expressed as percentage of the size of the bond
issue. Lead underwriter and prime dealer haircuts are expressed as a percentage of the value of the bond. Size of the issue and trading volume
are measured in dollars. The bid-ask spread is measured as a fraction of the par amount of the bond. The Amihud measure is expressed
as a fraction of the par amount. Medium-term note takes value one if the bond issue is a medium-term note, and zero otherwise. Standard
errors are clustered at the issuer and monthly level. The superscripts ∗ and ∗∗ denote significance at the ten-percent and five-percent levels,
respectively. The sample period is monthly from December 2008 to December 2012.


  Variable                          Coeff.   t-stat      Coeff.   t-stat       Coeff.    t-stat      Coeff.    t-stat       Coeff.    t-stat


  Time to Maturity                 10.286     9.33∗∗     10.260     9.44∗∗      9.639     8.10∗∗      9.349      7.49∗∗      9.042     7.48∗∗
  Coupon Rate                      −0.001     0.00        0.129     0.23        0.274     0.59        0.465      0.84        0.070     0.17

  Issuer CDS Spread                                       0.009     1.42      −0.002    −0.28       −0.000     −0.07         0.000     0.11

  Underwriter CDS Spread                                                        0.021     3.48∗∗      0.014      2.27∗∗     0.013     2.10∗∗
  Prime Dealer CDS Spread                                                       0.010     2.02∗∗      0.011      2.36∗∗     0.012     2.40∗∗
  Underwriter Haircut                                                           0.039     0.11        0.051      0.11      −0.007    −0.02
  Prime Dealer Haircut                                                          0.543     2.08∗∗      0.500      2.20∗∗     0.549     2.33∗∗

  Number of Dealers                                                                                 −0.070     −1.67∗      −0.071    −1.72∗
  Number of Investors                                                                                0.011      0.56        0.036     1.63
  Inventory                                                                                         −0.122     −5.90∗∗     −0.141    −6.46∗∗
  Institutional Holdings                                                                            −0.003     −0.08       −0.029    −0.63

  Log Size of Issue                                                                                                        −1.724    −2.99∗∗
  Log Trading Volume                                                                                                        0.781     2.82∗∗
  Bid-Ask Spread                                                                                                            0.045     0.83
  Amihud Measure                                                                                                           −0.478    −1.41
  Medium-Term Note                                                                                                          0.010     0.02


  Time Fixed Effects                           Yes                  Yes                    Yes                   Yes                    Yes
  Issuer Fixed Effects                         No                   No                     No                    No                     No

  Adjusted R2                                0.552                 0.601                 0.630                 0.654                  0.685
  Number of Observations                      1646                  1646                  1646                  1646                   1646
                                                                    Table 7
Results from the Cross Sectional Regression of Mispricing on Explanatory Variables with Issuer Fixed Effects. This table
reports summary statistics for the cross sectional regressions of bond-specific mispricing on the indicated variables. Time to maturity is in years.
Coupon rate is expressed as a percentage. Issuer, lead underwriter, and prime dealer CDS spreads are measured in basis points. Inventory
denotes the total inventory holdings of dealers as a percentage of the size of the bond issue. Institutional holdings are expressed as percentage
of the size of the bond issue. Lead underwriter and prime dealer haircuts are expressed as a percentage of the value of the bond. Size of the
issue and trading volume are measured in dollars. The bid-ask spread is measured as a fraction of the par amount of the bond. The Amihud
measure is expressed as a fraction of the par amount. Medium-term note takes value one if the bond issue is a medium-term note, and zero
otherwise. Standard errors are clustered at the issuer and monthly level. The superscripts ∗ and ∗∗ denote significance at the ten-percent and
five-percent levels, respectively. The sample period is monthly from December 2008 to December 2012.


  Variable                          Coeff.    t-stat      Coeff.    t-stat       Coeff.     t-stat       Coeff.    t-stat       Coeff.    t-stat


  Time to Maturity                  10.091      9.33∗∗    10.104      9.28∗∗      9.584      7.92∗∗       9.180     8.14∗∗       8.907      7.76∗∗
  Coupon Rate                        0.699      1.39       0.669      1.29        0.563      1.04         1.117     1.50         1.075      1.64

  Issuer CDS Spread                                        0.006      0.92      −0.001     −0.15        −0.002     −0.32       −0.001      -0.30

  Underwriter CDS Spread                                                         0.018      2.58∗∗       0.016      2.27∗∗      0.016      2.33∗∗
  Prime Dealer CDS Spread                                                        0.011      1.88∗        0.012      2.08∗∗      0.011      1.96∗∗
  Underwriter Haircut                                                           −0.058     −0.11        −0.193     −0.37       −0.240     −0.46
  Prime Dealer Haircut                                                           0.495      1.72∗        0.454      1.79∗       0.487      1.89∗

  Number of Dealers                                                                                     −0.081     −1.57       −0.100     −1.81∗
  Number of Investors                                                                                    0.017      0.79        0.033      1.43
  Inventory                                                                                             −0.109     −4.99∗∗     −0.128     −5.17∗∗
  Institutional Holdings                                                                                −0.021     −0.38       −0.040     −0.69

  Log Size of Issue                                                                                                            −1.255     −1.83∗
  Log Trading Volume                                                                                                            0.670      1.96∗∗
  Bid-Ask Spread                                                                                                                0.064      1.47
  Amihud Measure                                                                                                               −0.125     −0.57
  Medium-Term Note                                                                                                              0.882      1.64


  Time Fixed Effects                            Yes                   Yes                     Yes                    Yes                    Yes
  Issuer Fixed Effects                          Yes                   Yes                     Yes                    Yes                    Yes

  Adjusted R2                                 0.564                  0.628                  0.654                  0.669                  0.690
  Number of Observations                       1646                   1646                   1646                   1646                   1646
