                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           WORKER OVERCONFIDENCE:
                     FIELD EVIDENCE AND IMPLICATIONS FOR
                EMPLOYEE TURNOVER AND RETURNS FROM TRAINING

                                        Mitchell Hoffman
                                        Stephen V. Burks

                                       Working Paper 23240
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w23240


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2017


A previous paper appeared as “Training Contracts, Worker Overconfidence, and the Return from
Firm-Sponsored General Training.” That previous paper has been divided in two, with the present
paper focusing on overconfidence. The other paper (Hoffman and Burks, 2017) studies the impact
of training contracts on quitting, and uses a different dataset (though also based on workers at
Firm A). Across the two papers, some portions of text may be similar. We are deeply indebted to
David Card, Stefano DellaVigna, John Morgan, and Steve Tadelis for their advice and
encouragement. For particularly detailed comments, we also thank Ben Handel, Ben Hermalin,
Ken Judd, Pat Kline, Botond Koszegi, Don Moore, Matthew Rabin, Lowell Taylor, and Kenneth
Train, as well as numerous seminar participants. We especially thank the many trucking industry
managers and drivers who shared their insights with us. We thank managers at Firms A and B for
sharing their data, for facilitating on-site data collection (Firm A), and for helping with the field
experiment (Firm B). Graham Beattie, Christina Chew, Dan Ershov, Sandrena Frischer, Will
Kuffel, Amol Lingnurkar, Kristjan Sigurdson, and Irina Titova provided outstanding research
assistance. Hoffman acknowledges financial support from the National Science Foundation
IGERT Fellowship, the Kauffman Foundation, and the Social Science and Humanities Research
Council of Canada. Burks and the Truckers & Turnover Project acknowledge financial support
from Firm A, the MacArthur Foundation, the Sloan Foundation, the Trucking Industry Program
at Georgia Tech, and University of Minnesota, Morris. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of any of the research funders or the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Mitchell Hoffman and Stephen V. Burks. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Worker Overconfidence: Field Evidence and Implications for Employee Turnover and Returns
from Training
Mitchell Hoffman and Stephen V. Burks
NBER Working Paper No. 23240
March 2017
JEL No. D03,J24,J41,M53

                                            ABSTRACT

Combining weekly productivity data with weekly productivity beliefs for a large sample of
truckers over two years, we show that workers tend to systematically and persistently over-
predict their productivity. If workers are overconfident about their own productivity at the current
firm relative to their outside option, they should be less likely to quit. Empirically, all else equal,
having higher productivity beliefs is associated with an employee being less likely to quit. To
study the implications of overconfidence for worker welfare and firm profits, we estimate a
structural learning model with biased beliefs that accounts for many key features of the data.
While worker overconfidence moderately decreases worker welfare, it also substantially increases
firm profits. This may be critical for firms (such as the main one we study) that make large initial
investments in worker training.


Mitchell Hoffman
Rotman School of Management
University of Toronto
105 St. George Street
Toronto, ON M5S 3E6
CANADA
and NBER
mitchell.hoffman@rotman.utoronto.ca

Stephen V. Burks
Division of Social Science
University of Minnesota, Morris
600 East 4th Street
Morris, MN 56267
svburks@morris.umn.edu




A online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w23240
1       Introduction

Scholars have long argued that people have a tendency to be overconﬁdent about their ability (see,

e.g., Adam Smith’s The Wealth of Nations). Decades of research in psychology (and growing research

in economics) support the idea that people are overconﬁdent. However, this research is primarily

based on short-term student lab experiments. Much less is known about overconﬁdence in the ﬁeld

(especially over time) and even less so in the context of employee productivity in the workplace.1

Are workers overconﬁdent about their productivity in an actual workplace setting? Is overconﬁdence

persistent or does it quickly disappear over time due to learning? What are the implications of

worker overconﬁdence for employee behavior, employee welfare, and the proﬁts of ﬁrms?

        We address these questions using unique data from the trucking industry. While it is one

speciﬁc industry, trucking is ideal for our study because it is large (see Section 2) and productivity

(miles driven per week) is easy to measure. At a leading trucking ﬁrm (which we call Firm A), 895

new workers were asked to predict their weekly productivity for two years. We show that workers

who expect higher productivity end up achieving higher productivity, so subjective beliefs are pre-

dictive. However, the data also reveal a pattern where workers tend to systematically overpredict

their productivity. Overprediction is very persistent. The overprediction we observe without ﬁnan-

cial incentives remains even when belief-elicitation is made incentive-compatible using randomized

ﬁnancial incentives for accurate prediction at a second large trucking ﬁrm (Firm B). We refer to this

overprediction as “overconﬁdence” and say more about the term below.

        Having documented this overprediction, we next seek to model it quantitatively, as well as to

understand its implications. We turn to Jovanovic’s (1979) canonical model of turnover, where quit-

ting decisions reﬂect the evolution of worker beliefs about job match or productivity. We document

that, consistent with theory, workers who expect higher productivity are less likely to quit. From the

standpoint of the ﬁrm, this may be especially important because the ﬁrm is providing the workers
    1
     For exceptions in economics on overconﬁdence in the ﬁeld, see the literature on overconﬁdent CEOs pioneered by
Malmendier and Tate (2005), where overconﬁdence is measured using CEO’s personal portfolio decisions, as well as
Hoﬀman (2016), who studies how overconﬁdence aﬀects businesspeople’s demand for information by eliciting beliefs, and
Wang (2015) who studies loan oﬃcers, accommodating potentially biased beliefs in loan oﬃcer screening ability using
a structural model. In psychology, there are various studies that examine overconﬁdence among particular workers,
e.g., Baumann et al. (1991) study doctors and nurses. However, these studies (e.g., Baumann et al., 1991) often
measure beliefs only once and often consider hypothetical situation/vignettes or trivia questions instead of predicting
productivity. The only prior-to-ours high-frequency study we are aware of that follows overconﬁdence over a substantial
time period is a psychology study by Massey et al. (2011), who show that US football fans tend to persistently over-
predict the chance of their favorite team winning over a 4-month period.


                                                          1
with ﬁrm-sponsored general training at no direct cost. Turnover is costly for the ﬁrm, leading the

ﬁrm to lose the individuals that they recently provided training to. While potentially useful for ﬁrms,

if workers are overconﬁdent about their ability at the ﬁrm relative to their outside option, this may

distort worker quitting decisions, reducing worker welfare.

      To evaluate the importance of overconﬁdence for worker welfare and ﬁrm proﬁts, we develop

a structural model of worker turnover. Similar to Jovanovic (1979), workers learn about their un-

derlying productivity through weekly productivity realizations, and decide when, if ever, to quit.

However, we do not impose that workers are fully rational. Workers may hold biased priors, or learn

faster or slower than predicted by Bayes’ rule, nesting the standard model as a special case. Using

our rich subjective belief data for identiﬁcation, we estimate that workers have mean bias of 30-

35% of underlying productivity, as well as substantial variance bias, with learning much slower than

predicted by Bayes’ rule. Our model ﬁts the data quite well, whereas a standard model performs

far worse. In a counterfactual simulation, we show that eliminating worker overconﬁdence would

moderately increase worker welfare (because workers make better decisions), but would substantially

reduce ﬁrm proﬁts.

      Our study makes three main contributions to the literature. First, we provide long-term high-

frequency ﬁeld evidence on overconﬁdence, some of the longest high-frequency evidence in any ﬁeld

(psychology or economics).2 Moore and Healy (2008) provide an excellent survey of recent work and

divide overconﬁdence into three types: relative overconﬁdence (thinking you are better than others),

absolute overconﬁdence (thinking you are better than you actually are), and over-precision (thinking

your beliefs are more precise than they actually are). Our paper’s largest focus is on absolute

overconﬁdence, which we refer to hereafter simply as overconﬁdence. Overconﬁdence research has

mostly focused on short-term laboratory tasks, e.g., trivia games. This paper analyzes overconﬁdence

using weekly data over two years on forecasts about individual productivity in an actual work setting.

      Second, we quantify the worker welfare impacts of overconﬁdence by developing a structural

learning model with biased beliefs. We present one of the ﬁrst papers in economics to estimate a

learning model with biased beliefs.3 More generally, we contribute to a small but growing literature
   2
     To our knowledge, our study provided the longest high-frequency ﬁeld evidence in the literature when it ﬁrst
appeared. In recent work by psychologists, Moore et al. (2017) study a geopolitical forecasting tournament, where
people participated for up to 3 years. They ﬁnd a small but persistent degree of overconﬁdence. Our study diﬀers in
that it examines workplace productivity (instead of various world events), it examines implications of overconﬁdence,
and it models overconﬁdence using a structural model.
   3
     While several recent papers in labor and personnel economics analyze learning using a structural approach (e.g.,


                                                         2
using subjective beliefs in various ways to estimate structural models (for pioneer papers, see, e.g.,

Bellemare et al., 2008; Chan et al., 2008; van der Klaauw and Wolpin, 2008).4

       Third, we demonstrate that worker overconﬁdence beneﬁts ﬁrms by increasing the proﬁtabil-

ity of training. Counterfactual simulations suggest biased beliefs are quantitatively important in

facilitating training, i.e., training would be substantially less proﬁtable for ﬁrms if workers were not

overconﬁdent. While a number of ﬁeld studies analyze how ﬁrms may beneﬁt from consumer biases

(see Koszegi (2014) for a survey), ours is the ﬁrst (to our knowledge) to analyze how ﬁrms may

beneﬁt from biases of their workers.

       The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 gives background on trucking and describes the data.

Section 3 analyzes subjective productivity belief data, both from Firm A (without incentives) and

from Firm B (with randomized ﬁnancial incentives). Section 4 develops the model and structurally

estimates it. Section 5 performs the counterfactual simulations. Section 6 concludes.



2     Background and Data

2.1    Institutional Background

Truckdriving in the US. Truckdriving is a large occupation, with roughly 1.8 million US workers

operating heavy trucks such as those used by the ﬁrms we study (BLS, 2010). Firms A and B are in

the long-distance truckload segment of the for-hire trucking industry, which is the largest employment

setting for this occupation. An important distinction is between long-haul and short-haul trucking.

Long-haul truckload drivers are usually paid by the mile (a piece rate) (Belzer, 2000) and drive long

distances from home. In contrast, short-haul truckload drivers generally spend fewer nights away

from home and are not usually paid by the mile.5
Arcidiacono, 2004; Bojilov, 2013; Sanders, 2016; Stange, 2012), we allow for both generalized and non-rational learning.
Two papers in industrial organization, Goettler and Clay (2011) and Grubb and Osborne (2015), estimate biased
learning models of plan choice for online groceries and cell phone service, respectively. A main diﬀerence in our paper
is that belief biases are identiﬁed using high-frequency subjective belief data, whereas in Goettler and Clay (2011) and
Grubb and Osborne (2015), biases are identiﬁed through contractual choices. There are advantages of each approach.
An advantage of using contracts relative to using subjective beliefs is that economists are more trusting of “what people
do” compared to “what people say.” A virtue of using beliefs is that repeated sub-optimal ex post contractual choices
may reﬂect factors other than biased beliefs, including inertia or switching costs.
    4
      See Arcidiacono et al. (2014) and Wiswall and Zafar (2015) for examples of more recent papers, and see van der
Klaauw (2012) for a general discussion on incorporating subjective beliefs into dynamic structural models. Appendix
A.11 describes additional papers.
    5
      We highlight a few more institutional details. Truckload is the segment that hauls full trailer loads. Truckload
has employee turnover rates, often over 100% per year (Burks et al., 2008), as well as low unionization, and most



                                                           3
      The main training for heavy truckdrivers is that needed to obtain a commercial driver’s license

(CDL). Most new drivers take a formal CDL training course, and in some states it is required by

law (BLS, 2010). CDL training can be obtained at truck driving schools run by trucking companies,

at private truck driving schools, and at some community colleges. At Firm A, the CDL training

drivers received lasted about 2-3 weeks, and included classroom lectures, simulator driving, and

actual behind-the-wheel truck driving. The market price for CDL training at private training schools

varies, but is often several thousand dollars.

      The drivers we study in this paper received training under a 12-month training contract. Under

this contract, Firm A paid for the training and in return the driver committed to stay with the ﬁrm

for a year. If they driver left early, they were ﬁned between $3,500 and $4,000. Drivers did not

post a bond, and the ﬁrm seemed to collect only about 30% of the penalties owed (despite the ﬁrm

making strenuous eﬀorts to collect the penalties owed); further details on the contracts are provided

in a companion paper (Hoﬀman and Burks, 2017), which studies the contracts in detail.6

      Production. Truckload drivers haul full loads between a wide variety of locations. While

our data do not contain driver hours, drivers are constrained by the federal legal limit of about 60

hrs/week, and managers informed us that drivers often work up to the limit. Firm A loads are

assigned via a central dispatching system and are assigned primarily by proximity (as well as hours

left up to the federal limit). Once a load is ﬁnished, a driver may start a new one.

      Productivity in long-haul trucking is measured in miles per week. There are signiﬁcant cross-

driver diﬀerences in average productivity, as well as substantial idiosyncratic variation in productivity

within drivers. When asked the reason for signiﬁcant cross-driver diﬀerences, managers described

various factors including speed, skill at avoiding traﬃc, route planning (miles are calculated according

to a pre-speciﬁed distance between two points, not by distance traveled), not getting lost, and

coordinating with people to unload the truck. For example, drivers who arrive late to a location may

have to wait a long time for their truck to be unloaded, which can be highly detrimental to weekly

miles. As for the sources of week-to-week variation, managers emphasized weather, traﬃc, variable
drivers do not own their own trucks. Around 10% of trucks in 1992 were driven by drivers who own their own truck
(owner-operators), with the remainder driven by drivers driving company-owned trucks (company drivers) (Baker and
Hubbard, 2004). All the drivers we study are non-union company drivers. For an analysis of productivity in trucking,
see Hubbard (2003).
   6
     The Appendix of Hoﬀman and Burks (2017) explains how it is common for large truckload ﬁrms to provide CDL
training.




                                                         4
loading/unloading time, and disadvantageous load assignments. Thus, weekly miles, our measure of

productivity, reﬂect both driver performance and eﬀort, as well as factors that drivers do not control

and may be diﬃcult to predict ex ante. See Appendix G for more on measuring productivity.


2.2    Firm A Data

Data Information. To create our dataset, we collected subjective beliefs about next week’s produc-

tivity for a subset of 895 new drivers trained at one of the ﬁrm’s training schools in late 2005-2006.

Beyond the productivity beliefs survey, drivers did various tests (e.g., IQ, personality) during train-

ing, and were invited to do other surveys during their ﬁrst two years of work (see Appendix A.1).

We will sometimes refer to drivers in our data as the “data subset,”7 and several other papers by

the author analyze this subset of drivers in other work.8 However, the productivity belief data we

collect have never been analyzed previously. Records from the ﬁrm provide weekly data on miles

and earnings, and we also have worker demographic information.

       Every week around Tuesday,9 drivers in the data subset were asked to predict their miles for

the following pay week (Sunday-Saturday, starting on the Sunday in 5 days). This occurred for up

to roughly two years, with some variation in maximum weeks depending on when drivers started.

Drivers responded by typing an answer to the below question, which we sent over the truck’s computer

system: About how many paid miles do you expect to run during your next pay week? We interpret

this question as asking drivers for their subjective mean.10 There are several potential concerns with

using our beliefs question to predict behavior and study overconﬁdence:
   7
      We use the term “data subset” to distinguish it from the full sample of drivers at Firm A (for whom there is regular
personnel data, but no beliefs data) who are studied in Hoﬀman and Burks (2017) and Burks et al. (2015).
    8
      Appendix A.12 describes several unrelated papers using the data subset (e.g., comparing social preferences of
truckers, students, and non-trucker adults). Burks et al. (2013) analyze new truckers predicting their quintile on an
IQ test to test between diﬀerent theories of relative overconﬁdence (people tending to overestimate how well they do
compared to other people). Our paper diﬀers from Burks et al. (2013) in that we study absolute overconﬁdence instead
of relative overconﬁdence; we study beliefs about productivity instead of about performance on an IQ test; and we
study beliefs over time instead of at a single point in time. In addition, Burks et al. (2013) is focused on testing between
diﬀerent theories of the causes of relative overconﬁdence across people, whereas our paper focuses on the consequences
of absolute overconﬁdence for worker behavior and contract design. Although the papers deal with quite diﬀerent
issues, we view the contributions as complementary. Burks et al. (2008) describe the Firm A data collection in detail.
1,069 drivers took part in data collection during training. We restrict our sample to drivers with a code denoting no
prior trucking experience or training, giving us 895 drivers whom we are conﬁdent are brand-new to trucking.
    9
      The question was sent to drivers on Tuesday in 85% of driver-weeks, with the remainder on nearby days (details
in Appendix A.6).
   10
      Another possible interpretation is that it is asking drivers for the median of their subjective mile distribution for
next week. In the data subset, mean and median miles are almost identical (the median of worker miles per week is
1% less than the mean miles per week). Thus, whether workers reported their mean or median expected miles seems
unlikely to matter for the reduced-form or structural estimation. See Appendix A.6 for further discussion of belief
elicitation methods, as well as the issue of lumpy beliefs/possible rounding.


                                                             5
  1. Researchers might worry that beliefs are stated to please others, e.g., drivers exaggerate their

     productivity beliefs to please their boss. However, in our setting, drivers were informed repeat-

     edly that their responses and participation were never to be shared with the company. That

     is, driver supervisors would never even know whether a worker participated in the survey, let

     alone what his responses were.

  2. No incentives were used to incentivize accurate belief responses. However, as we discuss below

     in our ﬁeld experiment with Firm B (see Section 3.2), we ﬁnd no evidence that beliefs are

     diﬀerent when workers are rewarded for accurate beliefs.

  3. There is substantial non-response: the average response rate to the weekly beliefs survey is

     28%. A 28% response rate may seem low, but is comparable to that in many nongovernmental

     surveys. For example, in an inﬂuential recent study, Card et al. (2012) ﬁnd a response rate of

     20% in a survey of UC Berkeley employees. In Appendix A.1, we re-do our main structural

     estimation while performing Inverse Probability Weighting (to account for any diﬀerential

     selection on observed characteristics) and show that it has little impact on our estimates. We

     also estimate a Heckit selection model using the response rate to prior surveys other than the

     productivity beliefs survey to form an exclusion restriction. We ﬁnd consistent evidence that

     non-response bias is limited and is not an important driver of our conclusions. Appendix A.1

     provides additional further discussion regarding non-response bias.

      One limitation of personnel data is we generally do not see where drivers go when they termi-

nate. Fortunately, we did an “exit survey” by mail for drivers in the data subset. In drivers leaving

the ﬁrm, the vast majority are not moving to long-haul trucking jobs. Speciﬁcally, about 48% of

drivers report moving to a non-trucking job or unemployment, and 25% went to a local driving job.

Only 12% report moving to a long-haul trucking job, and 15% to a regional trucking job. While

the response rate on the exit survey was only about 25%, whether someone responds is uncorrelated

with most driver characteristics (see Appendix A.5 for more on the exit survey).

      Summary Statistics. Panel A of Table 1 present sample means on driver characteristics.

The median data subset driver is male, white, and 35 years old. Drivers have very low average credit

scores. Of the 88% of drivers with credit scores (12% lack a suﬃcient credit history to have a score),

the mean and median credit scores are 586 and 564, respectively, compared to a median of 723 for

                                                  6
the US general population at the time of data collection; further, 53% of drivers have a credit score

below 600 (i.e., “subprime”), compared to 15% of the US population (Appendix A.4).

      Panel B provides quantiles of productivity and productivity beliefs for our main sample, as

well as for the sample of 699 drivers used to estimate the structural model. That productivity beliefs

exceed productivity on average is easily observed in these simple statistics. In our estimation sample,

the median productivity belief corresponds with roughly the 75th percentile in the distribution of

actual productivity.



3     Reduced Form Analysis

In this section, we show that, while subjective beliefs are predictive about actual productivity and

employee turnover, workers also exhibit a tendency to overpredict productivity. We ﬁrst present our

main results from about two years of non-incentivized belief data from Firm A, and then present the

Firm B incentivized data to show the results are robust to incentives.


3.1   Firm A Data

Predicting Productivity. Table 2 shows that beliefs help predict productivity beyond other

predictors. We estimate:

                               yi,t = α + βbi,t−1 + γ ȳi,t−1 + Xi δ + i,t                        (1)

where yi,t is driver i’s productivity in his tth week with the company; bi,t−1 is his subjective belief

about his productivity in week t stated in week t − 1; ȳi,t−1 is lagged average productivity to date;

and Xi are controls. Column 2 estimates β̂ = 0.15, meaning, a driver whose expectation is 100 miles

higher than another driver will end up driving an average of 15 miles more. Once average productivity

to date or driver ﬁxed eﬀects are added, the coeﬃcient drops to between 0.07 and 0.08. That is,

within person, subjective beliefs have some predictive power, but less so. Overall, the results suggest

that subjective beliefs have informational content, being somewhat predictive across individuals, and

mildly predictive within individuals. The relatively low coeﬃcients likely reﬂect attenuation bias due

to measurement error in subjective beliefs (which we account for in the structural model).

      Predicting Quitting. Table 3 shows that quitting decisions reﬂect subjective beliefs outside

of predictors in a standard Bayesian model. We estimate Cox proportional hazard models of quitting

                                                    7
of the form:

                                       log(hi,t ) = αt + βbi,t + γ ȳi,t + Xi δ,                                    (2)

where hit is the quit hazard of driver i with t weeks of tenure and αt is the log baseline hazard.

Average productivity to date, ȳi,t is a suﬃcient statistic for beliefs about productivity in a standard

Bayesian normal learning model. However, a 100 mile increase in subjective miles predicts a 6%

decrease in the probability a worker quits. The true eﬀects are likely higher, with observed estimates

biased downward due to measurement error. The coeﬃcient on beliefs does not change very much

as controls are added.

       The ﬁnding that having higher productivity beliefs is associated with a lower chance of quitting

is robust. To show that the ﬁnding is not driven by outliers, Appendix Table E1 repeats Table 3

using a dummy for beliefs being above the median (as opposed to a continuous measure) and ﬁnds

sizeable impacts. Our result remains when we use lagged beliefs (Appendix Table E2) or a worker’s

average belief to date (Appendix Table E3), the latter which aims to measure beliefs more of as a

stable worker characteristic. These two checks help assuage the concern of reverse causality (e.g.,

one concern is that people who expect to quit in the future might believe that they will slow down

and drive fewer miles). These two checks yield the same result.11 In contrast to a “standard”

setup where workers hold the same beliefs given their productivity signals, workers’ heterogeneous

subjective beliefs predict quitting.

       Overprediction. Although beliefs are predictive, Figure 1 shows that average beliefs con-

sistently exceed productivity. Productivity and beliefs are collapsed by week of tenure and then

smoothed using a local polynomial regression. Workers initially overpredict by roughly 500 miles per

week, about 25% of average productivity. This diﬀerence declines over time, though it is persistent

and decreases very slowly. Even after 100 weeks, worker overprediction is still around 150-200 miles

per week. Panel (a) shows means, whereas panel (b) shows medians. Two concerns with Panels (a)

and (b) are (i) The sample changes over time (due to quits) and (ii) The productivity line is based
  11
    Despite the diﬀerent checks and despite the fact that the coeﬃcient on beliefs does not change much by including
observable variables, it is possible that there may be selection on unobserved variables. Thus, we interpret the results
here as evidence that overconﬁdence correlates with fewer quits instead of that overconﬁdence causes fewer quits. In
addition to these checks, one might also think to include some version of (Beliefs - Productivity) instead of Beliefs
as a regressor. However, as we discuss after Prop. 1 in Appendix C, it is the level of a person’s perceived inside
and outside options that aﬀects quitting in theory, not overprediction. Further, including (Beliefs-Productivity) as a
regressor imposes the restriction that coeﬃcients on Beliefs and Productivity are the same.




                                                           8
on all workers whereas the belief line is based on workers who respond to the survey in a given week.

To address (i), we restrict the sample to workers who are there for most of the sample period (at

least 75 weeks) in Panel (c). To address (ii), in Panel (d), we re-make the picture dropping the 38%

of workers who never respond to the survey. We restrict to workers who are there at least 75 weeks,

and look at medians instead of means (to verify results are not driven by outliers). In both cases,

the overall pattern of overconﬁdence is similar, though standard errors are larger.12

       The average results mask that beliefs are sensible in several ways, and there is a lot of het-

erogeneity within and across drivers. First, beliefs exhibit aspects of Bayesian updating. As seen

in Appendix Table E4, increases in average productivity to date are associated with substantial in-

creases in future beliefs, both across and within drivers. Also consistent with Bayesian updating,

in predicting beliefs, the weight on average productivity to date increases with tenure (column 3 of

Table E4). Second, although beliefs exceed miles in almost every week when averaged over all drivers,

individual beliefs exceed miles only 65% of the time; in 35% of driver-weeks, drivers underpredict,

so it’s not the case that each driver overpredicts each week. Third, drivers diﬀer substantially in av-

erage overprediction. Appendix Figure E3 shows that many drivers are moderately overconﬁdent,

some are well-calibrated, and some are very overconﬁdent. Fourth, as mentioned above in Section

2.1, there is a lot of week-to-week variation in productivity that drivers don’t control.

       That workers’ beliefs are sensible in several ways suggests to us that their beliefs are plausible

(and not a mark simply of people not taking the survey seriously). In addition, Huﬀman and Shvets

(2016) have recently collected data that broadly conﬁrm our results. In particular, after our paper

ﬁrst appeared, Huﬀman and Shvets (2016) worked with a ﬁrm where store managers were asked

to predict their quintile in a tournament where store managers competed against one another in

terms of quarterly store performance. In their paper-in-progress, Huﬀman and Shvets (2016) also

ﬁnd evidence of persistent workplace overconﬁdence (with overprediction even among managers who

had been there for two years or more).13 Thus, our long-term ﬁeld evidence on overconﬁdence in the
  12
     In Panels (c) and (d), we stop at 75 weeks instead of the full sample to increase sample size. However, results are
similar if we restrict to workers who are there for 100 weeks. More generally, we have made the basic graph comparing
productivity and productivity beliefs a number of diﬀerent ways, including varying means vs. medians, restricting to
workers with diﬀerent tenure levels, restricting based on survey response (all subjects, excluding subjects who never
respond, restricting only to weeks where both subject productivity and productivity belief are available), and dropping
high outliers in productivity beliefs. Across speciﬁcations, although the exact levels of overconﬁdence vary, the basic
graph is broadly similar. In Appendix Figure E2, we plot (Beliefs - Productivity) as a function of tenure, as opposed
to plotting beliefs and productivity as separate lines.
  13
     Their study is complementary to ours and diﬀers in several important respects. First, while we study absolute



                                                           9
workplace has recently been replicated in a very diﬀerent context.

       We also emphasize that drivers did not receive direct feedback in the form of someone telling

them that they had made overpredictions or underpredictions in the past. Receiving such feed-

back might have reduced the persistence of overconﬁdence, as feedback has been shown to reduce

overconﬁdence (Benson and Önkal, 1992).

       There are several interpretations of our result that workers tend to systematically over-predict

productivity. For example, workers may report aspirations instead of true expectations. Or, work-

ers may report expected miles supposing that “everything goes well” and there are no unexpected

hiccups. For both these explanations, one might imagine that misprediction could be eliminated if

workers were incentivized to state the mean of their subjective productivity distribution. Alterna-

tively, overprediction may reﬂect workers’ true beliefs and instead reﬂect a persistent behavioral bias

that would be hard to eliminate with an incentive; overprediction may persist, given both substan-

tial idiosyncratic variation in miles and given potential variance bias. To distinguish between these

explanations, we turn to incentivized data.


3.2    Incentivized belief data from Firm B

To distinguish between these diﬀerent explanations and to overcome other concerns with non-

incentivized data (e.g., that non-incentivized subjects do not “think hard” enough about their fore-

casts), we randomized ﬁnancial incentives for truckers at another large trucking company, Firm B,

to accurately guess about their productivity. 272 workers were randomly assigned to guess without

ﬁnancial incentives or to receive up to $10 per week for guessing about their productivity.14 Sub-

jects did this for about 2-6 weeks before being re-assigned to another treatment: control (nothing

changes), increased incentive (up to $50 per week), or “debiasing.”15 See Appendix B for further
overconﬁdence, Huﬀman and Shvets (2016) study relative overconﬁdence. They ﬁnd that 48% of managers predicted
a better quintile than they actually achieved. Second, unlike us (who survey new workers every week for two years),
Huﬀman and Shvets (2016) survey their managers one time, but exploit that managers have diﬀerent levels of tenure
when surveyed. Third, Huﬀman and Shvets (2016) provide evidence in support of selective memory as a mechanism
for overconﬁdence: they ask managers to recall performance in a past tournament (prior to the one being surveyed
about), and observe that managers who did well in the past have accurate perceptions, whereas those who did poorly
tend to remember themselves doing better than they actually did. This is broadly related to, but diﬀerent from,
our assumptions in the structural model (Section 4 below), where we allow people’s perception of signal precision to
potentially diﬀer from true signal precision. In our setting, because a majority of people exhibit overprediction, they
often get signals that are worse than their beliefs; thus, ignoring or forgetting bad signals is similar to thinking the
signal is less precise than it actually is.
   14
      While we focus on productivity, we also had subjects guess about their weekly earnings (see Appendix B).
   15
      “Debiasing” refers to an additional experiment treatment where we provided information about the existence of
overconﬁdence in truckers so as to see if overconﬁdence could be reduced. Providing information about the existence


                                                          10
information (e.g., how stake size was chosen).

       Appendix Table B2 shows that neither the $10 incentive nor the $50 incentive had a signiﬁcant

impact on productivity beliefs. Given that the standard errors are moderately sized, we can’t rule

out moderate-sized eﬀects in either direction. For example, using column 1 of Table B2, the 95%

conﬁdence interval on the impact of the $10 incentive was -131 miles to +66 miles, and the 95%

conﬁdence interval on the impact of the $50 incentive was -181 miles to +171 miles. However,

given a mean overconﬁdence level of 250 miles in the column 1 sample, we are able to reject the

hypothesis that all the observed overconﬁdence would disappear if workers were given either $10 or

$50 incentives.

       Furthermore, Appendix Table E5 shows that there is no evidence that the predictiveness of

subjective beliefs toward actual productivity varies with the randomized incentives.



4     Model and Structural Estimation

Our reduced-form analysis suggests that workers overpredict their productivity, as well as that greater

beliefs are correlated with a lower chance of quitting. We now develop a structural model of quitting

and belief formation to help understand these results and to do counterfactuals of changing beliefs

(i.e., how much does overconﬁdence aﬀect training contracts and worker welfare).

       The model is a discrete time extension of the model in Jovanovic (1979) allowing for biased

beliefs. A worker decides each week whether to quit his job. It is an optimal stopping problem; once

he quits, he cannot return.16 Quitting is the only decision to make—in particular, there is no eﬀort

decision.17 Workers have diﬀerent underlying productivities, but productivity is initially unknown,

both to the worker and the ﬁrm. The worker is forward-looking in his quitting decision and each

week’s miles provides him a noisy signal from which he learns about his underlying productivity.

However, workers may be subject to belief biases. The worker’s priors need not be accurate, e.g.,

he may believe that the job is on average quite lucrative. Further, as new productivity information
of overconﬁdence led to some decreases in productivity beliefs, but impacts seemed to fade with time since treatment,
giving us limited power to examine whether randomized changes in beliefs aﬀected quitting. Discussion is left to
Appendix B.
  16
     While workers who quit Firm A are allowed to re-apply, relatively few return. Of inexperienced workers starting
in 2002-2003 who quit during 2002-2003, less than 8% return by the end of 2009.
  17
     Eﬀort decisions are not included in most related structural learning models (e.g., Arcidiacono, 2004; Stange, 2012).
Our data do not contain exogenous variation in the piece rate that would be needed to plausibly identify the cost
of eﬀort function. We speculate, however, that including eﬀort in the model would not qualitatively aﬀect our main
conclusions or would actually strengthen them (see Appendix A.7 for further discussion).


                                                           11
arrives, he may over- or underweight his prior relative to pure Bayesian updating. In addition to

reﬂecting productivity beliefs, quitting decisions will also reﬂect a driver’s underlying taste for the

job or career (e.g., how much a driver dislikes being away from home) as well as idiosyncratic shocks

(e.g., a ﬁght with the boss). The ﬁrm makes no decisions.18


4.1    Model Setup

The time horizon is inﬁnite and given in weeks 1, 2, ... . Workers have baseline productivity η,
                              
which is distributed N η0 , σ02 . Workers are paid by a piece rate, wt , that depends on their tenure.

Workers know the piece rate-tenure proﬁle, and believe that this proﬁle will not be changed by the
                                                                                            
company at some future date.19 A worker’s weekly miles, yt , are distributed N a (t) + η, σy2 ,20 and

weekly earnings are thus Yt = wt yt . a(t) is a known learn-by-doing process, which we specify below.

The worker’s outside option is rt and also depends on his tenure. Every period t, the worker makes

a decision, dt , whether to stay (dt = 1) or to quit (dt = 0). Workers make the decision to quit in t

having observed their past miles y1 , y2 , ..., yt−1 , but not their current week miles, yt . Workers and

ﬁrms are assumed to be risk-neutral and to have a discount factor given by δ.21

       Stay-or-Quit Decisions. Workers make their stay-or-quit decisions every period to maximize

perceived expected utility:
                                                              ∞
                                                                                                        
                                                               
                               Vt (xt ) =     max Et                 δ   s−t
                                                                               us (ds , xs ) |dt , xt       .         (3)
                                            dt ,dt+1,...
                                                               s=t

where xt is the vector of state variables (xt includes past miles, y1 , ..., yt−1 , and is detailed further be-

low). (3) can be written as a Bellman Equation: Vt (xt ) = maxdt Et (ut (dt , xt ) + δVt+1 (xt+1 )|dt , xt ).

       The per-period utility from staying at the job is equal to the sum of the worker’s non-pecuniary
  18
      In the model, the piece rate-tenure proﬁle and training contract are taken as given. In addition, the ﬁrm is assumed
not to ﬁre workers. In the data subset, quitting is over 3 times more common than ﬁring, and ignoring ﬁring enormously
simpliﬁes the model by preventing us from having to estimate a dynamic game.
   19
      Assumptions of this form are standard in structural labor and personnel economics, and allows us to avoid having
to specify beliefs over possible future ﬁrm policy changes. We believe the assumption is reasonable in our setting, given
it is not common for the ﬁrm to make large changes in the pay schedule.
   20
      Assuming that signals are normally distributed is standard in structural learning models (see the survey by Ching
et al. (2013)). Visually, the distribution of signals (miles) among all workers has a bell shape centered close to around
2,000 miles, suggesting this assumption is reasonable (and that the distribution is closer to normal than to log-normal
or uniform).
   21
      Risk neutrality is assumed in many dynamic learning models (e.g., Crawford and Shum, 2005; Nagypal, 2007;
Stange, 2012; Goettler and Clay, 2011), though not in all (for examples with risk aversion, see the survey by Ching et
al. (2013)). Coscelli and Shum (2004) show that risk parameters are not identiﬁed in certain classes of learning models.




                                                                12
taste for the job, earnings, and an idiosyncratic shock:

                                             ut (1, xt ) = α + wt yt + εSt ,

where α is the worker’s non-pecuniary taste for the job, and εSt is an i.i.d. idiosyncratic error

unobserved to the econometrician (but observed by the worker) with an Extreme Value-Type 1

distribution and scale parameter τ . Since workers likely diﬀer unobservedly in taste for the job, we

assume there is unobserved heterogeneity in non-pecuniary taste for the job, α, with α drawn from

a mass-point distribution (Heckman and Singer, 1984).

       If the worker quits, he may have to pay a ﬁne associated with the training contract. Let the

vector k denote the training contract, with kt the penalty for quitting at tenure t. The utility from

quitting is the ﬁne, plus the discounted value of his outside option, plus an idiosyncratic shock:
                                                                   rt
                                           ut (0, xt ) = −kt +        + εQ
                                                                         t ,
                                                                  1−δ
where εQ                                                                            S 22 Let V S ≡
       t is an i.i.d. unobserved idiosyncratic error with the same distribution as εt .       t

Et (ut (1, xt ) + δVt (xt+1 )|1, xt ) and VtQ ≡ Et (ut (0, xt ) + δVt (xt+1 )|0, xt ) be the choice-speciﬁc value

functions for staying and quitting, respectively. Plugging in for ut (1, xt ) and ut (0, xt ), the choice-

speciﬁc value functions are given by:
                                           rt          Q
                      VtQ = −kt +             + εQ          Q
                                                 t ≡ V t + εt
                                          1−δ
                                                                                            S
                 VtS = α + Et (wt yt |xt ) + δE(Vt+1 (xt+1 )|xt ) + εSt ≡ V t + εSt ,
                                                                                        
                                                                         S          Q
and the Bellman Equation can be re-written as Vt (xt ) = maxdt ∈{0,1} Vt (xt ) , Vt (xt ) .

       Agents gradually learn their productivity as more and more productivity signals are observed.

Thus, after a suﬃciently large number of periods, T, the value function can be approximated by the

following asymptotic value functions:
                                             rT          Q
                                VQ =            + ε Q ≡ V + εQ
                                            1−δ
                                                                                     S
                                V S = α + wT η + δE(V (x )|x) + εS ≡ V                  + εS
                                                            
                              V (x) = max V S (x) , V Q (x)
                                           d∈{0,1}

  22
    Even though only a portion of the penalties owed were collected, as described in Section 2, we assume that drivers
act as if the utility cost of quitting is equivalent to the utility loss from paying the contract penalty. We believe this
assumption is reasonable. Firm A was very ﬁrm with new drivers about its intention to collect money owed upon a
quit. After a quit, drivers who did not pay faced aggressive collection contacts by both Firm A and collection agencies,
as well as the reporting of delinquency to credit agencies. As a robustness check, we have experimented with estimating
versions of the model assuming drivers act as if the utility loss from quitting is 0.3 times the penalty. Model ﬁt tended
to be less good. Indeed, our preferred model still fails to fully match the quitting spike at one year, as seen in Figure 2.


                                                            13
       Belief Formation. In a standard normal learning model, a worker’s beliefs about his period

t productivity equals the weighted sum of his prior and his demeaned average productivity to date:
                                                   σy2                 (t − 1) σ02           t−1
                                                                                             s=1 ys  − a(s)
               E(yt |y1 , ..., yt−1 ) =                        η 0+                                         + a(t)       (4)
                                             (t − 1) σ02 + σy2      (t − 1) σ02 + σy2              s−1
As t increases, the agent eventually shifts all the weight from his prior to his average productivity

signals. We augment the standard learning model in two ways. First, we allow for agents to be
                                                                                                     
overconﬁdent: instead of believing that their productivity, η, is drawn from a distribution N η0 , σ02 ,
                                                              
agents believe η is drawn from a distribution N η0 + ηb , σ02 . Second, we allow for agents to have

a perception of signal noise that may be diﬀerent from the true signal noise: workers perceive the

standard deviation of weekly productivity signals to be σy instead of σy . With these two assumptions,

an agent’s subjective expectation of his productivity, denoted by E b (where b stands for belief), is:
                                              σy 2                               (t − 1) σ02         t−1
                                                                                                         − a(s)
                                                                                                     s=1 ys
        E b (yt |y1 , ..., yt−1 ) =                          2 (η0 + ηb ) +                                     + a(t)   (5)
                                      (t −   1) σ02   + σy                    (t − 1) σ02 + σy 2       s−1
If ηb is greater (less) than zero, then agents exhibit positive (negative) mean bias or overconﬁdence

(underconﬁdence). As more signals come in, agents will learn not to be overconﬁdent, eventually

putting zero weight on (η0 + ηb ). The speed at which this occurs, however, will be determined by σy .

       We allow that workers’ reported subjective beliefs include some measurement error, as ac-

curately reporting one’s beliefs about productivity may be unusual or unfamiliar for a worker. We

assume that reported beliefs equal underlying subjective beliefs plus a normally distributed error. The
                                                                                                                        
reported subjective belief, bit , of driver i at tenure week t is distributed: bit ∼ N E b (yit |yi1 , ..., yit−1 ) , σb2 .

       Summary of Within Period Timing. The within period timing in week t is as follows:

   1. Workers form beliefs bt given past miles y1 , y2 , ..., yt−1 .

   2. εSt and εQ
               t are realized and workers decide whether or not to quit.

   3. yt is realized, if they do not quit.

Learning by Doing and Skill Accumulation. Productivity increases with the learning by doing
                                                                     e(x)
function a(t) = 2a1 ∗ (Λ(a2 t) − .5), where Λ(x) =                  1+e(x)    and t is worker tenure in weeks. a(t) depends

only on tenure; thus, the speed of learning by doing does not depend on the number of miles driven

or on the ability of the driver. Workers fully anticipate the path of a(t).23
  23
    The logistic functional form is consistent with Jovanovic and Nyarko’s (1996) micro-founded model of learning by
doing in which the speed of learning decreases over time, as well as the empirical results on tenure and productivity in
Shaw and Lazear (2008). Here, a1 is the total amount by which productivity increases and a2 indicates the speed of
learning by doing. We believe our assumption that workers fully anticipate the learning by doing process is reasonable
in our setting. In interviews, managers often referred to a steep “learning curve” for rookie drivers.


                                                                    14
       We also account for skill accumulation following CDL training. After CDL training at Firm A,

drivers do “on-the-job training” which includes driving with an experienced driver riding along. We

use a length of 5 weeks for on-the-job training.24 We account for the possibility that drivers may gain

valuable skills during this time: we assume the outside option over time is rt = r − 6−min{t,6}
                                                                                         5      s0 . We

ﬁx r using outside data, while s0 , the value of skills from on-the-job training, is estimated. (Besides

allowing for skill accumulation during the ﬁrst 5 weeks, we alternatively estimate the model allowing
                                                                                             e(x)
for continuous skill accumulation: rt = r + 2θ1 ∗ (Λ(θ2 t) − .5), where Λ(x) =              1+e(x) ,   and θ1 and θ2

are parameters to estimate.)

       Solving the Model. The state variables consist of past miles, the piece rate, the training

contract, taste heterogeneity, a person’s level of overconﬁdence, a vector of observable additional

characteristics (X), and the idiosyncratic shocks: xt = (y1 , ..., yt−1 , w, k, α, ηb , X, ε). The model can

allow for heterogeneity in taste for the job and/or in overconﬁdence. To solve the model, we ﬁrst

solve for the asymptotic value functions (after all learning has taken placed) using value function

iteration. With the asymptotic value functions in hand, backward recursion can then be applied to

solve the dynamic programming problem. We provide further details in Appendix D.


4.2    Discussion of Model Assumptions

Outside option. In our model, the outside option, rt , depends on tenure, but not productivity.

This feature diﬀers from many models of ﬁrm-sponsored general training where the worker is paid

the same share of his marginal product at both his inside and outside option (though less than his

full marginal product at both), e.g., Acemoglu and Pischke (1999b). We believe our assumption is

realistic in our context given that only 12% of workers who exit report moving to a long-haul trucking

job, with the vast majority moving to another type of work (see Section 2.2). Having high ability in

long-haul trucking does not necessarily imply that one will have high ability in non-trucking jobs or

even in short-haul trucking.25

       In addition, our assumption about the outside option is consistent with an earlier ﬁnding that,
  24
     During this time, drivers often are paid by ﬂat salary instead of by mile. We use a ﬂat salary of $375 per week
during on-the-job training. We also assume drivers do not begin learning about their productivity until after 5 weeks.
  25
     As discussed in Section 2, in contrast to long-haul drivers who are usually paid per mile, short-haul drivers are
usually paid by the hour. For short-haul drivers, relationship-management skills (for managing customer and client
relationships) are more important than being able to do a lot of miles quickly while far from home. Some workers will
be better at long-haul whereas others are will be better at short-haul.




                                                         15
all else equal, workers with higher productivity to date are substantially less likely to quit. That

is, if workers had the same productivity in their inside and outside options and were paid the same

share of their marginal product at each, then high and low ability workers would be equally likely to

quit. As seen in columns 2-3 of Table 3, this is not the case.

      Beliefs. While our model allows for non-standard belief formation, these features are estimated

from data instead of imposed. The model does not assume that people have overconﬁdent priors or

learn more slowly than would be predicted by Bayes’ Rule, but rather these features are identiﬁed via

the belief data (see Section 4.3); our model nests the standard model as a special case. Several aspects

of our generalized normal learning model receive support from the results in Section 3. Diﬀerences

in subjective beliefs are moderately predictive of diﬀerences in productivity across workers, but only

mildly predictive within workers. This ﬁnding is consistent (broadly) with our modeling assumption

that workers do not have private information about their underlying productivity. Subjective beliefs

do, however, aﬀect quitting decisions in our model, which is consistent with our earlier empirical

ﬁnding that, all else equal, workers with greater belief bias are less likely to quit. Although drivers

in the model have biased beliefs, they correctly anticipate future changes in their beliefs.

      A strong assumption in the model is that workers are not overconﬁdent about their outside

option despite potentially being overconﬁdent about their current job ability. However, for over-

conﬁdence to “lock in” workers after training, this assumption is stronger than necessary. Instead,

overconﬁdence will reduce quitting if the worker is more overconﬁdent about his current job earnings

than his outside option (see Prop. 1 in Appendix C); i.e., he exhibits diﬀerential overconﬁdence. If

the strong assumption of no outside overconﬁdence fails, but workers are still diﬀerentially overconﬁ-

dent, overconﬁdence will still theoretically reduce quitting, but less so than if the strong assumption

held. While the assumption of diﬀerential overconﬁdence is diﬃcult to test, we present 6 pieces of

evidence and arguments on why it seems reasonable in our setting. Though no piece individually is

foolproof, together, the 6 pieces signiﬁcantly support the assumption of diﬀerential overconﬁdence.

We begin with the strongest pieces of argument/evidence, moving down to pieces that are more

speculative.


  1. Insofar as drivers select the job at which they believe their ability will be the highest, this

     may lead them toward being diﬀerentially overconﬁdent about their ability at the current job


                                                  16
       relative to the outside option.26

   2. We collected data on workers’ perceived outside options. Drivers in the data subset were asked

       what their earnings would have been had they not started work with Firm A. First, we compare

       drivers’ response to this question to what “similar-looking” people earned in the March 2006

       Current Population Survey (CPS). As Appendix Figure E4 shows, the perceived outside option

       workers would have earned had they not gone through training does not appear to be higher

       than what people like them in the CPS are earning. Second, there is little correlation between

       a worker’s perceived inside option and his perceived outside option (see bolded text in the notes

       of Figure E4 for details). If workers were equally overconﬁdent about their inside and outside

       options, we would expect that workers who were more conﬁdent about their inside options to

       also be more conﬁdent about their outside options, but this is not the case.

   3. Table 3 showed that, all else equal, workers with higher productivity beliefs are less likely to

       quit while controlling for actual productivity to date. This ﬁnding is supportive of diﬀerential

       overconﬁdence.27

   4. While current earnings are proportional to ability in long-haul trucking, most US jobs do not

       pay piece rates. Thus, even if workers are overconﬁdent about their productivity at their

       outside option, it is unclear how much this aﬀects workers’ perceptions of their earnings at

       their outside option.28

   5. It is possible that new workers may form productivity expectations using information from
  26
      Van den Steen (2004) provides a “winner’s curse” argument on how self-selection can promote belief biases. Consider
a worker choosing among several jobs. For each job, he receives a noisy signal about his productivity there. The agent
will naturally choose the job with the highest signal, and will be overconﬁdent there relative to other jobs. While it
is easy to imagine that workers may have diﬀerent beliefs when choosing between long-haul trucking jobs and non-
long-haul trucking jobs, it is also quite possible that workers might expect to have diﬀerent productivity at diﬀerent
long-haul trucking ﬁrms. For example, one driver may have a lot of experience driving around the South and would
be less productive at a ﬁrm where most of the routes were in the Northeast. Based on where the routes are, it may be
harder for a driver to get home regularly, and spending a lot of time getting home could negatively aﬀect productivity.
In a related line of thinking, Lazear (2016) argues that diﬀerential overconﬁdence emerges naturally in a model of
occupational choice (since people are likely to choose expectations with positive expectation errors), and provides
evidence for this using CPS and PSID data.
   27
      In Proposition 1 in Appendix C, we prove that more overconﬁdent workers will be less likely to quit if and only if
they are more overconﬁdent about the inside than the outside option. This ﬁnding would seem unlikely if workers had
the same beliefs about their inside and outside options. Moreover, if having high productivity beliefs was indicative of
drivers who think the “grass is always greener” in other jobs, then high beliefs would be correlated with more quitting,
not less.
   28
      Performance pay is used in only 37% of U.S. jobs, comprises a median of 4% of total pay across jobs, and is less
common in blue-collar jobs like trucking than white-collar jobs (Lemieux et al., 2009). Of course, other pecuniary
aspects of a job (e.g., the perceived probability of being promoted to a higher wage) may be aﬀected by overconﬁdence.


                                                           17
       experienced drivers who are reasonably successful as truckers. New workers may fail to fully

       recognize that those who “make it” as truckers (i) are endogenously selected and that the full

       sample of new drivers may not be as successful on average and (ii) have already gone through

       an initial period of increasing productivity.

   6. The assumption of diﬀerential overconﬁdence is consistent with evidence in psychology and

       behavioral economics (see Appendix A.8 for details).29 The main idea is that, to avoid cogni-

       tive dissonance and other psychological discomfort, drivers who have invested signiﬁcant time,

       energy, and training contract debt into starting out with working at Firm A may engage in

       a form of “motivated reasoning” in order to believe that they made the right choice to start

       work where they did relative to their outside option (Kunda, 1990).


       Micro-foundations of Overconﬁdence. Several theoretical micro-foundations for overcon-

ﬁdence have been proposed in the literature, including evolutionary advantages, self-signaling, and

social-signaling. We remain agnostic about the source of the overconﬁdence (since our model and es-

timation do not depend on knowing the source). Our contribution is to document overconﬁdence and

explore the implications of overconﬁdence for behavior and welfare, not to understand its foundation.

We do, however, assume that agents do not receive psychological utility from their beliefs, consistent

with our Section 3 experimental ﬁnding that incentives do not appear to reduce overconﬁdence. If

agents received psychological utility from beliefs, we might expect them to trade oﬀ incentives for

accuracy with the utility value from stating high beliefs (unless, of course, the personal beneﬁts

from stating optimistic beliefs are so strong that agents are unwilling to trade-oﬀ moderate-sized

incentives to reduce their optimism). (To the extent that the assumption is incorrect and truckers

do receive substantial psychological beneﬁts from their beliefs, this would cause us to overstate the

beneﬁt to workers of eliminating overconﬁdence.) Also, we remain agnostic whether workers are

overconﬁdent about their own skills (e.g., “I have great endurance on the road”) vs. whether they

are overoptimistic about external events (e.g., “traﬃc will be better next week”).

       Learning about productivity. We model quitting as a product of worker learning. This is
  29
    The assumption of diﬀerential overconﬁdence may be more important for the interpretation of the counterfactuals
than the structural estimation. In the structural estimation, overconﬁdence about the inside option varies over time
due to learning. Thus, the model-speciﬁed overconﬁdence about the inside option would not be exactly oﬀset by
overconﬁdence about the outside option unless it varied over time in the same way (this is one important way in which
the dynamic structural model diﬀers from the one-period model in Appendix C). Appendix A.8 discusses further.


                                                         18
consistent with Table 3 where we show that, all else equal, workers with higher subjective productivity

beliefs are less likely to quit, as are workers with higher average productivity to date.


4.3     Estimation and Identiﬁcation

The model is estimated by maximum likelihood. In Appendix D, we derive the likelihood function

and describe the estimation procedure. Although the parameters are jointly identiﬁed, we can discuss

the main data features that allow us to identify particular model parameters.

       Productivity and skill parameters. The productivity parameters σ0 , σy , and η0 are identi-

ﬁed primarily by the productivity data. σ0 reﬂects the degree of permanent productivity diﬀerences

across individuals. σy reﬂects diﬀerences within individuals in productivity. η0 reﬂects the mean

average ability of workers in the population. The learning by doing parameters, a1 and a2 , are

identiﬁed by how much productivity goes up (a1 ) and how quickly (a2 ). The skill gain parameter,

s0 , is identiﬁed based on turnover levels during the ﬁrst 5 weeks when workers are driving with an

experienced driver. The continuous skill gain parameters, θ1 and θ2 are identiﬁed by how much

quitting changes with tenure given the increase in measured productivity.

       Taste heterogeneity. The taste for job parameters are identiﬁed from persistent diﬀerences

between individual quitting behavior and the predictions of the model. Suppose that the data

contained many low-productivity workers who nevertheless kept choosing not to quit. This would

cause the model to estimate that there is a large amount of unobserved taste heterogeneity.

       Belief parameters. The subjective beliefs data are critical for identifying the belief parame-

ters. Prior mean bias (overconﬁdence), ηb , is identiﬁed by the diﬀerence between believed and actual

productivity, particularly at lower tenure levels. The believed standard deviation of productivity

shocks, σy , determines the subjective speed of learning in the model. The larger σy is, the slower

that agents’ initial overprediction will disappear. The standard deviation of beliefs, σb , is identiﬁed

by noise in beliefs unrelated to information in model-predicted subjective expectations. An increase

in σb leads to greater week-to-week ﬂuctuations in beliefs unrelated to actual productivity.30

       Scale parameter. The scale parameter of the idiosyncratic shock, τ , is identiﬁed based oﬀ

of how much quitting behavior in the data diﬀers from that predicted by a model with individual
  30
    Possible heterogeneity in ηb (discussed in Appendix A.9) is identiﬁed from diﬀerences across people in the extent
of productivity overprediction. We also note that ηb and σ   y , in addition to aﬀecting subjective beliefs, will also aﬀect
quitting. For example, the faster that agents begin to rely on their average productivity to date in making quit decisions
(that is, the faster their quitting decisions reﬂect “learning”), the smaller that σy will be.


                                                             19
unobserved heterogeneity, but not time-varying uncertainty. Higher levels of τ tend to ﬂatten the

quit hazard with respect to worker tenure.


4.4    Implementation

The outside option, r, is taken to be the median full-time earnings from the 2006 March CPS of

workers like the data subset “median” driver (35-year old males with a high school degree), which is

$32,000 per year.31 We convert this to a weekly wage of $640. The weekly discount factor, δ, is set to

δ = 0.9957, corresponding to an annual discount factor of 0.8.32 In our baseline estimates, we do not

include demographic covariates or heterogeneity in overconﬁdence.33 Learning is assumed complete

after T = 130 periods. We use data on up to 110 weeks per driver. After presenting our baseline

estimates, we discuss robustness to alternative assumptions. In our dataset, we focus on 699 workers

with complete data (see Appendix D).


4.5    Structural Results

Table 4 displays the main structural estimates and indicates substantial mean bias and variance bias.

As a benchmark, column 1 provides estimates assuming no mean bias. Column 2 allows for mean

bias, estimating bias, ηb , of 589 miles (or roughly 30% of 2,025 miles, the estimated mean of the true

productivity distribution). The productivity parameters in column 2 also diﬀer from those in column

1 and seem more reasonable in size.34 In terms of variance bias, the believed standard deviation of

productivity shocks is roughly 2.5 times higher than the actual standard deviation of productivity

shocks. This implies that workers update beliefs considerably slower than predicted by Bayes’ Rule.
  31
      “High school graduate” is the modal educational category (40% of drivers) whereas “Some college” is the median
category. Table F1 shows our estimates are very similar if we assume a higher outside option.
   32
      It is standard in most dynamic structural models to assume rather than estimate the discount factor, as the discount
factor is usually weakly identiﬁed. We have experimented with a broad range of discount factors in sensitivity analysis.
Model ﬁt appears best for annual discount factors in the range of 0.80. However, assuming an annual discount factor of
0.90 or 0.95 yields quite similar estimates (see Table F1). A discount factor of 0 yields a substantially worse ﬁt, evidence
that workers in our context are forward looking. An annual discount factor of 0.80 is “low,” but is comparable or higher
than discount factors used or estimated in other models analyzing dynamic choices of blue-collar or low-income workers
(e.g., Paserman, 2008; Fang and Silverman, 2009; Warner and Pleeter, 2001).
   33
      We have also estimated models with covariates, for example, allowing taste for the job, α, to depend on gender,
education, race, and age. However, including covariates has little eﬀect on model ﬁt and on the estimates of the other
parameters. See also Card and Hyslop (2005) for an example of a dynamic model where covariates are excluded because
they do not signiﬁcantly improve model ﬁt.
   34
      For example, the mean of the prior productivity distribution is 2,025 miles per week, down roughly 20% from 2,468
miles per week in column 1. In column 1, the prior productivity distribution needs to explain the earnings data. But
it also needs to explain the quitting and subjective beliefs data, which “pulls” the estimate substantially upward.




                                                            20
                                                                                               tσ02
Recall that the weight agents place on their signals relative to their prior is            tσ02 +σy 2
                                                                                                       .   After 20 weeks,

the worker is estimated to place weight 0.31 on his signals (whereas if σy = σy , the worker would

place weight 0.77 on his signals).35 Table 4 also indicates signiﬁcant heterogeneity in non-pecuniary

taste for the job.

       Table 5 takes the baseline model and adds learning by doing and continuous skill accumulation.

The ﬁt is better in both speciﬁcations than in Table 4. Many of the parameters are qualitatively

similar to before, but there are some diﬀerences. In column two, the mean prior bias is larger than

before, estimated at 707 miles. The estimated taste heterogeneity is also somewhat diﬀerent.

       Figure 2 shows the model ﬁts the data quite well. We simulate 40,000 drivers. The quit

hazard-tenure, productivity-tenure, and beliefs-tenure proﬁles observed in the data are plotted using

an Epanechnikov kernel. As in the data, the model-predicted quit hazard is initially increasing,

reﬂecting learning about productivity. When workers are uncertain about their productivity, they

face an incentive to wait and see how productive they will be before quitting. Also, the model

predicts a large spike in quitting after 52 weeks (when drivers come oﬀ the 12-month contract).

       The models with mean bias (column 2 in Tables 4 and 5) ﬁt the data much better in terms

of overall ﬁt than the models without mean bias (column 1), according to a likelihood ratio test

(p < 0.01). To analyze model ﬁt on the quitting data alone, we compare the observed weekly

number of drivers quitting (Ot ) with the number predicted from the model (Et ) using a chi-squared
                                                (Et −Ot )2
test. The chi-squared statistic is          t       Et     .   Inference is conducted using T degrees of freedom,

where T is the maximum number of weeks a driver is observed. For column 1 of Table 4, the chi-

squared statistic is 520.2, whereas for column 2, the chi-squared statistic is 214.0 (p < 0.01).36 Thus,

the ﬁt in terms of quitting is considerably better in the model with belief bias than without it.

       Robustness. Table F1 shows our main estimates are quite robust to diﬀerent assumptions.

Increasing the discount factor does not signiﬁcantly change the estimates, nor does using inverse
  35
      This ﬁnding is consistent with the well-known psychological phenomenon of “conservatism” (Edwards, 1968), where
agents update less than a rational agent would after receiving new information. For recent evidence on conservatism,
see Eil and Rao (2011) and Mobius et al. (2014). For theory on conservative updating, see Schwartzstein (2014).
   36
      Chi-squared tests are often used to assess the ﬁt of dynamic models (e.g., Keane and Wolpin, 1997; Card and
Hyslop, 2005). Comparing the chi-squared statistic in column 1 of Table 4 with that in column 2 after one parameter
is added, the diﬀerence in chi-squared is highly signiﬁcant (χ2df =1 = 520.2 − 214.0 → p < 0.01). (As caveated though
in Card and Hyslop (2005), it is more correct to think of the calculated chi-squared statistic as an informal measure of
ﬁt, since the predicted numbers are created from the same data being used for the observed cell entries.) The model
with mean bias also ﬁts other aspects of the data besides the means in Figure 2, such as the distribution of beliefs and
productivity over tenure (see Figure F1). To see the poor model ﬁt for the model without mean bias, see Figure F2.



                                                               21
probability weighting to address non-response. Winsorizing subjective beliefs at 4, 000 miles decreases

the mean bias term by 5% to 560 miles, suggesting that very high beliefs are accounting for only a

small share of the overall mean bias. Allowing learning to occur over 200 weeks (instead of 130) and

increasing the outside option also do not much change the estimates. Results are also qualitatively

robust to allowing for heterogeneity in overconﬁdence. Appendix A.9 discusses this and additional

robustness checks.

       One can imagine alternative non-standard economic forces that aﬀect a worker’s taste for

the job, e.g., feelings of commitment toward the ﬁrm providing training. However, time-invariant

shifters of job taste are already accounted for via the taste heterogeneity parameters. In contrast,

overconﬁdence provides a time-varying impact on the value of staying that ﬁts the data well.

       Out-of-Sample Fit. All drivers in our sample have the 12-month training contract described

in the main text. A companion paper (Hoﬀman and Burks, 2017) studies worker behavior under three

diﬀerent contractual regimes (the 12-month contract, a no contract regime, and an 18-month pro-

rated contract), showing that the model developed in the present paper can predict basic retention

patterns under the no contract and 18-month contract regimes. Thus, our structural model also

makes reasonable out-of-sample predictions, which is a more demanding test for the model.



5      Counterfactual Simulation: Debiasing

Set-up for Counterfactuals. We use our baseline structural estimates (column 2 of Table 4) to

quantify the importance of biased beliefs. Proﬁts are deﬁned as production proﬁts, plus training

contract penalties, minus training costs. For a worker who stays T periods before quitting, proﬁts

are:
                          
                          T                                        
                                                                   T
                     π=         δ t−1 ((P − mc − wt )yt − F C) +         δ t−1 θkt qt − T C        (6)
                          t=1                                      t=1
where P is the price the ﬁrm charges for one mile of shipment, mc is the non-wage marginal cost

per mile (such as truck wear and fuel costs), wt is the piece rate, yt is a driver’s productivity, F C

is ﬁxed costs per week (such as back oﬃce support for the driver), qt is a dummy for quitting in

week t, θ is the share of the training contract penalty collected by the ﬁrm, and T C is training cost

per worker. Based on consultation with Firm A managers, we assume that P − mc = $0.70/mile,

θ = 0.3, F C = $650/week, and T C = $2, 500 for the new inexperienced workers we study. We equate

                                                    22
the ﬁrm’s weekly discount factor to the worker’s, δ = 0.9957, so as to avoid having results being

driven by diﬀerences in discount factors; our conclusions are unchanged if we assume higher discount

factors for both worker and ﬁrm. Further details on computing proﬁts are given in Appendix A.10.1

and Appendix D.

       Although workers have biased beliefs, they have standard preferences. Worker welfare is mea-

sured simply by summing earnings, taste for trucking, and idiosyncratic shocks, as in equation (3).37

       For the counterfactuals, we simulate the full data-generating process for 3,000 simulated work-

ers for up to 1,300 weeks each. While workers are simulated for up to 1,300 weeks, we focus on

showing proﬁts per worker and welfare per worker numbers after 110 weeks (corresponding to the

maximum number of weeks under observation in the data).38 Throughout the counterfactuals, we

focus separately on proﬁts and worker welfare, and do not analyze total welfare.39

       Debiasing: Reducing Worker Overconﬁdence. To examine quantitatively how overcon-

ﬁdence aﬀects quitting, worker welfare, and proﬁts, we simulate eliminating worker overconﬁdence,

which we also refer to, following the psychology literature, as “debiasing.” We also consider elimi-

nating overconﬁdence by one-half, recognizing that debiasing may be incomplete in practice. This

practice of analyzing the impacts of counterfactually eliminating a “behavioral” parameter also ap-

pears in work such as Handel (2013).

       As seen in Table 6, full debiasing increases worker welfare by about 5% since worker quitting

decisions become less distorted by overconﬁdence. Although the workers exhibit signiﬁcant turnover

in the baseline, turnover becomes even higher when workers are debiased. In the un-debaised simu-

lation, worker retention is 43% after 60 weeks, but this falls to 33% under 50% debiasing, and to 24%

under 100% debiasing. Without debiasing, workers tend to interpret low-mileage weeks as repeated

instances of “bad luck” (i.e., weeks that are low relative to their prior beliefs). After debiasing,

workers’ quitting decisions are no longer distorted by having a rosy outlook.

       In addition, ﬁrm proﬁts substantially decline under debiasing. Under full debiasing, proﬁts
  37
     Since workers have biased beliefs, average experienced utility will diﬀer from a worker’s ex ante expected utility. We
measure welfare using experienced utility; this focus is shared by the empirical work of Grubb and Osborne (2015) and
the theoretical framework in Mullainathan et al. (2012).
  38
     The counterfactuals yield the same qualitative conclusions if we analyze proﬁt and worker welfare after 1,300 weeks.
  39
     While we found our conclusions on proﬁts and worker welfare to be very robust to diﬀerent assumptions, we
found total welfare to depend more closely on particular assumptions made. That our counterfactuals do not lead to
unambiguous changes in total welfare is not surprising, given our model allows for multiple market failures, including
private information about taste for the job and shocks; biased beliefs; quitting externalities; and monopsony power in
the training market.


                                                            23
per worker decline by over $3,000. Due to the increase in quitting, the ﬁrm has less time to make

proﬁts from a given worker. Our counterfactual allows us to quantify how much overconﬁdence

aﬀects training proﬁts and worker welfare in this market.40



6        Conclusion

Using a sample of truckers, we ﬁnd that workers tend to persistently overpredict their productivity

(on average), thereby providing robust ﬁeld evidence on worker overconﬁdence. Higher productivity

beliefs are correlated with less quitting while controlling for actual productivity to date. To quantify

the importance of biased beliefs for proﬁts and welfare, we structurally estimate a quitting model with

potentially biased beliefs. We show that overconﬁdence is critical for the proﬁtability of training.

If worker overconﬁdence was eliminated, proﬁts from training would fall substantially. Further,

overconﬁdence moderately reduces worker welfare by distorting worker decisions.

         Our results parallel several studies in behavioral industrial organization indicating that ﬁrms

may proﬁtably exploit consumers’ biases, focusing instead on the behavioral biases of workers. An

important diﬀerence in our setting, besides the identity of the parties involved, is the possibility of a

baseline market failure of underinvestment. In a second-best world with underinvestment in general

training, the existence of worker overconﬁdence makes training more proﬁtable, potentially increasing

the quantity of ﬁrm training. Paralleling the work in industrial organization, we ﬁnd evidence that

agents (in our case, workers) are harmed by a behavioral bias, but our results also raise the possibility

that it may not necessarily be in workers’ interests to have that bias eliminated. Unfortunately,

because our data are primarily from one ﬁrm, we are unable to calculate how overconﬁdence aﬀects

the share of ﬁrms willing to train; thus, we are unable to weigh this beneﬁt against the distortion

from overconﬁdence on worker decision-making. Additional research is clearly called for.

         While truckers are well-suited for examining overconﬁdence about productivity, it is important

to highlight that we are focusing on one particular job, and the patterns we document may not
    40
    This counterfactual takes training contracts as ﬁxed. It is conceivable that ﬁrms would optimally adjust contracts
(wages and training contract penalties) if workers did not exhibit overconﬁdence. We explored this extended debiasing
counterfactual in an earlier version of the paper. Under this counterfactual of debiasing with optimal contractual
responses, the overall conclusions from the baseline debiasing counterfactual remain quite similar. The main diﬀerence
was that debiasing tended to push ﬁrms toward decreasing optimal quit penalties. Even if the training contract is
ﬁxed, eliminating worker overconﬁdence might make workers unwilling to accept the job in the ﬁrst place without an
increase in the wage. If eliminating worker overconﬁdence was also accompanied by an increase in worker wages, this
would further increase the worker welfare beneﬁt of debiasing.



                                                         24
necessarily hold in other settings. Future worker should examine whether worker overconﬁdence

occurs in other settings. While piece rate compensation is not shared by most other jobs, piece rate

compensation is not necessary for overconﬁdence to make workers less likely to quit after training. For

example, workers may be over-optimistic about some other aspect of the job, e.g., the probability

of being promoted. While we focus on ﬁrm training, overconﬁdence can help entice or “lock in”

workers even if there is no training involved, and may be relevant for other types of human capital

investment, e.g., going to college, or for occupational choice in general.41

       Worker overconﬁdence may be important for many aspects of optimal job design and compen-

sation. For example, when ﬁrms can choose to pay ﬂat wages or piece rates, paying a piece rate

may be appealing if workers are overconﬁdent since overconﬁdent workers perceive they may earn

more than they actually will (Larkin and Leider, 2012). Future work should continue to analyze the

importance of worker biases for employee behavior, worker welfare, and ﬁrm outcomes.




  41
     See Stinebrickner and Stinebrickner (2012) for evidence that college students are initially overconﬁdent about their
likely performance in college. There has been recent discussion, particularly related to law schools, that students may be
overly optimistic about their future job prospects when taking on student loans, e.g., David Segal, “Law Students Lose
the Grant Game as Schools Win,” New York Times, April 2011 and Liz Goodwin, “Law grads sue school, say degree is
’indentured servitude’,” Yahoo News, August 2011. In a diﬀerent application for workers, the impact of overconﬁdence
about job-ﬁnding on optimal unemployment insurance, see Spinnewijn (2015). For work on overoptimism and stock
options for nonexecutive workers, see, e.g., Oyer and Schaefer (2005).


                                                           25
References
Acemoglu, Daron and Jorn-Steﬀen Pischke, “The Structure of Wages and Investment in Gen-
 eral Training,” Journal of Political Economy, 1999b, 107 (3), 539–572.
Arcidiacono, Peter, “Ability Sorting and the Returns to College Major,” Journal of Econometrics,
 2004, 121 (1-2), 343–375.
  , V. Joseph Hotz, Arnaud Maurel, and Teresa Romano, “Recovering Ex Ante Returns and
  Preferences for Occupations using Subjective Expectations Data,” Working Paper 20626, National
  Bureau of Economic Research October 2014.
Baker, George P. and Thomas N. Hubbard, “Contractibility And Asset Ownership: On-Board
 Computers and Governance In U. S. Trucking,” QJE, 2004, 119 (4), 1443–1479.
Baumann, Andrea, Raisa Deber, and Gail Thompson, “Overconﬁdence among Physicians
 and Nurses: The ‘Micro-Certainty, Macro-Uncertainty’ Phenomenon,” Social Science & Medicine,
 May 1991, 32 (2), 167–174.
Bellemare, Charles, Sabine Kroger, and Arthur van Soest, “Measuring Inequity Aversion in
 a Heterogeneous Population Using Experimental Decisions and Subjective Probabilities,” Econo-
 metrica, 2008, 76 (4), 815–839.
Belzer, Michael, Sweatshops on Wheels: Winners and Losers in Trucking Deregulation, Oxford
 University Press, 2000.
Benson, P George and Dilek Önkal, “The eﬀects of feedback and training on the performance
 of probability forecasters,” International Journal of Forecasting, 1992, 8 (4), 559–573.
BLS, “Bureau of Labor Statistics Occupational Outlook Handbook, 2010-11: Truck Drivers and
 Driver/Sales Workers,” 2010.
Bojilov, Raicho, “Incentives to Work or Incentives to Quit?,” 2013. Mimeo, Ecole Polytechnique.
Burks, Stephen V., Bo Cowgill, Mitchell Hoﬀman, and Michael Housman, “The Value of
 Hiring through Employee Referrals,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2015, 130 (2), 805–839.
  , Jeﬀrey Carpenter, Lorenz Goette, and Aldo Rustichini, “Overconﬁdence and Social
  Signalling,” Review of Economic Studies, 2013, 80 (3), 949–983.
  , , , Kristen Monaco, Kay Porter, and Aldo Rustichini, “Using Behavioral Economic
  Field Experiments at a Firm: The Context and Design of the Truckers and Turnover Project,” in
  “The Analysis of Firms and Employees: Quantitative and Qualitative Approaches” 2008.
Card, David, Alexandre Mas, Enrico Moretti, and Emmanuel Saez, “Inequality at Work:
 The Eﬀect of Peer Salaries on Job Satisfaction,” AER, 2012, 102 (6), 2981–3003.
   and Dean R. Hyslop, “Estimating the Eﬀects of a Time-Limited Earnings Subsidy for Welfare-
  Leavers,” Econometrica, 2005, 73 (6), 1723–1770.
Chan, Tat, Barton Hamilton, and Christopher Makler, “Using Expectations Data to Infer
 Managerial Objectives and Choices,” 2008. Mimeo, Washington University in St. Louis.
Ching, Andrew T., Tulin Erdem, and Michael P. Keane, “Learning Models: An Assessment
 of Progress, Challenges, and New Developments,” Marketing Science, 2013, 32 (6), 913–938.
Coscelli, Andrea and Matthew Shum, “An Empirical Model of Learning and Patient Spillovers
 in New Drug Entry,” Journal of Econometrics, 2004, 122 (2), 213 – 246.
Crawford, Gregory S. and Matthew Shum, “Uncertainty and Learning in Pharmaceutical


                                              26
  Demand,” Econometrica, 2005, 73 (4), 1137–1173.
DeGroot, Morris, Optimal Statistical Decisions, New York, NY: Mcgraw-Hill College, 1970.
Edwards, Ward, “Conservatism in Human Information Processing,” in B. Kleinmuntz, ed., Formal
 Representation of Human Judgement, 1968, pp. 17–52.
Eil, David and Justin M. Rao, “The Good News-Bad News Eﬀect: Asymmetric Processing of
  Objective Information about Yourself,” American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 2011, 3
  (2), 114–38.
Fang, Hanming and Dan Silverman, “Time-Inconsistency And Welfare Program Participation:
  Evidence From The NLSY,” International Economic Review, 2009, 50 (4), 1043–1077.
Goettler, Ronald and Karen Clay, “Tariﬀ Choice with Consumer Learning and Switching
 Costs,” Journal of Marketing Research, 2011, 48 (4), 633–652.
Grubb, Michael D. and Matthew Osborne, “Cellular Service Demand: Biased Beliefs, Learning,
 and Bill Shock,” American Economic Review, 2015, 105 (1), 234–71.
Handel, Benjamin R., “Adverse Selection and Inertia in Health Insurance Markets: When Nudg-
 ing Hurts,” American Economic Review, December 2013, 103 (7), 2643–82.
Heckman, James J. and Burton Singer, “A Method for Minimizing the Impact of Distributional
 Assumptions in Econometric Models for Duration Data,” Econometrica, 1984, 52 (2), 271–320.
Hoﬀman, Mitchell, “How is Information Valued? Evidence from Framed Field Experiments,” The
 Economic Journal, 2016, 126 (595), 1884–1911.
   and Stephen V. Burks, “Training Contracts, Employee Turnover, and the Returns from Firm-
  sponsored General Training,” 2017. Mimeo, University of Toronto.
Hubbard, Thomas N., “Information, Decisions, and Productivity: On-Board Computers and
 Capacity Utilization in Trucking,” American Economic Review, 2003, 93 (4), 1328–1353.
Huﬀman, David and Julia Shvets, “Overconﬁdence and Memory: Evidence from Managers,”
 2016. Presentation, Stanford Institute for Theoretical Economics.
Jovanovic, Boyan, “Job Matching and the Theory of Turnover,” JPE, 1979, 87 (5), 972–90.
   and Yaw Nyarko, “Learning by Doing and the Choice of Technology,” Econometrica, 1996, 64
  (6), 1299–1310.
Keane, Michael P. and Kenneth I. Wolpin, “The Career Decisions of Young Men,” JPE, 1997,
 105 (3), 473–522.
Koszegi, Botond, “Behavioral Contract Theory,” Journal of Economic Literature, 2014, 52 (4),
 1075–1118.
Kunda, Ziva, “The case for motivated reasoning.,” Psychological bulletin, 1990, 108 (3), 480.
Larkin, Ian and Stephen Leider, “Incentive Schemes, Sorting and Behavorial Biases of Employ-
  ees: Experimental Evidence,” American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 2012, 4 (2), 184–214.
Lazear, Edward P., “Overconﬁdence and Occupational Choice,” NBER Working Papers 21921,
  National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc January 2016.
Lemieux, Thomas, W. Bentley MacLeod, and Daniel Parent, “Performance Pay and Wage
  Inequality,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2009, 124 (1), 1–49.
Malmendier, Ulrike and Geoﬀrey Tate, “CEO Overconﬁdence and Corporate Investment,”
 Journal of Finance, December 2005, 60 (6), 2661–2700.


                                               27
Massey, Cade, Joseph P Simmons, and David A Armor, “Hope Over Experience Desirability
 and the Persistence of Optimism,” Psychological Science, 2011, 22 (2), 274–281.
Mobius, Markus M., Muriel Niederle, Paul Niehaus, and Tanya Rosenblat, “Managing
 Self-Conﬁdence: Theory and Experimental Evidence,” 2014. Working paper, UC San Diego.
Moore, Don A. and Paul J. Healy, “The Trouble With Overconﬁdence,” Psychological Review,
 2008, 115 (2), 502 – 517.
  , Samuel A Swift, Angela Minster, Barbara Mellers, Lyle Ungar, Philip Tetlock,
  Heather HJ Yang, and Elizabeth R Tenney, “Conﬁdence calibration in a multiyear geopo-
  litical forecasting competition,” Management Science, 2017, Forthcoming.
Mullainathan, Sendhil, Joshua Schwarzstein, and William J. Congdon, “A Reduced-Form
 Approach to Behavioral Public Finance,” Annual Review of Economics, 2012, 4, 511–540.
Nagypal, Eva, “Learning by Doing vs. Learning About Match Quality: Can We Tell Them Apart,”
 Review of Economic Studies, 2007, 74 (1), pp. 537–566.
Oyer, Paul and Scott Schaefer, “Why Do Some Firms Give Stock Options to All Employees?:
 An Empirical Examination of Alternative Theories,” Journal of Financial Economics, 2005, 76
 (1), 99–133.
Paserman, M.Daniele, “Job Search and Hyperbolic Discounting: Structural Estimation and Policy
 Evaluation,” Economic Journal, 2008, 118 (531), 1418–1452.
Sanders, Carl, “Skill Uncertainty, Skill Accumulation, and Occupational Choice,” 2016. Mimeo,
  WashU in St. Louis.
Schwartzstein, Joshua, “Selective Attention and Learning,” Journal of the European Economic
  Association, 2014, 12 (6), 1423–1452.
Shaw, Kathryn and Edward P. Lazear, “Tenure and Output,” Labour Economics, 2008, 15 (4),
  704–723.
Spinnewijn, Johannes, “Unemployed but Optimistic: Optimal Insurance Design with Biased
  Beliefs,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 2015, 13 (1), 130–167.
Stange, Kevin M., “An Empirical Investigation of the Option Value of College Enrollment,”
  American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2012, 4 (1), 49–84.
Stinebrickner, Todd and Ralph Stinebrickner, “Learning about Academic Ability and the
  College Dropout Decision,” Journal of Labor Economics, 2012, 30 (4), 707 – 748.
Van den Steen, Eric, “Rational Overoptimism (and Other Biases),” American Economic Review,
 2004, 94 (4), 1141–1151.
van der Klaauw, Wilbert, “On the Use of Expectations Data in Estimating Structural Dynamic
  Choice Models,” Journal of Labor Economics, 2012, 30 (3), 521 – 554.
   and Kenneth I. Wolpin, “Social Security and the Retirement and Savings Behavior of Low-
  income Households,” Journal of Econometrics, 2008, 145 (1-2), 21–42.
Wang, James, “Why hire loan oﬃcers? Examining delegated expertise,” Technical Report, Working
 Paper. University of Michigan 2015.
Warner, John T. and Saul Pleeter, “The Personal Discount Rate: Evidence from Military
 Downsizing Programs,” American Economic Review, 2001, 91 (1), 33–53.
Wiswall, Matthew and Basit Zafar, “Determinants of College Major Choice: Identiﬁcation using
 an Information Experiment,” Review of Economic Studies, 2015, 82 (2), 791–824.


                                             28
           Figure 1: Overconﬁdence: Comparing Subjective Productivity Forecasts with Actual Worker
                               Productivity (as a Function of Worker Tenure)
           2600




                                                                                          2600
                2400




                                                                                             2400
 Miles per week




                                                                              Miles per week
      2200




                                                                                   2200
           2000




                                                                                          2000
           1800




                                                                                          1800
                       0       50                             100                                   0         50                              100
                             Weeks of tenure                                                                Weeks of tenure

                           95% CI              Miles                                                     95% CI                Miles
                           95% CI              Mile beliefs                                              95% CI                Mile beliefs



                           (a) Means                                                                    (b) Medians


                                                                                     2600
           2600




                                                                                            2400
              2400
 Miles per week




                                                                             Miles per week
                                                                                  2200
     2200




                                                                         2000
           2000




                                                                                     1800
           1800




                       0       50                             100                                   0        50                               100
                             Weeks of tenure                                                               Weeks of tenure

                           95% CI              Miles                                                     95% CI               Miles
                           95% CI              Mile beliefs                                              95% CI               Mile beliefs


      (c) Means, Restrict to Workers Who Stay at                         (d) Medians, Restrict to Workers Who Stay at
                   Least 75 Weeks                                         Least 75 Weeks & Respond to Belief Survey

Notes: This ﬁgure analyzes actual and believed productivity for the drivers in the data subset. Each subﬁgure is plotted
using a local polynomial regression with an Epanechnikov kernel. At a given week of tenure t on the ﬁgure, actual
productivity is the productivity achieved during that week, whereas believed productivity in t represents the driver’s
expectation about miles in week t + 1. Observations are excluded from the sample if weekly miles are 0, if weekly
predicted miles are 0, or if the driver is ever observed in the dataset receiving activity-based pay or salary pay instead
of being paid by the mile. We restrict attention to weeks of tenure between 6 and 110 (early weeks involve training
and the sample becomes relatively scant after around two years). A bandwidth of 5 weeks is used for the productivity
data and a bandwidth of 7 weeks is used for the belief data. In panels (a) and (c), the productivity and belief data are
collapsed into weekly means before local polynomial smoothing. In panels (b) and (d), the productivity and belief data
are collapsed into weekly medians before local polynomial smoothing. In panel (d), we restrict to the 62% of workers
who ever respond to the survey. The ﬁgure is similar if we restrict miles to weeks where the driver responds to the
survey, though standard errors are larger. It may seem surprising that the initial amount of overconﬁdence is large.
However, as noted in Section 3.1, this ﬁgure averages across workers. At an individual level, workers only over-predict
their productivity in 65% of driver-weeks (with the percentage calculated excluding instances where miles driven next
week is 0, i.e., where the driver is not working). Thus, drivers are not individually over-predicting every week, as there
is substantial idiosyncratic variation in miles in the data.




                                                                    29
                                         Figure 2: Structural Model: Model Fit


                               Survival from quitting                                      Quit hazard
                 1                                                        0.05
                                                         Data                                                   Data
                                                         Model                                                  Model
                0.8                                                       0.04

                0.6                                                       0.03

                0.4                                                       0.02

                0.2                                                       0.01

                 0                                                          0
                      0   20     40    60        80     100                      0   20   40    60        80   100
                                      Week                                                     Week

                                Mean productivity                                          Mean beliefs
               3000                                                       3000
                                                         Data                                                   Data
                                                         Model                                                  Model



               2500                                                       2500
       Miles




                                                                  Miles




               2000                                                       2000



               1500                                                       1500
                      0   20     40    60        80     100                      0   20   40    60        80   100
                                      Week                                                     Week


Notes: This ﬁgure compares model-simulated data against the actual data to assess model ﬁt. We plot the survival
curve, the quit hazard, the mean miles-tenure proﬁle, and the mean beliefs-tenure proﬁle. The model simulated
corresponds to Column 2 in Table 5. We simulate the entire data-generating process for 40,000 drivers. The data are
from 699 drivers with the 12-month contract, all of whom are from the same training school and hired in late 2005 or
2006. The paths of quits, earnings, and beliefs over tenure are plotted using an Epanechnikov kernel, with
bandwidths of 6 weeks, 5 weeks, and 10 weeks, respectively. For model ﬁt on the distribution of productivity across
drivers, see Appendix Figure F1.




                                                                 30
                                        Table 1: Summary Statistics


 Panel A: Driver Characteristics

 Variable                      Mean
 Female                        0.10
 Black                         0.11
 Hispanic                      0.02
 Age                             36
 Married                       0.41
 Number of Kids                0.96
 Years of Schooling              13
 Credit Score                   586
 No Credit Score               0.12
 Number of workers               895

 Panel B: Productivity and Productivity Beliefs
                    Data Subset                Estimation Sample
 Percentile      Miles      Miles               Miles               Miles
                            Beliefs                                 Beliefs
 10%               897       1500                1019                1500
 25%              1367       1800                1475                2000
 50%              1883       2300                1972                2500
 75%              2427       2750                2506                2800
 90%              2942       3000                3005                3050
 Mean             1908       2323                1998                2423
Notes: Panel A provides summary statistics. The drivers in the data are from one of Firm A’s training schools and
were hired in late 2005 or 2006. Panel B presents quantiles and means on productivity and productivity beliefs, both
for the data subset (895 drivers) and for the 699 drivers with complete data that we use in the structural estimation
(see Appendix D). Summary statistics on miles are calculated restricting to weeks where miles is greater than zero.
Though mean miles and beliefs are higher for the estimation sample, the diﬀerence between the two is similar in both
samples. In both samples, median mile beliefs lie at roughly the 70th percentile of miles. See Appendix A.3 for more
details on data and sample construction.




                                                         31
               Table 2: Do Productivity Beliefs Predict Productivity? OLS Regressions

                                             (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)
            L. Predicted miles            0.194***     0.147***      0.072***     0.068***     0.080***
                                           (0.023)      (0.019)       (0.016)      (0.015)      (0.022)
            L. Avg miles to date                                     0.719***     0.623***
                                                                      (0.036)      (0.036)
            Demographic Controls             No           Yes           No           Yes          No
            Work Type Controls               No           Yes           No           Yes          No
            Subject FE                       No           No            No           No           Yes
            Observations                    8,449        8,449         8,445        8,445        8,449
            R-squared                       0.070        0.129         0.169        0.191        0.294
Notes: The dependent variable is miles driven per week. An observation is a driver-week. Standard errors clustered
by driver in parentheses. Demographic controls are controls for gender, race, marital status, age (dummies for 25-30,
30-35, 35-40, 40-45, 45-50, 50-55, 55-60, 60-80), and education (dummies for high school, some college, or BA plus).
Productivity is given in terms of hundreds of miles driven per week. All regressions include week of tenure dummies.
The base sample is drivers in the data subset. * signiﬁcant at 10%; ** signiﬁcant at 5%; *** signiﬁcant at 1%


                    Table 3: Do Productivity Beliefs Predict Quitting? Cox Models

                                            (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)            (5)
          Predicted miles               -0.059***                                 -0.057***      -0.065***
                                         (0.018)                                   (0.020)        (0.021)
          Avg miles to date                           -0.081***     -0.118***       -0.011        -0.073*
                                                       (0.013)       (0.038)       (0.034)        (0.041)
          Demographic Controls             No            Yes            Yes           No            Yes
          Work Type Controls               No            Yes            Yes           No            Yes
          Observations                    8,509         33,374         8,509         8,509         8,509
Notes: An observation is a driver-week. Both predicted miles and average miles to date are in hundreds of miles per
week. The regressions are Cox proportional hazard models, where the failure event is quitting. Events where the
driver is ﬁred are treated as censored. Standard errors clustered by worker in parentheses. Demographic controls are
the same as in Table 2. Column 3 diﬀers from column 2 in that it restricts to the sample to driver-weeks for which
there is a corresponding belief expectation. The base sample is drivers in the data subset. In addition, in columns 1,
3, 4 and 5, the sample is restricted to observations with non-missing miles, non-missing average miles to date, and
positive mile beliefs. * signiﬁcant at 10%; ** signiﬁcant at 5%; *** signiﬁcant at 1%




                                                          32
                                   Table 4: Baseline Structural Estimates

                                                                           No Bias     Belief Bias
                                                                             (1)           (2)
                        Productivity and Skill Parameters
                  η0    Mean of prior productivity dist                      2464         2025
                                                                             (18)         (17)
                  σ0    Std dev of prior productivity dist                    475          286
                                                                             (18)         (11)
                  σy    Std dev of productivity shocks                        707          706
                                                                             (3.6)        (3.6)
                  s0    Skill accumulation in ﬁrst 5 weeks                   14.9          8.6
                                                                             (3.1)        (4.4)
                        Taste UH Parameters
                  μ1    Mass point 1 of taste UH                             -249         -260
                                                                              (8)         (14)
                  μ2    Mass point 2 of taste UH                             -107         -135
                                                                             (20)         (13)
                  μ3    Mass point 3 of taste UH                              139          135
                                                                             (43)         (41)
                  p1    Probability type 1                                   0.55         0.34
                                                                            (0.04)       (0.07)
                  p1    Probability type 2                                   0.24         0.43
                                                                            (0.03)       (0.06)
                        Belief Parameters
                  ηb    Belief bias                                                       589
                                                                                          (28)
                  σy    Believed std dev of productivity shocks             3653         1888
                                                                            (158)        (136)
                  σb    Std dev in beliefs                                    300          298
                                                                             (1.4)        (1.4)
                        Scale Parameter
                  τ     Scale param of idiosyncratic shock                   1620         2208
                                                                             (178)        (350)
                        Log-likelihood                                      -91064       -90865
                        Number of workers                                     699          699

Notes: This table presents estimates of the structural parameters. The idiosyncratic shock, skill gain, and taste
parameters are given in terms of dollars whereas the productivity and belief parameters are given in terms of miles.
“Taste UH” stands for unobserved heterogeneity in taste for the job. Standard errors are in parentheses and are
calculated by inverting the Hessian. A weekly discount factor of 0.9957 is assumed for workers and ﬁrms,
corresponding to an annual discount factor of 0.8. The data are from 699 drivers in the data subset, all of whom face
the 12-month training contract.




                                                         33
           Table 5: Structural Estimates with Learning by Doing and Skill Accumulation

                                                                            No Bias     Belief Bias
                                                                              (1)           (2)
                        Productivity and Skill Parameters
                  η0    Mean of prior productivity dist                        2401         1838
                                                                               (12)         (23)
                  σ0    Std dev of prior productivity dist                      508          274
                                                                               (19)         (10)
                  σy    Std dev of productivity shocks                          706          706
                                                                               (1.5)        (1.6)
                  a1    Learning by doing level                                 154          242
                                                                               (12)         (15)
                  a2    Learning by doing speed                                0.08         0.11
                                                                              (0.01)       (0.01)
                  θ1    Skill accumulation level                                 56          118
                                                                               (39)         (55)
                  θ2    Skill accumulation speed                               0.92         0.03
                                                                              (0.33)       (0.01)
                        Taste UH Parameters
                  μ1    Mass point 1 of taste UH                               -219         -420
                                                                               (42)         (79)
                  μ2    Mass point 2 of taste UH                                -77         -162
                                                                               (44)         (56)
                  μ3    Mass point 3 of taste UH                                167          176
                                                                               (57)         (62)
                  p1    Probability type 1                                     0.54         0.60
                                                                              (0.07)       (0.04)
                  p1    Probability type 2                                     0.25         0.19
                                                                              (0.05)       (0.04)
                        Belief Parameters
                  ηb    Belief bias                                                         707
                                                                                           (24)
                  σy    Believed std dev of productivity shocks               3420         1329
                                                                              (138)        (63)
                  σb    Std dev in beliefs                                      299         297
                                                                               (0.3)       (0.3)
                        Scale Parameter
                  τ     Scale param of idiosyncratic shock                    1733         1808
                                                                              (166)        (201)
                        Log-likelihood                                       -91020       -90767
                        Number of workers                                      699          699

Notes: As in Table 4, the idiosyncratic shock, skill gain, and taste parameters are given in terms of dollars whereas
the productivity and belief parameters are given in terms of miles. For the newly added parameters here, a1 and a2
are in miles, whereas θ1 and θ2 are in dollars. Standard errors are in parentheses and are calculated by BHHH.




                                                          34
                                    Table 6: Counterfactual Simulations

                        Counterfactual:           Baseline       50% debias    100% debias
                        Proﬁts per worker          $4,907          $3,247          $1,500
                        Welfare per worker        $54,840         $56,496         $57,612
                        Retention at 20wks           0.79           0.61            0.39
                        Retention at 40wks           0.56           0.41            0.27
                        Retention at 60wks           0.43           0.33            0.24
Notes: This table reports the results of the counterfactual simulations described in the text, while assuming that
training contracts are not adjusted in response. Under the 50% debias and 100% debias counterfactuals, worker
overconﬁdence is reduced by 50% or 100% (by reducing ηb by 50% or 100%). Proﬁts and welfare are deﬁned in
Section 5 of the text. The model simulated here corresponds to column 2 of Table 4.




                                                            35
