                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       CEO BEHAVIOR AND FIRM PERFORMANCE

                                       Oriana Bandiera
                                       Stephen Hansen
                                         Andrea Prat
                                       Raffaella Sadun

                                      Working Paper 23248
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23248


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                         March 2017, Revised September 2017




This project was funded by Columbia Business School, Harvard Business School and the Kau
man Foundation. We are grateful to Morten Bennedsen, Robin Burgess, Wouter Dessein, Bob
Gibbons, Rebecca Henderson, Ben Hermalin, Paul Ingram, Amit Khandelwal, Nicola Limodio,
Michael McMahon, Antoinette Schoar, Daniela Scur, Steve Tadelis and seminar participants at
ABD Institute, Bocconi, Cattolica, Chicago, Columbia, Copenhagen Business School, Cornell,
the CEPR Economics of Organization Workshop, the CEPR/IZA Labour Economics Symposium,
Edinburgh, Harvard Business School, INSEAD, LSE, MIT, Munich, NBER, Oxford, Politecnico
di Milano, Princeton, Science Po, SIOE, Sydney, Stanford Management Conference, Tel Aviv,
Tokyo, Toronto, Uppsala, and Warwick for useful suggestions. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Oriana Bandiera, Stephen Hansen, Andrea Prat, and Raffaella Sadun. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
CEO Behavior and Firm Performance
Oriana Bandiera, Stephen Hansen, Andrea Prat, and Raffaella Sadun
NBER Working Paper No. 23248
March 2017, Revised September 2017
JEL No. J22,J24,M12,O4

                                         ABSTRACT

We measure the behavior of 1,114 CEOs in six countries parsing granular CEO diary data
through an unsupervised machine learning algorithm. The algorithm uncovers two distinct
behavioral types: “leaders” and “managers”. Leaders focus on multi-function, high-level
meetings, while managers focus on one-to-one meetings with core functions. Firms with leader
CEOs are on average more productive, and this difference arises only after the CEO is hired. The
data is consistent with horizontal differentiation of CEO behavioral types, and firm-CEO
matching frictions. We estimate that 17% of sample CEOs are mismatched, and that mismatches
are associated with significant productivity losses.

Oriana Bandiera                                Andrea Prat
London School of Economics                     Columbia Business School
o.bandiera@lse.ac.uk                           3022 Broadway, Uris 624
                                               New York, NY 10027-6902
Stephen Hansen                                 andrea.prat@columbia.edu
University of Oxford
Department of Economics                        Raffaella Sadun
Manor Road Building                            Harvard Business School
Manor Road                                     Morgan Hall 233
Oxford OX1 3UQ                                 Soldiers Field
United Kingdom                                 Boston, MA 02163
stephen.hansen@economics.ox.ac.uk              and NBER
                                               rsadun@hbs.edu
1        Introduction
CEOs are at the core of many academic and policy debates. The conventional wisdom, backed by
a growing body of empirical evidence (Bertrand and Schoar 2003, Bennedsen et al. 2007, Kaplan
et al. 2012), is that the identity of the CEO matters for firm performance. What is less known
is what di↵erent CEOs do di↵erently, and whether and how di↵erences in CEO behavior have
significant economic implications.
        Scholars have approached this question in two ways. At one end of the spectrum, an influential
cluster of studies starting with Mintzberg (1973) have focused on the measurement of the actual
behavior of executives. They do so by “shadowing” CEOs in real time through personal observation.
While shadowing exercises have revealed a wealth of information on the nature of the managerial
job, they are based on small and selected samples and, as such, are difficult to generalize. At the
other end of the spectrum, organizational economists have developed abstract categorizations of
leadership styles that, however, are difficult to map into empirical proxies of behavior (Dessein and
Santos (2016); Hermalin (1998, 2007)).1
        This paper develops a new methodology to bring back quantitative measurements of CEO
behavior by scaling up the shadowing methods to large samples. Our aim is to advance knowledge on
questions that have managerial behavior at their core, through new, large-scale and internationally
comparable evidence on what CEOs actually do.
        This approach involves two primary challenges: a) how to shadow a large number of CEOs, and
b) how to aggregate granular information on their activities into a summary measure that has a
consistent meaning across subjects. We address the first challenge by shadowing the CEOs’ diaries,
rather than the individuals themselves, via daily phone calls with the CEOs or their Personal
Assistants. This approach allows us to collect comparable data on the behavior of 1,114 CEOs
of manufacturing firms in six countries: Brazil, France, Germany, India, UK and the US. Overall,
we collect data on 42,233 activities covering an average of 50 working hours per CEO. We record
the same five features for each activity: its type (e.g. meeting, plant/shop-floor visits, business
lunches etc.), planning horizon, number of participants involved, number of di↵erent functions,
and the participants’ function (e.g. finance, marketing, clients, suppliers, etc.).2 We find that CEO
    1
     Hermalin (1998) and Hermalin (2007) propose a rational theory of leadership, whereby the leader possesses private
non-verifiable information on the productivity of the venture that she leads. Van den Steen (2010) highlights the
importance of shared beliefs in organizations, as these lead to more delegation, less monitoring, higher utility, higher
execution e↵ort, faster coordination, less influence activities, and more communication. Bolton et al. (2013) highlights
the role of resoluteness, A resolute leader has a strong, stable vision that makes her credible among her followers.
This helps align the followers’ incentives and generates higher e↵ort and performance. Dessein and Santos (2016)
explore the interaction between CEO characteristics, CEO attention allocation, and firm behavior: small di↵erences
in managerial expertise may be amplified by optimal attention allocation and result in dramatically di↵erent firm
behavior.
   2
     In earlier work (Bandiera et al. 2017) we used the same data to measure the CEOs’ labor supply and assess
whether and how it correlates with di↵erences in corporate governance (and in particular whether the firm is led by
a family CEO).



                                                           2
behavior di↵ers considerably along all five features. In particular, while the majority of CEOs spend
most of their time in meetings, they di↵er in the extent to which their focus is on firms’ employees
vs. outsiders, and within the former, whether they mostly interact with high-level executives vs.
production employees. CEOs also di↵er in how they organize these interactions in terms of duration,
number of people involved, number of functions these people represent and planning horizon. We
also show that these dimensions of time use are correlated so that, for instance, CEOs who focus
on production also tend to have short, one-to-one meetings.
   CEO diaries yield a wealth of information that is too high-dimensional to be easily compared
across CEOs or correlated with other outcomes of interest, such as CEO and firm characteristics.
To address this second challenge, we use a machine learning algorithm that projects the many
dimensions of observed CEO behavior onto two pure behaviors, and generates a one-dimensional
behavior index that represents a CEO as a convex combination of the two pure behaviors. The
algorithm finds the combination of features that best di↵erentiates between the sample CEOs. The
first of the two pure behaviors is associated with more time spent with employees involved with
production activities, and one-on-one meetings with firm employees or suppliers. The second pure
behavior is associated with more time spent with C-suite executives, and in interactions involving
several participants and multiple functions from both inside and outside the firm together. To
fix ideas, we label the first type of pure behavior “manager” and the second “leader”, following
the behavioral distinctions described in Kotter (1999). In Kotter’s work, management comprises
primarily of monitoring and implementation tasks. In contrast, leadership aims primarily at the
creation of organizational alignment, and involves significant investments in interpersonal commu-
nication across a broad variety of constituencies.
   The scalar behavior index can be used to investigate a range of questions about the causes and
consequences of CEO behavior. A natural starting point is to study the correlation between CEO
behavior and firm performance, which we do by merging the behavior index with firm balance sheet
data. We find that leader CEOs are more likely to be found in larger and more productive firms.
The correlation is economically and statistically significant: increasing the CEO behavior index by
one standard deviation is associated with an increase of 7% in sales controlling for labor, capital,
and other standard firm-level variables.
   The correlation between CEO behavior and firm performance can be interpreted in three ways:
(i) CEO behavior simply reflects firm heterogeneity correlated with performance; (ii) CEO behavior
a↵ects performance and CEOs are vertically di↵erentiated, i.e. leader CEOs improve performance
regardless of the type of firms they work for, but they are scarce; (iii) CEO behavior a↵ects
performance and CEOs are horizontally di↵erentiated, i.e. firm performance is a function of the
correct firm-CEO match, but there are CEO-firm matching frictions and some firms are run by
CEOs with a firm-inappropriate behavior, thus causing a performance loss.
   We use the subset of firms for which we have productivity data before and after the appointment



                                                 3
of the current CEO to investigate the first alternative, i.e. performance di↵erentials across CEOs
simply being driven by firm heterogeneity. This exercise reveals two results. First, firm performance
pre-appointment is not correlated with CEO type: firms that hire leader CEOs have the same
productivity growth as firms that hire manager CEOs before the CEO appointment. Second, the
hire of a leader CEO is associated with a significant change in firm productivity relative to the pre-
appointment period, which emerges gradually and increases over time. Overall, these results are
in contrast with the idea that CEO behavior is merely a reflection of di↵erential pre-appointment
trends or firm-level, time-invariant di↵erences in performance.
       We then turn to the second class of alternatives–that is, that CEO behavior a↵ects firm perfor-
mance, either via vertical or horizontal di↵erentiation in CEO behavior. In the absence of exogenous
variation that would allow us to tell these alternatives apart, we develop a simple model of CEO-
firm assignment that encompasses both possibilities, and estimate it to test which is a better fit
for the data. In the model, CEOs and firms have heterogeneous types and a correct firm-CEO
assignment results in better firm performance. The model incorporates pure vertical di↵erentia-
tion–where all firms need leaders but leaders are scarce, and hence firms that end up with leaders
perform better–and horizontal di↵erentiation–where some firms need managers and others lead-
ers, but matching frictions imply that some of the firms that need leaders end up with managers.
The model estimation is consistent with horizontal di↵erentiation of CEOs with matching frictions.
More specifically, while most firms with managers are as productive as those with leaders, overall
the supply of managers outstrips demand, such that 17% of the firms end up with the “wrong”
type of CEO. These inefficient assignments are more frequent in lower income countries (36% vs
5%). The productivity loss generated by the misallocation of CEOs to firms equals 13% of the
labor productivity gap between high and low income countries.
       The main contribution of this study is a new method to measure CEO behavior in large samples,
with an approach can be easily replicated in a variety of contexts. To the best of our knowledge, the
largest CEO shadowing exercise besides ours is still Mintzberg (1973) and it comprised five CEOs.3
Our approach to the measurement of managerial behavior can be used to address questions that
have been core to the field of organizational economics, but has so far been subjected to limited,
if none, empirical investigation. For example, the coordinating role of entrepreneurs has been of
interest to economics since Coase (1937), and Roberts (2006) emphasizes the critical role played by
leadership behavior in complementing the organizational design tasks of general managers.4
       The paper is also related to a growing literature documenting the role of management pro-
cesses on firm performance (Bloom and Van Reenen 2007 and Bloom et al. 2016). The correlation
   3
     Other authors have performed shadowing exercises of executives below the CEO level (For instance, Kotter (1999)
studied 15 general managers). Some consulting companies, such as McKinsey, run surveys where they ask CEOs to
report their overall time use, but this is done on the basis of their subjective aggregate long-term recall rather than
on a detailed observational study.
   4
     More recently, Cai and Szeidl (2016)) have shown that exogenous shifts in the interactions between an en-
trepreneur and his/her peers is associated with large increases in firm revenues, productivity and managerial quality.



                                                          4
between CEO behavior and firm performance that we uncover is of the same order of magnitude
as the correlation with management practices but, as we show in using a subsample of firms for
which we have both CEO time use and management practices data, management practices and
CEO behavior are independently correlated with firm performance. More recently, the availability
of rich longitudinal data on managerial transitions within firms has led to the quantification of het-
erogeneity in managerial quality, and its e↵ect on performance. Lazear et al. (2015) and Ho↵man
and Tadelis (2017), for example, report evidence of significant manager fixed e↵ects within firms,
with magnitudes similar to the ones reported in this paper. Di↵erently from these studies, we focus
on CEOs rather than middle managers. We share the objective of Lippi and Schivardi (2014) to
quantify the output reduction caused by distortions in the allocation of managerial talent.
    Finally, the paper is related to the literature that studies CEO traits such as skills and personal-
ity (Kaplan et al. (2012), Kaplan and Sorensen (2016) Malmendier and Tate (2005) and Malmendier
and Tate (2009)) or self-reported management styles Mullins and Schoar (2013). We di↵er from
this literature in the object of measure (behavior vs. traits) and in terms of methodology: behavior
can be measured using actual diary data, while typically the assessment of personality measures
needs to rely on third party evaluations, self reports or indirect proxies for individual preferences.
    The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the data and the machine learning
algorithm. Section 3 presents the analysis of the relationship between CEO behavior and firm
performance looking, among other things, at whether firm past productivity leads to di↵erent
types of CEOs being appointed. Section 4 interprets the correlation between CEO behavior and
firm performance by estimating a simple CEO-firm assignment model. Section 5 concludes.


2     Measuring CEO Behavior
2.1      The Sample
We drew the sampling frame randomly from the set of firms classified in the manufacturing sector
in the accounting database ORBIS, an extensive commercial data set produced by the company
Bureau Van Dijk that contains company accounts for more than 200 million companies around the
world.
    The sample covers CEOs in six of the world’s ten largest economies: Brazil, France, Germany,
India, the United Kingdom and the United States. For comparability, we chose to focus on estab-
lished market economies and opted for a balance between high- and middle-to-low-income countries.
We interview the highest-ranking authority in charge of the organization who has executive powers
and reports to the board of directors. While titles may di↵er across countries (e.g. Managing
Director in the UK), we refer to them as CEOs in what follows.
    To maintain comparability of performance data, we restricted the sample to manufacturing
firms. We then selected firms with available sales and employment data in the latest accounting


                                                   5
year prior to the survey.5 This yielded a sample of 6,527 firms in 32 two-digits SIC industries that
we randomly assigned to di↵erent analysts. Each analyst would then call the companies on the list
and seek the CEO’s participation. The survey was presented to the CEOs as an opportunity to
contribute to a research project on CEO behavior. To improve the quality of the data collected,
we also o↵ered CEOs with the opportunity to learn about their own time use with a personalized
time use analysis, to be delivered after the data had been collected.6
       Of the 6,527 firms included in the screened ORBIS sample, 1,114 (17%) participated in the
survey,7 of which 282 are in Brazil, 115 in France, 125 in Germany, 356 in India, 87 in the UK and
149 in the US.
       Table A.1 shows that sample firms have on average lower log sales (coefficient 0.071, standard
error 0.011) but we do not find any significant selection e↵ect on performance variables, such as labor
productivity (sales over employees) and return on capital employed (ROCE) (see the Appendix for
details). Table A.2 shows descriptive statistics on the sample CEOs and their firms. Sample CEOs
are 51 years old on average, nearly all (96%) are male and have a college degree (92%). About half
of them have an MBA. The average tenure is 10 years, with a standard deviation of 9.55 years.8
Finally, sample firms are very heterogeneous in size and sales values. Firms have on average 1,275
employees and $222 million in sales (respectively, 300 and $35 million at the median).

2.2      The Survey
To measure CEO behavior we develop a new survey tool that allows a large team of enumerators
to record in a consistent and comparable way all the activities the CEO undertakes in a given day.
Data are collected through daily phone calls with their personal assistant (PA), or with the CEO
himself (43% of the cases). We record diaries over a week that we chose based on an arbitrary
ordering of firms. Enumerators collected daily information on all the activities the CEO planned
   5
      We went from a random sample of 11,500 firms with available employment and sales data to 6,527 eligible ones
after screening for firms for which we were able to find CEO contact details and were still active. We could find CEO
contact details for 7,744 firms and, of these, 1,217 later resulted not to be eligible. 310 of the 1,217 could not be
contacted to verify eligibility before the project ended.Among this set 1,009 were located in Brazil; 896 in Germany;
762 in France; 1,429 in India; 1,058 in the UK; 1,372 in the U.S. The lower number of firms screened in France and
Germany is due to the fact that the screening had to be done by native language research assistants based in Boston,
of which we could only hire one for each country. The sample construction is described in detail in the Appendix.
    6
      The report was delivered two years after the data collection and included simple summary statistics on time use,
but no reference to the behavioral classification across “leaders” and “managers” that we discuss below.
    7
      This figure is at the higher end of response rates for CEO surveys, which range between 9% and 16% (Graham
et al. (2013)). 1,131 CEOs agreed to participate but 17 dropped out before the end of the data collection week for
personal or professional contingencies that limited our ability to reach them by phone.
    8
      The heterogeneity is mostly due to the distinction between family and professional CEOs, as the former have
much longer tenures. In our sample 57% of the firms are owned by a family, 23% by disperse shareholders, 9% by
private individuals, and 7% by private equity. Ownership data is collected in interviews with the CEOs at the end
of the survey week and independently checked using several Internet sources, information provided on the company
website and supplemental phone interviews. We define a firm to be owned by an entity if this controls at least 25.01%
of the shares; if no single entity owns at least 25.01% of the share the firm is labeled as “Dispersed shareholder”.




                                                          6
to undertake that day as well as those actually done.9 On the last day of the data collection,
the enumerator interviewed the CEO to validate the activity data (if collected through his PA)
and to collect information on the characteristics of the CEO and of the firm. Figure A.1 shows a
screenshot of the survey tool.10 The survey collects information on all the activities lasting longer
than 15 minutes in the order they occurred during the day. To avoid under (over) weighting long
(short) activities we structure the data so that the unit of analysis is a 15-minute time block.
       Overall we collect data on 42,233 activities of di↵erent duration, equivalent to 225,721 15-minute
blocks, 90% of which cover work activities.11 The average CEO has 202 15-minute time blocks,
adding up to 50 hours per week on average.

2.3      The Data
Figure 1, Panel A shows that the average CEO spends 70% of his time interacting with others
(either face to face via meetings or plant visits, or “virtually” via phone, videoconferences or
emails). The remaining 30% is allocated to activities that support these interactions, such as
travel between meetings and time devoted to preparing for meetings. The fact that CEOs spend
such a large fraction of their time interacting with others is consistent with the prior literature.
Coase (1937), for example, sees as the main task of the entrepreneur precisely the coordination of
internal activities that cannot be otherwise be e↵ectively regulated through the price mechanism.
The highly interactive role of managers is also prominent in classic studies in management and
organizational behavior, such as Drucker (1967), Mintzberg (1973) and Mintzberg (1979).12
       The richness and comparability of the time use data allows for a much more detailed description
of these interactions relative to prior studies. We use as primary features of the activities their: (1)
type (e.g. meeting, lunch, etc.); (2) duration (30m, 1h, etc.); (3) whether planned or unplanned;
(4) number of participants; (5) functions of participants, divided between employees of the firms,
which we define as “insiders” (finance, marketing, etc.), and non-employees, or “outsiders” (clients,
banks, etc.). Panel B shows most of this interactive time is spent with insiders. This suggests that
most CEOs chose to direct their attention primarily towards internal constituencies, rather than
serving as “ambassadors” for their firms (i.e. connecting with constituencies outside the firm). Few
CEOs spend time with insiders and outsiders together, suggesting that, if they do build a bridge
between the inside and the outside of the firm, CEOs typically do so alone. Panel C shows the
distribution of time spent with the three most frequent insiders—production, marketing, and C-
suite executives—and the three most frequent outsiders—clients, suppliers, and consultants. Panel
D shows most CEOs engage in planned activities with a duration of longer than one hour with
   9
     70% of the CEOs worked 5 days, 21% worked 6 days and 9% 7 days. Analysts called the CEO after the weekend
to retrieve data on Saturdays and Sundays.
  10
     The survey tool can also be found online on www.executivetimeuse.org.
  11
     The non-work activities cover personal and family time during business hours.
  12
     Mintzberg (1973), for example, documents that in a sample of five managers 70-80% of managerial time is spent
communicating.


                                                        7
a single function. There is no marked average tendency towards meeting with one or more than
one person. Another striking aspect of the data shown in Figure 1 is the marked heterogeneity
underlying these average tendencies. For example, CEOs at the bottom quartile devote just over
40% of the time to meetings whereas those at the top quartile reach 65%; CEOs at the 3rd quartile
devote over three times more time to production than their counterparts at the first quartile; and
the interdecile ranges for time with two people or more and two functions or more are well over
50%. The evidence of such marked di↵erences in behavior across managers is, to our knowledge, a
novel and so far under explored phenomenon.
   The data also shows that systematic patterns of correlation across these distributions, as we
show in the heat map of Figure 2. This exercise reveals significant and intuitive patterns of co-
occurrence. For example, CEOs who do more plant visits spend more time with employees working
on production and suppliers. The data also shows that they tend to meet these functions one at the
time, rather than in multi-functional meetings. In contrast, CEOs who do more “virtual” commu-
nications engage in fewer plant visits, spend more time with C-suite executives, and interact with
large and more diverse groups of individuals. They are also less likely to include purely operational
functions (production, marketing—among inside functions—and clients and suppliers—among out-
siders) in their interactions. These correlations are consistent with the idea that CEO time use
reflects latent styles of managerial behavior, which we investigate in more detail in the next section.
   The activities also appear to largely reflect conscious planning vs. mere reactions to external
contingencies. To assess this point, we asked whether each activity was undertaken in response to
an emergency: only 4% of CEOs’ time was devoted to activities that were defined as emergencies.
Furthermore, we compared the planned schedule of the manager (elicited in the morning conver-
sation) with the actual agenda (elicited in the evening conversation). This comparison shows that
CEOs typically undertake all the activities scheduled for a given day—overall just under 10% of
planned activities were cancelled.

2.4   The CEO Behavior Index
While the richness of the diary data allows us to describe CEO behavior in great detail, it makes
standard econometric analysis unfeasible because we have 4,253 unique activities (defined as a
combination of the five distinct features measured in the data) and 1,114 CEOs in our sample.
   To address this, we exploit the idea–based on the patterns of co-occurrence in time use shown
in Figure 2–that the high-dimensional raw activity data is generated by a low-dimensional set of
latent managerial behaviors. The next section discusses how we construct a scalar CEO behavior
index employing a widely-used machine learning algorithm.




                                                  8
     Figure 2 - CEO Behavior: Raw Data
                                                                Figure 1: CEO Behavior: Raw Data
     A. Activity Type                                                                            B. Activity Participants, by Affiliation
                      .8




                      .6
      Share of Time




                      .4




                      .2




                      0
                           Meeting   Communications   Plant visit   Working Alone   Travel




     C. Activity Participants, by Function                                                       D. Activity Structure




Notes: For each activity feature, the figure plots the median (the line in the box), the interquartile range (the
height of the box) and the interdecile range (the vertical line). The summary statistics refer to average shares of time
computed at the CEOs level.




                                                                                             9
      Table 2 Correlations in the Raw Data
                                                                         Figure 2: CEO Behavior: Correlations
      Meeting                            1

      Plant visit                 -0.5218               1

      Communications              -0.4673        -0.1647            1

      Planned                     0.2009         -0.1169        0.0339             1

      More 1 participant          0.1056          0.0032        0.0921      0.2883              1

      More than 1 function        0.1816         -0.1736        0.1289      0.2043          0.511           1

      Insiders                    -0.0486         0.0587        0.1632     -0.0941         0.0329      0.0018               1

      Outsiders                     0.034          -0.057      -0.1877      0.0337         -0.1827      -0.406     -0.7052                  1

      Insiders & Outsiders        0.0975         -0.0977        0.0096      0.1144         0.2122       0.5444       -0.482        -0.2224               1




10
      C-suite                     -0.0363        -0.1394        0.2441      0.1147         0.1514       0.1371      0.3511         -0.3252         -0.0512             1

      Production                  -0.1565         0.4114       -0.0823     -0.1157         0.0246      -0.1387      0.3455         -0.2917         -0.1092      -0.303              1

      Marketing                   0.0926         -0.1456        0.0645     -0.0228         0.0129       0.1662      0.1931         -0.2684          0.0787     -0.1882        -0.1447            1

      Clients                     -0.0945         0.0028        -0.028      0.0134         -0.1714     -0.1389     -0.4156          0.4275          0.0729     -0.1789          -0.134      -0.0455             1

      Suppliers                   -0.0358         0.1089       -0.1622     -0.0381         -0.1702     -0.1703     -0.3264          0.3492          0.0384     -0.2192         0.0214       -0.0723      0.0444                 1

      Consultants                 0.0387         -0.0483       -0.0676     -0.0182         -0.0817     -0.0251     -0.2367          0.2154          0.0931     -0.0344        -0.1429       -0.0746     -0.0606        -0.0085                1

                                                            Communica                    More 1    More than 1                                  Insiders &
                               Meeting       Plant visits                Planned                                 Insiders       Outsiders                    C-suite       Production    Marketing    Clients       Suppliers       Consultants
                                                              tions                    participant  function                                    Outsiders


     Notes: Each cell reports the correlation coefficient between the variables listed in the row and column. Each variable indicates the share of time spent by
     CEOs in activities denoted by the specific feature (this is the same data used to generate Figure 1. Cells are color coded so that: dark (light) gray=positive
     (negative) correlation, reject H0: correlation=0 with p=.10 or lower, white= cannot reject H0: correlation=0.
Methodology

To reduce the dimensionality of the data we use latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA) (Blei et al.,
2003), a hierarchical Bayesian factor model for discrete data.13 Simpler techniques like principal
components analysis (PCA, an eigenvalue decomposition of the variance-covariance matrix) or
k-means clustering (which computes cluster centroids with the smallest squared distance from
the observations) are also possible, and indeed produce similar results as we discuss below. The
advantage of LDA relative to these other methods is that it is a generative model which provides a
complete probabilistic description of time-use patterns.14 LDA posits that the actual behavior of
each CEO is a mixture of a small number of “pure” CEO behaviors, and that the creation of each
activity is attributable to one of these pure behaviors. Another advantage of LDA is that it naturally
handles high-dimensional feature spaces, so we can admit correlations among all combinations of
the five distinct features, which are potentially significantly more complex than the correlations
between individual feature categories described in figure 2. While LDA and its extensions are most
widely applied to text data, where it forms the basis of much of probabilistic topic modeling, close
variants have been applied to survey data in various contexts (Erosheva et al., 2007; Gross and
Manrique-Vallier, 2014). Ours is the first application to survey data in the economics literature
that we are aware of.
       To be more concrete, suppose all CEOs have A possible ways of organizing each unit of their
time, which we define for short activities, and let xa be a particular activity. Let X ⌘ {x1 , . . . , xA }
                                                                                         k
be the set of activities. A pure behavior k is a probability distribution                    over X that is common
to all   CEOs.15
       In our baseline specification, we focus on the simplest possible case in which there exist only
                                      0         1
two possible pure behaviors:              and       , and discuss alternative approaches and sensitivity of the
main results using models with more than two pure behaviors in Section 4. In this simple case, the
behavior of CEO i is given by a mixture of the two pure behaviors according to weight ✓i 2[0,1],
thus the probability that CEO i generates activity a can lie anywhere between                       0   and   1 16
                                                                                                    a         a.     We
refer to the weight ✓i as the behavior index of CEO i.
  13
      LDA is an unsupervised learning algorithm, and uncovers hidden structure in time use without necessarily linking
it to performance. This allows us to first describe the most prominent distinctions among CEOs while staying agnostic
on whether time use is related to performance in a systematic way. A supervised algorithm would instead “force” the
time use data to explain performance. Moreover, popular penalized regression models such as LASSO can be fragile
in the presence of highly correlated covariates, which makes projecting them onto a latent space prior to regression
analysis attractive.
   14
      Tipping and Bishop (1999) have shown that one can provide probabilistic foundations for PCA via a Gaussian
factor model with a spherical covariance matrix in the limit case where the variance approaches zero. Clearly, though,
our survey data is not Gaussian, so PCA lacks an obvious statistical interpretation in our context.
   15
      Importantly, the model allows for arbitrary covariance patterns among features of di↵erent activities. For example,
one behavior may be characterized by large meetings whenever the finance function is involved but small meetings
whenever marketing is involved.
   16
      In contrast, in a traditional clustering model, each CEO would be associated with one of the two pure behaviors,
which corresponds to restricting ✓i 2 {0, 1}.



                                                            11
        Figure 3: Data Generating Process for Activities with Two Pure Behaviors
                                        CEO 1                    ...                CEO N

                                   1         1             1        1        N          N




                                            Pure Behavior 0             Pure Behavior 1




                             0                      1      0                 1      0             1
                             1                      1      a                 a      A             A


                                            ...                                      ...
                    Activity 1                                 Activity a                        Activity A
Notes: This figure provides a graphical representation of the data-generating process for the time-use data. First,
CEO i chooses – independently for each individual unit of his time – one of the two pure behaviors according to a
Bernoulli distribution with parameter ✓i . The observed activity for a unit of time is then drawn from the distribution
over activities that the pure behavior defines.


       Figure 3 illustrates the LDA procedure. For each activity of CEO i, one of the two pure
behaviors is drawn independently given ✓i . Then, given the pure behavior, an activity is drawn
                                                                    0        1
according to its associated distribution (either                        or       ). So, the probability that CEO i assigns
to activity xa is     i   ⌘ (1   ✓i )   0   +    ✓i a1 .
                      a                 a
   If we let ni,a be the number of times activity a appears in the time use of CEO i, then by
                                                            Q Q n
independence the likelihood function for the model is simply i a i i,a .17 While in principle one
can attempt to estimate          and ✓ via direct maximum
                                                     1    likelihood or the EM algorithm, in practice
the model is intractable due to the large number of parameters that need to be estimated (and
which grow linearly in the number of observations). LDA overcomes this challenge by adopting a
Bayesian approach, and placing Dirichlet priors on the                             and ✓i terms. For estimating posteriors
we follow the Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) approach of Griffiths and Steyvers (2004).18
                                                                                               0
Here we discuss the estimated object of interest, which are the two estimated pure behaviors b
  17
      While a behavior defines a distribution over activities with correlations among individual features (planning,
duration, etc.), each separate activity in a CEO’s diary is drawn independently given pure behaviors and ✓i . The
independence assumption of time blocks within a CEO is appropriate for our purpose to understand overall patterns
of CEO behavior rather than issues such as the evolution of behavior over time, or other more complex dependencies.
These are of course interesting, but outside the scope of the paper.
   18
      We set a uniform prior on ✓i –i.e. a symmetric Dirichlet with hyperparameter 1–and a symmetric Dirichlet with
hyperparameter 0.1 on k . This choice of hyperparameter promotes sparsity in the pure behaviors. Source code for
implementation is available from https://github.com/sekhansen.



                                                                  12
     1
and b , as well as the estimated behavioral indices ✓bi for every CEO i = 1, . . . , N .
       Intuitively, LDA identifies pure behaviors by finding patterns of co-occurrence among activities
across CEOs, so infrequently occurring activities are not informative. For this reason we drop activ-
ities in fewer than 30 CEOs’ diaries, which leaves 654 unique activities and 98,347 time blocks—or
78% of interactive time—in our baseline empirical exercise. In the appendix we alternatively drop
activities in fewer than 15 and 45 CEOs’ diaries and find little e↵ect in the main results.

Estimates

To illustrate di↵erences in estimated pure behaviors, in Figure 4 we order the elements of X
                                             0
according to their estimated probability in b and then plot the estimated probabilities of each
element of X in both behaviors. The figure shows that the combinations that are most likely in
pure behavior 0 have low probability in pure behavior 1 and vice versa. Tables B.1 and B.2 list the
five most common activities in each of the two behaviors.19 To construct a formal test of whether
the observed di↵erences between pure behaviors are consistent with a model in which there is only
one pure behavior (i.e. a model with no systematic heterogeneity), we simulate data by drawing an
activity for each time block in the data from a probability vector that matches the raw empirical
frequency of activities. We then use this simulated data to estimate the LDA model with two pure
behaviors as in our baseline analysis, and find systematically less di↵erence between pure behaviors
than in our actual data (for further discussion see the Appendix).
       The two pure behaviors we estimate represent extremes. As discussed above, individual CEOs
generate activities according to the behavioral index ✓i that gives the probability that any specific
activity is drawn from pure behavior 1. Figure 5 plots both the frequency and cumulative distribu-
tions of the ✓bi estimates across CEOs. Many CEOs are estimated to be mainly associated with one
pure behavior: 316 have a behavioral index less than 0.05 and 94 have an index greater than 0.95.
As Figure 5 shows, though, the bulk of CEOs lies away from these extremes, where the distribution
of the index is essentially uniform.

Results using alternative dimensionality reduction techniques

A question of interest is whether the CEO behavior index built using LDA could be reproduced
using more familiar dimensionality reduction techniques. To investigate this point, we examined
the sensitivity of the classification to PCA and k-means analysis. For this anaysis, we do not use the
same 654-dimensional feature vector as for LDA, but rather six marginal distributions computed on
the raw time use data that capture the same distinctions that LDA reveals as important. For each
CEO, we counted the number of engagements that: (1) last longer than one hour; (2) are planned;
  19
    Table B.3 displays the estimated average time that CEOs spend with the di↵erent categories in figure 1 derived
from the estimated pure behaviors and CEO behavioral indices. Reassuringly, there is a tight relationship between
the shares in the raw data and the estimated shares.



                                                       13
   behaviorFigure
            0 is twice as likely to spend time with only outside functions. Very stark
                  4: Probabilities of Activities in Estimated Pure Behaviors
   di↵erences emerge in time spent with specific inside functions. Behavior 1 is over ten times
   as likely to spend time in activities with commercial-group and business-unit functions,
   and nearly four times as likely to spend time with the human-resource function. On the
   other hand, behavior 0 is over twice as likely to engage in activities with production.
   Smaller di↵erences exist for finance (50% more likely in behavior 0) and marketing (10%
   more likely in behavior 1) functions. In terms of outside functions, behavior 0 is over
   three times as likely to spend time with suppliers and 25% more likely to spend time with
   clients, while behavior 1 is almost eight times more likely to attend trade associations.
      In summary, an overall pattern arises in which behavior 0 engages in short, small,
   production-oriented activities and behavior 1 engages in long, planned activities that
   combine numerous functions, especially high-level insiders.

   2.4.2     The CEO Behavior Index
Notes: The dotted line plots the estimated probabilities of di↵erent activities in pure behavior 0, the solid line plots
the estimated probabilities of di↵erent activities in pure behavior 1. The 654 di↵erent activities are ordered left to
   The two behaviors we estimate represent extremes. As discussed above, individual CEOs
right in descending order of their estimated probability in pure behavior 0.
   generate time use according to the behavioral index i that gives the probability that any
   specific time block’s feature combination is drawn from behavior 1. Figure 4 plots both
   the frequency and cumulative distributions of i in our sample.
                          Figure 5: CEO Behavior and Index Distribution




               (a) Frequency Distribution                            (b) Cumulative Distribution

                            Figure
Notes: The left-hand side plot displays4:
                                        theCEO  Behavior
                                           number          Index
                                                  of CEOs with    Distributions
                                                               behavioral indices in each of 50 bins that divide
the space [0,1] evenly. The right-hand side plot displays the cumulative percentage of CEOs with behavioral indices
           Notes:
lying in these bins.Theleft-hand side plot displays the number of CEOs with behavioral indices
           in each of 50 bins that divide the space [0, 1] evenly. The right-hand side plot
           displays the cumulative percentage of CEOs with behavioral indices lying in these
           bins.
                                                     14

      Many CEOs are estimated to be mainly associated with one behavior: 316 have a be-
   havioral index less than 0.05 and 94 have an index greater than 0.95. As figure 4 shows,
         Table 1: Most important behavioral distinctions in CEO time use data


                                    X times less likely                              X times more likely
                                    in Behavior 1                                    in Behavior 1
           Feature                                         Feature
           Plant Visits             0.11                   Communications            1.9
           Just Outsiders           0.50                   Outsiders + Insiders      1.90
           Production               0.50                   C-suite                   34.00
           Suppliers                0.30                   Multifunction             1.50


Notes: We generate the values in the table in two steps. First, we create marginal distributions over individual
features in activities for each pure behavior. Then, we report the probability of the categories within features in
behavior 1 over the probability in behavior 0 for the categories for which this ratio is largest.


(3) involve two or more people; (4) involve outsiders alone; (5) involve high-level inside functions;
and (6) involve more than one function. The first principal component in PCA analysis explains
35% of the variance in this feature space and places a positive weight on all dimensions except (4).
Meanwhile, k-means clustering produces one centroid with higher values on all dimensions except
(4) (and, ipso facto, a second centroid with a higher value for (4) and lower values for all others).
Hence the patterns identified using simpler methods validate the key di↵erences from LDA with
two pure behaviors. Note that LDA is still a necessary first step in this analysis because it allows
us to identify the important marginals along which CEOs vary. We have also experimented with
PCA and k-means on the 654-dimensional feature space over which we estimate the LDA model,
but the results are much harder to interpret relative to the ones described above.

Interpretation of the CEO Behavior Index: Leaders and Managers

We now turn to analyzing the underlying heterogeneity between pure behaviors that generate
di↵erences among CEOs, which is ultimately the main interest of the LDA model. To do so, we
compute marginal distributions over each relevant activity feature from both pure behaviors. Table
1 displays the ratios of these marginal distributions (always expressed as the ratio of the probability
for pure behavior 1 relative to pure behavior 0 for simplicity), for the the activities that are more
di↵erent across the two pure behaviors. A value of one indicates that each pure behavior generates
the category with the same probability; a value below one indicates that pure behavior 1 is less
likely to generate the category; and a value above one indicates that pure behavior 1 is more likely
to generate the category.
    Overall, the di↵erences in the CEO behavior index indicate a wide heterogeneity in the way
CEOs interact with others: pure behavior 0 assigns a greater probability to activities involving one
individual at a time, and activities (plant visits) and functions (production and suppliers) that are


                                                           15
most related to operational activities. In contrast, pure behavior 1 places higher probabilities on
activities that bring several individuals together, mostly at the top of the hierarchy (other C-suite
executives), and from a variety of functions.20 Higher values of the CEO behavior index ✓bi will
thus correspond to a greater intensity of these latter types of interactions.
       Di↵erences in the CEO behavior index are systematically correlated with firm, industry and
country characteristics. Starting with firm characteristics, Figure D.2 in the Appendix shows that
the behavior index takes higher values in larger firms (as proxied by number of employees, and the
listed status dummies), and in organizational contexts in which the CEO is more likely to share
managerial responsibilities with other peers (that is, when the firm is a multinational or part of a
larger corporate group, and when there is a COO). The index is significantly lower in cases firms
owned and managed by a family CEO. The variation across industries shows higher values of the
index in industries characterized by a greater intensity of managerial and creative tasks relative to
routine tasks (which we identify using the industry level measures built by Autor et al. (2003)) and
greater R&D intensity (defined as industry business R&D divided by industry employment from
NSF data). The variation across countries–shown in Figure D.2–shows a wide distribution of the
CEO behavior index across all countries, but significantly lower averages in Brazil and India.21 The
data also shows that CEO behavior varies systematically with specific CEO characteristics, namely
CEO skills (college of MBA degree) and experience abroad. Note, however, that the correlation
between CEO behavior and firm characteristics (and firm size in particular) remains large significant
even when we control for CEO traits. This points to the fact that observable CEO characteristics
do not fully capture di↵erences in CEO behavior.22 In contrast, we find no correlation between the
behavior index and the CEOs’ job satisfaction (on a scale from 1 to 5): the average value of the
CEO index for those above (below) the median level of job satisfaction is 0.42 (0.44), the p-value
of the test of zero di↵erence is 0.32.
       While the labeling of the two pure behaviors is arbitrary, the distinctions between pure behavior
0 and pure behavior 1 map into behavioral classifications that have been observed in the past by
management scholars. In particular, the di↵erences between the two pure behaviors are related to
the behavioral distinction between “management” and “leadership” emphasized by Kotter (1999).
This defines management primarily as monitoring and implementation tasks, i.e. “setting up sys-
tems to ensure that plans are implemented precisely and efficiently.” In contrast, leadership is
needed to create organizational alignment, and requires significant investment in communication
  20
      We have constructed simulated standard errors for the di↵erences in probabilities of each feature reported in
the figure, based on draws from the Markov chains used to estimate the reported means. All di↵erences are highly
significant except time spent with insiders, as we discuss in the Appendix.
   21
      While most of the econometric analysis will exploit within country and within industry variation in the behavior
index, we will return to the possible drivers and implications of these cross country di↵erences for firm and country
productivity in Section 4.2.
   22
      To the extent that optimal CEO behavior varies according to firms’ needs, and that boards can observe the CV
of a CEO but not his actual behavior, this may lead to mismatches of CEOs to firms. We formalize a model of how
these mismatches may arise in equilibrium in Section 4.



                                                         16
across a broad variety of constituencies.23 This interpretation is corroborated by the fact that lead-
ership behavior–that is, higher values of ✓bi –is more prevalent in larger and more skill intensive firms,
in which CEO time may be more e↵ective in creating alignment relative to impersonal monitoring
and/or alternative contractual approaches. For example, Drucker (1967) mentions the importance
of personal meetings in the management of knowledge workers, arguing that the “[...] relationships
with other knowledge workers are especially time consuming. Whatever the reason—whether it
is absence of or the barrier of class and authority between superior and subordinate in knowledge
work, or whether he simply takes more seriously—the knowledge worker makes much greater time
demands than the manual worker on his superiors as well as on his associates” “[. . . ] One has to sit
down with a knowledge worker and think through with him what should be done and why, before
                                                                           24
when knowing whether he is doing a satisfactory job or not.”
    From now onwards we will refer to CEOs with higher values of the behavioral index as leaders,
and those with lower values as managers. In the next section we investigate whether di↵erences in
the behavioral index–which are built exclusively on the basis of the CEO time use data–correlate
with firm performance, and provide a simple framework to assess the possible reasons behind the
correlation.


3     CEO Behavior and Firm Performance: Evidence
An open question is whether our index of CEO behavior, built to capture the main di↵erences
between CEOs without any information on firm performance, correlates with performance. To
investigate this issue, we match our CEO behavior data with accounting information extracted
from ORBIS. We were able to gather at least one year of sales and employment data in the period
in which the CEOs were in office for 920 of the 1,114 firm in the CEO sample.25
   23
      More specifically, “[...] leadership is more of a communication problem. It involves getting a large number of
people, inside and outside the company, first to believe in an alternative future—and then to take initiative based
on that shared vision. [...] Aligning invariably involves talking to many more employees than organizing does. The
target population may involve not only a manager’s subordinates but also bosses, peers, sta↵ in other parts of the
organization.”
   24
      Similarly, Mintzberg (1979) emphasizes the importance of informal communication activities in the coordination of
complex organizations.Mintzberg (1979) refers to “Mutual Adjustments”–i.e. the “achievement of the coordination of
work by simple process of informal communication”–in his proposed taxonomy of the various coordination mechanisms
available to firms. Mintzberg states that mutual adjustment will be used in the very simplest of organizations, as
well as in the most complicated. The reason is that this is “the only system that works under extremely difficult
circumstances.”
   25
      Of these: 41 did not report sales and employment information; 64 were dropped when removing extreme values
from the productivity data; 89 had data only for years in which the CEO was not in office, or in office for less than
one year, or not in any of the three years prior to the survey.




                                                          17
3.1      Cross-Sectional Correlations
Productivity

We start by analyzing whether CEO behavior correlates with productivity, a key metric of firm
performance (Syverson, 2011). We follow a simple production function approach and estimate by
OLS a regression of the form:


                          yif ts = ↵✓bi +   E
                                                ef t +   K
                                                             kf t +   M
                                                                          mf t + ⇣t + ⌘s + "if ts              (1)

where yif ts is the log sales (in constant 2010 USD) of firm f, led by CEO i, in period t and sector
s. ✓bi is the behavior index of CEO i, ef t , kf t , and mf t denote, respectively, the natural logarithm
of the number of firm employees and, when available, capital and materials. ⇣t and ⌘s are period
and three digits SIC sector fixed e↵ects, respectively.
    The performance data includes up to three most recent years of accounting data pre-dating the
survey, conditional on the CEO being in office.26 To smooth out short run fluctuations and reduce
measurement error in performance, inputs and outputs are averaged across the cross-sections of
data included in the sample. The results are very similar when we use yearly data and cluster the
standard errors by firm (Appendix Table D.2, column 2). We include country and year dummies
throughout, as well as a set of interview noise controls.27 The coefficient of interest is ↵, which
measures the correlation between log sales and the CEO behavior index. Recall that higher values
of the index imply a closer similarity with the pure behavior labeled as “leader”.
    Column 1, Table 2 shows the estimates of equation (1) controlling for firm size, country, year
and industry fixed e↵ects, and noise controls. Since most countries in our sample report at least
sales and number of employees, we can include in this labor productivity regression a subsample of
920 firms. The estimate of ↵ is positive (coefficient 0.343, standard error 0.108) and we can reject
the null of zero correlation between firm labor productivity and the CEO behavior index at the 1%
level.
    Column 2 adds capital, which is available for a smaller sample of firms (618). The coefficient
of the CEO behavior index remains of similar magnitude (coefficient 0.227, standard error 0.111)
and is significant at the 5% level in the subsample. A one standard deviation change in the CEO
behavior index is associated with a 7% change in sales–as a comparison, this is about 10% of the
  26
     We do not condition on the CEO being in office for at least three years to avoid introducing biases related to
the duration of the CEO tenure, i.e. we include companies that have at least one year of data. We have 3 years of
accounting for 58% of the sample, 2 years for 24% and 1 year for the rest of firms.
  27
     These are a full set of dummies to denote the week in the year in which the data was collected, a reliability
score assigned by the interviewer at the end of the survey week, a dummy taking value one if the data was collected
through the PA of the CEO, rather than the CEO himself, and interviewer dummies. All columns weighted by the
week representativeness score assigned by the CEO at the end of the interview week. Errors clustered at the three
digit SIC level. Since the data is averaged over three years, year dummies are set as the rounded average year for
which the performance data is available.




                                                              18
e↵ect of a one standard deviation increase in capital on sales.28 In Column 3 we add materials,
which further restricts the sample to 448 firms. In this smaller sample, the coefficients on capital and
materials have the expected magnitude and are precisely estimated. Nevertheless, the coefficient
on the CEO behavior index retains a similar magnitude and significance. Column 4 restricts the
sample to firms that, in addition to having data on capital and materials, are listed on stock market
and hence have higher quality data (243 firms). The coefficient of the CEO behavior index is larger
in magnitude (0.641) and significant at the 1% level (standard error 0.279). In results reported
in Table D.2 we show that the coefficient on the CEO behavior index is of similar magnitude and
significance when we use the Olley-Pakes estimator of productivity.

Controlling for other Firm or CEO observables

Since the CEO behavior index varies according to specific firm and managerial characteristics
potentially correlated with firm performance (see Figures D.1 and D.2), in Table D.2 we investigate
the robustness of the results to the inclusion of these variables. We find that family CEO firms
tend to be on average less productive than firms led by professional managers, while listed firms
are firms with a COO tend to be on average more productive. Productivity is higher in firms where
CEOs have experience outside their home country, are older and work longer hours. Including
these other firm or CEO observables, however, leaves the magnitude and significance of the CEO
behavior index practically unchanged.

Management

What CEOs do with their time may reflect broader di↵erences in management processes across
firms rather than CEO behavior per se. To investigate this issue, we matched the CEO behavior
index with management practices collected using the World Management Survey (Bloom et al.
2016).29 We were able to gather management data for 191 firms in our CEO sample.
       The CEO behavior index is positively correlated with the average management score: a one
standard deviation change in the management index is associated with a 0.06 increase in the CEO
behavior index.30 Management and CEO behavior, however, are independently correlated with firm
productivity, as we show in Column 5 of Table 2 using the sample of 156 firms for which we could
match the management and CEO behavior data with accounting information. The coefficients
  28
      To make this comparison we multiply the coefficient of the CEO behavior index in column 2 (0.227) by the
standard deviation of the index in the subsample (0.227*0.33) = 0.07, and express it relative to the same figures for
capital (coefficient of 0.387 times the standard deviation of log capital of 1.88=0.73).
   29
      The survey methodology is based on semi-structured double blind interviews with plant level managers, run
independently from the CEO time use survey.
   30
      See Appendix Table D.3 for details. Bender et al. (2016) analyze the correlation between management practices
and employees’ wage fixed e↵ects and find evidence of sorting of employees with higher fixed e↵ects in better managed
firms. The analysis also includes a subsample of top managers, but due to data confidentiality it excludes the highest
paid individuals, who are likely to be CEOs. This is the first time that data on middle level management practices
and CEO behavior are combined.


                                                         19
imply that a standard deviation change in the CEO behavior (management) index is associated
with an increase of 0.16 (0.19) log points in sales.31
    Overall, these results imply the CEO behavior index is distinct from other, firm-wide, manage-
ment di↵erences.

Profits

Column 6 analyzes the correlation between CEO behavior and profits per employee. This allows
us to assess whether CEOs capture all the extra rent they generate, or whether firms profit from
being run by leader CEOs. The results are consistent with the latter: the correlation between
the CEO index and profits per employee is positive and precisely estimated. The magnitudes are
also large: a one standard deviation increase in the CEO behavior index is associated with an
increase of approximatively $3,100 in profits per employee. Another way to look at this issue is
to compare the magnitude of the relationship between the CEO behavior index and profits to the
magnitude of the relationship between the CEO behavior index and CEO pay. We are able to make
this comparison for a subsample of 196 firms with publicly available compensation data. Over this
subsample, we find that a standard deviation change in the CEO behavior index is associated with
an increase in profits per employee of $4,939 (which, using the median number of employees in the
subsample, would correspond to $2,978,000 increase in total profit) and an increase in annual CEO
compensation of $47,081. According to the point estimates above, the CEO keeps less than 2%
of the marginal value he creates through his behavior. This broadly confirms the finding that the
increase in firm performance associated with higher values of the CEO behavior index is not fully
appropriated by the CEO in the form of rents.

More than two pure CEO behaviors

Working with only two pure behaviors has the clear advantage of delivering a one-dimensional index,
which is easy to represent and interpret. In contrast, when the approach is extended to K rather
than two pure behaviors, the behavioral index becomes a point on a (K                  1)-dimensional simplex.
However, a natural question to ask is whether the simplicity of the two-behaviors approach may
lead to significant loss of information, especially when it comes to the correlation between CEO
behavior and performance. To investigate this issue, we followed an alternative approach, in which
the optimal number of pure behaviors is chosen according to a statistical criterion. To implement
this approach, we estimate LDA on randomly drawn training subsets of the data, and then use
   31
      When we do not control for the management (CEO) index, the coefficient on the CEO (management) index
is 0.606 (0.207) significant at the 5% level. The magnitude of the coefficient on the management index is similar
to the one reported by Bloom et al. (2016) in the full management sample (0.15). The correlation between CEO
behavior and management practices is driven primarily by practices related to operational practices, rather than HR
and people-related management practices. See Appendix Table D.3 for details.




                                                        20
the estimated parameters to predict the held-out data. The details of this exercise are discussed in
Appendix.
       This approach shows that a model with eleven pure behaviors is best at prediction. However,
we also find that, among these eleven pure behaviors, the pure behavior with the largest correlation
with productivity is the most dissimilar to pure behavior 0 (manager) used in the simple K = 2
model. That is, in spite of its simplicity, the model with two pure behaviors is able to capture
the salient correlations with firm performance that are found in the more complex K = 11 case.
This is reassuring, given the focus of the paper on the relationship between CEO behavior and firm
                 32
performance.

Robustness using shares of time and standard dimensionality reduction techniques

We have checked the robustness of the basic cross sectional results in various ways. First, since the
index summarizes information on a large set of activity features, a question of interest is whether
this correlation is driven just by a subset of those features. To this purpose, in Table D.1 we
show the results of equation (1) controlling for the individual features used to compute the index
separately. The table show that each feature is correlated with performance on its own, so that the
index captures their combined e↵ect.
       Second, we have verified that the results are robust to using more standard dimensionality
reduction techniques such as k-means and principal components (see Table D.2). Table D.2, Panel A
we show that these alternative ways of classifying CEOs do not fundamentally alter the relationship
between behavior and firm performance.

3.2      Firm Performance Before and After the CEO Appointment
One possible mechanism underpinning the observed correlation between CEO behavior and firm
performance is that firms with traits that lead to higher productivity are more likely to hire leaders.
To provide evidence on this hypothesis we use firm performance in the years pre-dating the CEO
appointment. We use this pseudo-panel data to ask two complementary questions. First, do
di↵erences in productivity trends before the CEO appointment predict the type of CEO that is
eventually hired by the firm? This provides us with a rough empirical assessment of whether time
varying firm heterogeneity pre-dating the appointment of the CEO is associated with di↵erences in
CEO behavior. Second, is the CEO behavior index associated with changes in productivity relative
to the period preceding the appointment of the CEO? This exercise provides evidence on whether
time invariant firm heterogeneity is the sole driver of the cross sectional performance di↵erentials
across CEOs.
  32
    Other applications of LDA to the time use data may well require going for a greater number of pure styles. The
tradeo↵ between interpretability (which favors a small number of pure behaviors) and goodness-of-fit (which favors
a greater number) is well known in the unsupervised learning literature. See, for example, Chang et al. (2009).



                                                       21
   Table 3: CEO behavior and Firm Performance
                                    Table 2: CEO behavior and Firm Performance
                                                                      (1)           (2)          (3)             (4)             (5)               (6)
   Dependent Variable                                                                           Log(sales)                                    Profits/Emp

   CEO behavior index                                              0.343***      0.227**       0.322***      0.641**          0.505**           10.027***
                                                                    (0.108)       (0.111)       (0.121)       (0.279)          (0.235)           (3.456)
   log(employment)                                                 0.889***      0.555***      0.346***      0.339**          0.804***           -0.284
                                                                    (0.040)       (0.066)       (0.099)       (0.152)          (0.075)           (0.733)
   log(capital)                                                                  0.387***      0.188***       0.194*
                                                                                  (0.042)       (0.056)       (0.098)
   log(materials)                                                                              0.447***      0.421***
                                                                                                (0.073)       (0.109)
   Management                                                                                                                0.187**
                                                                                                                             (0.074)
   Number of observations (firms)                                     920           618           448      243                 156                 386
   Observations used to compute means                                2,202         1,519         1,054     604                 383                1,028
                                                                      all          with k     with k & m with k &             with                 with
   Sample                                                                                                m, listed         management            profits,
                                                                                                                              score               listed
   Notes: *** (**) (*) denotes significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level, respectively. We include at most 5 years of data for each firm
Notes:    *** (**)
   and build        (*) denotes
               a simple   average significance
                                    across output at and
                                                      the 1%,    5% and
                                                            all inputs      10%
                                                                         over     level,
                                                                               this      respectively.
                                                                                    period.  The number   Weofinclude     at mostused
                                                                                                                  observations       3 years  of data for
                                                                                                                                          to compute        each
                                                                                                                                                        these
   means
firm  and are reported
           build         at the
                  a simple       foot ofacross
                             average      the table.  Theand
                                                 output      sample
                                                                  all in Columns
                                                                      inputs   over 1this
                                                                                      includes
                                                                                           period.all firms with at least
                                                                                                       The number           one year withused
                                                                                                                        of observations      both tosales and
                                                                                                                                                       compute
   employment
these  means aredata.   Columns
                   reported        2, 3 foot
                               at the    and 4ofrestrict  the sample
                                                 the table.             to firms
                                                               The sample      in with additional
                                                                                   Columns           data onallcapital
                                                                                               1 includes        firms (column
                                                                                                                        with at 2),   capital
                                                                                                                                   least  one and
                                                                                                                                               yearmaterials
                                                                                                                                                     with both
   (columns 3 and 4). The sample in columns 4 and 7 is restricted to listed firms. "Firm size" is the log of total employment in the
sales and employment data. Columns 2, 3 and 4 restrict the sample to firms with additional data on capital (column 2), capital
   firm. All columns include a full set of country and year dummies, two digits SIC industry dummies and noise controls. Noise
andcontrols are (columns
     materials   a full set of dummies
                            3 and   4). The to denote
                                               sample the     week in4the
                                                         in column           year in which
                                                                         is restricted       the data
                                                                                        to listed        was”Firm
                                                                                                    firms.   collected,
                                                                                                                     size”a isreliability
                                                                                                                                the log ofscore
                                                                                                                                            totalassigned  by
                                                                                                                                                  employment
   the interviewer   at the end   of the   survey  week,    a dummy     taking  value  one  if the   data was   collected
in the firm. All columns include a full set of country and year dummies, three digits SIC industry dummies and noise        through     the PA  of thecontrols.
                                                                                                                                                        CEO,
   rather than the CEO himself, and interviewer dummies. All columns weighted by the week representativeness score assigned by
Noise controls are a full set of dummies to denote the week in the year in which the data was collected, a reliability score
   the CEO at the end of the interview week. Errors clustered at the 2 digit SIC level.
assigned by the interviewer at the end of the survey week, a dummy taking value one if the data was collected through the
PA of the CEO, rather than the CEO himself, and interviewer dummies. All columns weighted by the week representativeness
score assigned by the CEO at the end of the interview week. Errors clustered at the three digit SIC level.




                                                                              22
       To implement this approach, we restrict the sample to the 204 firms that have accounting data
within a five-year interval both before and after CEO appointment.33 To start, Column 1 shows
that these firms are representative of the larger sample in terms of the correlation between the CEO
behavior index and performance. The correlation is 0.362 (standard error 0.132) for firms that do
not belong to the subsample, and the interaction between the CEO behavior index and the dummy
denoting the subsample equals -0.095 and is not precisely estimated.
       We first test whether productivity trends before appointment can predict the type of CEO that
is eventually hired by the firm. Column 2 shows that this is not the case–in the pre-appointment
period, firms that eventually appoint a leader CEO have similar productivity trends relative to
firms that hire managers.
       Next, we investigate whether the correlation between CEO behavior and firm performance
simply reflects time invariant firm heterogeneity by estimating the following di↵erence-in-di↵erences
model:


                                  yf t = ↵At + At ✓bi +        E
                                                                   ef t + ⇣t + ⌘f + "it                            (2)

       Where t denotes whether the time period refers to the 5 years before or after the appointment
of the CEO. Similarly to the results shown in Table 2, inputs and outputs are aggregated across
the two di↵erent subperiods, before and after CEO appointment. ⌘f are firm fixed e↵ects, At = 1
after appointment, and ✓bi is the behavior index of the appointed CEO. The linear CEO behavior
index term is omitted since it is absorbed by the firm fixed e↵ects. The coefficient of interest is ,
which measures whether firms that eventually appoint CEO with higher levels of the CEO behavior
index experience a greater increase in productivity after the CEO is in office relative to the years
preceding the appointment.34
       Column 3 shows that the coefficient       is positive and significant (coefficient 0.130, standard error
0.057). Given this coefficient, the within firm change in productivity after the CEO appointment
is -0.05, 0 and 0.07 log points for values of the CEO index that are, respectively, at the 10th, 50th
and 90th percentiles of the distribution of the CEO behavior index.35 In column 4 we provide more
detail on the nature of the correlation between CEO behavior and performance by splitting the
post period into two sub periods: 1-2 and 3-5 years after appointment. The results suggest that
  33
      We do not find this subsample of firms with before and after data to be selected in terms of the magnitude of the
CEO behavior index or firm size. The subsample, however, tends to be skewed towards professional CEOs relative
to family CEOs. This is because family CEOs tend to have longer tenures–therefore, the before appointment period
is typically not observed. The sample is also more skewed towards firms located in France, Germany and the UK
relative to the US. This is due to the fact that accounting panel data for US private firms–of which are sample is
primarily composed of–is typically less complete relative to Europe.
   34
      Note that, since we do not know the behavior of the previous CEO, this is a lower bound on the e↵ect of switching
from managers to leader CEOs, since at least part of these firms would have had already a leader CEO before the
current appointment.
   35
      The overall e↵ect turns positive for values of the CEO behavior index greater than 0.42, which corresponds to
the 62nd percentile of the distribution of the index.



                                                          23
the correlation materializes only three years after appointment.
    While the before and after results discussed so far control for time invariant firm heterogeneity,
CEOs may adjust their behavior in response to unobserved time-varying productivity shocks fol-
lowing their appointment. To investigate this issue, we restrict the sample to the 102 firms whose
current CEO had been in office for less than three years at the time of the survey–i.e., we correlate
the estimated CEO behavior with future changes in productivity. The results of this exercise are
shown in column 5. The fact that the results hold, and are actually stronger in this smaller sample
of less experienced CEOs cast doubts on the hypothesis that the results are entirely driven by CEO
learning e↵ects, at least in the very first years after the appointment is made.
    Taken together, these results indicate that the correlation between CEO behavior and firm
performance cannot be solely driven by di↵erences in time-invariant firm level unobservables, time-
varying shocks to performance pre-dating the CEO appointment, or CEOs adapting their behavior
to productivity shocks. The evidence does not rule out that firms hire CEOs with specific behavioral
traits in response to unobserved time-varying productivity shocks contemporaneous to the CEO
appointment. Since the correlation materializes three years after the CEO is appointed, this would
would imply that corporate boards are able to predict performance three years in advance and to
replace CEOs three years before the predicted performance e↵ects actually occur.


4     CEO Behavior and Firm Performance: Interpretation
CEO behavior can a↵ect firm performance in two di↵erent ways, both consistent with the empirical
patterns discussed above. First, CEOs may be vertically di↵erentiated, i.e. leader CEOs are always
conducive to better performance, but their supply is limited, such that firms hiring managers are
penalized. Second, CEOs may be horizontally di↵erentiated, i.e. leader CEOs may be needed in
certain circumstances, while manager CEOs may be best fit in others. In this case, the performance
di↵erentials across CEOs would arise in the presence of matching frictions, i.e. if manager CEOs
are more likely to be mismatched relative to leader CEOs.
    We develop a simple model of CEO-firm assignment that encompasses both possibilities and
use it to test which of the two is a better fit for the data.

4.1   Model
We propose a simple assignment model of CEOs with di↵erent behaviors to firms with di↵erent
traits. In the case of vertical di↵erentiation, leaders are preferred by all firms, and those who are
able to hire one perform better. In the horizontal case, some firms prefer managers, but if managers
are relatively more abundant than the demand for their services, some of the firms that should be
matched with leaders instead end up with managers, and consequently su↵er a performance penalty.




                                                  24
                    Table 4: CEO behavior
                             Table  3: CEOand Firm Performance
                                                Behavior       - Before
                                                             and    Firmand After Appointment Regressions
                                                                            Performance       Before and                                      After CEO Appointment
                                                                                                       (1)                  (2)                  (3)                   (4)                  (5)
                    Dependent variable: log(sales)
                    Sample                                                                    After appointment       Before        Before and after   Before and after    Before and after
                                                                                                of the current  appointment of the appointment of the appointment of the appointment of the
                                                                                                     CEO           current CEO        current CEO     current CEO (after current CEO (after
                                                                                                                                                         divided in 2        divided in 2
                                                                                                                                                         subperiods)     subperiods) - firms
                                                                                                                                                                              with CEO
                                                                                                                                                                         tenure<=3 years at
                                                                                                                                                                          time of the survey

                    Firm appoints high index CEO                                                    0.258***
                                                                                                     (0.073)
                    Firm is in balanced sample                                                       0.173*
                                                                                                     (0.102)
                    Firm appoints high index CEO & is in balanced sample                             -0.112
                                                                                                     (0.130)
                    Trend                                                                                                  0.007
                                                                                                                          (0.014)
                    Trend*Firm appoints high index CEO                                                                    -0.010
                                                                                                                          (0.019)
                    After CEO appointment                                                                                                       -0.022
                                                                                                                                               (0.109)
                    After CEO appointment*Firm appoints high index CEO                                                                         0.097**
                                                                                                                                               (0.041)




25
                    After CEO appointment (1<=t<=2)                                                                                                                   0.124                0.254
                                                                                                                                                                     (0.106)              (0.238)
                    After CEO appointment (3<=t<=5)                                                                                                                   0.195                0.172
                                                                                                                                                                     (0.178)              (0.382)
                    After CEO appointment (1<=t<=2)*Firm appoints high index CEO                                                                                      0.040                0.083
                                                                                                                                                                     (0.049)              (0.091)
                    After CEO appointment (3<=t<=5)*Firm appoints high index CEO                                                                                    0.177***             0.325**
                                                                                                                                                                     (0.065)              (0.132)
                    log(Employment)                                                                 0.891***             0.916***             0.797***              0.763***             0.745***
                                                                                                     (0.039)              (0.091)              (0.072)               (0.060)              (0.065)
                    Observations                                                                      2,202                 684                  408                   572                  271
                    Number of firms                                                                    920                  204                  204                   204                  102
                    Spell averages                                                                      y                    n                    y                     y                    y
                    Firm fixed effects                                                                  n                    y                    y                     y                    y


     Notes: *** (**) (*) denotes significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level, respectively. All columns include the same controls used in 2, column 1. The sample in columns
                  Notes: *** (**) (*) denotes significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level, respectively. All columns include the same controls used in Table 3, column 1. The sample in columns
     1-4 includes the set firms with at least one year of non missing productivity data both in the 5 year interval before and after CEO appointment; in column 5 we also
                  2-4 includes only the set firms with at least one year of non missing productivity data in the 5 year interval before and after CEO appointment; in column 5 we also
     exclude CEOs exclude   had been
                     that CEOs            in their
                                   that had  been inposition    for more
                                                       their position for more    3 years
                                                                            thanthan 3 yearsatatthe
                                                                                                 the time      the
                                                                                                     timeofofthe    survey.
                                                                                                                  survey.     “Firms
                                                                                                                          "Balanced     in balanced
                                                                                                                                     sample"           sample”
                                                                                                                                              is a dummy   taking is  a dummy
                                                                                                                                                                  value            taking
                                                                                                                                                                          one if the firm isvalue
                                                                                                                                                                                             part ofone
                                                                                                                                                                                                     this if the firm is
                  set. Productivity data in column 1 is aggergated as in Table 3, column 1. Column 3 uses all available yealy data within 5 years before CEO appointment. In column 3 we
     part of this set. Productivity data in column 1 is aggregated as in Table 3, column 1. Column 2 uses all available yearly data within 5 years before CEO appointment.
                  build averages of output and inputs using data in the 5 years before CEO appointment, and the 5 years after CEO appointment, combine the two cross sections and
                   we build
     In column 3 include   firmaverages         output
                                 level fixedofeffects.    and inputs
                                                       Columns    4 and 5using   data
                                                                           use the same     the 5 years
                                                                                       inapproach,         before
                                                                                                      except        CEO
                                                                                                             that the  afterappointment,
                                                                                                                             CEO appointmentandperiod
                                                                                                                                                   the 5isyears
                                                                                                                                                           dividedafter   CEO
                                                                                                                                                                     in two       appointment,
                                                                                                                                                                             subperiods  (1<=t<=2;combine
                                                                                                                                                                                                     and        the two
                  3<=t<=5   years   after  appointment).    "After CEO    appointment"   is  a dummy    taking  value oneto   denote  the cross  section computed
     cross sections and include firm level fixed e↵ects. Columns 4 and 5 split the after CEO appointment period in two sub-periods (1<=t<=2; and 3<=t<=5 years after  after CEO    appointment.   Errors
                  clustered by industry in column 1, by firm in column 2, and by firm and before/after CEO appointment period in columns 3 to 5.
     appointment). “After CEO appointment” =1 for the cross section computed after CEO appointment. Errors clustered by industry in column 1, by firm in column 2,
     and by firm and before/after CEO appointment period in columns 3 to 5.
Set-up

CEO i can adopt one of two possible behaviors : xi = m (“manager”) and xi = l (“leader”). Once
a CEO is hired, he decides how he is going to manage the firm that hired him. CEO i has a type
⌧i 2 {m, l}. Type m prefers behavior m to behavior l. Namely, he incurs a cost of 0 if he selects
behavior m and cost of c > 0 if he selects behavior l. Type l is the converse: he incurs a cost of 0 if
he selects behavior l and cost of c if he selects behavior m. The cost of choosing a certain behavior
can be interpreted as coming from the preferences of the CEO (i.e. he may find one behavior more
enjoyable than the other), or his skill set (i.e. he may find one behavior less costly to implement
than the other).
       Firms also have types. The type of firm f is ⌧f 2 {m, l}. The output of firm f assigned to CEO
i is
                                            yf i =   f   + I⌧f =xi                                                (3)

where I is the indicator function and           > 0. Hence, firm f ’s productivity depends on two com-
ponents. The first is a firm-specific component that we denote                  f.   In principle, this can depend
on observable firm characteristics, unobservable firm characteristics, and more generally the firm’s
“innate” type. We include this term to build the firm heterogeneity issues discussed in Section 3.2
explicitly into the model and its subsequent estimation. The second component is specific to the
behavior of the CEO. Namely, if the CEO’s behavior matches the firm’s type, then productivity
increases by a positive amount           . This captures the fact that di↵erent firms require di↵erent
behaviors: there is not necessarily a “best” behavior in all circumstances, but there is scope for
horizontal di↵erentiation. We assume that c <              so that it is efficient for the CEO to always adopt
a behavior that corresponds to the firm’s type.
       To introduce the possibility of matching frictions, we must discuss governance. Firms o↵er a
linear compensation scheme that rewards CEOs for generating good performance. The wage that
CEO i receives from employment in firm f is

                               w (yf i ) = w̄ + B(yf i        f)   = w + BI⌧f =xi ,

where w̄ is a fixed part, and B              0 is a parameter that can be interpreted directly as the
performance-related part of CEO compensation, or indirectly as how likely it is that a CEO is
retained as a function of his performance (in this interpretation the CEO receives a fixed per-
period wage but he is more likely to be terminated early if firm performance is low).
       The total utility of the CEO is equal to compensation less behavior cost, i.e. w(yf i )            I⌧i 6=xi c.
After a CEO is hired, he chooses his behavior. If the CEO is hired by a firm with the same type,
he will obviously choose the behavior that is preferred by both parties. The interesting case is
                                                                   c
when the CEO type and the firm type di↵er. If B >                      , the CEO will adapt to the firm’s desired
                                                                                                                  c
behavior, produce an output of       f   + , and receive a total payo↵ of w̄ + B              c. If instead B <       ,


                                                         26
the CEO will choose xi = ⌧i , produce output           f   and receive a payo↵ w̄. We think of B as a measure
of governance. A higher B aligns CEO behavior with the firm’s interests.

Pairing Firms and CEOs

Now that we know what happens once a CEO begins working for a firm, let us turn our attention
to the assignment process. There is a mass 1 of firms. A proportion                   of them are of type l, the
remainder are of type m. The pool of potential CEOs is larger than the pool of firms seeking
a CEO. There is a mass P >> 1 of potential CEOs. Without loss of generality, assume that a
proportion           of CEOs are of type l. The remainder are of type m. From now on, we refer
to type l as the scarce CEO type and type m as the abundant CEO type. We emphasize that
scarcity is relative to the share of firm types. So, it may be the case that the share of type l CEOs
is actually more numerous than the share of type m firms. Note that the model nests the case of
pure vertical di↵erentiation, where no firm actually wants a type m CEO, i.e. when                      = 1.
       The market for CEOs works as follows. In the beginning, every prospective CEO sends his
application to a centralized CEO job market. The applicant indicates whether he wishes to work
for a type m or type l firm. All the applications are in a large pool. Each firm begins by downloading
an application meant for its type. Each download costs k to the firm. After receiving an application,
firms receive a signal about the underlying type of the CEO that submitted it. If the type of the
applicant corresponds to the type of the firm, the signal has value 1. If the type is di↵erent, the
signal is equal to zero with probability ⇢ 2 [0, 1] and to one with probability 1 ⇢. Thus, ⇢ = 1
denotes perfect screening and ⇢ = 0 represents no screening.36 This last assumption distinguishes
our approach from existing theories of manager-firm assignment, where the matching process is
assumed to be frictionless, and the resulting allocation of managerial talent achieves productive
efficiency.37
       Potential CEOs maximize their expected payo↵, which is equal to the probability they are hired
times the payo↵ if they are hired. Firms maximize their profit less the screening cost (given by the
number of downloaded application multiplied by k). Clearly, if k is low enough, firms download
applications until they receive one whose associated signal indicates the CEO type matches the
firm type, which we assume holds in equilibrium.
       Define residual productivity as total productivity minus type-specific baseline productivity:
yf i      f.

Proposition 1 Firms led by the type l CEOs and those led by the type m CEOs have equal residual
   36
      The implicit assumption is that CEOs have private information about their types, while firms’ types are common
knowledge. However, we could also allow firms to have privately observed types; in equilibrium, they will report them
truthfully. Moreover, if CEOs have limited or no knowledge of their own type, it is easy to see that our mismatch
result would hold a fortiori.
   37
      See for example Gabaix and Landier (2008), Tervio (2008), Bandiera et al. (2015). An exception in the literature
is Chade and Eeckhout (2016), who present a model in which agents’ characteristics are only realized after a match
is formed, which leads to a positive probability of mismatch in equilibrium.


                                                           27
productivity if at least one of the following conditions is met: (i) Neither CEO type is sufficiently
scarce; or (ii) Screening is sufficiently e↵ective; or (iii) Governance is sufficiently good.

       Each of the three conditions guarantees efficient assignment. If there is no scarce CEO type
( = ), a CEO has no reason to apply to a firm of a di↵erent type. If screening is perfect (⇢ = 1),
a CEO who applies to a firm of the other type is always caught (and hence he won’t do it). If
                               c
governance is good (B <            ,), a CEO who is hired by a firm of the other type will always behave
in the firm’s ideal way (and hence there will either be no detectable e↵ect on firm performance or
CEOs will only apply to firms of their type).
       In contrast, if any of conditions (i)-(iii) are not met, CEO behavior and firm performance will
be correlated because of inefficient assignments. The following proposition characterizes how the
latter can occur in equilibrium, and the implications of the mismatches for observed performance
di↵erentials.

Proposition 2 If the screening process is sufficiently unreliable, governance is sufficiently poor,
and one CEO type is sufficiently abundant,38 then in equilibrium:

       • All scarce-type CEOs are correctly assigned;

       • Some abundant-type CEOs are misassigned;

       • The average residual productivity of firms run by abundant-type CEOs is lower than those of
         firms run by scarce-type CEOs.

Proof. See Appendix.
       The intuition for this result is as follows. If all abundant-type CEOs applied to their firm type,
they would have a low probability of being hired and they would prefer to apply to the other firm
type and try to pass as a scarce-type CEO. In order for this to be true, it must be that the share
of abundant types is sufficiently larger than the share of scarce types, and that the risk that they
are screened out is not too large. If this is the case, then in equilibrium some abundant-type CEOs
will apply to the wrong firm type, up to the point where the chance of getting a job is equalized
under the two strategies. In the extreme case of vertical di↵erentiation where                = 1, that is, when
no firm demands type m CEOs, abundant-type CEOs reduce productivity in all firms.
       Under Proposition 2, the economy under consideration does not achieve productive efficiency.
As the overall pool of scarce-type CEOs is assumed to be insufficient to cover all firms that prefer
that CEO type (P >> 1), it would be possible to give all firms their preferred type and thus
increase overall production.39
  38
    Formally, this is given by the conditions: B < c , and ⇢ <        .
  39
    If side transfers were feasible, this would also be a Pareto improvement as a type l CEO assigned to type m firm
generates a higher bilateral surplus than a type m CEO matched with a type l firm, and the new firm-CEO pair
could therefore compensate the now unemployed type m CEO for her job loss.


                                                        28
From Theory to Data

As described in Equation (3), the output of firm f assigned to CEO i depends on firm type and
CEO behavior. Then the observed di↵erence in performance between firms that hire a type l CEO
and those that hire a type m CEO is:


                    y.l   y.m = [sl (   l   +    ) + (1       sl )     m]     [sm (   m   +   ) + (1   sm ) l ]

where si is the share of CEOs who are correctly assigned to their firm types. That is, the average
performance of firms led by type l CEOs is equal to the performance of type l firms when correctly
matched (   l   +   ), weighted by the share of type l CEOs who are correctly assigned (sl ) plus the
performance of misassigned type m firms (                    m)        weighted by the share of type l CEOs who are
wrongly assigned (1        sl ).
   Simplifying and imposing the condition of proposition 2 by which all scarce type CEOs are
correctly matched in equilibrium (that is, sl = 1) yields:


                                    y.l         y.m = sm (     l         m)   + (1    sm )4                           (4)

Equation (4) highlights two important points. First, the case in which performance di↵erentials
reflect entirely firm heterogeneity through the (                  l        m)   term maps into a situation in which CEOs
are horizontally di↵erentiated and there are no matching frictions–that is, sm = 1. Second, there
are two alternative mechanisms through which CEO behavior may lead to estimate cross-sectional
performance di↵erentials:

   • Horizontal di↵erentiation in CEO behavior with matching frictions: In this case,
     there is demand for both types of CEOs, but matching is imperfect, such that 0 < sm < 1.
     Performance di↵erentials capture the costs of the mismatches of type m CEOs (4), as well
     as firm heterogeneity.

   • Vertical di↵erentiation in CEO behavior: In this case, there is no demand for type m
     CEOs that is, sm = 0. In this case, performance di↵erentials reflect entirely the costs of the
     mismatches of type m CEOs (4).

In absence of exogenous variation that would allow us to distinguish between these di↵erent mech-
anisms, we evaluate the plausibility of these alternatives by estimating the model, and assessing
which values of the parameters sm ,               and (   l            m)   best fit the data.




                                                                   29
4.2          Model Estimation
Set-Up

The main data input of the model is firms’ conditional productivity; that is, the residuals of
a regression of productivity on firm characteristics as estimated in Column 1, Table 2, without
country fixed e↵ects, which we model separately. We denote the residual of firm f run by CEO i as
"bif .40 In line with the theory, we adopt the statistical model "bif =          f   + I⌧f =xi    + vif , where    f
is a “baseline” productivity; ⌧f 2 {m, l} is the firm’s type; xi 2 {m, l} is the CEO’s behavior; and
     is the productivity di↵erence between firms with the “right” CEO and firms with the “wrong”
CEO behavior relative to firm needs.
                                                   bi = l whenever I✓bi >=0.5 . That is, we discretize the
         To obtain an empirical proxy of xi we use x
CEO behavior index using 0.5 as a cuto↵, such that all CEOs above this threshold are classified as
                                               bi as observed data, ⌧f is a random variable.
type l, and the rest as type m. While we treat x
         We assume the conditions of Proposition 2 hold. That is, we assume that since all type l CEOs
(xbi = 1) are correctly assigned, whenever we observe a type l we also must have ⌧f = l. In contrast,
only a share sm of type m CEOs (b
                                xi = 0) is correctly assigned: when we observe a type m CEO,
⌧f = m with probability sm 2 [0, 1]; otherwise, with probability 1                   sm the CEO is misassigned
and ⌧f = l.
         As mentioned above, note that the model nests both pure vertical and pure horizontal dif-
ferentiation. In the case of pure vertical di↵erentiation sm = 0; that is, all manager CEOs are
misassigned. Vice versa, in the case of pure horizontal di↵erentiation sm = 1; that is, all manager
CEOs are assigned to firms that need their behavior. The main objective of the statistical model
is to provide some evidence on which of these two scenarios is more consistent with the data.
         As for the baseline productivity, we model      f    = xcf ,⌧f where cf denotes the country in which
firm f operates. We also assume that xcf ,l = A + xcf ,m so that the baseline productivity of type l
firms is that of type m firms plus a common constant term. This formulation allows for observed
productivity di↵erences between firms run by CEOs with di↵erent behaviors to arise from factors
innate to firm types, in addition to the assignment friction channel. Finally, we treat vif as a
mean-zero normal random variable whose variance is both country and assignment specific:                         2
                                                                                                                 1,cf
(   2
    0,cf )   is the standard deviation of residuals in an efficient (inefficient) CEO-firm pair.
         Given these observations, the likelihood function can be written as:
    40
    To maintain comparability in the pooled vs. regional results that we discuss in the next section, we also limit
the sample to those firms for which there is at least one observation per region, industry, and year, since these are
used as controls in the estimation of the residuals. This leaves 851 observations out of 920.




                                                         30
                           8                                                                                9
                           >                                                                           2     >
                         Y >           p sm                                                                + >
                                                                     1
                           <            2⇡ H,cf
                                                  exp        2   2           "bif    xcf ,m                  =
                                                                H,cf
                                                                                                                 ⇥
                               >                                                                       2    >
                       f 2⇥(m) >        p 1 sm                                                              >
                                                                         1
                               :         2⇡ L,cf
                                                   exp           2   2        "bif    A       xcf ,m        ;
                                                                     L,cf
                                                     "                                                      #
                           Y             1                       1                                          2
                                   p           exp               2           "bif    A    xcf ,m                .                (5)
                                       2⇡ H,cf               2   H,cf
                         f 2⇥(l)


where ⇥(m) and ⇥(l) are the sets of firms managed by type m and type l CEOs. Type l CEOs are
always efficiently assigned to type l firms and their residuals are drawn from a normal distribution
with mean A + xcf ,m +         ; in contrast, firms run by type m CEOs have their residuals drawn from
a mixture of two normals, one with mean xcf ,m +                             if the assignment is efficient, and another with
mean A + xcf ,l if the assignment is inefficient. The mixing probability is simply sm , the probability
that type m CEOs are assigned to type m firms. We use the EM algorithm to maximize (5).

Estimates

The A parameter is estimated to be .026. Since the EM algorithm does not directly yield standard
errors, we formally test the restriction A = 0 by plugging this value into (5) and maximizing with
respect to the other parameters. A simple likelihood ratio test then fails to reject the restriction
(the associated p-value is 0.706). Intuitively, when we divide type m CEOs into two groups, one
with high performance and one with low performance, the high-performing group has productivity
residuals with a mean statistically indistinguishable from that of the residuals of type l CEOs.41
    The estimate of        is 0.532, which implies that the loss associated with an incorrect assignment
of CEOs is substantial. Given that the units of the residual are log points, the estimate implies that
                                                                                                                     exp(0.532) 1
moving from a correct assignment to an incorrect one reduces firm productivity by                                     exp(0.532) ,   or
around 41%.
    The estimated sm is 0.744. To test whether the data are consistent with pure vertical di↵eren-
tiation, we impose the restriction sm = 0 in (5), which a likelihood ratio test rejects with a p-value
of 0.00202. The key underlying property of the data that lets us test sm = 0 is that under this
restriction leader CEOs uniformly outperform manager CEOs. We can reject this in favor of a
mixture model with sm > 0, since we observe a large fraction of manager CEOs whose performance
is similar to that of leader CEOs. Also, note that once we reject sm = 0, we must necessarily reject
  41
     Note that in the E-step we explicitly infer the probability that type m CEOs are efficiently assigned, which allows
us to then estimate parameters in the M-step. As is standard, the log likelihood is defined under the assumptions of
the theoretical model, namely that       > 0, and that leader CEOs are scarce and all correctly assigned; thus, while
there are combinations of parameters with A > 0 and           = 0 that produce the same value of the likelihood, these
violate the basic assumption of the model that correctly assigned firm-CEO pairs are more productive. Of course,
nothing in the statistical model rules out both       > 0 and A > 0 but, importantly, we find no role for A when we
optimize (5) beginning from the best-fit solution with > 0.



                                                                     31
sm = 1. In the model with sm = 0 we estimate separate mean parameters for managers and leaders,
and also separate variance parameters–these are match-quality specific, and managers are in a bad
match while leaders are in a good match. By contrast, in the model with sm = 1 we fit separate
mean parameters for managers and leaders, but a single variance parameter since all CEOs are in
a good match. So the maximized likelihood will be lower for the model with sm = 1 compared to
the model with sm = 0.
       Overall, a model with heterogenous firms and assignment frictions fits the data significantly
better than one without firm heterogeneity (pure vertical di↵erentiation) or one without such
frictions (pure horizontal di↵erentiation).

Quantifying the importance of matching frictions for aggregate productivity

We now use the model to study the aggregate performance implications of CEO-firm matching
frictions. To do so, we exploit di↵erences in the parameter estimates across high (France, Germany,
UK and US) and low/middle (Brazil and India) income regions, under the assumption that the level
of development in a country is negatively correlated with assignment frictions. This assumption
is based on the existing evidence documenting a positive relationship between development, the
supply of managerial capital and good governance.42
       We start from the quantification of the share of misassignments in the pooled sample. We first
derive      , i.e. the share of type l firms, from the market clearing condition. Overall the whole
sample, we observe a share b = 0.347 of type l CEOs. We must then have                     = b + (1     b)(1    sm ).
The right-hand side of this expression is the total share of CEOs assigned to type l firms: all type
l CEOs and a portion 1          sm of type m CEOs. Plugging in for b and sm , we obtain                  = 0.514 so
that slightly over half of firms are of type l . This in turn implies that a share                    b = 0.168 of
firms are misassigned in our data, leading to an overall productivity loss of 0.089 (= 0.168 ⇤                  ) log
points.
       We then allow the sm parameter in the likelihood function (5) to vary according to whether
the firm is located in a low/middle- or high-income country. We restrict A = 0 in line with the
results above. The estimation results are in table 4. In low/middle income countries, CEOs are
efficiently assigned with probability 0.546, while the corresponding probability for CEOs in high-
income countries is 0.893. The derived parameters in the table are obtained using the same steps
as described above.
  42
     For example, Gennaioli et al. (2013) report wide di↵erences in the supply of managerial/entrepreneurial human
capital using regional data for a large cross section of countries. Di↵erences in the availability of basic managerial
skills across countries and their relationship with development and firm performance are also discussed in Bloom
et al. (2016). Furthermore, development is also likely to a↵ect the quality of corporate governance, which a↵ect both
the selection and the dismissal of misassigned CEOs. LaPorta et al. (1999) and La Porta et al. (2000) study the
heterogeneity of corporate governance and ownership structures around the world. More recently, and specifically
related to CEOs, Urban (2016) reports large di↵erences in the percentage of CEOs dismissed for bad performance in
public firms in Brazil and India (both 16%) vs. France (29%), Germany (40%), UK (35%) and US (27%).



                                                         32
  On this basis, we can rule out di↵erences in baseline productivity between firm type’s driving
  the results (1.); pure horizontal di↵erentiation (2.); and pure vertical di↵erentiation (3.).
      We now proceed with the restriction A = 1 and estimate q separately for di↵erent regions.
  Results are in the following table. Broadly the same as before, but with higher rates of efficient
  assignments in both regions. Size of counterfactual increases slightly to 0.347 ⇥ 0.639 = 0.222.
                          Table 4: Estimation Results by Region
                                         Estimated Parameters             Derived Parameters
                                                                                      % firms
                                                         sm             b
                                                                                     mismatched
              low/middle income          0.667         0.546          0.216 0.572       0.356
                 high income             0.667         0.893          0.495 0.549       0.054

Notes: In its first two columns, this table displays the estimated parameters resulting from maximizing (5) using
the EM algorithm under the restriction that A = 0. The third column is the observed share of leader CEOs in each
region. The fourth is the value of   consistent with market-clearing given sm and the observed shared of leader CEOs,
while the fifth is the di↵erence between the fourth and third, as this gives the share of type   l firms run by manager
CEOs.


    One possible explanation for these di↵erent probabilities across countries is that firms in high-
income countries have higher demand for type l CEOs. Indeed, consistent with this idea, the data
shows a much larger share of type l CEOs in high-income countries relative to low/middle-income
countries (0.495 vs. 0.216). However, note that the               parameters we extract—which capture the
share of type l firms—are in fact very similar in both regions (if anything, there is slightly higher
demand for type l CEOs in poorer countries).43
    Instead, the main di↵erence between regions emerging from the exercise is that type l firms in
low/middle-income countries are unable to locate and hire leader CEOs. It is important to reiterate
that this is not necessarily due to scarcity of type l CEOs in the population per se. Rather, barriers
to the allocation of talent might prevent the right individuals from entering the CEO job market.
Regardless of the deeper cause, the share of inefficiently assigned type l firms in these countries
is 0.356, compared to 0.054 in high-income countries. While there is still a sizable number of
inefficient assignments in richer countries, the share in poorer countries is over six times as large.44
    To conclude, we use our estimates to quantify how much productivity in low income countries
would increase if the assignment process were as efficient as in the richer countries in the sample.
This implies building a counterfactual where sm increases from 0.546 to 0.893, which requires the
share of leader CEOs to increase from 0.216 to 0.521 to maintain market clearing, and which yields
                                                 3
a drop in the share of misassigned firms from 0.356 to 0.051. Given that the productivity di↵erence
   is now estimated at a somewhat higher value of 0.667, productivity would increase by 0.203 log
  43
     We have repeated the same chi-squared tests for restrictions on sm as described above for each region separately.
While the power of the tests is lower due to reduced sample size, we are able to reject pure vertical and horizontal
di↵erentiation at a 10% significance level in both regions.
  44
     Our findings provide a counterpoint to Chade and Eeckhout (2016), who estimate the degree of mismatch in the
US CEO labor market using wage data. First, while they find substantial mismatch based on the deviation of the
observed wage distribution from what a model with perfect matching on observables would predict, our estimates
that explicitly incorporate heterogeneity in CEO behavior indicate little mismatch in high-income countries. Second,
they argue that nearly all match productivity di↵erences arise from firm rather than CEO characteristics, whereas
we find an important role for CEO heterogeneity.


                                                          33
points.
    We benchmark this magnitude against the macro di↵erences in labor productivity across coun-
tries observed in the time interval covered by our survey and productivity data (2010-2014) using
the Penn World Table data v.9 (Feenstra and Timmer, 2015). The average di↵erences in log labor
productivity between the two subsets of countries is 1.560. Therefore, improving the allocation of
CEOs to firms in low/middle income countries could account for up to 13% of the cross-country
di↵erences in labor productivity.45


5     Conclusions
This paper combines a new survey methodology with a machine learning algorithm to measure
the behavior of CEOs in large samples. We show that CEOs di↵er in their behavior along several
dimensions, and that the data can be reduced to a summary CEO index which distinguishes between
“managers” –i.e. CEOs that are primarily involved with production-related activities– and leaders
-i.e. CEOs that are primarily involved in communication and coordination activities.
    Guided by a simple firm-CEO assignment model, we show that there is no “best practice” in
CEO behavior—that is, a behavior that is optimal for all the firms—rather, there is evidence of
horizontal di↵erentiation in CEO behavior, and significant frictions in the assignment of CEOs to
firms. In our sample of manufacturing firms across six countries we estimate that 17% of firm-CEO
pairs are misassigned and that misassignments are found in all regions but are more frequent in
emerging economies. The consequences for productivity are large: the implied productivity loss
due to di↵erential misassignment is equal to 13% of the labor productivity gap between firms in
high- and middle/low-income countries in our sample.
    This paper shows that an under explored dimension of managerial activity–that is, how CEOs
spend their time–is both heterogeneous across managers and firms, and correlated with firm per-
formance. Future work could utilize our data and methodology to inform new leadership models,
which incorporate more explicitly the drivers and consequences of di↵erences in CEO behavior, and
in particular explore the underlying firm-CEO matching function, which is not dealt with explicitly
in the current paper. Furthermore, a possible next step of this research would be to extend the
data collection to the diaries of multiple managerial figures beyond the CEO. This approach would
allow us to further explore whether and how managerial interactions and team behavior vary across
firms and correlate with firm performance (Hambrick and Mason, 1984). These aspects of man-
agerial behavior, which are now largely absent from our analysis, are considered to be increasingly
important in the labor market (Deming (2015)), but have so far been largely unexplored from an
empirical perspective. We leave these topics for further research.

  45
     The average labor productivity for high (low/middle) income countries in our sample is 11.4 (9.83). These values
are calculated using data on output-side real GDP at chained PPPs and the total number of persons engaged from
the Penn World Tables.


                                                         34
References
Autor, D. H., Levy, F., and Murnane, R. J. (2003). The Skill Content of Recent Technological
  Change: An Empirical Exploration. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(4):1279–1333.

Bandiera, O., Guiso, L., Prat, A., and Sadun, R. (2012). What Do CEOs Do? CEP Discussion
  Papers dp1145, Centre for Economic Performance, LSE.

Bandiera, O., Guiso, L., Prat, A., and Sadun, R. (2015). Matching Firms, Managers, and Incentives.
  Journal of Labor Economics, 33(3):623 – 681.

Bandiera, O., Lemos, R., Prat, A., and Sadun, R. (2017). Managing the Family Firm: Evidence
  from CEOs at Work. Review of Financial Studies.

Bender, S., Bloom, N., Card, D., Van Reenen, J., and Wolter, S. (2016). Management Prac-
  tices, Workforce Selection and Productivity. NBER Working Papers 22101, National Bureau of
  Economic Research, Inc.

Bennedsen, M., Nielsen, K. M., Perez-Gonzalez, F., and Wolfenzon, D. (2007). Inside the Family
  Firm: The Role of Families in Succession Decisions and Performance. The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 122(2):647–691.

Bertrand, M. and Schoar, A. (2003). Managing with Style: The E↵ect of Managers on Firm Policies.
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(4):1169–1208.

Blei, D. M., Ng, A. Y., and Jordan, M. I. (2003). Latent Dirichlet Allocation. Journal of Machine
  Learning Research, 3:993–1022.

Bloom, N., Sadun, R., and Van Reenen, J. (2016). Management as a Technology? NBER Working
  Papers 22327, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Bloom, N. and Van Reenen, J. (2007). Measuring and Explaining Management Practices Across
  Firms and Countries. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(4):1351–1408.

Bolton, P., Brunnermeier, M. K., and Veldkamp, L. (2013). Leadership, Coordination, and Corpo-
  rate Culture. The Review of Economic Studies, 80(2):512–537.

Cai, J. and Szeidl, A. (2016). Interfirm Relationships and Business Performance. NBER Working
  Papers 22951, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Chade, H. and Eeckhout, J. (2016). Stochastic Sorting. mimeograph.

Chang, J., Gerrish, S., Boyd-Graber, J. L., and Blei, D. M. (2009). Reading Tea Leaves: How
  Humans Interpret Topic Models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems.


                                                 35
Coase, R. (1937). The nature of the firm. Economica, 4, New Series(16):386–405.

Deming, D. J. (2015). The Growing Importance of Social Skills in the Labor Market. NBER
  Working Papers 21473, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Dessein, W. and Santos, T. (2016). Managerial Style and Attention. mimeograph.

Drucker, P. (1967). The E↵ective Executive. New York : Harper and Row.

Erosheva, E. A., Fienberg, S. E., and Joutard, C. (2007). Describing Disability through Individual-
  Level Mixture Models for Multivariate Binary Data. The Annals of Applied Statistics, 1(2):502–
  537.

Feenstra, Robert C., R. I. and Timmer, M. P. (2015). The next generation of the penn world table.
  American Economic Review, 10(105):3150–3182.

Gabaix, X. and Landier, A. (2008). Why has CEO Pay Increased So Much? The Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 123(1):49–100.

Gennaioli, N., Porta, R. L., de Silanes, F. L., and Shleifer, A. (2013). Human Capital and Regional
  Development. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(1):105–164.

Graham, J. R., Harvey, C. R., and Puri, M. (2013). Managerial attitudes and corporate actions.
  Journal of Financial Economics, 109(1):103–121.

Griffiths, T. L. and Steyvers, M. (2004). Finding Scientific Topics. Proceedings of the National
  Academy of Sciences, 101(Suppl. 1):5228–5235.

Gross, J. H. and Manrique-Vallier, D. (2014). A Mixed Membership Approach to the Assessment
  of Political Ideology from Survey Responses. In Airoldi, E. M., Blei, D., Erosheva, E. A., and
  Fienberg, S. E., editors, Handbook of Mixed Membership Models and Its Applications. CRC Press.

Hambrick, D. C. and Mason, P. A. (1984). Upper Echelons: The Organization as a Reflection of
  Its Top Managers. The Academy of Management Review, 9(2):193–206.

Hermalin, B. E. (1998). Toward an Economic Theory of Leadership: Leading by Example. American
  Economic Review, 88(5):1188–1206.

Hermalin, B. E. (2007). Leading for the Long Term. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization,
  62(1):1–19.

Ho↵man, M. and Tadelis, S. (2017). How do managers matter? evidence from performance metrics
  and employee surveys in a firm. mimeo, University of Toronto.



                                                36
Kaplan, S. N., Klebanov, M. M., and Sorensen, M. (2012). Which CEO Characteristics and Abilities
  Matter? The Journal of Finance, 67(3):973–1007.

Kaplan, S. N. and Sorensen, M. (2016). Are CEOs Di↵erent? Characteristics of Top Managers.
  mimeograph.

Kotter, J. P. (1999). John Kotter on What Leaders Really Do. Harvard Business School Press,
  Boston.

La Porta, R., Lopez-de Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., and Vishny, R. (2000). Investor protection and
  corporate governance. Journal of Financial Economics, 58(1-2):3–27.

LaPorta, R., Lopez-De-Silanes, F., and Shleifer, A. (1999). Corporate Ownership Around the
  World. Journal of Finance, 54(2):471–517.

Lazear, E. P., Shaw, K. L., and Stanton, C. T. (2015). The value of bosses. Journal of Labor
  Economics, 33(4):823 – 861.

Lippi, F. and Schivardi, F. (2014). Corporate control and executive selection. Quantitative Eco-
  nomics, 5:417–456.

Malmendier, U. and Tate, G. (2005). CEO Overconfidence and Corporate Investment. Journal of
  Finance, 60(6):2661–2700.

Malmendier, U. and Tate, G. (2009). Superstar CEOs. The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  124(4):1593–1638.

Mintzberg, H. (1973). The Nature of Managerial Work. Harper and Row., New York.

Mintzberg, H. (1979). The Structuring or Organizations. Englewood Cli↵s, N.J.: Prentice-Hall.

Mullins, W. and Schoar, A. (2013). How do CEOs see their Role? Management Philosophy and
  Styles in Family and Non-Family Firms. NBER Working Papers 19395, National Bureau of
  Economic Research, Inc.

Roberts, J. (2006). The Modern Firm: Organizational Design for Performance and Growth John
  Roberts (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2004); ISBN 0-19-829376-3, 318 pages. Business
  Ethics Quarterly, 16(01):109–109.

Tervio, M. (2008). The Di↵erence That CEOs Make: An Assignment Model Approach. American
  Economic Review, 98(3):642–68.

Tipping, M. E. and Bishop, C. M. (1999). Probabilistic principal component analysis. Journal of
  the Royal Statistical Society B, 61(3):611–622.


                                                37
Urban, D. (2016). The E↵ects of Culture on CEO Power: International Evidence from Executive
  Turnover The E↵ects of Culture on CEO Power: International Evidence from Executive Turnover.
  mimeo, Technische Universität München (TUM).

Van den Steen, E. (2010). On the origin of shared beliefs (and corporate culture). RAND Journal
  of Economics, 41(4):617–648.




                                              38
 Appendix Tables and Figures - Not for Publication
A      Data Appendix
A.1     The Time Use Survey
The time use survey took place in two stages: in the Spring of 2011 a team of 15 analysts based
in Mumbai and led by one of our project managers collected data on India, while the rest of the
countries were covered in a second survey wave in the Spring of 2013 by a team of 40 enumerators
based at the London School of Economics.46 To ensure comparability, we adopted the same protocol
and retained the same project manager across both waves. The enumerators where typically grad-
uate students (often MBAs) recruited specifically for this project. All enumerators were subject
to a common intensive training on the survey methodology for three days at the beginning of the
project, plus weekly team progress reviews and one to one conversations with their supervisors to
discuss possible uncertainties with respect to the classification of the time use data. Each interview
was checked o↵ at the end of the week by one supervisor, who would make sure that the data was
complete in every field, and that the enumerator had codified all the activities according to the
survey protocol. Each enumerator ran on average 30 interviews.
    Each enumerator was allocated a random list of about 120 companies, and was in charge of
calling up the numbers of his or her list to convince the CEO to participate in the survey, and to
collect the time use data in the week allocated to the CEO. One project manager, five full time
supervisors and one additional manager working on a part time basis led the survey team. We
actively monitored and coached the enumerators throughout the project, which intensified their
persistence in chasing the CEOs and getting them to participate. We also o↵ered the CEOs a
personalized analysis of their use of time (which was sent to them in January 2012 to the Indian
CEOs and in June 2014 to the rest of the countries) to give them the ability to monitor their time
allocation, and compare it with peers in the industry.
    The survey instrument is available at www.executivetimeusesurvey.org. A screenshot of the
blank instrument is shown in Figure A.1.

A.2     Sampling Frame
The sampling frame was drawn from ORBIS, an extensive commercial data set that contains
company accounts for several millions of companies around the world. Our sampling criteria were
as follows. First, we restricted the sample to manufacturing and additionally kept firms that were
classified as “active” in the year prior to the survey (2010 in India and 2012 for the other countries)
and with available recent accounting data.47 These conditions restricted our sample to 11,500 firms.
Second, we further restricted the sample to companies for which we could find CEOs contact details.
  46
     The data collection methodology discussed in this section is an evolution of the approach followed in Bandiera
et al. (2012) to collect data on the diary of 100 Italian CEOs. While the data collection of the Italian data was
outsourced to a private firm, the data collection described in this paper was internally managed from beginning to
end. Due to this basic methodological di↵erence and other changes introduced after the Italian data was collected
(e.g. the vector of features used to characterize every activity) we decided not to combine the two samples.
  47
     For the Indian sample, we also restricted the sample to firms headquartered in the fifteen main Indian states.
This excluded firms located in Assam, Bihar, Chandigarh, Chhattisgarh, Dadra, Daman and Diu, Goa, Himachal
Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir, Jharkhand, Orissa and Uttarakhand, each of which accounts for less than 3% of
Indian GDP.


                                                        39
Appendix Figure 1 - Survey Instrument
               Figure A.1: Survey Instrument




                            40
  Table A1 - Selection           Table A.1: Selection Analysis
                                                           (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)
  Sample                                                   All         All        All         All
  Dependent Variable: Dummy=1 if CEO participated
  Country=Brazil                                         0.677***    0.695***   0.655***    0.559*
                                                          (0.074)     (0.075)    (0.079)    (0.288)
  Country=France                                         0.210***    0.256***     0.143     0.562**
                                                          (0.073)     (0.074)    (0.104)    (0.221)
  Country=Germany                                          0.115     0.194**     0.152*     0.476**
                                                          (0.072)     (0.078)    (0.082)    (0.222)
  Country=India                                          0.658***    0.699**    1.227***     0.672
                                                          (0.247)     (0.272)    (0.371)    (0.425)
  Country=UK                                             -0.178**     -0.139*   -0.153**     0.088
                                                          (0.074)     (0.074)    (0.077)    (0.218)
  Ln(Sales)                                                         -0.071***
                                                                      (0.011)
  ln(Sales/Employees)                                                           -0.018
                                                                                (0.030)
  ROCE                                                                                       0.000
                                                                                            (0.001)
  Number of firms                                         6256        5993       4090        3492

Notes: *significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. All columns estimated by
  Notes: *significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. All columns estimated by
probit (marginal e↵ects reported, robust standard errors under coefficient). The dependent variable
  probit (marginal effects reported, robust standard errors under coefficient). The dependent
in all columns is a dummy=1 if the CEO participated in the survey. The selection regression is run
  variable in all columns is a dummy=1 if the CEO participated in the survey. The selection
on the latest available year of accounting data. All columns include 2 digits SIC industry dummies.
  regression is run on the latest available year of accounting data. All columns include 2 digits SIC
  industry dummies.
To gather contact information we hired a team of research assistants based in Mumbai, London and
Boston who verified the CEOs names and found their phone numbers and emails. This restricted
the sample to 7,744 firms. Of these, 907 later resulted not to be eligible for the interviews upon the
first telephonic contact (the reasons for non eligibility included recent bankruptcy or the company
not being in manufacturing), and 310 were never contacted because the project ended before this
was possible. The final number of eligible companies was thus 6,527, with median yearly sales of
$53,000,000. Of these, we were able to secure an interview with 1,131 CEOs, although 17 CEOs
dropped out before the end of the data collection week for personal reasons and were thus removed
from the sample before the analysis was conducted.
     The selection analysis in Table A.1 shows that firms in the final sample have on average slightly
lower log sales relative to the sampling frame (coefficient 0.071, standard error 0.011). However,
we do not find any significant selection e↵ect on performance variables, such as labor productivity
(sales over employees) and return on capital employed (ROCE).
     Table A.2 presents the basic summary statistics of the sample.




                                                  41
        Table 1: Summary Statistics
                              Table A.2: Summary Statistics
                                                                            Standard
        Variable                                   Mean        Median       Deviation     Observations
        A. CEOs Traits
        CEO age                                    50.93         52.00         8.45            1107
        CEO gender                                  0.96         1.00          0.19            1114
        CEO has college degree                      0.92         1.00          0.27            1114
        CEO has MBA                                 0.55         1.00          0.50            1114
        CEO tenure in post                         10.29         7.00          9.55            1110

        B. Firms Traits
        Employment                                 1,275.47       300.00       6,497.72        1114
        Sales ('000 $)                           222,033.90    35,340.49   1,526,261.00         920
        Capital ('000 $)                          79,436.72    10,029.00     488,953.60        618
        Materials ('000 $)                       157,287.10    25,560.02   1,396,475.00        448
        Profits per employee ('000 $)                  8.62         2.55          14.87        386



Notes: Variables in Panel
       Notes: Variables inAPanel
                             and A
                                 B and
                                   are drawn  from our
                                       B are drawn     survey
                                                    from      and ORBIS,
                                                         our survey      respectively.
                                                                    and ORBIS, respectively.


               Table B.1: Five Most Common Activities in Pure Behavior 0

     Type      Planned      Duration      Size         Functions              Prob. in    0    Prob. in   1

    Meeting      Yes         Long        Large        Production                 0.057            0.000
    Meeting      Yes         Long        Small           Clients                 0.027            0.000
    Meeting      Yes         Long        Small        Production                 0.025            0.012
    Meeting      Yes         Long        Large         Marketing                 0.024            0.012
    Meeting      Yes         Long        Large    Marketing/Production           0.023            0.000


B     Further Results from LDA Model
B.1    Most common activities in each pure behavior
These tables display the most common activities in each pure behavior. In the duration category,
long refers to an activity’s lasting longer than one hour; in the size category, small refers to an
activity’s involving just one other person, while large refers to its involving more than one person.
Regarding functions, groupcom refers to members of the firm’s commercial group, and associations
are trade association meetings.

B.2    Significance of Di↵erences in Pure Behaviors
A natural question is whether the di↵erence in pure behaviors is significant. To explore this, we
adopt the following approach. First, we generate a dataset of activities based upon a model in which
there are no underlying di↵erences among CEOs. Specifically, we take the empirical distribution of


                                                      42
              Table B.2: Five Most Common Activities in Pure Behavior 1

       Type      Planned    Duration     Size      Functions          Prob. in   0   Prob. in   1

      Meeting      Yes       Long       Large       C-suite              0.057          0.000
      Meeting      Yes       Long       Large       Others               0.027          0.000
      Meeting      Yes       Long       Large     Associations           0.025          0.012
      Meeting      Yes       Long       Large   Marketing/Clients        0.024          0.012
      Meeting      Yes       Long       Large        Board               0.023          0.000


the 654 activities that enter the LDA analysis and for each time unit draw an activity independently
from it. This corresponds to a model in which there is a single pure behavior from which all CEOs
draw their observed activities. We then estimate the same parameters on this simulated data as
we do on the actual data, and compute the Hellinger distance between the two estimated pure
behaviors. We repeat this procedure 1,000 times.
    Figure B.1 plots the distribution of the Hellinger distances in the 1,000 simulations. The red
line denotes the Hellinger distance we observe observe in the actual data. In no simulation does the
Hellinger distance between two behaviors exceed that we observe in the actual data: the maximum
simulated distance is 0.412 whereas in the actual data the distance is 0.776. We therefore conclude
that it is highly unlikely that our observed data is consistent with a model in which all CEOs adopt
a single pure behavior.

B.3    Estimated time shares
We also report the raw and estimated time shares in the baseline sample in table B.3. The raw shares
are simply the shares of time that the average CEO is observed to spend in di↵erent categories.
These di↵er slightly from those displayed in figure 1 since we only compute averages on the subset
of activities that include non-rare feature combinations. The estimated shares are the fraction of
time each behavior spends in each category, weighted by the average value of the CEO behavior
index. In general there is a very close relationship between the raw and estimated shares. The
largest deviations occur for time with outsiders and with insiders and outsiders together. However
these are derived from the probabilities each behavior places on di↵erent combinations of individual
functions rather than a feature explicitly included in the algorithm.


C     Proof of Proposition 2
We verify that the situation described in the proposition corresponds to a Bayesian equilibrium.
To simplify notation re-normalize all variables so that = 1.
    First note, that if B > 1, all CEOs will choose the behavior that is optimal for the firm that
hires them. This means that CEO behavior only depends on firm type. Therefore, in what follows
we assume that governance is sufficiently poor, so B < c.
    In that case, when a CEO is hired, her utility is w̄ + B if she works for a firm of the same type
and w̄ if she works for a firm of a di↵erent type. To simplify notation, further normalize w̄ + B = 1.



                                                 43
Figure B.1: Distribution of Hellinger Distances in Simulated Data




                               44
                           Table B.3: Raw and Estimated tab_shares_1612
                                                        Time Shares
                                                            Raw        Estimated
                                       Meeting              0.803        0.801
                                  Communications            0.068         0.06
                                      Site Visit             0.06        0.062
                                       Insiders             0.657        0.653
                                      Outsiders             0.235        0.175
                                Insiders & Outsiders        0.108        0.171
                                     Production              0.35        0.355
                                      Marketing             0.206        0.208
                                       C-suite              0.115        0.122
                                        Clients             0.103        0.104
                                      Suppliers             0.064        0.068
                                     Consultants            0.026        0.026
                                       Planned              0.764        0.782
                                       >1 Hour              0.657        0.687
                                  2 People or More          0.553        0.573
                                2 Functions or More         0.273        0.262

Notes: This table compares the observed share of time that CEOs spend on average in di↵erent activities
                                                                                             P
                                                                                                        against
                                                                                                        bi b +(1 ✓
                                                                                                        ✓        bi ) b
                                                                                                            1           0
that estimated by LDA. To obtain the latter, we obtain the average time spent on each activity as   i
                                                                                                              N
                                                                                                                          .


Hence the utility of a correctly matched CEO is one and the utility of a mismatched CEO is
                                                          w̄
                                                  b⌘          .
                                                       w̄ + B
Note that b is a measure of the quality of governance, with b = 1, being the worst level of governance.
    A type m firm faces an abundant supply of type m CEOs. As all the applications it receives
come from type m CEOs, the firm will simply hire the first applicant. A type l firm instead may
receive applications from both CEO types. If k is sufficiently low, the optimal policy consists in
waiting for the first candidate with s = l and hire him.
    We now consider CEOs. Suppose that all leader CEOs apply to type l firms and manager CEOs
apply to type l firms with probability z and to type m firms with probability 1 z.
    If a manager CEO applies to a type m firm, he will get a job if and only if his application is
downloaded. The mass of type m firms is 1         . The mass of manager CEOs applying to type m
firms is (1    ) (1 z) m. The probability the CEO is hired is

                                                         1
                                           Pm =                            .
                                                  (1     ) (1       z) m

    If instead a manager CEO applies to a type l firm, he will get a job if and only if his application
is considered and the firm does not detect deception. Computing the first probability requires
an additional step, because some firms consider more than onePage   application
                                                                       1         before they find an
application which passes the screening process.



                                                       45
   The probability that a type l firm application is accepted if it is considered is:

                                                    (1        ) z (1 ⇢) +
                                            H=                            .
                                                           (1      )z +

The mass of applications that are downloaded by type l firms is therefore:
                                                                                              1
                                      1 + (1       H) + (1           H)2 + ... =                .
                                                                                              H
Given that the mass of applicants to type l firms is m ((1                                    ) z + ), the probability that an
application is considered is

                                                           =
                          m ( + (1                ) z) H       m ((1             ) z (1       ⇢) + )

   The probability that a type m CEO applicant passes the screening process is 1                                 ⇢. Thus, the
probability that a type m CEO applicant is hired by a type l firm is

                                                             (1 ⇢)
                                        Pl =                                              .
                                                  m ((1        ) z (1     ⇢) + )

    In the equilibrium under consideration a type m CEO must be indi↵erent between applying to
the two types of firms. As the benefit of being hired by a same-type firm is one, while the benefit
of being hired by a type l firm is b, the indi↵erence condition is Pm = bPl , which yields:

                                       1                              (1 ⇢) b
                                                         =                           ,
                                 (1        ) (1     z)       ((1       ) z (1 ⇢) + )

yielding
                                            (1         ) (1 ⇢) b          (1          )
                                      z=                                                 .
                                             (1          + b) (1          ) (1        ⇢)
The solution of z will be positive – meaning that some type m CEOs will apply to type l firms – if

                                                                (1       )
                                                  ⇢<1                       ,
                                                               (1       ) b

which is satisfied as long as ⇢ is not too high, b is not too low, and is sufficiently smaller than .
For instance, the combination of ⇢ = 0, b = 1, and > would work.
   Type l CEOs always produce 1, while the average productivity of a type m CEO is equal to
the probability that he is matched with a type m firm, which is
                                                           1 z
                                                                             .
                                                   1     z + z (1       ⇢)

By replacing z, we find the average productivity of a type m CEO:

                                         (1         ) ((1   ) (1          ⇢) + )
                                                                                                                     ,
            (1    ) (1    ) (1        ⇢) + (1         ) + ((1            ) (1 ⇢) b               (1    ) ) (1   ⇢)



                                                               46
    COO in the org


                                                                                      Above median age
         Family CEO


                      -.1           0               .1             .2                                    -.05      0          .05        .1           .15

 Notes: Each point represents the coefficient obtained when regressing the CEO behavior index on each dummy variable, including country dummies as additional
 controls.

  Figure D.1: CEO Behavior Index: Variation across Countries and SIC 2 industries
 Panel A - CEO Behavior by Country (relative to the US)                            Panel B - CEO Behavior by Industry




                                                                             1
   .2




                                                                             .5
   .1
   0




                                                                             0
   -.1




                                                                             -.5
   -.2




                                                                             -1
   -.3




                                                                               b==31
                                                                                  b==2
                                                                                    b==37
                                                                                       b==3
                                                                                         b==28
                                                                                           b==11
                                                                                              b==5
                                                                                                b==12
                                                                                                  b==10
                                                                                                     b==8
                                                                                                       b==21
                                                                                                         b==16
                                                                                                           b==17
                                                                                                             b==20
                                                                                                               b==22
                                                                                                                 b==34
                                                                                                                   b==19
                                                                                                                      b==7
                                                                                                                        b==9
                                                                                                                          b==23
                                                                                                                            b==18
                                                                                                                              b==14
                                                                                                                                b==13
                                                                                                                                  b==15
                                                                                                                                    b==29
                                                                                                                                      b==25
                                                                                                                                        b==32
                                                                                                                                          b==24
                                                                                                                                            b==30
                                                                                                                                              b==33
            cc_in           cc_br   cc_uk      cc_ge       cc_fr


 Notes: Each
Notes:       pointpoint
          Each     represents the coefficient
                         represents           obtained whenobtained
                                        the coefficient     regressing when regressing the CEO behavior index on country and two
 the CEO behavior index on a full set of SIC2 industry dummies,
digits  SIC
 including   fixeddummies
           country e↵ects.as additional controls.


which is smaller than one whenever ⇢ < 1.
   Finally, note that the di↵erence between the profit (including CEO compensation) of a correctly
matched firm and an incorrectly matched one is 1 B.


D          Additional Results
D.1          CEO Behavior Index: Additional Descriptives
D.1.1          Variation across Countries and Industries
Figure D.1 shows the point estimates and confidence intervals of the regression of the CEO behavior
index on, respectively, country (using the US as relative country benchmark) and SIC 2 industry
dummies.
    Country and industry fixed e↵ects together account for 17% of the variance in the CEO behavior
index. This is due primarily do the fact that the CEO behavior index varies by country, and in
particular it is significantly higher in rich countries (France, Germany, UK and US), relative to
low and middle income countries (Brazil and India). In contrast, industry fixed e↵ects are largely
insignificant.

D.1.2          Correlation with Firm and CEO Characteristics
Panel A, Figure D.2 reports the correlation between CEO behavior and firm/CEO traits controlling
for country and industry fixed e↵ects. Larger firms, multinationals, listed firms and firms that have
a COO are all more likely to hire a leader CEO.
    The index is also correlated with specific CEO characteristics, as shown in Panel B. It is sig-
nificantly larger for CEOs who report having had a study or work experience outside their home
country, or to have attained an MBA degree or equivalent. In contrast, there is no evidence that


                                                                        47
  Figure 3
                    Figure D.2: CEO Behavior Index, Firm and CEO Characteristics
  Panel A - CEO Behavior Index and Firm Characteristics                             Panel B - CEO Behavior Index and CEO Characteristics

          Above median employment
                                                                                      Experience abroad
                      Multinational


                             Listed
                                                                                                   MBA
                    Part of a group


                    COO in the org
                                                                                            Internal hire
                   Task Abstraction


                     R&D Intensity
                                                                                       Above median age
                       Family CEO

                                      -.1   0          .1           .2                                      -.05    0        .05           .1   .15

 Notes: Each point represents the coefficient obtained when regressing the CEO behavior index on each dummy variable, including country dummies as additional
Notes:   Each point represents the coefficient obtained when regressing the CEO behavior index on each dummy
  controls.
variable, including country and SIC2 industry dummies as additional controls.


  Panel A - CEO Behavior by Country (relative to the US) Panel B - CEO Behavior by Industry
the  index is related to the age of the executive, or to whether     the CEO was promoted to the role
within the organization.
                                                                              1
    .2




D.2          Production Function: Robustness Checks
                                                                              .5
    .1




We have examined the robustness of the basic results discussed in Table 2. The robustness checks
    0




are summarized in Tables D.1 and D.2. In each table, Column 1 simply reports the baseline results
                                                                              0




of Table 2, column 1.
    -.1




                                                                              -.5




D.2.1          Using shares of time instead of the CEO Behavior Index
    -.2




Table D.1 shows the basic production function results when we use the share of time spent by
                                                                              -1
    -.3




CEOs incc_inactivities  cc_br with cc_uk
                                      di↵erentcc_ge              rather thanb==31
                                                      featurescc_fr            b==2
                                                                              theb==37
                                                                                    b==3
                                                                                      b==28
                                                                                    CEO b==11
                                                                                           b==5
                                                                                             b==12
                                                                                               b==10
                                                                                                  b==8
                                                                                              index.b==21
                                                                                                      b==16
                                                                                                        b==17
                                                                                                          b==20
                                                                                                            b==22
                                                                                                              b==34
                                                                                                                b==19
                                                                                                          Starting b==7
                                                                                                                     b==9
                                                                                                                       b==23
                                                                                                                         b==18
                                                                                                                       withb==14
                                                                                                                             b==13
                                                                                                                               b==15
                                                                                                                                 b==29
                                                                                                                                   b==25
                                                                                                                                     b==32
                                                                                                                               activityb==24
                                                                                                                                         b==30
                                                                                                                                           b==33
                                                                                                                                           type,
Column 2 shows that there is a negative and precisely estimated correlation between the time
  Notes: Each point represents the coefficient obtained when regressing
spent
  the CEOin behavior
             plant visits
                      index onand a full performance,        while
                                          set of SIC2 industry       the correlation with time spent in communications is
                                                               dummies,
  including country dummies   as additional  controls.
positive but not precisely estimated (all relative to time spent in meetings). Column 3 shows that
among participants, firm performance is higher when CEOs devote more time to insiders together
with outsiders as opposed to outsiders or insiders alone. Moving to specific functions, Column 3
shows that performance is negatively correlated with the time spent with production and clients
and positively correlated with time spent with C-suite executives and marketing. Column 5 shows
that performance is positively correlated with planning and multi-functional and multi-participant
interactions but not with meeting duration. Taken together, the results suggests that most of the
features for which CEOs with di↵erent indexes behave similarly (meetings, insiders, group size) are
not correlated with performance. The sole exception is the share of planned time, which is positively
correlated with performance but not with the index. Moreover, all the di↵erences captured by our
index (site vs communication, outsiders alone vs with insiders, production and clients vs. C-suite,
single function vs multifunction interactions) are individually correlated with firm performance.



                                                                         48
D.2.2      Alternative specification choices
We examined whether the results varied when we used annual accounting data, instead of the
averaged version employed in the baseline regressions. Table (D.2), Panel A, column 2 shows that
the baseline results are not sensitive to this choice. In column 3 we show that the unweighted
regressions deliver a very similar coefficient on the CEO behavior index relative to the baseline
results, which are weighted by the representativeness of the week as rated by the CEO at the end
of the data collection week.

D.2.3      Controlling for CEO and firm characteristics
We investigated whether the coefficient of the CEO behavior index in the baseline result could
capture the e↵ect of other CEO or firm observables, which could be at the same time correlated
with CEO behavior and firm performance. In column 4 we show that the coefficient on the index
actually increases when we control for the overall number of hours worked by the CEO during
the survey week, a proxy for e↵ort which was extensively analyzed in Bandiera et al. (2017). In
columns 5 and 6 we include a set of firm dummies to denote whether the firm is a multinational,
part of a group, owned and run by a family CEO, listed on a public exchange and has a COO in
the organizational chart, and CEO characteristics (dummies to capture whether the CEO holds an
MBA degree or equivalent, has studied or worked abroad, is male, was promoted internally and
age). While these additional variables are for the most part insignificant, the coefficient on the
CEO behavior index remains large and statistically significant.48

D.2.4      Alternative ways of expressing the CEO behavior index, including alternative
           dimensionality reduction techniques
We experimented with di↵erent ways of expressing the CEO behavior index.
    First, we used a discretized version of the index (=1 if the index is     0.5), as shown in Ta-
ble (D.2), Panel A, column 7. We also examined alternative dimensionality reduction approaches,
namely PCA and k-means analysis, on the key marginals that emerge from LDA as being signifi-
cantly di↵erent across behavior types. For each CEO, we counted the number of engagements that:
(1) last longer than one hour; (2) are planned; (3) involve two or more people; (4) involve outsiders
alone; (5) involve high-level inside functions; and (6) involve more than one function.
    The first principal component in PCA analysis explains 36% of the variance in this feature
space and places a positive weight on all dimensions except (4). Meanwhile, k-means clustering
produces one centroid with higher values on all dimensions except (4) (and, ipso facto, a second
centroid with a higher value for (4) and lower values for all others). Hence the patterns identified
using simpler methods validate the key di↵erences from LDA with two pure behaviors. 49 In the
columns 8 and 9 of Table D.2, Panel A we show that these alternative ways of classifying CEOs do
not fundamentally alter the relationship between behavior and firm performance.
  48
     Among the firm variables, the only significant ones are the family CEO dummy (negative) and the COO dummy
(positive). Among the CEO variables, the only significant ones are the log of CEO age and the dummy to capture
experience abroad, both positive.
  49
     Note that LDA is still a necessary first step in this analysis because it allows us to identify the important marginals
along which CEOs vary. We have experimented with PCA and k-means on the 654-dimensional feature space over
which we estimate the LDA model, but the results are much harder to interpret relative to the ones described above.




                                                            49
D.2.5     Activity selection
In the baseline analysis, we define a rare activity as one not present in the time use of at least 30
CEOs. When we drop these activities from the analysis, we discard 23% of interactive activities
on average across CEOs. One potential concern is that the choice of rare activities itself is a
component of behavior that we do not capture with the behavior index. To address this, we
construct a behavior index based on dropping activities not present in the time use of at least 15
and, alternatively, 45 CEOs. The results are presented in Table (D.2), Panel B, columns 2 and 3.
The results are essentially identical as for the baseline index.
    In the baseline results, we build the index only on the basis of interactive activities, excluding
traveling. Column 4 shows that we would obtain very similar results if we were to include travel in
the set.
    LDA is a mixed-membership model that allows CEOs to mix their time between two pure
behaviors. An alternative model is a simpler mixture model in which each CEO is associated
exclusively to one behavior. We have estimated a multinomial mixture model via the EM algorithm,
and derived an alternative behavior index as the probability that a CEO draws activities from
behavior 1. 50 Again, we find a significant relationship between the behavior index and firm
performance, as shown in Table (D.2), Panel B, column 5.
    The behavior index in the main paper is based on all 1,114 CEOs in our time use survey, but
we have sales data for 920. We therefore also construct the index based on the subset of CEOs for
which sales data is available, but as column 6 shows this does not change the coefficient.
    A final concern is that the di↵erences we capture in the behavior index arise solely from cross-
region variation in time use, and that within-region variation is not related to firm performance.
We therefore construct a behavior index for CEOs in low/middle-income countries based solely on
time use observed in these countries, and likewise for CEOs in the high-income countries. Column
7 shows the results on firm performance, and we again find a significant relationship.

D.2.6     Alternative estimation techniques
Table (D.2), Panel B, column 8 shows the results when we regress we regress the Olley Pakes
estimator of productivity on the CEO behavior index. Given the need to rely on panel data for
capital, this restricts the sample to 562 firms. As a comparison, the OLS estimate of the CEO
behavior index on the same sample is 0.244 (standard error 0.107).

D.2.7     Choosing number of pure behaviors with out-of-sample prediction
As discussed in the main text, we choose two pure behaviors primarily for interpretability, but
an alternative is to choose the number of pure behaviors K based on a statistical criterion. We
adopt perhaps the most popular approach–cross-validation–in which K is chosen based on the
ability of the model to predict out-of-sample observations. We first randomly draw two-thirds of
our sample of CEOs as training data, and fit an LDA model for various values of K beginning
from K = 2. Then we take the estimated parameters and compute the goodness-of-fit for the test
data (the held-out one-third of CEOs) using perplexity, a standard measure in the machine learning
   50
      In the mixture model, each CEO draws all of his/her activities from a single pure behavior, but the econometrician
is unsure which behavior this is. The E-step in the EM algorithm provides a probability distribution over cluster
assignments, and we use the probability of being assigned to cluster 1 as the behavior index.



                                                          50
               Table D.1: Production Function Results Using Shares of Time
                                                                    (1)         (2)        (4)        (5)         (3)
 Dependent Variable: log(sales)
 log(employment)                                                  0.889***   0.895***    0.893***   0.907***   0.876***
                                                                   (0.040)    (0.039)     (0.041)    (0.040)    (0.040)
 CEO behavior index                                               0.343***
                                                                   (0.108)
 Share of time spent in Communications                                         0.066
                                                                              (0.253)
 Share of time spent in Plant visits (site)                                  -1.168***
                                                                              (0.364)
 Share of time spent with Insiders only                                                  0.375**
                                                                                          (0.187)
 Share of time spent with Insiders and Outsiders together                                 -0.166
                                                                                          (0.166)
 Share of time spent with Production                                                       0.055
                                                                                          (0.175)
 Share of time spent with Marketing                                                      0.494***
                                                                                          (0.164)
 Share of time spent with C-suite managers                                                           0.247
                                                                                                    (0.187)
 Share of time spent with Clients                                                                    0.353
                                                                                                    (0.237)
 Share of time spent with Suppliers                                                                            -0.661***
                                                                                                                 (0.235)
 Share of time spent with Consultants                                                                             0.459
                                                                                                                 (0.299)
 Share of time spent in Planned activities                                                                        0.373
                                                                                                                 (0.239)
 Share of time spent in Interactions> 1hr                                                                       -0.804**
                                                                                                                 (0.318)
 Share of time spent in Interactions with more than 2 people                                                     -0.462
                                                                                                                 (0.603)
 Share of time spent in interactions with more than 2 functions                                                   0.281
                                                                                                                 (0.649)
 Number of observations (firms)                                     920        920         920        920          920
 Observations used to compute means                                2,202      2,202       2,202      2,202        2,202

Notes: *** (**) (*) denotes significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level, respectively. All columns
include the same controls used in 2, column 1.




                                                       51
                                            Table D.2: Robustness Checks
  Panel A
                                           (1)           (2)            (3)            (4)           (5)           (6)            (7)            (8)         (9)
                                                    Firm by year
                                                     accounting
                                                    data, cluster              Control for       Control for   Control for
                                                     at the firm                 hours              firm          CEO         Discretized      Principal
  Experiment                             Baseline        level    No weighting  worked           observables   observables   version (>=.5)   Component    K-means


  Dependent Variable: Log sales

  CEO behavior index                     0.343***    0.275***       0.298***        0.338***      0.265**       0.309***       0.234***       0.109***     0.259***
                                          (0.108)     (0.091)        (0.104)         (0.105)      (0.114)        (0.108)        (0.064)        (0.030)      (0.074)
  log(CEO hours worked)                                                              0.297*
                                                                                     (0.159)
  MNE (dummy)                                                                                       0.089
                                                                                                   (0.078)
  Part of a Group (dummy)                                                                           0.045
                                                                                                   (0.084)
  Family CEO (dummy)                                                                              -0.215**
                                                                                                   (0.093)
  Listed (dummy)                                                                                   0.143*
                                                                                                   (0.085)
  COO in the org (dummy)                                                                           0.143*
                                                                                                   (0.079)
  CEO has MBA (dummy)                                                                                             -0.048
                                                                                                                 (0.072)
  CEO has Experience abroad (dummy)                                                                              0.189**
                                                                                                                 (0.080)
  CEO age                                                                                                        0.354*
                                                                                                                 (0.181)
  CEO is male (dummy)                                                                                             -0.126
                                                                                                                 (0.132)
  CEO is an internal promotion (dummy)                                                                            0.063
                                                                                                                 (0.057)
  Number of observations (firms)           920         2,202           920            920           920            920           920             920         920
  Observations used to compute means      2,202        2,202          2,202          2,202         2,202          2,202         2,202           2,202       2,202



  Panel B
                                           (1)           (2)            (3)            (4)           (5)           (6)            (7)            (8)

                                                    Exclude alla Exclude alla                                               Index computed
                                                    activities not activities not                                  Index    by high and low Olley Pakes
                                                    present in at present in at      Include                   computed on      income      productivity
                                                       least 15       least 45      Travel and    Mixture      sales sample    countries      residual
  Experiment                             Baseline       CEOs           CEOs           Email       model             only       separately


  Dependent Variable: Log sales

  CEO behavior index                     0.343***    0.305***       0.316***        0.265***      0.133**       0.347***       0.292***       0.472***
                                          (0.108)     (0.110)        (0.102)         (0.096)      (0.064)        (0.102)        (0.081)        (0.106)
  Number of observations (firms)            920         920            920             920          920            920            920            562
  Observations used to compute means       2,202       2,202          2,202           2,202        2,202          2,202          2,202          1,431



Notes: *** (**) (*) denotes significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level, respectively. All columns include the same controls used
in 2, column 1. Panel A: Column 2 uses yearly accounting data instead of firm level aggregates (always based a max on an
interval including 5 years per firm, during the CEO tenure in office). Column 3 shows unweighted results. Column 4 includes
as additional control the log of total hours worked by the CEO during the week. Column 5 includes as additional controls a set
of firm level characteristics (MNE status, part of a group, family CEO, listed firm dummies). Column 6 includes as additional
controls a set of CEO characteristics (MBA, study or work experience abroad, gender and internal promotion dummies and log
age). Column 7 uses the discretized version of the CEO behavior index (=1 if the index is                                       0.5). Column 8 uses an index
derived using the first principal component from PCA. Column 9 derives the index from a k-means clustering approach. Panel
B: Column 2 uses LDA excluding all activities that are not present in at least 15 CEO diaries, and column 3 does the same
using 45 diaries as a threshold. Column 4 builds the index using a Mixture Model. Column 5 computes the index with the
LDA method, but only using the activities of CEOs working in firms included in the production function sample. Column 6
applies the LDA approach di↵erently by high and low/middle52
                                                           income countries. Column 7 uses the CEO behavior index built
by high and low income country separately. Column 8 shows the results obtained when we regress the Olley Pakes estimator of
productivity on the CEO behavior index.
            Figure D.3: Perplexity for Di↵erent Numbers of Pure Behaviors
              302

              300

              298

              296

              294

              292

              290

              288

              286

              284

              282
                        2
                        3


                        5
                        6


                        8
                        9
                       10
                       11
                       12
                       13


                       15
                       16


                       18
                       19
                       20
                       21
                       23


                       25
                       30
                       35
                       40
                       45
                       50
                        4




                        7




                       14




                       17




                       24
                     K=
                     K=


                     K=
                     K=


                     K=
                     K=
                     K=




                     K=



                    K=
                    k=
                    K=
                    K=


                    K=
                    K=


                    K=
                    K=
                    K=
                    K=
                    K=


                    K=
                    K=
                    K=
                    K=
                    K=
                    K=
                    K=




                    K=




                    K=
Notes: This graph plots the average perplexity computed on test data from ten randomly drawn
sets of training data. The split between training data and test data is two-thirds / one-third. Lower
values of perplexity indicate better goodness-of-fit. There are gaps in the values for K due to save
on computation time.


literature given by             2 P P                      ⇣P                ⌘3
                                   N  A                         K        k
                                      i=1   a=1 ni,a log        k=1 ✓i,k a
                            exp 4                PN                           5
                                                      i=1 Ti

where ni,a is the total number of times activity a appears in the time use of CEO i; ✓i,k is the
probability CEO i adopts pure behavior k; ak is the probability that pure behavior k generates
activity a; and Ti is the total number of time units observed for CEO i. Here the relevant population
of CEOs is the test sample. We use the estimated value of ak from the LDA estimation on the
training data, and a uniform distribution for ✓i,k to compute perplexity. We repeat this procedure
ten times, each time randomly drawing the training data. Figure D.3 reports the average perplexity
computed on the test data across these ten draws. Lower values indicate better goodness-of-fit.
    As we increase the number of pure behaviors from K = 2, we can indeed better fit time-use
patterns, as can be seen from the decreasing perplexity. Naturally, the most parsimonious model
does not account for all the underlying correlations in the high-dimensional feature space. At
the same time, the improvement in fit levels o↵ fairly quickly, and the average perplexity stays
essentially flat from K = 5 through K = 25 before subsequently increasing. This increase is due
to the fact that high values of K capture correlations specific to the training data that do not
generalize to test data.
    For illustrative purposes, we choose to analyze K = 11, where average perplexity achieves a
local minimum, although K = 18 corresponds to the global minimum (the di↵erence is merely 0.25
and the interpretation difficulties for K = 11 will a fortiori become more severe for K = 18). Rather
than describing behavior with a single index, the K = 11 model yields a ten-dimensional vector


                                                 53
       Figure D.4: Coefficient Estimates for Model with Eleven Pure Behaviors

             (mean) r8_all_0

             (mean) r8_all_1

             (mean) r8_all_2

             (mean) r8_all_3

             (mean) r8_all_4

             (mean) r8_all_5

             (mean) r8_all_7

             (mean) r8_all_8

             (mean) r8_all_9

            (mean) r8_all_10

                               -2         -1.5         -1         -.5          0           .5

Notes: This graph plots the coefficient estimates for the productivity regression in column (1) of
table 2 when we replace the scalar behavioral index with the output of the model with K = 11.
The omitted category is the probability put on the sixth pure behavior. The dots represent point
estimates, and the lines 95% confidence intervals.


that describes CEO behavior (we omit the probability associated with the sixth pure behavior).
We use this in place of the behavioral index in the regression model of column (1) of table 2. The
point estimates and confidence intervals are displayed in figure D.4.
    An initial result is that an F-test for the joint significance of the variables is highly signifi-
cant, which implies that the underlying heterogeneity in the probability of choosing di↵erent pure
behaviors among CEOs is important for explaining di↵erences in firm performance. In terms of
individual coefficients, eight are significantly negative relative to the sixth pure behavior, while two
are not significantly di↵erent.
    To gain more insight into what di↵erences these capture, we first compare each pure behavior in
the K = 11 model to pure behavior 0 in the baseline model by computing their Hellinger distance.
This is a standard metric in the information theory literature, and lies in the [0, 1] interval. We then
transform the distances by computing their z-values, and also standardize the estimated coefficients
in the productivity regression (treating the coefficient on pure behavior six as zero). Figure D.5
displays a scatterplot of these two series. There is clearly a positive correlation between distance
from pure behavior 0 in the baseline model and a more positive association with productivity.
Moreover, the behavior closest (furthest) from behavior 0 are among those least (most) associated


                                                  54
Figure D.5: Hellinger Distance from Pure Behavior 0 vs. Coefficient in Productivity
Regression




                                            2
                                                                                                                            6




                            Standardized values of (coeff)
                                                        1
                                                                                   3
                                                                                                                                    8
                                                                          10
                                                                               5

                                                                                                         4
                                           0

                                                             7                                       2


                                                                 0                                           9
                               -1




                                                                                                1
                                            -2




                                                                     -1                       0                       1         2
                                                                                       Standardized values of (helling_1)




with high firm performance. In this way, the behavioral di↵erences in the K = 11 model appear
to capture many of the important di↵erences that also emerge from a more parsimonious model.
At the same time, interpreting the content of each separate behavior is difficult, which serves to
highlight the choice of K = 2 on the grounds of simplicity.

D.3       CEO Behavior Index and Management Practices
D.3.1      Management Data
We were able to match the CEO behavior index with information on management practices for
191 firms in our sample. The data are drawn from the World Management Survey (WMS).51 This
uses an interview-based evaluation tool that defines 18 basic management practices and scores them
from one (“worst practice”) to five (“best practice”) on a scoring grid. This evaluation tool was first
developed by an international consulting firm, and scores these practices in three broad areas. First,
Monitoring: how well do companies track what goes on inside their firms, and use this for continuous
improvement? Second, Target setting: do companies set the right targets, track outcomes, and
take appropriate action if the two are inconsistent? Third, Incentives/people management: are
companies promoting and rewarding employees based on performance, and systematically trying to
hire and retain their best employees? The survey was targeted at plant managers, who are senior
enough to have an overview of management practices but not so senior as to be detached from
day-to-day operations.
    The data is collected through interviews with production plant managers using a “double-
blind” technique. One part of this technique is that managers are not told in advance they are
being scored or shown the scoring grid. They are only told they are being “interviewed about
management practices for a piece of work”. The other side of the double blind technique is that
the interviewers do not know anything about the performance of the firm. To survey is based
 51
      More details can be found at http://worldmanagementsurvey.org/



                                                                                                    55
on “open” questions. For example, on the first monitoring question we start by asking the open
question, “tell me how your monitor your production process”, rather than closed questions such
as “Do you monitor your production daily? [yes/no]”. We continue with open questions focused on
actual practices and examples until the interviewer can make an accurate assessment of the firm’s
practices. For example, the second question on that performance tracking dimension is, “What
kinds of measures would you use to track performance?” and the third is “If I walked around
your factory, could I tell how each person was performing?”.52 The other side of the double-blind
technique is that interviewers are not told anything about the firm’s performance in advance. They
are only provided with the company name, telephone number, and industry. Since the WMS
randomly samples medium-sized manufacturing firms (employing between 50 and 5,000 workers)
who are not usually reported in the business press, the interviewers will generally have not heard
of these firms before, so they should have few preconceptions.

D.3.2   Management and CEO Behavior
We look at the cross sectional correlation between the management data and the CEO behavior
index in Table D.3. Columns 1 shows that the two variables are positively correlated (all regressions
include log employment, country dummies and a set of noise controls). Columns 2 and 3 show that
the correlation is stronger for the operational subcomponents of the management score, while
they are positive but insignificant for the questions in the survey measuring people management
processes. In columns 4-6 we investigate the relationship between firm performance, management
and CEO behavior. This shows that the two indices are positively and independently correlated
with firm productivity.




 52
    The full list of questions for the grid can be found      at   http://worldmanagementsurvey.org/wp-
content/images/2010/09/Manufacturing-Survey-Instrument.pdf.


                                                 56
    Table 6: CEO Behavior, Management and Firm Performance
                    Table D.3: CEO Behavior Index and Management Practices
                                                        (1)         (2)         (3)               (4)         (5)           (6)
    Dependent Variable                                        CEO behavior index                           Log(sales)

    CEO behavior index                                                                         0.606**                    0.550*
                                                                                               (0.277)                    (0.280)
    Management (z-score)                             0.054*                                                  0.207**      0.187**
                                                     (0.030)                                                 (0.082)      (0.075)
    Operations, Monitoring, Targets (z-score)                      0.057*
                                                                   (0.029)
    People (zscore)                                                              0.043
                                                                                (0.034)
    log(employment)                                  0.106*** 0.109***         0.104***        0.848***     0.880***     0.843***
                                                      (0.033)      (0.033)      (0.034)         (0.093)      (0.067)      (0.075)
    Number of firms                                     191          191          191             142          142           142
    Note: *** (**) (*) denotes significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level, respectively. All columns include industry
Notes:   *** and
    dummies     (**)a (*)    denotes
                       restricted  set ofsignificance
                                           noise controls.atColumns
                                                              the 1%,(1)5%     and
                                                                           to (3)     10%country
                                                                                  include   level, dummies.
                                                                                                     respectively.
                                                                                                                ColumnsColumns
                                                                                                                           (4) to (6) (1)
to (3)  include
    include         country
             also year           dummies.
                           dummies.             Columns
                                      "Management"            (4)standardized
                                                         is the    to (6) includevalue also
                                                                                        of theyear
                                                                                                Bloomdummies.
                                                                                                         and Van ”Management”
                                                                                                                   Reenen (2007)
    management
is the  standardizedscore, value
                             "Operations,
                                     of theMonitoring
                                              Bloom and    andVanTargets"
                                                                      Reenenand (2007)
                                                                                  "People" management
                                                                                             are subcomponentsscore,of”Operations,
                                                                                                                         the main
    management
Monitoring      andscore.  Noise controls
                      Targets”              are a reliability
                                    and ”People”              score assigned by the
                                                        are subcomponents           ofinterviewer
                                                                                        the mainatmanagement
                                                                                                      the end of the survey
                                                                                                                       score.week Noise
    and a dummy taking value one if the data was collected through the PA of the CEO, rather than the CEO himself, as
controls   are a reliability score assigned by the interviewer at the end of the survey week and a
    well a variable capturing the reliability of the management score (as assessed by the interviewer) and the duration of
dummy      taking
    the management   value     oneInifcolumns
                        interview.     the data      was
                                                (4) to      collected
                                                       (6) we  include atthrough     theofPA
                                                                           most 5 years    data of
                                                                                                 for the
                                                                                                     each CEO,
                                                                                                          firm andrather
                                                                                                                     build a than
                                                                                                                              simple the
CEO average across output and all inputs over this period. Industry controls are 1 digit SIC dummies. All columns by
       himself,    as   well   a  variable   capturing      the   reliability   of  the  management         score  (as   assessed
the weighted   by the and
     interviewer)        weektherepresentativeness
                                   duration of the   scoremanagement
                                                            assigned by the    CEO at theInend
                                                                             interview.            of the interview
                                                                                               columns      (4) to (6)week.
                                                                                                                          weErrors
                                                                                                                                include
    clustered at the  2  digit SIC level.
at most 5 years of data for each firm and build a simple average across output and all inputs
over this period. Industry controls are 1 digit SIC dummies. All columns weighted by the week
representativeness score assigned by the CEO at the end of the interview week. Errors clustered
at the 2 digit SIC level.




                                                                    57
