                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       INTERNATIONAL INFLATION SPILLOVERS THROUGH INPUT LINKAGES

                                      Raphael A. Auer
                                     Andrei A. Levchenko
                                        Philip Sauré

                                      Working Paper 23246
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23246


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2017




We are grateful to João Amador, Ariel Burstein, Stefan Gerlach, Sophie Guilloux-Nefussi,
Federico Mandelman, Paolo Surico, Ben Tomlin, and workshop participants at Bank for
International Settlements, De Nederlandsche Bank, European Central Bank, Swiss National
Bank, the SNB-IMF-IMF Economic Review conference on External Adjustment, the 2015 CEPR
ESSIM, the 2016 Joint Central Bank Conference, and the Bank of Lithuania-National Bank of
Poland-CEBRA-CEPR conference on Macroeconomic Interdependence in the Age of Global
Value Chains for helpful suggestions, and to Andreas Kropf, Bogdan Bogdanovic, Julian Ludwig,
Pierre Yves Deléamont, Gian Marco Humm, Barthélémy Bonadio, and Burcu Erik for excellent
research assistance. We would especially like to thank Christopher Otrok for sharing his factor
model estimation code with us. The views expressed in this study do not necessarily reflect those
of the Bank for International Settlements or the Swiss National Bank. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Raphael A. Auer, Andrei A. Levchenko, and Philip Sauré. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
International Inflation Spillovers Through Input Linkages
Raphael A. Auer, Andrei A. Levchenko, and Philip Sauré
NBER Working Paper No. 23246
March 2017
JEL No. F33,F41,F42

                                           ABSTRACT

We document that observed international input-output linkages contribute substantially to
synchronizing producer price inflation (PPI) across countries. Using a multi-country, industry-
level dataset that combines information on PPI and exchange rates with international and
domestic input-output linkages, we recover the underlying cost shocks that are propagated
internationally via the global input-output network, thus generating the observed dynamics of
PPI. We then compare the extent to which common global factors account for the variation in
actual PPI and in the underlying cost shocks. Our main finding is that across a range of
econometric tests, input-output linkages account for half of the global component of PPI inflation.
We report three additional findings: (i) the results are similar when allowing for imperfect cost
pass-through and demand complementarities; (ii) PPI synchronization across countries is driven
primarily by common sectoral shocks and input-output linkages amplify co-movement primarily
by propagating sectoral shocks; and (iii) the observed pattern of international input use preserves
fat-tailed idiosyncratic shocks and thus leads to a fat-tailed distribution of inflation rates, i.e.,
periods of disinflation and high inflation.

Raphael A. Auer                                   Philip Sauré
Bank for International Settlements                Swiss National Bank
Postfach CH-4002                                  Philip.Saure@snb.ch
Basel
Switzerland
raphael.auer@bis.org

Andrei A. Levchenko
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
611 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER
alev@umich.edu
1    Introduction

One of the most contentious issues in monetary policy is whether inflation rates are primarily
driven by national or international factors (see, e.g., Bernanke 2007, Carney 2015, Fischer 2015,
Draghi 2016). While it is well established that inflation comoves closely across countries, the
reasons for this positive comovement are not well understood. The international correlation of
inflation could be on the one hand due to common structural trends and similar policies, or on
the other hand to cross-country propagation of inflationary shocks via real and financial channels.
Different answers to the question of why inflation comoves across countries have far-reaching
implications for the conduct of national monetary policy and the scope for international monetary
co-operation. Understanding the mechanisms behind international inflation synchronization is
important for inflation forecasting, optimal monetary policy, international policy coordination,
and currency unions, among other areas (see, e.g., Corsetti, Dedola and Leduc 2010, Galı́ 2010).
    This paper documents that the cross-border propagation of cost shocks through input-output
linkages contributes substantially to synchronizing producer price inflation (PPI) across countries.
In the first step of the analysis, we recover the cost shocks that are consistent with observed price
dynamics and the global network of input-output trade. In the second step, we compare the extent
of global synchronization in observed PPI and the recovered cost shock series, and attribute the
difference to the impact of linkages.
    The following simple expression conveys the main idea. Abstracting from the sectoral dimen-
sion, suppose that country c’s production uses inputs from country e. Then, the log change in
the PPI of country c can be expressed as

                                  P
                                  [ P I c = γc,e × β × P
                                                       [ P Ie + C
                                                                bc ,                             (1)

where C
      bc is the change in the local costs in c (which could be due to changes in productivity,
prices of primary factors, or local intermediate inputs). The extent to which e’s inflation shocks
propagate to c is a product of two values: the cost share γc,e of inputs from e in the value of
output of c, and the cross-border pass-through β that governs how much of the local price change
in e is actually passed on to foreign buyers.
    We assemble a unique dataset that combines monthly disaggregated producer price indices
(P P Ic ) with data on sectoral domestic and international input trade from the World Input Output
Database (WIOD). The WIOD provides information on cross-border input shares γc,e by country
pair and sector pair. Our data cover 30 countries and 17 sectors over the period 1995-2011. The
baseline analysis assumes full pass-through of cost shocks to input buyers: β = 1. This allows us to
focus more squarely on the properties of the global input-output structure, and is an appropriate



                                                  1
benchmark in this context.1
       As a preliminary investigation, we simulate hypothetical inflation shocks and use the WIOD
to compute how they propagate across countries. The strength of international input-output
linkages is such that global inflation shocks transmit significantly into countries. On average, a
shock that raises inflation by 1% in the other countries in the world other than the country under
observation raises domestic PPI by 0.19%. There is substantial cross-country heterogeneity in the
extent to which international price changes affect domestic inflation. At the top end, there are
three countries with elasticities with respect to global inflation of over 0.3: Hungary, Belgium,
and the Czech Republic. Russia, Australia, Japan, and the US appear the least susceptible to
global inflation shocks, with elasticities in the range of 0.06-0.10. Similarly, the propagation of
shocks between individual countries is highly unbalanced. For instance, an inflationary shock
to Germany transmits with an elasticity of 0.11 to Hungary, the Czech Republic, and Austria,
whereas an inflationary shock to China transmits to Korea and Taiwan with an elasticity of 0.07.
Similar magnitudes characterize other closely integrated countries, such as the US, Canada, and
Mexico.
   The main analysis then examines the extent to which international input-output linkages affect
the comovement of actual PPI inflation (P
                                        [ P I c ). It uses a generalization of the relationship (1)
and data on the P [P I c and γc,e to recover the underlying cost shocks Cbc . It then compares the
extent of cross-country synchronization in the actual P [ P I c with the extent of synchronization
in the underlying cost shocks C  bc . The incremental increase in synchronization of actual P[P Ic
compared to C
            bc is then attributed to the cross-border propagation of inflationary shocks through
input linkages.2 Our quantification of inflation synchronization builds on Ciccarelli and Mojon
(2010) and Jackson, Kose, Otrok and Owyang (2015). The metrics of synchronization are based
on the share of the variance of a country’s inflation that is accounted for by either a single global
factor or by a finer set of global and sector factors.
       The main finding is that international input-output linkages matter a great deal for inflation
synchronization. The extent of synchronization of observed PPI is roughly double the level of
synchronization in the underlying cost shocks. For the median country, the global component
accounts for 51% of the variance of PPI, whereas the global component accounts for only 28%
of the variance of the cost shocks, according to the static factor analysis following Ciccarelli and
Mojon (2010). These differences are even more pronounced in the dynamic factor analysis.
       We next examine the channels through which global input-output linkages give rise to inflation
comovement. We investigate the role of exchange rate movements, pricing-to-market, and the
   1
    Section 4.1.1 provides the detailed discussion and presents results under different assumptions on pass-through.
   2
    The approach is akin to Foerster, Sarte and Watson (2011)’s analysis of the role of input linkages in US sectoral
output comovement.



                                                         2
heterogeneity in cross-border input linkages in generating inflation comovement.
   Exchange rate movements play no role in synchronizing inflation across countries. In a coun-
terfactual that ignores exchange rate movements when recovering the underlying shocks, the
common component in the recovered cost shocks is approximately the same as in the baseline.
Because the exchange rate is a relative price and a bilateral exchange rate movement thus tends
to increase prices in one country but decrease them in another, one would expect exchange rate
movements to result in less synchronization. However, it could also be the case that exchange
rates are correlated among subgroups of countries, thereby also affecting inflation comovement.
In our sample, these effects appear to balance and exchange rates have no net impact on the
extent of synchronization.
   The degree of pricing-to-market also does not play a large role in inflation synchronization.
We implement a scenario that features price complementarities following Burstein and Gopinath
(2015), such that each seller’s pricing rule is a function of both its cost shock (with elasticity β),
and the prices of all other sellers supplying that market (with elasticity 1 − β). Under both a
mid-range value of β = 2/3, and a low-end value of β = 1/3, the recovered cost shocks exhibit if
anything even less synchronization than in the baseline. Thus, the main result that input linkages
contribute substantially to synchronization is unchanged when allowing for pricing-to-market.
   We next document that the heterogeneity in the input coefficients across sectors and countries
contributes modestly to international comovement. We compute two different counterfactual PPIs
that would arise under the baseline recovered cost shocks, but in a world in which there was no
sectoral or country heterogeneity in input linkages, and examine comovement of the resulting
counterfactual PPIs. That is, we quantify the extent of global comovement under the cost shocks
inferred in the baseline but fed through a different input-output structure. The first counterfactual
eliminates differences across sectors but keeps differences across countries. Specifically, for each
importer-exporter country pair, sectoral input use is set equal to the average input use. The
second counterfactual in addition eliminates differences across foreign source countries. That is,
for each importing country, sectoral imported input use is set equal to the average imported
input use. The global factor explains 10–20% less of the variation in these counterfactual PPIs
compared to the observed PPIs, suggesting that input linkage heterogeneity itself – over and above
the average level of linkages – does contribute to global inflation synchronization.
   Our baseline procedure infers the underlying cost shocks from PPI data and the extent of input
linkages. We supplement the main analysis by collecting direct data on one type of underlying
cost: unit labor costs (ULC). These data are available only at quarterly frequency and for only 26
out of 30 countries in our sample. We assess the extent of synchronization in ULCs using the same
three metrics of synchronization as for our PPI and cost shocks. The extent of synchronization
in ULC is if anything lower than in the baseline cost shocks, and much closer to the cost shocks

                                                  3
than to actual PPI. Thus, direct measurement confirms the main finding of the paper.
      Finally, we document that PPI synchronization across countries is driven by common sectoral
shocks and that input-output linkages amplify comovement primarily by propagating sectoral
shocks. We implement a dynamic factor model that decomposes the underlying sector-level PPI
fluctuations into the global, sectoral, and country factors following the methodology developed in
Jackson et al. (2015). In this model, international comovement in PPI could be due to a common
global factor affecting all PPI series or to sectoral factors that are also common across countries.
The first main result is that global PPI comovement is not accounted for by global shocks (i.e.,
shocks to all sectors and all countries) but rather by sectoral ones (i.e., shocks to a specific sector
in all countries conditional on the global shock). Second, international input-output linkages
increase global comovement by increasing the share of the variance explained by sectoral shocks.
These results are consistent with the view that global comovement arises due to idiosyncratic
developments in individual sectors such as the energy or transportation equipment industries,
which spill over both across borders and sectors via input-output linkages, thereby synchronizing
national PPIs.
      The last part of the paper assesses the role of global input linkages in transmitting tail inflation
risks. Acemoglu, Ozdaglar and Tahbaz-Salehi (2017) emphasize that input-output linkages can
generate macroeconomic tail risks if the structure of the input-output matrix is such that a few
sectors play a disproportionately important role as input suppliers. We show that country-level
inflation rates have fat tails, when measured against a normal benchmark. These fat tails in
actual inflation are inherited from the underlying cost shocks, which are themselves significantly
more fat-tailed than a normal distribution. Comparing the distributions of actual PPI and the
underlying cost shocks, it appears that the IO matrix only modestly dampens the underlying tail
risks, as the PPI is only modestly less fat-tailed than the cost shocks. However, this finding is
itself evidence that the structure of input linkages is such that the fat-tailed shocks are preserved.3
      Our analysis contributes to the literature on cross-border inflation synchronization and its
determinants. Monacelli and Sala (2009), Burstein and Jaimovich (2012), Andrade and Zachari-
adis (2016), and Beck, Hubrich and Marcellino (2016) study the comovement of international
prices using sectoral and regional inflation data, while Ciccarelli and Mojon (2010), Mumtaz and
Surico (2009, 2012) and Mumtaz, Simonelli and Surico (2011) examine the role of aggregate real
linkages in inflation comovement. Borio and Filardo (2007) and Bianchi and Civelli (2015) ad-
dress the related question of the extent to which global output gaps affect domestic inflation
dynamics. Bems and Johnson (2012, 2015) and Patel, Wang and Wei (2014) combine data on
global input linkages with domestic prices and exchange rates to construct theoretically founded
  3
     Acemoglu et al. (2017) show that a more “balanced” IO matrix would average out fat-tailed shocks and yield
inflation outcomes well-approximated by a normal distribution.



                                                      4
measures of real exchange rates. Also related is the literature on the role of input linkages in
business cycle synchronization more broadly (see, e.g., Kose and Yi 2006, Burstein, Kurz and
Tesar 2008, di Giovanni and Levchenko 2010, Johnson 2014).
        The role of input linkages for inflation synchronization is receiving increasing attention. Auer
and Sauré (2013) and Antoun de Almeida (2016) adapt the approach of di Giovanni and Levchenko
(2010) to examine whether sector pairs trading more intensively with one another display greater
inflation synchronization. Auer, Borio and Filardo (2017) present evidence that cross-border
trade in intermediate goods and services is the main channel through which global economic
slack influences domestic CPI inflation. Our approach accounts not only for direct cross-country
spillovers through input linkages but also spillovers that travel through third markets.
        The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the conceptual frame-
work and the empirical strategy. Section 3 describes the data and the basic features of the world
input-output matrix, and Section 4 reports the main results. Sections 5 and 6 present the exercises
of implementing the model on sector-level data and of computing inflation tail risks, respectively.
Section 7 concludes.


2        Conceptual Framework

There are N countries, indexed by c and e, and S sectors, indexed by s and u. The world is
characterized by global input linkages: sector u producing output in country c has a cost function

                                           Wc,u,t = W (Cc,u,t , pc,u,t ),

where pc,u,t ≡ {pc,u,e,s,t }s=1,...,S
                            e=1,...,N is the vector of prices of inputs from all possible source countries
e and sectors s paid by sector u in country c. Input prices pc,u,e,s,t are indexed by the purchasing
country-sector to reflect the fact that prices actually paid by each sector in each country for a
given input may differ. The cost of value added is denoted by Cc,u,t . This cost embodies the wage
bill and the cost of capital.4
        Standard steps using Shephard’s Lemma yield the following first-order approximation for the
change in the cost function:
                                                              X
                               cc,u,t ≈ γ C
                               W         c,u,t−1 Cc,u,t +           γc,u,e,s,t−1 pbc,u,e,s,t ,                    (2)
                                                 b
                                                              e,s

    4
     In the exposition that follows, as a shorthand we refer to Cc,u,t as the cost of value added. As the PPI data
used in the empirical implementation only cover industrial sectors, in the analysis below Cc,u,t actually includes the
cost of any inputs that are not in the set of sectors that comprise the PPI (such as service sector inputs). Section
4.2 and Appendix B present two robustness checks on this approach, and show that accounting in different ways
for shock transmission through sectors outside of PPI if anything strengthens the results.




                                                          5
where the hat denotes proportional change (b                                        C
                                           xt = xt /xt−1 − 1). In this expression, γc,u,t−1 is the
share of value added in the value of total output and γc,u,e,s,t−1 is the share of expenditure on
input e,s by sector-country c,u in the value of total output of sector c,u at time t − 1.
    To apply this expression to the data, we make two assumptions. First, the percentage change
in the producer price index as measured in the data is proportional to the change in the cost
function:
                                                P
                                                [ P I c,u,t = β W
                                                                cc,u,t .                                   (3)

The proportionality constant β can be less than 1 to account for imperfect pass-through of cost
shocks to prices. This assumption allows for the possibility of variable markups: producers do
not fully pass the cost shocks to the consumers. Two settings in which the cost pass-through is
complete (β = 1) are marginal cost pricing and constant markups over marginal cost.
    Second, the change in the price paid by producers in c,u for inputs from e,s is given by
                                                                         
                                          pbc,u,e,s,t = β Wce,s,t + E
                                                                    bc,e,t ,                               (4)

where E
      bc,e,t is the change in the exchange rate between c and e. That is, the changes in prices
paid by c,u for inputs are proportional to the change in the cost function of the input-supplying
sector W
       ce,s,t and the change in the exchange rate.


2.1    Recovering Underlying Cost Shocks

The cost shock C
               bc,u,t for each country c and sector u is then recovered directly, based on combining
equations (2), (3), and (4):
                                                                                                   !
                             1        P P I c,u,t −                             P P I e,s,t
                                       [                 X                       [
               C
               bc,u,t =
                           C
                                                                 βγc,u,e,s,t−1               +E
                                                                                              bc,e,t  .   (5)
                          γc,u,t−1         β                                        β
                                                       e∈N,s∈S


In this expression, P             bc,e,t , γc,u,e,s,t−1 , and γ C
                      P I c,u,t , E                            c,u,t−1 are all taken directly from the data.
                    [
    It will be convenient to express (5) in matrix notation:
                                                   "                         #
                                              −1                 PPI
                                                                 [
                                                                 0        0
                                      C
                                      b =D             (I − βΓ )     − βΓ
                                                                        eE  b .                            (6)
                                                                  β

C     [ are the N S × 1 vectors of all country-sector cost shocks and PPIs. The matrix Γ is
b and PPI
the N S × N S global input-output matrix, the ij’th element of which is the share of spending on
input i in the total value of sector j’s output, where i and j index country-sectors. Finally, D is
                                                            C
a N S × N S diagonal matrix whose diagonal entries are the γc,u,t−1 coefficients.



                                                             6
   In the last term,                                   
                                             E
                                             b1,t
                                      b =  ...  ⊗ 1S×1 
                                                       
                                      E                
                                            EN,t
                                             b

where Ebc,t a N × 1 vector of exchange rate changes experienced by country c relative to its trading
partners, and thus E b is the N N S × 1 vector of stacked exchange rate changes that only vary by
                         e 0 is:
country pair. The matrix Γ
                                               0
                                                                       
                                          Γ  0                 ...    0
                                         1   0                         
                                      0  0 Γ2                  0    ...
                                    Γ =
                                    e                                  ,                      (7)
                                        0   0                 ...    0 
                                                                        
                                                                      0
                                          0 ...                 0    ΓN

       0
with Γc defined as the S × N S matrix whose rows are country c’s rows of Γ0 . To streamline
notation, the time subscripts are suppressed in the matrix notation.
    Equation (5) is used together with monthly frequency PPI data to recover the underlying
cost shocks C
            bc,u,t for every country, sector, and month. Equation (5) does not involve any lags,
amounting to the assumption that imported inputs are shipped and used within the month.
Monthly data exhibit seasonality that potentially differs by country and sector, and correcting
explicitly for such seasonality is not feasible in our data. Thus, we follow the common practice of
transforming both the actual PPI data and the underlying cost shock data into 12-month changes:

                                                   11
                                                   Y
                              P\
                               P I12c,u,t =             (1 + P
                                                             [ P I c,u,t−τ ) − 1
                                               τ =0

and
                                               11
                                               Y
                                   C12
                                   d c,u,t =               bc,u,t−τ ) − 1.
                                                      (1 + C
                                               τ =0

   The ultimate object of interest is the country-level rather than sector-level inflation. With
that objective, we aggregate sectoral PPI series and cost shocks using sectoral output weights:
                                                    X
                                   P\
                                    P I12c,t =               ωc,u P\
                                                                   P I12c,u,t                   (8)
                                                    u∈S

and
                                                    X
                                      C12
                                      d c,t =             ωc,u C12
                                                               d c,u,t ,                        (9)
                                                   u∈S

where ωc,u is the share of sector u in the total output of country c. We employ the sectoral output
weights from 2002, the year closest to the middle of the sample.


                                                         7
       The object in (8) has a clear interpretation: it is the aggregate PPI of country c. The aggregate
PPI series we build track closely (though not perfectly) the official aggregate PPIs in our sample
of countries.5 The object in (9) is the output-share-weighted composite cost shock in country c.
It can be interpreted as the PPI in country c in the counterfactual world without input linkages
in production. For maximum consistency between the two measures, the construction of C12   d c,t
uses the same sectoral weights ωc,u as that of P\
                                                P I12c,t . This approach ignores the possibility
that in the absence of input linkages, output shares would be different. Without a full-fledged
model calibrated with all of the relevant elasticities, it would be impractical to specify a set
of counterfactual output shares. Our approach has the virtue of transparency and maximum
comparability between the actual PPIs and the counterfactual cost measures.

2.2      Metrics of Synchronization

We employ three metrics for the extent of international synchronization in P\
                                                                            P I12c,t and C12
                                                                                         d c,t .
It is important to emphasize that these are simply statistical devices that summarize the extent
of the comovement in a data sample. The first, following Ciccarelli and Mojon (2010), is the R2
of the regression of each country’s P\
                                     P I12c,t and C12
                                                  d c,t on the corresponding unweighted global
average of the same measure (excluding the country itself).
       The second and third are based on estimating a factor model on the panel of PPI and cost
shock series:
                                             Xc,t = λc Ft + c,t ,                                         (10)

where the left-hand side variable Xc,t is, alternatively, P\
                                                           P I12c,t or C12
                                                                       d c,t . According to (10),
the cross-section of inflation rates/cost shocks at any t is equal to a factor Ft common to all
countries times a country-specific, non-time-varying coefficient λc , plus a country-specific idiosyn-
cratic shock c,t . None of the objects on the right-hand side of (10) are observed, but they can be
estimated. As is customary, the factor analysis is implemented after standardizing each country’s
data to have mean zero and standard deviation 1. This ensures that countries with more volatile
inflation rates do not have a disproportionate impact on the estimated values of the common fac-
tor. After estimating the factor model, the metric for synchronization is the share of the variance
of inflation in country c accounted for by the global factor Ft : V ar(λc Ft )/V ar(Xc,t ).
       We implement two variations of (10). The first is a static factor model in which the parameters
are recovered through principal components, as in Ciccarelli and Mojon (2010). The second is a
dynamic factor model based on Jackson et al. (2015) in which both Ft and c,t are assumed to
   5
    In our sample of countries, the mean correlation between our constructed aggregate PPI and the official PPI,
in 12 month changes, is 0.70, and the median is 0.83. The minimum is 0.02 for Bulgaria, which experienced
hyperinflation between 1995 and 1998 (after 1998, the correlation for Bulgaria is 0.76). The maximum is 0.99
(Japan).



                                                       8
follow AR(p) processes:

                                               X
                                     Ft =               φl Ft−l + ut                         (11)
                                             l=1..pF
                                             X
                                   c,t =             ρc,l c,t−l + µc,t .                   (12)
                                            l=1..p

The precise implementation of the Bayesian estimation of this model’s parameters is a simplified
special case of the more general one described in Section 5 below.


3      Data and Basic Patterns
3.1    Data

The empirical implementation requires data on (i) industry-level PPI and (ii) cross-border input-
output linkages. A contribution of our paper is the construction of a cross-country panel dataset
of monthly sectoral producer prices that can be merged with existing datasets on input-output
use.
    The PPI data were collected from international and national sources.        The frequency is
monthly. The PPI series come from the Eurostat database for those countries covered by it.
Because many important countries (the US, Canada, Japan, China) are not in Eurostat, we
collected PPI data for these countries from national sources, such as the BLS for the US and
StatCan for Canada. Unfortunately, the sectoral classifications outside of Eurostat tend to be
country-specific and require manual harmonization.
    Information on input linkages comes the World Input-Output database (WIOD) described in
Timmer, Dietzenbacher, Los, Stehrer and de Vries (2015), which provides a global input-output
matrix. It reports, for each country and output sector, input usage broken down by source sector
and country. The WIOD is available at yearly frequency and covers approximately 40 countries.
Merging the PPI and WIOD databases required further harmonization of the country and sector
coverage. The sectoral classification of the original PPI series are concorded to a classification
that can be merged with the WIOD database, which uses two-letter categories that correspond
to the ISIC (rev. 2) sectoral classification. Appendix Table A1 shows the conversion tables used
in the process.
    The final sample includes 30 countries plus a composite Rest of the World (ROW) category,
17 tradable sectors, and runs from 1995m1 to 2011m12. Appendix Table A2 reports the list of
countries and sectors used in the analysis. Additionally, some countries are included in the “Rest
of the World” category because of an excessive share (> 0.4) of missing data in the PPI. These
are summarized in Appendix Table A3.


                                                       9
   The empirical methodology requires a balanced sample of countries×sectors×months, necessi-
tating some interpolation. When the original PPI frequency is quarterly, the monthly PPI levels
are interpolated from the quarterly information. Other missing PPI observations are extrapolated
using a regression of a series inflation on seasonal monthly dummies (e.g., a missing observation for
January is set to the average January inflation for that series). If a country-sector series is missing
over the entire time horizon (9 cases out of the 527 series), its inflation values are extrapolated
based on the rest of the country’s series. Overall, 9.8% of the PPI values are extrapolated.
   An important feature of the PPI index is that it only covers the industrial sector in the
majority of countries. Thus, service sector prices are not included in the analysis.
   Figure 1 reports the share of foreign inputs in the overall input usage in each country. On
average in this sample of countries, 0.4 of the total input usage comes from foreign inputs, but
there is considerable variation, from less than 0.2 for Russia, China, and Japan to nearly 0.8 for
Belgium. Figure 2 reports the cross-sectoral variation in the same measure, defined as the share
of imported inputs in the total input usage in a particular sector worldwide. Sectors differ in their
input intensity, with over 0.4 of all inputs being imported in the Coke and Petroleum sector but
only approximately 0.1 in the Food and Beverages sector.
   Figure 3 gives a sense of the time variation in the intensity of foreign input usage. The share
of foreign inputs in total input purchases rose from approximately 0.2 to nearly 0.3 from 1995 to
the eve of the Great Trade Collapse and then fell to 0.24.

3.2   Tracing Inflation Shocks Through Input Linkages

Before using the PPI data in the estimation of the common factors, we use the WIOD to examine
the nature of the cross-border input-output linkages. We make use of the relation (6) to go
from the shocks to the resulting PPI. This requires solving for the equilibrium PPI series using
the Leontief inverse. Stacking countries and sectors, assuming full-pass-through (β = 1), and
ignoring exchange rate movements, the equilibrium PPI series given a vector of cost shocks are
as follows:
                                                       −1
                                       [ = I − Γ0
                                       PPI                   DC.
                                                              b                                   (13)

   To gauge the extent to which input linkages propagate inflationary shocks, we feed into the
world input-output matrix several hypothetical underlying cost shocks C.
                                                                      b The first set are infla-
tionary shocks to three largest economies in the world: the US, Japan, and China. In the case
of the US, for instance, these are shocks to C
                                             b that lead to a PPI inflation of 1% in the US. By
construction, only US entries of the cost shock C
                                                b are non-zero: the assumption is that only the
US experiences a shock. Nonetheless, other countries’ PPIs can react to the US shock because
the US sectors are part of the global value chain (equation 13). Another shock we feed in is a


                                                  10
worldwide 10% shock to the energy sector, intended to simulate an increase in oil prices. Note
that the magnitude and sign of the shock do not matter in this exercise, as evidenced by the
linear system (13), so these could be deflationary shocks to the key countries or declines in energy
prices.
   Figure 4 presents the results. Several conclusions are noteworthy. First, the foreign impact
of a cost shock to an individual country is quantitatively limited. A 1% inflation rate in the US
produces inflation of approximately one-tenth that amount in Canada and Mexico, by far the
most closely connected economies to the US. In 5 other countries, the impact is 0.02% or greater,
or one-fiftieth of US inflation. In nearly half the countries, the impact is smaller than 0.01%, or
one-hundredth of US inflation. The pattern is similar for the Japanese and Chinese shocks. In
each case, there are 2-3 countries with an inflation rate of approximately one-tenth of the country
being subjected to the shock, while the rest of the sample experiences small inflation changes.
   Figure 5 presents the generalization of these three subfigures, by plotting the proportional
impact of an inflationary shock affecting each source country on each destination country in the
sample. That is, it reports
                                            ∆P P Idest
                                           ∆P P Isource
when source is the country experiencing an inflation shock. To make the plot more readable, we
drop the own impact entries (source = dest), which accounts for the “blank” spots on the graph.
The source countries are sorted from most to least important in average outward impact, and the
same is done for destination countries.
   The impact of inflationary shocks is highly heterogeneous across both sources and destinations.
Inflationary shocks to some countries, such as Lithuania, Greece, Slovenia, or Bulgaria, have
virtually no discernible impact on inflation in other countries. This is because those countries are
not important input suppliers to other countries. At the other end of the spectrum, the top 5
countries in terms of their impact on foreign inflation are Germany, China, Russia, the US, and
Italy. Germany’s impact is both highest on average (0.04 of ∆P P Idest /∆P P IDEU when averaging
over dest) across the whole sample and the most diffuse. For 10 countries (all of which are in
Europe), the impact is above 0.05, and for the top 3 – Hungary, the Czech Republic, and Austria
– the impact is above 0.1. Russia’s impact is approximately half of Germany’s (0.02) and more
concentrated, with only 2 countries – Lithuania and Bulgaria – with an impact of over 0.05.
   It is not surprising that the bilateral impact of an inflationary shock is limited. A related
question is whether global inflation shocks transmit significantly into countries. We thus consider
an experiment in which, for each country, we generate a shock that raises inflation by an average
of 1% in all the other countries in the world. Figure 6 reports the results. Global inflationary
shocks can have substantial impacts on country-level inflation. On average, a 1% shock to global


                                                11
PPI inflation leads to a 0.19% increase in domestic PPI. There is substantial heterogeneity, and at
the top end, there are 3 countries that exhibit elasticities with respect to global inflation of over
0.3: Belgium, Hungary, and the Czech Republic. Russia, Australia, Japan, and the US appear
the least susceptible to global inflation shocks, with impacts in the range 0.06-0.10.
    The last panel of Figure 4 reports the global impact of a 10% global energy sector shock.
Unsurprisingly, as the shock is global, the impact is much stronger and much more widespread.
Nonetheless, it is also remarkable how much heterogeneity there is, from a 3.5% impact in Lithua-
nia and Russia to 0.3% in Ireland and Slovenia.


4    Input Linkages and Global Inflation Comovement

This section reports the main inflation synchronization results. To do so, we need to take a stand
on the degree of pass-through of the price and exchange rate shocks into producer prices. We
present the baseline results under full pass-through of cost shocks: β = 1. A value of β close to
1 is consistent with some recent micro estimates of input cost shock pass-through at the border.
Closest to our framework, Ahn, Park and Park (2016) construct effective input price indices using
sector-level price and input usage data and show that the pass-through of imported input price
shocks to domestic producer prices is nearly 1 for European countries and 0.7 for Korea. Berman,
Martin and Mayer (2012) find that the exchange rate pass-through into import prices is close to
complete (0.93) and considerably higher than that into the prices of consumer goods. Similarly,
Amiti, Itskhoki and Konings (2014) document that for non-importing Belgian firms, exchange
rate pass-through into export prices is close to 1, again suggesting that exporters transmit their
cost shocks almost fully to buyers. Section 4.1.1 returns to the question of pass-through, and
examines the sensitivity of the results to the various assumptions on imperfect pass-through.
  Table 1 reports the main results. Panel A reports the R2 metric, Panel B the static factor
model metric, and Panel C the dynamic factor model metric. The columns labeled P\   P I12c,t
present the results for the actual PPI. We confirm that there is considerable global synchronization
in PPI, just as was found for CPI in previous work. The simple average of other countries’ inflation
produces an average R2 of 0.365 at the mean and 0.317 at the median in this sample of countries.
The global static factor accounts for 0.463 of the variance of the average country’s inflation at the
mean and 0.511 at the median. The dynamic factor delivers very similar averages: 0.447 at the
mean and 0.488 at the median.
    The three methods thus reveal quite similar levels of synchronization in actual PPI. They also
produce similar answers regarding the cross-country variation. In the cross-section of countries,
the R2 metric has a nearly 0.9 correlation with both the static and the dynamic variance shares.
The static and dynamic variance shares have a 0.997 correlation across countries. According


                                                 12
to all three measures, there is a fair bit of country heterogeneity around these averages, with
Spain, Germany, and Italy being the most synchronized countries according to both metrics, and
Romania, Slovenia, and Korea at the other extreme.
  The columns labeled C12
                        d c,t present the same statistics for the cost shocks, and the columns
labeled “Difference” report the simple difference between the metrics for PPI and the cost shocks.
It is clear that input linkages have considerable potential to explain observed synchronization in
PPI. The average R2 for the cost shocks falls to 0.166 (mean) and 0.122 (median). The static
global factor explains 0.294 (mean) and 0.281 (median) of the variation in C12
                                                                           d c,t for the average
country, and the dynamic factor explains 0.253 (mean) and 0.239 (median).
   The difference between synchronization metrics for C12
                                                      d c,t and P\
                                                                 P I12c,t can be interpreted as
the contribution of global input linkages to the observed inflation synchronization. According to
the most modest metric – the static factor – input linkages account for 37% (45%) of observed
synchronization at the mean (median). The R2 metric implies the largest contribution, with
input linkages responsible for 54% (62%) of observed synchronization at the mean (median). The
dynamic factor results lie in between.

4.1     Understanding the Mechanisms

We now perform a battery of alternative experiments designed to better understand the mech-
anisms behind the results. Namely, we examine the role of exchange rates; the importance of
incomplete pass-through; and the nature of domestic and international linkages. Section 5 esti-
mates the relative roles of global and sectoral shocks.

4.1.1    Imperfect Pass-Through and Pricing-to-Market

We begin by evaluating the role of exchange rates in the baseline results. Examining equation
(5) that states how the cost shocks are recovered, it is clear that the procedure assumes that
exchange rate shocks are transmitted to the input-importing country with the same intensity as
price shocks. That is, a change in the local cost of the foreign input-supplying country is simply
additive with the change in the exchange rate. While to us this appears to be the most natural
case to consider, it is possible that the pass-through of exchange rate shocks is different from
the pass-through of marginal cost shocks. It is also well-known that exchange rates are much
more volatile than price levels, and thus, when we in effect recover the cost shocks as linear
combinations of price and exchange rate changes, the variability in exchange rates can dominate
and make the cost shocks more volatile. Note that this will not mechanically reduce comovement
in the cost shocks compared to PPIs, as both data samples are standardized prior to applying
factor analysis.



                                                13
       To determine the role of exchange rate shocks in our results, we carry out the same analysis of
recovering the cost shocks and extracting a common component, while ignoring the exchange rate
movements. Note that this is deliberately an extreme case: exchange rate pass-through is positive
according to virtually all available estimates, whereas here we in effect set it to zero and retain
only the PPI changes as cost shocks. Table 2 presents the results. To facilitate comparison across
scenarios, the top panel of the table reproduces from Table 1 the mean and median of the R2 ’s
and of the shares of variance accounted for the static and dynamic factors for actual PPI and the
baseline recovered cost shocks. The panel labeled “Alt. cost shocks: No Ebc,e,t ” reports the results
ignoring exchange rate movements. It turns out that doing so leaves the implied contribution of
input linkages to inflation synchronization virtually unchanged. According to all three metrics,
the variance shares of the global factor for cost shocks recovered while ignoring exchange rates
are quite similar to the baseline.
       An active literature has explored the role of demand complementarities and pricing-to-market
in the determination of international prices and exchange rate pass-through (Dornbusch 1987,
Atkeson and Burstein 2008). Under some market structures and demand systems, firms set their
prices as a function of both their cost shocks and the prices of other firms serving a particular
market. In other words, instead of (4), prices and costs have the following relationship:

                                pbc,u,e,s,t = β(W        bc,e,t ) + (1 − β)Pbc,u,t
                                                ce,s,t + E                                                     (14)

where
                                                    X
                                        Pbc,u,t =         σc,u,e,s,t−1 pbc,u,e,s,t                             (15)
                                                    e,s

                                       C
and σc,u,e,s,t−1 = γc,u,e,s,t−1 /(1 − γc,u,t−1 ) is the market share of good e, s in market c, u (see, e.g.
Burstein and Gopinath 2015).6 Since in this formulation all prices depend on all the other prices,
extracting the cost shocks from observed PPI series is more challenging, but can still be done in
one step. Appendix A presents the detailed derivations.
       We implement the counterfactuals allowing for price complementarities under two alternative
values for β: 1/3 and 2/3. This range for β reflects the considerable uncertainty in the literature
regarding the correct value for the pass-through coefficient. For example, Goldberg and Campa
(2010) report an estimate of the exchange rate pass-through rate into import price indices of 0.61
in a sample of 19 advanced economies, and Burstein and Gopinath (2015) report an updated
estimate of 0.69. However, pass-through into import prices is estimated to be much lower when
   6
    In this formulation, the “market” defined by price complementarities is all the inputs purchased by sector u in
country c, rather than the entire country c. This assumption is important for tractability, but implies that markets
are segmented between input-purchasing sectors in each country. This would be the case, for instance, if inputs
are sufficiently customized that the input-purchasing sector cannot arbitrage away price differences across sectors
within its country.


                                                            14
looking at individual import prices. For example, Burstein and Gopinath (2015) report an average
pass-through rate of 0.28 in the large micro dataset underlying the official US import price indices.7
    The panels labeled “Pricing complementarity” in Table 2 report the results for the different
values of β. If anything, allowing for pricing-to-market reduces the amount synchronization in C.
                                                                                               b
According to all three of our metrics, a smaller share of variance in these recovered cost shocks
is explained by the common factor than in the baseline, though the magnitudes are similar. The
results are also not sensitive to whether we set β to 1/3 or 2/3. A priori, we would have expected
that the role of imported inputs for the synchronization of inflation rates is decreasing in β. Under
price complementarities, however, the cost shocks to foreign countries and sectors seem to interact
in such a way that the aggregate impact of cost shocks is reinforced. Therefore, as β decreases,
the higher price complementarities thus seem to offset the reduced impact of direct cross-border
spillovers.
    We contrast these results with a simpler alternative, in which pass-through is imperfect but
there are no demand complementarities. That is, the pricing rule is given by (4) with β strictly
less than 1. We refer to this scenario as “mechanical pass-through,” and report the results in the
bottom two panels of Table 2, for the same two values of β as above. Under mechanical incomplete
pass-through, the results are sensitive to β, and imply a smaller contribution of input linkages to
synchronization when β is substantially less than 1. This is sensible: equation (5) makes it clear
that a lower β by construction reduces the difference between P[P I c,u,t and C
                                                                              bc,u,t . Because under
lower pass-through the two series become more similar, the share of variance explained by the
global factor also becomes more similar.
    The difference between these results and the ones with demand complementarities is stark.
Whereas lower mechanical pass through rates imply a smaller impact of input linkages on inflation
synchronization, that is not the case once we use a realistic pricing-to-market framework taking
into account that more limited pass-through also means a higher degree of price complementarities.
Imperfect cost pass-through and price complementarities interact in such a way that allowing for
pricing-to-market does not change the magnitude of the contribution of input linkages to inflation
   7
     See also Gopinath and Rigobon (2008) or Auer and Schoenle (2016). Note however that studies examining
the response of highly disaggregated firm-and-product-specific unit values to the exchange rate obtain much larger
pass-through coefficients (Berman et al. 2012, Amiti et al. 2014). The discrepancy between the pass-through
for individual goods and that for aggregate series may relate to the difficulty of handling product substitutions
in microeconomic data and of aggregating microeconomic price fluctuations into import price indices when the
bundle of goods is non-constant (see Nakamura and Steinsson 2012, Gagnon, Mandel and Vigfusson 2014). In this
context, an important finding is that of Cavallo, Neiman and Rigobon (2014), who focus on the relative price of
newly introduced products and document that the relative price of identical new goods introduced in two different
markets tracks the nominal exchange rate with an elasticity of approximately 0.7. A further difficulty concerns the
distinction between exchange rate and cost pass-through. While the literature has yielded a range of estimates for
exchange rate pass-through, there is comparatively little work on the pass-through of cost shocks or on how the
import content of exports affects pass-through (for exceptions, see Auer and Mehrotra, 2014 and Amiti, Itskhoki
and Konings, 2014, 2016).



                                                        15
comovement.

4.1.2   Heterogeneity in International Input Linkages

Next, we evaluate the role of heterogeneity in input usage across countries and sectors for syn-
chronizing national inflation rates. To this end, we construct two counterfactual scenarios for PPI
under “balanced” input-output linkages. The first scenario preserves the cross-country hetero-
geneity in input linkages but assumes that within each pair of importer-exporter countries, there
are no differences across sectors. That is, we assume a counterfactual input-output matrix Γ0b1
with the following elements:
                                          b1             1         X
                                         γc,u,e,s =                        γc,k,e,l .
                                                         S2
                                                              k∈S,l∈S

That is, for any pair of countries c and e, there is an S × S matrix of input usage that gives
how much of country e’s inputs by sector are used in country c’s output in each sector. This
counterfactual, labeled “b1”, suppresses sectoral heterogeneity within each country-pair. It is
designed to mimic a one-sector model, in which countries use one another’s aggregate inputs to
produce a single output.
   The second counterfactual instead focuses on cross-country heterogeneity. It implements a
counterfactual scenario in which the input-output matrix Γ0b2 is assumed to have the elements
                                       
                                         1      P
                                       
                                        S2
                                                       γc,k,e,l                           if c = e
                         b2                   k∈S,l∈S
                        γc,u,e,s   =
                                             1                 P
                                       
                                        (N −1)S 2
                                                                             γc,k,e0 ,l   if c 6= e
                                                     k∈S,l∈S,e0 ∈N \{c}


That is, it assumes that all domestic linkages are equal to the average domestic linkage observed
in the data and that all international linkages for all sectors and countries are equal to the average
international linkage. Finally, these counterfactual γ values are rescaled such that the total share
                                                     C remains the same as in the baseline, to
of value added in output in each sector and country γc,u
avoid confounding the heterogeneity in input linkages per se with overall input intensity.
   The counterfactual PPI is given by

                                                                               e0
                                                                   −1                   
                        [ counter = I − Γ0counter
                        PPI                                                DC
                                                                            b +Γ
                                                                                counter E
                                                                                        b ,            (16)

for counter = {b1, b2}, where Γ
                              e counter is the counterfactual version of (7), which uses the elements
of the counterfactual Γ matrix instead of the actual values. Just as in the baseline analysis,
equation (16) assumes that all βs equal 1.
   The panels “Balanced 1” and “Balanced 2” of Table 3 report the results. The variance shares
accounted for by the common factors are lower than for the actual PPI in these counterfactuals,


                                                              16
but these values are closer to the actual PPI than to the baseline cost shocks. The magnitudes
also differ somewhat across metrics. The difference between the balanced counterfactual PPIs
and the actual PPIs is highest according to the R2 metric, with the mean R2 being 33% lower
in the Balanced 1 scenario and 16% lower in the Balanced 2 than the data. The factor models
imply smaller differences, only approximately 20% for Balanced 1 and less than 10% for Balanced
2. Indeed, comparing medians in the Balanced 2 scenario, there is actually a small increase in
the common component relative to the baseline. This suggests there may be some role for the
input linkage heterogeneity in generating the observed comovement, but that the average overall
linkages per se represent the single most important mechanism.

4.2      Robustness

A potential concern with our procedure is that not all sectors in WIOD are covered by PPI data.
Thus, our baseline procedure will miss the transmission of price shocks through sectors for which
PPI data are not available. For instance, if a sector uses imported service inputs, and there is an
inflationary shock to services abroad, that would not be captured by our procedure. Similarly, if a
PPI sector uses domestic service inputs, and the domestic service sector uses foreign intermediates,
then the foreign inflationary shock will be transmitted indirectly through the domestic service
sector. We do not have data for the full set of sectors available in WIOD. Nonetheless, to assess
the importance of these omitted sectors, we perform the following two exercises.
       First, we repeat the analysis using all of the sectors in WIOD, and attributing the overall
PPI inflation to the sectors for which actual sectoral PPI data are not available. This procedure
captures the transmission of non-PPI sector shocks under the assumption that the non-PPI sectors
experience similar inflation as PPI sectors in each country, at least when it comes to the high-
frequency movements. The panel “Imputed service prices” of Table 3 presents the results. The
cost shocks recovered in this way have an even lower common component than the baseline
C12
d c,u,t , making the results stronger.
       Second, we explicitly model the higher-order effects. This exercise takes into account the
second example above, namely that a sector uses service sector inputs, while the service sector in
turn uses imported inputs from a PPI sector. We iterate through the second-, third-, etc. order
effects to compute the infinite-order transmission of shocks via the unmeasured sectors. Appendix
B presents the procedure for recovering the cost shocks that takes into account the higher-order
effects transmitted through the non-PPI sectors.8 Panel “Higher-order input linkages” of Table 3
reports the results. Once again, if anything the results are strengthened: the common component
of C12
   d c,u,t is lower than in the baseline, implying a greater contribution of input linkages to the
   8
    The exercise is analogous to applying the Leontief inverse to calculate the Total Requirements Table from the
Direct Requirements Table.


                                                       17
synchronization of PPI inflation.
   As emphasized above, the baseline analysis simply aggregates the cost shocks and thus cleans
out the effect of not only international but also domestic input linkages. There is no obvious
reason why purely domestic linkages should synchronize inflation internationally. Nonetheless, we
construct an alternative counterfactual to be compared to P\P I12c,t , that assumes away interna-
tional input linkages but preserves the domestic linkages. This exercise constructs counterfactual
PPI changes that would obtain under recovered cost shocks C12
                                                            d c,u,t in an economy in which there
is input usage, but all of it domestic. Namely, we define the “autarky” counterfactual PPI change
as follows:
                                                                 −1
                                    [ AU T = I − Γ0AU T
                                    PPI                                   DC,
                                                                           b

where Γ0AU T is the counterfactual input-output matrix that forces all linkages to be domestic:
                                     0                                              
                                     Γ          0    ...                        0
                                     AU T,1  0                                      
                                     0      ΓAU T,2 0                         ...
                          Γ0AU T
                                                                                     
                                   =
                                     0
                                                                                     ,
                                               0    ...                        0    
                                                                                     
                                                                           0
                                        0      ...    0                   ΓAU T,N

and the elements of the S × S matrix ΓAU T,c are defined as:

                                                     N
                                                     X
                                        γc,u,s,t =         γc,u,k,s,t .
                                                     k=1

That is, in each country c, output sector u, all of the usage of sector s inputs observed in the
global input-output matrix is reassigned to be supplied domestically.
    The results are reported in the panel labeled “Domestic input linkages.” These are between
the observed PPI and the baseline C12
                                   d c,t , indicating that allowing only for domestic linkages does
synchronize inflation rates somewhat relative to the series of cost shocks. While perhaps surprising
at first glance, this effect may arise for example if the underlying cost shocks of some sectors
(such as oil and energy) are highly synchronized internationally and, at the same time, constitute
important inputs in many other sectors. Nevertheless, introducing domestic linkages does not
qualitatively change the main conclusion regarding the importance of cross-border linkages for
international synchronization.
   Finally, we assess to what extent the synchronization of inflation is due to the energy price
shocks. To that end, we construct a counterfactual PPI series that sets all of the C12
                                                                                    d c,t in the
energy sector (Coke, Refined Petroleum, and Nuclear Fuel) to zero, while keeping all of the other
cost shocks and the observed global IO structure. The bottom panel of Table 3 presents the
synchronization metrics of the resulting counterfactual PPI series. The energy price shocks do



                                                     18
contribute modestly to the synchronization of the PPI inflation rates across countries. The metrics
of synchronization are about 0.05 lower than for actual PPI across the board. On the one hand,
these results reveal the relative importance of this single sector. On the other, it is clear that
the bulk of synchronization in the global PPI is not driven by common shocks in, or cross-border
transmission of, energy prices.
    To summarize, the baseline results clearly show that the extent of input trade is at present
sufficiently high that input linkages could be responsible for the bulk of observed PPI synchroniza-
tion across countries. This finding is not sensitive to (i) the assumptions placed on exchange rates;
(ii) allowing for pricing-to-market with demand complementarities; or (iii) the role of non-PPI
sectors. Furthermore, it appears primarily driven by the average volumes of input trade rather
than their heterogeneity across countries and sectors (though heterogeneity does play a modest
role).

4.3      Direct Measurement of Cost Shock Synchronization

Our cost shocks are recovered from the PPI data itself, and capture all of the shocks to the cost
of primary factors (labor and capital), as well as non-tradeable inputs. We adopt this approach
because precise measures of the primitive cost shocks are not available. To provide additional
evidence on the synchronization of cost shocks, we collected data on Unit Labor Costs (ULC)
from Eurostat, OECD, as well as national sources. The ULCs are defined as the nominal unit
labor costs in the total economy. This data series is available for only 26 countries in our sample,
over the period 1996-2011. The ULC data are also quarterly, and thus cannot be combined with
our baseline analysis, which is at monthly frequency. Most importantly, the ULC data are just for
labor costs, and thus do not correspond directly to our C,
                                                        b which is an encompassing cost variable.
    Table 4 reports the results of implementing our analysis on ULCs. Because the sample of
countries is different, and the ULC data are quarterly, the top two panels report our baseline
results for P
            [ P I and C
                      b for this subsample of countries and converted to quarterly frequency. The
qualitative and quantitative outcomes are very similar to the baseline analysis. The bottom panel
implements the factor models on the ULCs. The extent of synchronization in ULCs is lower than
for C,
    b and much closer to C
                         b than to P[P I. Thus, evidence based on direct measurement accords
quite well with our finding that the cost shocks are less synchronized than actual inflation.


5     The Sectoral Dimension

Thus far, we have used different approaches to evaluate the importance of a common global
component from the panel of aggregated country series in the model (10). Our underlying data,
however, are disaggregated at the country-sector level. Examining sector-level data can tell us


                                                 19
more about the nature of the common global factor found above. In particular, by implementing
a sector-level decomposition, we can reveal how much of the common global component is in fact
due to global sectoral shocks and how a country’s sectoral composition affects its comovement
with the global factor.
   To that aim, we use the dynamic factor model developed in Jackson et al. (2015), that gen-
eralizes the model (10)–(12) and is implemented directly on sector-level data. Specifically, we
estimate the following model:

                             Xc,u,t = αc,u + λw    w    c    c    u    u
                                              c,u Ft + λc,u Ft + λc,u Ft + c,u,t                                    (17)

where Xc,u,t is the 12-month inflation rate in country c, sector u, which can be either the actual
P\                                      d c,u,t . It is assumed to comprise of a global factor Ftw
 P I12c,u,t or the recovered cost shock C12
common to all countries and sectors in the sample, the country factor Ftc common to all u in
country c, a sectoral factor Ftu common to all sector u prices worldwide, and an idiosyncratic
error term. Each of these factor series and the error term, in turn, are assumed to follow an AR
process, parallel to (11):
                                         X
                                Ftk =                   k
                                                  φk,l Ft−l + uk,t ,          k = w, c, u
                                        l=1..pF


and
                                                   X
                                     c,u,t =               ρc,u,l c,u,t−l + µc,u,t .
                                                  l=1..p

Under the assumptions that uk,t ∼ N (0, 1) for k = w, c, u, and the restriction that the sign of the
loading of the first series on the global factor be positive, the decomposition is well-defined. The
residuals µcs,t are assumed to be distributed

                                                                  2
                                                  µc,u,t ∼ N (0, σc,u ).

   We follow the Bayesian estimation procedure from Jackson et al. (2015), briefly summarized
here. First, we denote the parameter vector by ξ c,u = [ αc,u                        λc,u ρc,u ],   where the vector αc,u
collects the constant terms, λc,u summarizes all loadings, and ρc,u = (ρc,u,1 , ..., ρc,u,p ) all the AR
coefficients of the errors. The priors of these model parameters are set to

                                                                  −1
                                                  ξ c,u ∼ N (0, B̄c,u )

        −1 = diag([.001 ∗ 1
where B̄c,u                 1+nf actors , 1p ]), and 1n the n-dimensional vector with the elements

1. Thus, the constants, the loadings, and the error AR coefficients have a prior mean of 0, the
constant and loading a prior variance of 0.001, and the error AR coefficients a prior variance of 1.

                                                              20
   Next, the remaining model parameters φk = (φk,1 , ..., φk,pF ) have the priors

                                                φk ∼ N (0, Φ̄−1
                                                             k ),         k = w, c, u

where Φ̄−1
        k = diag (
                   1       1
                          0.85
                                 ...      1
                                       0.85pF   ). The prior variance is thus exponentially decreasing with the
lag length, reflecting that further lags have a smaller probability of having a non-zero effect.
                                        2 , have the priors
   Moreover, the variances of µc,u,t , σc,u

                                                    2
                                                   σc,u ∼ IG(v̄c,u /2, δ̄c,u /2),

where IG is the inverted gamma distribution, v̄c,u = 6, and δ̄c,u = 0.001. Finally, we set pF = 3
and p = 2. The starting values are 0 for all coefficients and random standard normal draws for
the factors.
   The algorithm then computes (implicitly determines) the posterior distribution of each of the
                                                                      2 , φ , and F k . At each step, a
parameters conditional on all other parameters, in the order ξ c,u , σc,u  k       t
new draw from the posterior distribution replaces the starting value (if granted a likelihood-ratio
criterion, see Chib and Greenberg 1994). Repeating this procedure, the (conditional) posterior
distributions converge and the frequency of the draws approaches the joint posterior distribution
of all coefficients and factors. The procedure is repeated 1500 times (3500 times in case of the
reduced model (10) without the sector dimension). To avoid dependence on initial conditions
(and after verifying convergence) the first 500 draws are discarded. The remaining draws are used
to compute our statistics.
   Because we are ultimately interested in the comovement of aggregate inflation, we aggregate
the sector-level model (17) to the country level in the same manner as in the baseline analysis.
To decompose the aggregate country inflation into the global, sectoral, country, and idiosyncratic
components, we combine (17) with (8):
                        X
               Xc,t =            ωc,u Xc,u,t
                        u∈S
                        X                             X                        X                        X
                   =             ωc,u λw    w
                                       c,u Ft +             ωc,u λcc,u Ftc +         ωc,u λuc,u Ftu +         ωc,u c,u,t .
                        u∈S                           u∈S                      u∈S                      u∈S


Denoting Λw               ωc,u λw      c                    ωc,u λcc,u , and Gsc,t =                 u    u
                  P                                 P                                     P
          c =       u∈S         c,u , Λc =            u∈S                                    u wc,u λc,u Ft ,     we obtain

                                                                                X
                                   Xc,t = Λw  w    c c     s
                                           c Ft + Λc Ft + Gc,t +                       ωc,u c,u,t .                          (18)
                                                                                u∈S

Equation (18) is the aggregation of the sector-level factor model (17). It states that country-level
inflation rate Xc,t can be decomposed into the component due to the global factor, the component



                                                                  21
due to the country factor, the component due to the sector factor, and an idiosyncratic component.
We can then compute the variance share of the global and country factors as

                                          (Λkc )2 V ar(Ftk )
                             sharec,k =                          k = w, c,                     (19)
                                            V ar(Xc,t )

and the share of the variance attributable to sector factors as

                                                    V ar(Gsc,t )
                                      sharec,u =                 .                             (20)
                                                    V ar(Xc,t )

We will be especially interested in the combined role of the global factors, that is, the sum of the
share of variance of the global factor and the sectoral factors, sharec,w + sharec,u . This would
tell us the total share of the variance of country c’s inflation that is due to global factors, both
overall and sectoral.
   Although the factors are distributionally uncorrelated, the sample realizations might be corre-
lated, and thus we orthogonalize F w , F c , and Gs before computing the decomposition to ensure
that the variance shares sum to unity. We orthogonalize first on the global factor, then on the
sectoral component. The share is computed for each draw, and the median share is reported.
   We estimate a factor model directly on sector-level price data, extracting global, country, and
sector shocks following (17), and then decompose aggregate inflation into the contribution of those
components as in (18). Table 5 reports the shares of variance of overall country-level P\  P I12c,t
and C12
    d c,t accounted for by the different shocks, calculated as in (19)-(20).
   Two observations stand out from the table. First, most of the global component in PPI
inflation is due to global sectoral shocks, rather than a single global shock. Panel A shows that
the global shock accounts for 0.070 (0.027) of the variance of country PPI for the mean (median)
country. Sectoral shocks, by contrast, account for 0.426 (0.481) at the mean (median). The
combined share of variance of actual P\
                                      P I12c,t accounted for by the global and sectoral shocks
(0.070 + 0.426 at the mean, 0.027 + 0.481 at the median) is quite comparable to the shares of
variance reported in Table 1 that use much simpler factor models.
    Second, the reductions in the extent of comovement in C12
                                                           d c,t compared to actual P\
                                                                                     P I12c,t
come primarily from the reductions in the share of variance explained by sectoral rather than
global shocks. Indeed, the global component accounts for slightly more of the variance of C12
                                                                                          d c,t
on average than of P\
                    P I12c,t . However, the share of variance explained by the sectoral shocks falls
by almost the same amount as in the simpler models of Table 1.
   These results suggest that common sectoral shocks are the primary driver of PPI synchro-
nization across countries and that input linkages amplify comovement primarily by propagating
sectoral shocks across countries.



                                                  22
6    Input Linkages and Inflation Tail Risks

As our third and final exercise, we examine to what extent international linkages amplify or
dampen the distribution of country inflation. Working with GDP data, Acemoglu et al. (2017)
emphasize that input-output linkages can generate macroeconomic tail risks if the structure of
the input-output matrix is such that a few sectors play a disproportionately important role as
input suppliers. In this section, we perform a related exercise by asking whether the observed
world input-output linkages are such as to create tail risks in the inflation series.
    Figure 7(a) presents the quantile-quantile (Q-Q) plot of the PPI series, standardized to have
mean zero and standard deviation one in each country versus the standard normal distribution.
Each circle is an observed (standardized) country-year realization of a PPI change. The fact
that observations are above the 45-degree line at the top of the plot and below at the bottom
indicates that PPI inflation has fatter tails than a normal distribution – large positive and negative
deviations are both more likely than in a normal distribution. Indeed, the conventional tests of
normality, such as the Jarque-Bera, Shapiro-Wilk, and D’Agostino-Belanger-D’Agostino tests,
reject normality of PPI with p-values under 0.000. Figure 7(b) presents the Q-Q plot for the
recovered cost shocks, once again standardized to mean zero and standard deviation one, country-
by-country. It appears that the cost shocks are also fat-tailed, and once again all the formal tests
reject normality with p-values under 0.000.
    Acemoglu et al. (2017) prove that when the structure of the input-output matrix is bal-
anced, even fat-failed shocks do not lead to fat-tailed aggregate fluctuations, as shocks are “di-
versified” and a Central Limit Theorem-type result implies that aggregate fluctuations are well-
approximated by a normal distribution. This is clearly not happening in the PPI data: fat-tailed
cost shocks do not “average out” in the input-output structure and instead lead to fat-tailed PPI
series.
    A related question is whether the input-output linkages amplify or dampen the cost shocks.
To assess this, Figure 8 presents the Q-Q plot of the standardized PPI against standardized
cost shocks. The PPI series is modestly less fat-tailed: the top and bottom quantiles of actual
PPI inflation are somewhat smaller than the highest and lowest cost shock realizations. Overall,
however, it does not appear that the observed IO structure plays a sufficiently strong dampening
role, and thus observed inflation still exhibits fat tails as evidenced by Figure 7(a).
    To determine whether this result is driven by this particular sample of shock realizations,
Figure 9 instead presents the Q-Q plots that come from simulated data in which we know the
distribution of shocks. That is, we draw a sample of C
                                                     b repeatedly from a known distribution and
then compute the resulting changes in PPI by applying the Leontief inverse as in (13). We then
aggregate to the country level to obtain the resulting country PPIs, standardize, and compare


                                                 23
to the standard normal. We do this for 2 distributions, Laplace and Normal, and 3 variants of
shocks: (i) shocks with standard deviation equal to the observed standard deviation of the C
                                                                                           b in
the data; (ii) shocks with standard deviation equal to 0.1; and (iii) global, country, sector, and
idiosyncratic shocks simulated based on the factor model in Section 5.
    The Laplace distribution has fatter tails than a Normal. By comparing PPI inflation implied
by the Laplace and the Normal underlying cost shocks, we can establish whether the existing IO
structure preserves the fat-tailed underlying shocks or averages them out. The top two panels
reveal that, indeed, the IO structure preserves fat-tailed shocks. When the cost shocks are Laplace
(Figures 9(a)-9(c)), the resulting country PPI inflation has fatter tails than a normal, reminiscent
of Figure 7(a) that depicts the actual PPI distribution. By contrast, when underlying cost shocks
are Normal (Figures 9(d)-9(f)), the resulting country PPI series inherit the absence of fat fails.
    We conclude from this exercise that the observed structure of global IO linkages is such that
the fat-tailed cost shocks do not average out and the observed PPI series inherits the fat tails of
the underlying shock process.


7    Conclusion

Inflation rates are highly synchronized across countries. In a dataset of PPI for 30 countries,
the single common factor explains nearly half of the fluctuations in PPI inflation in the average
economy. It is important to understand the reasons for this internationalization of inflation. This
paper evaluates a particular hypothesis: international input linkages are synchronizing inflation
rates.
    Our main finding is that input linkages indeed contribute substantially to the observed PPI
comovement. We undertake a number of additional exercises to better understand this result.
The main conclusion is not sensitive to the assumption on the exchange rate pass-through or to
the extent of pricing to market with demand complementarities. Both the average level of input
linkages and their heterogeneity matter for generating the full extent of synchronization. Finally,
the bulk of observed synchronization is due to common sectoral shocks.
    The policy relevance of our findings goes beyond potential usefulness in inflation forecasting,
as the propagation channel we document also has implications for optimal monetary policy. In
particular, the extent to which foreign marginal costs affect domestic distortions has been shown
to play a pivotal role in whether optimal monetary policy in an open economy targets only
domestic prices and output gaps (Corsetti et al. 2010). As international input-linkages represent
a direct link between foreign marginal costs and domestic production costs, their prevalence has
a first-order effect on the extent to which optimal monetary policy is inward-looking.




                                                24
Appendix A             Extracting C
                                  b under Pricing-to-Market

This Appendix derives the procedure for extracting the cost shocks under pricing-to-market with
demand complementarities. Dropping time subscripts, combining equations (14) and (15), and
     P
using e,s σc,u,e,s = 1 yields
                                         X
                             Pbc,u = β            σc,u,e,s (W      bc,e ) + (1 − β)Pbc,u
                                                            ce,s + E
                                           e,s


so that
                                                    X
                                      Pbc,u =              σc,u,e,s (W
                                                                     ce,s + E
                                                                            bc,e ).                              (A.1)
                                                     e,s

We use this expression to eliminate the unobserved term Pbc,u in equation (14):
                                                                      X
                   pbc,u,e,s = β(W      bc,e ) + (1 − β)
                                 ce,s + E                                      σc,u,e0 ,s0 (W
                                                                                            ce0 ,s0 + E
                                                                                                      bc,e0 ).   (A.2)
                                                                      e0 ,s0


Next, we use the approximation for changes of the cost function in country c and sector u:
                                         X
                         C b                                                  C b              C b
                 W
                 cc,u = γc,u Cc,u +               γc,u,e0 ,s0 p̂c,u,e0 ,s0 = γc,u Cc,u + (1 − γc,u )Pc,u .
                                         e0 ,s0


Again, we use (A.1) to substitute out the unobserved Pbc,u in this expression:
                                                                    X
                                  C b              C
                          W
                          cc,u = γc,u Cc,u + (1 − γc,u )                   σc,u,e,s (W
                                                                                     ce,s + E
                                                                                            bc,e ).
                                                                     e,s


Solving for C
            bc,u yields
                                             (                                                  )
                                       1          cc,u −
                                                             X
                            C
                            bc,u =
                                       C
                                                  W                 γc,u,e,s (W
                                                                              ce,s + E
                                                                                     bc,e ) .
                                      γc,u                    e,s


We are ultimately interested in expressing C     bc,u in terms of observables. The problem with is
expression is that we do not observe the W    cc,u ’s. We thus need to find an expression for W  cc,u in
terms of the observables γc,u,e,s , E
                                    bc,e , and P
                                               [ P I c,u . Pursuing that aim, we rewrite the expression
above, exploiting the following properties of exchange rates E      bc,e = E
                                                                           bc,0 + E        bc,0 = −E
                                                                                  b0,e and E        b0,c
(with some arbitrary reference currency 0):
                                  (                                                                        )
                             1                 C b
                                  cc,u + (1 − γc,u
                                                                           X
                  C
                  bc,u =
                            C
                                  W                )E0,c −                       γc,u,e,s (W
                                                                                           ce,s + E
                                                                                                  b0,e ) .
                           γc,u                                            e,s




                                                               25
Now, we define the 1 × N S vectors

                                  W
                                  c = (W         c1,S , W
                                       c1,1 , ...W                cN,S )0
                                                        c2,1 ..., W
                                       |     {z     }
                                                     S


(in other words, the (c − 1)N + u’s element of W
                                               c is W
                                                    cc,u ) and


                                    E
                                    b 0 = (E
                                           b0,1 , ...E
                                                     b0,1 , E         b0,N )0
                                                            b0,2 ..., E
                                           |     {z     }
                                                     S


(in other words, the (c − 1)S + u’s element of E      b0,c ). As in the main text, define the N S × N S
                                               b 0 is E
global input-output matrix Γ by its elements (recall that we have N countries and S sectors):

                                        Γ(e−1)S+s,(c−1)S+u = γc,u,e,s ,

                                                                                    C . With
and, finally, D as an N S × N S diagonal matrix with diagonal elements D(c−1)S+u = γc,u
this notation, we can write
                                      n                             o
                               b = D−1 (I − Γ0 )W
                               C                c + (I − D − Γ0 )E
                                                                 b0                              (A.3)

To recover the cost shocks C   b we need an expression for the unobserved W  c as a function of the
observables Eb 0 , input shares, and the producer price index P[ P I c,u .
   The P[ P I c,u , in turn, may be defined either based on local and export prices or based on local
prices only. In the former case, the weights are

                                                             Yr,s,c,u
                                          αr,s,c,u = P
                                                           r0 ,s0 Yr0 ,s0 ,c,u

where Yr,s,c,u are sales of products form c, u in market r, s. In the latter case, instead, the weights
are
                                                           δr,c Yr,s,c,u
                                        αr,s,c,u = P
                                                         r0 ,s0 δr,c Yr0 ,s0 ,c,u

with δc,c = 1 and δr,c = 0 if r 6= c.
      We apply these weights to the sum over prices pbr,s,c,u . Notice, however, that the export prices
entering the PPI need to be expressed in the exporter’s currency. Given our convention to express
pbr,s,c,u in destination currency (i.e., in the currency of the destination market), we need to correct
for the currency mismatch, thus building the weighted sums over pbr,s,c,u − E      br,c . The producer
price index is thus defined as
                                               X             h                i
                                 P
                                 [ P I c,u =         αr,s,c,u pbr,s,c,u − E
                                                                          br,c ,
                                               r,s



                                                         26
Using (A.2) this expression can be written as
                                                                                                         
                 X                                                X                                      
 P
 [ P I c,u   =     αr,s,c,u −Ebr,c + β(W
                                       cc,u + Ebr,c ) + (1 − β)           σr,s,e0 ,s0 (W
                                                                                       ce0 ,s0 + Ebr,e0 )
                           
                                                                   e0 ,s0
                                                                                                          
               r,s
                                                                                                               
               X                                              X                                                  
             =                cc,u + (1 − β) E
                   αr,s,c,u β W                b0,r − E b0,c +                      ce0 ,s0 − E
                                                                       σr,s,e0 ,s0 (W           b0,r + E  b0,e0 )
                                                                                                                 (A.4)
                           
                                                               e0 ,s0
               r,s
                                                                                                                  
                                                                                             
                                          X            X                                     
                cc,u + (1 − β) −E
             = βW                   b0,c +     αr,s,c,u     σr,s,e0 ,s0 (Wce0 ,s0 + E  b0,e0 )
                                          r,s          0 0
                                                                                              
                                                               e ,s


Where again we used that E     br,c = E      b0,c = −E
                                      br,0 + E                b0,c as well as P αr,s,c,u = 1 and
                                                       b0,r + E
                                                                                r,s
P
       σ     0
 e0 ,s0 r,s,e ,s 0 = 1. Turning to  matrix notation, we define  the N S ×  N S matrices A and M
through their elements

                   A(r−1)S+s,(c−1)S+u = αr,s,c,u       and M(r−1)S+s,(c−1)S+u = σr,s,c,u .

Making use of these matrices, the expression (A.4) becomes
                                                               
                             PPI
                             [ = βW            b 0 + A0 M W
                                  c + (1 − β) −E           c +E
                                                              b0


or
                                          h                          i
                     c = βI + (1 − β)A0 M −1 PPI          b 0 − A0 ME
                        
                     W                       [ + (1 − β) E          b0

Now, we can use this expression to eliminate W
                                             c in (A.3), which finally yields an expression for
C
b in terms of observables:
       n                             o
b = D−1 (I − Γ0 )W
C                c + (I − D − Γ0 )E
                                  b0
       n                          −1 h                          i                 o
  = D−1 (I − Γ0 ) βI + (1 − β)A0 M                   b 0 − A0 ME
                                                               b 0 + (I − D − Γ0 )E
                 
                                        [ + (1 − β) E
                                       PPI                                        b0


This equation requires knowledge of the market share and input share matrices A and M. These
are sourced from the WIOD.




                                                         27
Appendix B             Higher-Order Terms

This Appendix expands the model to include sectors outside the PPI coverage and describes
the recovery of the cost shocks, accounting explicitly for second- and higher-order transmission
through these sectors, for which price shocks are not observed. Section 4.2 in the main body of
the paper presents the results when recovering the cost shocks using the method described here.
We set β = 1 throughout the derivations.
   There are two sets of sectors, those for which PPI data exist (S o , superscripted by o for
“observed”) and those for which PPI data do not exist (S u , superscripted by n for “non-PPI,”or
unobserved). The PPI change in any sector (o or n) is given by

                              VA
                                                              X
                                                                       I
                                                                                          o              
               P
               [ P I c,u,t = γc,u,t−1 V
                                      d Ac,u,t +                      γc,u,e,s,t−1   P
                                                                                     [ P I e,s,t + E
                                                                                                   bc,e,t             (B.1)
                                                          e∈N,s∈S o
                                     X
                                                  I
                                                                     n             
                                +                γc,u,e,s,t−1   P
                                                                [ P I e,s,t + E
                                                                              bc,e,t ,
                                   e∈N,s∈S n


where Vd Ac,u,t is the change in the cost of value added. As noted in Section 2, the baseline
analysis recovers the cost shock as a residual between actual P       [ P I c,u,t and the price shocks in
                                                 o             
                               I
                         P
the observed sectors,        γc,u,e,s,t−1   P
                                            [ P I e,s,t + E
                                                          bc,e,t . The expression (B.1) shows, however,
                       e∈N,s∈S o
that a correct recovery of the cost shocks in the o-type sectors must be based on the full system
of PPIs and linkages of the o-type as well as the n-type sectors. For example, the second-order
term becomes explicit when plugging (B.1) into itself:

                           VA
                                                        X
                                                                    I
                                                                                       o              
            P
            [ P I c,u,t = γc,u,t−1 V
                                   d Ac,u,t +                      γc,u,e,s,t−1   P
                                                                                  [ P I e,s,t + E
                                                                                                bc,e,t
                                                     e∈N,s∈S o
                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                             
                                                                            I0
                                   X                             X
                                          I
                           +             γc,u,e,s,t−1                   γc,u,e,s,t−1 P
                                                                                      [ P I e,s,t + E
                                                                                                    bc,e,t           (B.2)
                             e∈N,s∈S n                     e∈N,s∈S o
                                   X                  
                                          I              VA
                           +             γc,u,e,s,t−1   γc,u,t−1 V
                                                                 d Ac,u,t
                             e∈N,s∈S n
                                                                                               
                                   X
                                            I0
                                                                   n              
                           +               γc,u,e,s,t−1       P
                                                              [ P I e,s,t   +E
                                                                             bc,e,t + E
                                                                                      bc,e,t  .
                               e∈N,s∈S n


The second line of this expression is the second-order term operating through the n-type sectors:
the impact of input cost shocks in the observed sectors on PPI through the usage of n-type sector
inputs and, in turn, the usage of o-type inputs by the n-type sectors.
   To account for higher-order terms, we adopt the following matrix notation. First, we define
   unscal                       VA
V
d Ao      as the vector of the γc,u,t−1 V
                                        d Ac,u,t ’s (unscal stands for “unscaled”). Then, we collect



                                                              28
the terms in (B.1) and write
                                             
                              !        unscal                         !             !
                     P
                     [ P Io         V Ao
                                     d                    Γo,o Γo,n        P
                                                                           [ P Io        e 0 E,
                                  =   unscal
                                              +                                        +Γ   b
                     P P In
                     [              VdAn                  Γn,o Γn,n        P P In
                                                                           [


where E
      b is defined in Section 2. The n-type sector PPI changes are equal to

                                    unscal
                        P
                        [ P In = V
                                 d An      + Γn,o P
                                                  [ P I o + Γn,n P
                                                                 [ P I n + Γ̃n E
                                                                               b                      (B.3)
                    
where Γ̃n = Γn,o Γn,n . Substituting P
                                     [ P I n repeatedly into (B.3) yields

                                      ∞
                                      Y               unscal
                      P
                      [ P In =              Γkn,n (V
                                                   d An      + Γn,o P
                                                                    [ P I o + Γ̃n E)
                                                                                  b
                                      k=0
                                                      unscal
                                  = (I − Γn,n )−1 (V
                                                   d An      + Γn,o P
                                                                    [ P I o + Γ̃n E).
                                                                                  b


The term P
         [ P I o can thus be expressed as

                unscal
    P
    [ P Io = V
             d Ao      + Γo,o P
                              [ P I o + Γo,n P
                                             [ P I n + Γ̃o E
                                                           b
                  unscal                                          unscal
            = V
              d Ao       + Γo,o P
                                [ P I o + Γo,n (I − Γn,n )−1 (V
                                                              d An       + Γn,o P
                                                                                [ P I o + Γ̃n E)
                                                                                              b + Γ̃o E
                                                                                                      b
                  unscal
                         + Γo,o + Γo,n (I − Γn,n )−1 Γn,o P
                                                            
            = V
              d Ao                                            [ P Io +
                                                                            unscal
                                             
              + Γo,n (I − Γn,n )−1 Γ̃n + Γ̃o E   b + Γo,n (I − Γn,n )−1 VdAn
                    
where Γ̃o = Γo,o Γo,n . This expression can now be used to recover the cost shocks by simply
                                                                       unscal
neglecting the contributions of the unobserved shocks, setting V   d An       = 0. We now define the
                                                                                              unscal
cost shocks takes into account all higher-order effects of the observed variables through V
                                                                                          d A     o  =
 bo∞−order , where where D is defined in Section 2. Thus, we can solve for these cost shocks
DC

                  b ∞−order = D−1 I − Γo,o − Γo,n (I − Γn,n )−1 Γn,o P
                                                                   
                  C o
                                                                      [P Io +
                              −D−1 Γo + Γo,n (I − Γn,n )−1 Γn E
                                                              
                                                                 b                                    (B.4)

Notice finally that the expression (B.4) collapses to (5) with β = 1 and Γo,o = Γ0 if o-type sectors
do not use inputs from n-type sectors (Γn,o = 0) or vice versa (Γo,n = 0).




                                                         29
References
Acemoglu, Daron, Asuman Ozdaglar, and Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi, “Microeconomic Origins of
   Macroeconomic Tail Risks,” American Economic Review, January 2017, 107 (1), 54–108.
Ahn, JaeBin, Chang-Gui Park, and Chanho Park, “Pass-Through of Imported Input Prices to
   Domestic Producer Prices; Evidence from Sector-Level Data,” February 2016. IMF Working
   paper 16/23.
Amiti, Mary, Oleg Itskhoki, and Jozef Konings, “Importers, Exporters, and Exchange Rate
  Disconnect,” American Economic Review, July 2014, 104 (7), 1942–1978.
     ,    , and      , “International Shocks and Domestic Prices: How Large Are Strategic
    Complementarities?,” March 2016. NBER Working Paper No. 22119.
Andrade, Philippe and Marios Zachariadis, “Global vs. local shocks in micro price dynamics,”
   Journal of International Economics, January 2016, 98, 78–82.
Antoun de Almeida, Luiza, “Globalization of Inflation and Input-Output Linkages,” May 2016.
   Mimeo, University of Frankfurt.
Atkeson, Andrew and Ariel Burstein, “Trade Costs, Pricing-to-Market, and International Relative
    Prices,” American Economic Review, December 2008, 98 (5), 1998–2031.
Auer, Raphael A. and Aaron Mehrotra, “Trade linkages and the globalisation of inflation in Asia
   and the Pacific,” Journal of International Money and Finance, 2014, 49 (PA), 129–151.
     and Philip Sauré, “The globalisation of inflation: a view from the cross section,” in Bank for
    International Settlements, ed., Globalisation and inflation dynamics in Asia and the Pacific,
    Vol. 70, Bank for International Settlements, 2013, pp. 113–118.
      and Raphael S. Schoenle, “Market structure and exchange rate pass-through,” Journal of
    International Economics, 2016, 98, 60–77.
    , Claurio Borio, and Andrew Filardo, “The globalisation of inflation: the growing importance
    of global value chains,” January 2017. BIS Working Papers, no 602.
Beck, Guenter W., Kirstin Hubrich, and Massimiliano Marcellino, “On the Importance of Sectoral
    and Regional Shocks for Price-Setting,” Journal of Applied Econometrics, December 2016,
    31 (7), 1234–1253.
Bems, Rudolfs and Robert C. Johnson, “Value-Added Exchange Rates,” October 2012. NBER
   Working Paper No. 18498.
      and     , “Demand for Value Added and Value-Added Exchange Rates,” March 2015.
    Forthcoming, American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics.
Berman, Nicolas, Philippe Martin, and Thierry Mayer, “How do Different Exporters React to
   Exchange Rate Changes? Theory, Empirics and Aggregate Implications,” Quarterly Journal
   of Economics, 2012, 127 (1), 437–492.
Bernanke, Ben, 2007. Globalization and Monetary Policy, Speech at the Fourth Economic
   Summit, Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research.
Bianchi, Francesco and Andrea Civelli, “Globalization and inflation: Evidence from a time-
   varying VAR,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 2015, 18 (2), 406 – 433.
Borio, Claudio E. V. and Andrew Filardo, “Globalisation and inflation: New cross-country
   evidence on the global determinants of domestic inflation,” May 2007. BIS Working Paper
   227.



                                                30
Burstein, Ariel and Gita Gopinath, “International Prices and Exchange Rates,” in Kenneth Ro-
   goff Elhanan Helpman and Gita Gopinath, eds., Handbook of International Economics, Vol. 4,
   Elsevier, 2015, chapter 7, pp. 391 – 451.
     and Nir Jaimovich, “Understanding Movements in Aggregate and Product-Level Real Ex-
    change Rates,” 2012. Mimeo, UCLA.
    , Christopher Kurz, and Linda L. Tesar, “Trade, Production Sharing, and the International
    Transmission of Business Cycles,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 2008, 55, 775–795.
Carney, Mark, 2015. Remarks at the Economic Policy Symposium hosted by the Federal Reserve
   Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, on 29 August 2015.
Cavallo, Alberto, Brent Neiman, and Roberto Rigobon, “Currency Unions, Product Introduc-
   tions, and the Real Exchange Rate,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 2014, 129 (2),
   529–595.
Chib, Siddhartha and Edward Greenberg, “Bayes inference in regression models with ARMA (p,
   q) errors,” Journal of Econometrics, 1994, 64 (1-2), 183–206.
Ciccarelli, Matteo and Benoit Mojon, “Global Inflation,” Review of Economics and Statistics,
    August 2010, 92 (3), 524–535.
Corsetti, Giancarlo, Luca Dedola, and Sylvain Leduc, “Optimal Monetary Policy in Open
   Economies,” in Benjamin M. Friedman and Michael Woodford, eds., Handbook of Mone-
   tary Economics, Vol. 3, Elsevier, 2010, chapter 16, pp. 861–933.
di Giovanni, Julian and Andrei A. Levchenko, “Putting the Parts Together: Trade, Vertical
   Linkages, and Business Cycle Comovement,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,
   April 2010, 2 (2), 95–124.
Dornbusch, Rudiger, “Exchange Rates and Prices,” American Economic Review, 1987, 77 (1),
   93–106.
Draghi, Mario, “How central banks meet the challenge of low inflation,” 2016. Marjolin lecture,
   Frankfurt, 4 February 2016.
Fischer, Stanley, “U.S. Inflation Developments,” 2015. Speech at the Federal Reserve Bank of
    Kansas City Economic Symposium, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August 29, 2015.
Foerster, Andrew T., Pierre-Daniel G. Sarte, and Mark W. Watson, “Sectoral vs. Aggregate
   Shocks: A Structural Factor Analysis of Industrial Production,” Journal of Political Econ-
   omy, February 2011, 119 (1), 1–38.
Gagnon, Etienne, Benjamin R. Mandel, and Robert J. Vigfusson, “Missing Import Price Changes
   and Low Exchange Rate Pass-Through,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,
   April 2014, 6 (2), 156–206.
Galı́, Jordi, “Inflation Pressures and Monetary Policy in a Global Economy,” International Jour-
     nal of Central Banking, 2010, 6 (1), 93–102.
Goldberg, Linda S. and José Manuel Campa, “The Sensitivity of the CPI to Exchange Rates:
   Distribution Margins, Imported Inputs, and Trade Exposure,” Review of Economics and
   Statistics, May 2010, 92 (2), 392–407.
Gopinath, Gita and Roberto Rigobon, “Sticky Borders,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, May
   2008, 123 (2), 531–575.
Jackson, Laura E., M. Ayhan Kose, Christopher Otrok, and Michael T. Owyang, “Specifica-
   tion and Estimation of Bayesian Dynamic Factor Models: A Monte Carlo Analysis with an
   Application to Global House Price Comovement,” in Eric Hillebrand and Siem Jan Koop-
   man, eds., Advances in Econometrics, Vol. 35, United Kingdom: Emerald Insight, 2015,
   chapter 15, pp. 361–400.

                                              31
Johnson, Robert C., “Trade in Intermediate Inputs and Business Cycle Comovement,” American
   Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, October 2014, 6 (4), 39–83.
Kose, M. Ayhan and Kei-Mu Yi, “Can the Standard International Business Cycle Model Explain
   the Relation Between Trade and Comovement,” Journal of International Economics, March
   2006, 68 (2), 267–295.
Monacelli, Tommaso and Luca Sala, “The International Dimension of Inflation: Evidence from
   Disaggregated Consumer Price Data,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, February
   2009, 41 (s1), 101–120.
Mumtaz, Haroon and Paolo Surico, “The Transmission of International Shocks: A Factor-
  Augmented VAR Approach,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, February 2009, 41
  (s1), 71–100.
      and      , “Evolving International Inflation Dynamics: World And Country-Specific Fac-
    tors,” Journal of the European Economic Association, August 2012, 10 (4), 716–734.
     , Saverio Simonelli, and Paolo Surico, “International Comovements, Business Cycle and
    Inflation: a Historical Perspective,” Review of Economic Dynamics, January 2011, 14 (1),
    176–198.
Nakamura, Emi and Jón Steinsson, “Lost in Transit: Product Replacement Bias and Pricing to
   Market,” American Economic Review, December 2012, 102 (7), 3277–3316.
Patel, Nikhil, Zhi Wang, and Shang-Jin Wei, “Global Value Chains and Effective Exchange Rates
    at the Country-Sector Level,” June 2014. NBER Working Paper No. 20236.
Timmer, Marcel P., Erik Dietzenbacher, Bart Los, Robert Stehrer, and Gaaitzen J. de Vries, “An
   Illustrated User Guide to the World Input–Output Database: the Case of Global Automotive
   Production,” Review of International Economics, August 2015, 23 (3), 575–605.




                                             32
                     Table 1. Synchronization in Actual PPI and Cost Shocks



                       Panel A: R2                    Panel B: Static Factor               Panel C: Dynamic Factor

Country    P\
            P I12c,t     C12
                         d c,t   Difference       P\
                                                   P I12c,t   C12
                                                              d c,t     Difference      P\
                                                                                         P I12c,t    C12
                                                                                                     d c,t     Difference
AUS         0.529        0.203     0.326           0.596      0.371       0.225          0.539       0.192       0.347
AUT         0.261        0.031     0.230           0.570      0.140       0.430          0.518       0.181       0.336
BEL         0.646        0.447     0.199           0.755      0.562       0.192          0.744       0.449       0.295
BGR         0.524        0.029     0.495           0.461      0.001       0.459          0.419       0.012       0.407
CAN         0.560        0.174     0.385           0.604      0.510       0.095          0.574       0.273       0.301
CHN         0.317        0.094     0.223           0.665      0.408       0.257          0.652       0.218       0.435
CZE         0.323        0.188     0.136           0.264      0.197       0.067          0.249       0.322      -0.073
DEU         0.729        0.382     0.346           0.860      0.404       0.456          0.860       0.564       0.295
DNK         0.226        0.330    -0.104           0.224      0.242      -0.017          0.224       0.298      -0.075
ESP         0.736        0.435     0.301           0.931      0.789       0.141          0.918       0.801       0.117
FIN         0.318        0.123     0.195           0.652      0.470       0.182          0.599       0.337       0.262
FRA         0.617        0.489     0.128           0.689      0.368       0.321          0.697       0.485       0.212
GBR         0.217        0.031     0.186           0.524      0.433       0.090          0.480       0.266       0.214
GRC         0.118        0.035     0.083           0.090      0.000       0.089          0.080       0.019       0.061
HUN         0.277        0.123     0.154           0.075      0.001       0.074          0.073       0.034       0.039
IRL         0.081        0.048     0.033           0.104      0.035       0.069          0.095       0.046       0.049
ITA         0.730        0.234     0.496           0.826      0.506       0.320          0.859       0.599       0.260
JPN         0.439        0.104     0.335           0.735      0.388       0.347          0.690       0.213       0.476
KOR         0.013        0.000     0.013           0.048      0.048       0.000          0.027       0.024       0.003
LTU         0.369        0.019     0.350           0.678      0.228       0.450          0.638       0.265       0.373
MEX         0.054        0.000     0.054           0.063      0.018       0.045          0.064       0.003       0.061
NLD         0.716        0.480     0.236           0.808      0.671       0.137          0.831       0.589       0.242
POL         0.103        0.258    -0.155           0.184      0.299      -0.115          0.165       0.301      -0.136
PRT         0.524        0.122     0.403           0.499      0.196       0.302          0.495       0.249       0.246
ROM         0.046        0.073    -0.028           0.000      0.017      -0.016          0.002       0.005      -0.003
RUS         0.281        0.130     0.151           0.215      0.264      -0.049          0.223       0.145       0.078
SVN         0.104        0.024     0.080           0.025      0.006       0.019          0.020       0.044      -0.024
SWE         0.261        0.024     0.238           0.499      0.227       0.272          0.475       0.150       0.325
TWN         0.286        0.053     0.233           0.492      0.445       0.047          0.467       0.229       0.238
USA         0.541        0.308     0.233           0.766      0.572       0.194          0.737       0.289       0.448

mean         0.365       0.166        0.199         0.463      0.294      0.170           0.447       0.253        0.194
median       0.317       0.122       0.211          0.511      0.281       0.139          0.488       0.239        0.240
min          0.013       0.000       -0.155         0.000      0.000      -0.115          0.002       0.003        -0.136
max          0.736       0.489        0.496         0.931      0.789       0.459          0.918       0.801         0.476

 Notes: Panel A reports the R2 s of the regression of the country’s inflation (P\ P I12c,t ) or the cost shock
 (C12
  d c,t ) on the simple average inflation or the cost shock of all the other countries in the sample and the
 difference between the two. Panel B reports the share of the variance in the country’s inflation (P\ P I12c,t )
 or the cost shock (C12
                     d c,t ) accounted for by the common static factor Ft and the difference between the
 two. Panel C reports the results when assuming a dynamic factor. Country code definitions are reported in
 Appendix Table A2.




                                                       33
 Table 2. Alternative Implementations: Imperfect Pass-through and Pricing-to-Market


                                                    Static       Dynamic
                                            R2      Factor        Factor
                                                         Baseline
                      P\
                       P I12c,t
                              mean        0.365      0.463          0.447
                              median      0.317      0.511          0.488
                      C12c,t
                      d
                              mean        0.166      0.294          0.253
                              median      0.122      0.281          0.239

                                                 Alt. cost shocks: No E
                                                                      bc,e,t
                      C12
                      d c,t
                               mean       0.171      0.327          0.299
                               median     0.091      0.313          0.229

                                           Pricing complementarity, β = 2/3
                      C12
                      d c,t
                               mean       0.105      0.198          0.165
                               median     0.050      0.187          0.083

                                           Pricing complementarity, β = 1/3
                      C12
                      d c,t
                               mean       0.085      0.215          0.159
                               median     0.040      0.141          0.144

                                          Mechanical pass-through, β = 2/3
                      C12
                      d c,t
                               mean       0.252      0.389          0.374
                               median     0.217      0.400          0.354

                                          Mechanical pass-through, β = 1/3
                      C12
                      d c,t
                               mean       0.227      0.422          0.407
                               median     0.183      0.490          0.444

Notes: This table reports the mean and median of the R2 s (first column) and of the shares of variance
explained by the static and dynamic factors (second and third columns) under alternative implementations
of the analysis. The assumptions in each scenario are described in detail in the text.




                                                    34
                    Table 3. Alternative Implementations: Input Linkages


                                                                         Static   Dynamic
                                                                  R2     Factor    Factor
                                                                          Baseline
        P\
         P I12c,t
                mean                                             0.365   0.463        0.447
                median                                           0.317   0.511        0.488
        C12
        d c,t
                mean                                             0.166   0.294        0.253
                median                                           0.122   0.281        0.239

                                                                 Symmetric input linkages
                                       counter
        Balanced 1 (sectors),    P\
                                  P I12c,t
               mean                                              0.243   0.363        0.339
               median                                            0.183   0.397        0.329
                                                       counter
        Balanced 2 (countries+sectors), P\
                                         P I12c,t
               mean                                              0.306   0.430        0.414
               median                                            0.265   0.543        0.519

                                                                   Imputed service prices
        C12
        d c,t
                  mean                                           0.113   0.208        0.181
                  median                                         0.089   0.153        0.112

                                                                 Higher-order input linkages
        C12
        d c,t
                  mean                                           0.139   0.253        0.211
                  median                                         0.074   0.249        0.105

                                                                  Domestic input linkages
                counter
        P\
         P I12c,t
                mean                                             0.258   0.367        0.333
                median                                           0.228   0.325        0.308

                                                                   No energy price shocks
              counter
        P\
         P I12c,t
                  mean                                           0.328   0.416        0.396
                  median                                         0.277   0.444        0.413

Notes: This table reports the mean and median of the R2 s (first column) and of the shares of variance
explained by the static and dynamic factors (second and third columns) under alternative implementations
of the analysis. The assumptions in each scenario are described in detail in the text.




                                                  35
                         Table 4. Direct Evidence: Unit Labor Costs


                                                          Static     Dynamic
                                                   R2     Factor      Factor
                        P\
                         P I12c,t , quarterly
                                  mean            0.434    0.497       0.486
                                  median          0.468    0.560       0.513
                        C12c,t , quarterly
                        d
                                  mean            0.182    0.312       0.301
                                  median          0.131    0.332       0.294
                        Unit Labor Costs
                                  mean            0.083    0.266       0.243
                                  median          0.024    0.183       0.151

Notes: This table reports the mean and median of the R2 s (first column) and of the shares of variance
explained by the static and dynamic factors (second and third columns) under alternative implementations
of the analysis. The assumptions in each scenario are described in detail in the text.




                                                  36
                          Table 5. Global, Sector, and Country Shocks


                               Panel A: P\
                                         P I12c,t                      Panel B: C12
                                                                                d c,t

             Country      Global     Sector     Country         Global     Sector     Country
             AUS          0.108      0.350       0.373          0.134      0.214       0.127
             AUT          0.004      0.594       0.260          0.280      0.235       0.210
             BEL          0.300      0.586       0.026          0.173      0.484       0.026
             BGR          0.111      0.370       0.316          0.077      0.018       0.845
             CAN          0.109      0.494       0.262          0.425      0.371       0.064
             CHN          0.007      0.761       0.101          0.006      0.336       0.024
             CZE          0.016      0.220       0.643          0.044      0.278       0.580
             DEU          0.044      0.799       0.079          0.106      0.626       0.026
             DNK          0.002      0.249       0.193          0.003      0.002       0.000
             ESP          0.045      0.846       0.047          0.029      0.735       0.058
             FIN          0.101      0.520       0.229          0.008      0.486       0.168
             FRA          0.022      0.643       0.172          0.011      0.484       0.007
             GBR          0.004      0.658       0.090          0.099      0.289       0.070
             GRC          0.101      0.076       0.432          0.278      0.016       0.321
             HUN          0.197      0.040       0.664          0.004      0.098       0.771
             IRL          0.008      0.038       0.652          0.001      0.007       0.631
             ITA          0.129      0.699       0.109          0.005      0.532       0.269
             JPN          0.003      0.696       0.195          0.002      0.215       0.570
             KOR          0.015      0.067       0.814          0.066      0.092       0.612
             LTU          0.015      0.703       0.123          0.178      0.406       0.161
             MEX          0.012      0.122       0.607          0.192      0.012       0.349
             NLD          0.180      0.700       0.066          0.185      0.556       0.007
             POL          0.034      0.182       0.557          0.028      0.304       0.440
             PRT          0.003      0.468       0.405          0.005      0.200       0.201
             ROM          0.028      0.005       0.948          0.004      0.016       0.902
             RUS          0.392      0.173       0.337          0.357      0.102       0.304
             SVN          0.027      0.040       0.783          0.237      0.046       0.023
             SWE          0.044      0.370       0.310          0.093      0.171       0.582
             TWN          0.011      0.538       0.240          0.091      0.136       0.434
             USA          0.024      0.778       0.097          0.145      0.291       0.300

             mean          0.070      0.426       0.338          0.109      0.259       0.303
             median        0.027      0.481       0.261          0.084      0.225       0.240
             min           0.002      0.005       0.026          0.001      0.002       0.000
             max           0.392      0.846       0.948          0.425      0.735       0.902

Notes: This table reports the shares of the variances of country PPIs and cost shocks accounted for by global,
sector, and country shocks, estimated as described in Section 5. Country code definitions are reported in
Appendix Table A2.




                                                     37
                                                                                                                Co                                          share                                                                                                                                                                         Share
                                                                                                                       ke
                                                                                                          El
                                                                                                             ec            ,R                 0   .1   .2       .3   .4   .5                                                                                                                                                     0   .2    .4     .6   .8
                                                                                                                t r.           ef
                                                                                                                                 .P
                                                                                                                       &
                                                                                                                           O      et
                                                                                                                                      ro
                                                                                                                            pt           l.                                                                                                                                                                               BEL
                                                                                                                    Tr          .E
                                                                                                                   an          qp                                                                                                                                                                                         NLD
                                                                                                                       sp           m
                                                                                                                  M
                                                                                                                          . E nt                                                                                                                                                                                         HUN
                                                                                                                               qp
                                                                                                                    an
                                                                                                                        uf          m                                                                                                                                                                                     SVN
                                                                                                             Ch                         nt
                                                                                                                em act.                                                                                                                                                                                                   LTU
                                                                                                                                  ,
                                                                                                                     ica            Ne                                                                                                                                                                                     IRL
                                                                                                                         lp              c
                                                                                                                 M            ro                                                                                                                                                                                         DNK
                                                                                                         Ba         ac           du
                                                                                                             sic hine cts                                                                                                                                                                                                 AUT
                                                                                                                  &           ry
                                                                                                                                  ,N                                                                                                                                                                                     TWN
                                                                                                                     Fa
                                                                                                              Ru         br
                                                                                                                            ic.
                                                                                                                                       ec                                                                                                                                                                                 CZE
                                                                                                       En         bb
                                                                                                                     er          M                                                                                                                                                                                       SWE
                                                                                                          er                        et
                                                                                                             gy          &              al                                                                                                                                                                               DEU
                                                                                                                 &           Pl
                                                                                                                    W           as
                                                                                                                                     tic                                                                                                                                                                                 BGR
                                                                                                                       at
                                                                                                                          er             s                                                                                                                                                                                PRT
                                                                                                                               Su




38
                                                                                                                                    pp                                                                                                                                                                                   CAN
                                                                                                     O       Pu                         ly
                                                                                                      th         lp          Te                                                                                                                                                                                          GRC
                                                                                                        er         ,              xt
                                                                                                           No Pap                    ile
                                                                                                                                         s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         MEX
                                                                                                               n−           er                                                                                                                                                                                            POL
                                                                                                                   M           ,P
                                                                                                           Le         et            rin                                                                                                                                                                                  GBR
                                                                                                              at         al              t.
                                                                                                                 he . Mi
                                                                                                                     r&           ne                                                                                                                                                                                      FRA
                                                                                                                          Fo ral                                                                                                                                                                                           FIN
                                                                                                                 W             ot                                                                                                                                                                                         ESP
                                                                                                                    oo             we
                                                                                                                        d              ar                                                                                                                                                                                  ITA
                                                                                                                          Pr
                                                                                                                               od
                                                                                                                                    uc                                                                                                                                                                                   ROM
                                                                                                           M            Ag              ts
                                                                                                              in                                                                                                                                                                                                         KOR

                                                                                                                                                                               Figure 2. Imported Input Use by Sector
                                                                                                                in           ric
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Figure 1. Imported Input Use by Country




                                                                                                        Fo         g             ul
                                                                                                                                    t                                                                                                                                                                                     AUS
                                                                                                           od         &               ur
                                                                                                                         Q
                                                                                                              ,B
                                                                                                                  ev
                                                                                                                            ua e                                                                                                                                                                                          USA
                                                                                                                                 rry
                                                                                                                      .&              in
                                                                                                                                         g
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ROW
                                                                                                                           To                                                                                                                                                                                             JPN
                                                                                                                                ba
                                                                                                                                     cc                                                                                                                                                                                  CHN
                                                                                                                                         o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         RUS




     Notes: This figure displays the share of imported inputs in total input purchases, by sector.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Notes: This figure displays the share of imported inputs in total input purchases, by country.
                            Figure 3. Imported Input Use over Time
          .28
          .26
        Share
       .24.22
          .2




                1995                   2000                      2005                      2010
                                                       Year

Notes: This figure displays the share of imported inputs in total input purchases, over time.




                                                    39
                                                            Figure 4. Global Impact, Hypothetical Shocks


                    USA                                                                  JPN
                    MEX                                                                 TWN
                    CAN                                                                 KOR
                    TWN                                                                 CHN
                    KOR                                                                 HUN
                      IRL                                                               CZE
                    CHN                                                                 MEX
                     BEL                                                                CAN
                    NLD                                                                  BEL
                    HUN                                                                 RUS
                    DEU                                                                 DEU
                     JPN                                                                USA
                    GBR                                                                 NLD
                    FRA                                                                 AUS
                    CZE                                                                   IRL
                    SVN                                                                 SVN
                    AUT                                                                 AUT
                    AUS                                                                   FIN
                    SWE                                                                 GBR
                      FIN                                                               POL
                    ESP                                                                 SWE
                    BGR                                                                 FRA
                    DNK                                                                 BGR
                    PRT                                                                 ESP
                    POL                                                                   ITA
                      ITA                                                               PRT
                    ROM                                                                 DNK
                    GRC                                                                 GRC
                     LTU                                                                ROM
                    RUS                                                                  LTU



                            0          .2        .4              .6        .8       1           0               .2        .4              .6    .8      1
                                                      %points ∆PPI                                                             %points ∆PPI


                                   (a) A 1% US Inflationary Shock                                             (b) A 1% Japan Inflationary Shock




40
                CHN                                                                              LTU
                KOR                                                                             RUS
                TWN                                                                             BGR
                CZE                                                                             GRC
                HUN                                                                             TWN
                MEX                                                                             HUN
                  IRL                                                                            BEL
                CAN                                                                             NLD
                 JPN                                                                            KOR
                SVN                                                                              JPN
                USA                                                                               FIN
                DEU                                                                             USA
                 BEL                                                                            FRA
                  FIN                                                                           CAN
                POL                                                                             POL
                BGR                                                                             ROM
                AUS                                                                             MEX
                NLD                                                                             ESP
                GBR                                                                             DEU
                AUT                                                                             AUS
                ESP                                                                               ITA
                  ITA                                                                           SWE
                FRA                                                                             CZE
                DNK                                                                             CHN
                SWE                                                                             PRT
                PRT                                                                             AUT
                GRC                                                                             DNK
                 LTU                                                                            GBR
                ROM                                                                               IRL
                RUS                                                                             SVN



                        0         .2        .4              .6        .8        1                       0            1               2          3           4
                                                 %points ∆PPI                                                                    %points ∆PPI


                                (c) A 1% China Inflationary Shock                                           (d) A 10% Rise in Energy Prices Worldwide



     Notes: This figure presents the change in PPI in each country in our sample following 4 hypothetical shocks: (a) a shock that leads to 1%
     inflation in the US; (b) a shock that leads to 1% inflation in Japan; (c) a shock that leads to 1% inflation in China; and (d) a worldwide 10%
     increase in energy prices.
Figure 5. The Proportional Impact of Each Source Country’s Inflation Shock on Each Destina-
tion Country’s Inflation




                                                    0.14


                                                    0.12
          impact (destination shock/source shock)




                                                     0.1


                                                    0.08


                                                    0.06


                                                    0.04


                                                    0.02




                                                    DEU
                                                      CHN
                                                        RUS
                                                          USA
                                                            FRA
                                                              NLD                                                                                                                         BEL
                                                                 ITA                                                                                                                    HUN
                                                                  GBR                                                                                                                 CZE
                                                                     JPN                                                                                                            SVN
                                                                       BEL                                                                                                        TWN
                                                                         ESP                                                                                                    LTU
                                                                           POL                                                                                                AUT
                                                                                                                                                                            BGR
                                                                             AUT                                                                                          SWE
                                                                               CAN                                                                                      NLD
                                                                                 KOR                                                                                  KOR
                                                                                   SWE                                                                              POL
                                                                                      AUS                                                                         DEU
                                                                                        CZE                                                                     PRT
                                                                                                                                                             FIN
                                                                                          TWN                                                              DNK
                                                                                            DNK                                                      IRL
                                                                                               FIN                                                 MEX
                                                                                                HUN                                              FRA
                                                                                                   MEX                                         ROM
                                                                                                                                             CAN
                                                                                                    ROM                                    ESP
                                                                                                       IRL                               GRC
                                                                                                         PRT                           GBR
                                                                                 source                    BGR                   ITA
                                                                                                                               CHN
                                                                                                             SVN             USA
                                                                                                               GRC         JPN                        destination
                                                                                                                 LTU     AUS
                                                                                                                       RUS

  Notes: This figure displays the proportional impact of an inflationary shock in each source country on
  inflation in each destination country.




                                                                                                                       41
      Figure 6. Country Impact of a 1% Inflationary Shock in Every Other Country


        BEL
       HUN
       CZE
       SVN
       TWN
        LTU
       AUT
       BGR
       SWE
       NLD
       DEU
       KOR
       POL
       PRT
         FIN
       DNK
         IRL
       MEX
       FRA
       ROM
       CAN
       ESP
       GRC
       GBR
       CHN
         ITA
       USA
        JPN
       AUS
       RUS



               0               .1                  .2                    .3                   .4
                                               %points ∆PPI

Notes: This figure displays the impact of an inflationary shock that leads to average 1% inflation in the
other countries in the world.




                                                   42
                 Figure 7. Quantile-Quantile Plots vs. Normal Distribution




                                    4   2
                       Standardized PPI
                             0      −2
                                    −4




                                                   −4      −2             0         2   4
                                                                   Inverse Normal


                                                                (a) Actual PPI
                                    6          4
                       Standardized Cost Shock
                             0      −2
                                    −4 2




                                                   −4      −2             0         2   4
                                                                   Inverse Normal


                                                        (b) Recovered Cost Shocks
Notes: This figure presents the Q-Q plots of PPI and cost shocks against a normal distribution. Each has
been standardized to have mean zero and standard deviation 1 in each country.



                                                                     43
             Figure 8. Quantile-Quantile Plot, Actual PPI and Recovered Cost Shocks
            6
            4
    Standardized PPI
       0    −2
            −4  2




                       −4      −2          0         2       4                                    6
                                     Standardized Cost Shock

Notes: This figure displays Q-Q plot of the actual PPI series and the recovered cost shocks. Each has been
standardized to have mean zero and standard deviation 1 in each country.




                                                   44
                                                              Figure 9. Quantile-Quantile Plot, Simulated Cost Shocks




                                                                                 6




                   4
                                                                                                                                             4




                                                                                 4




                   2
                                                                                                                                             2




                                                                                       2




                      0
                                                                                                                                              0




                                                                              0




             Standardized PPI
                                                                          Standardized PPI
                                                                                                                                      Standardized PPI




           -2
                                                                                                                                             -2




                                                                                 -2




                   -4
                                                                                                                                             -4




                                                                                 -4
                                -4      -2          0         2      4                       -4         -2          0         2   4                      -4         -2          0         2   4
                                             Inverse Normal                                                  Inverse Normal                                              Inverse Normal




45
                                (a) Laplace, st.dev = observed                                    (b) Laplace, st.dev = 0.1                                   (c) Laplace, factor model




                   4
                                                                                                                                             4




                                                                                 4




                   2
                                                                                                                                             2




                                                                                 2




                   0
                                                                                                                                              0




                                                                                 0




           Standardized PPI
                                                                          Standardized PPI
                                                                                                                                      Standardized PPI




                   -2
                                                                                                                                             -2




                                                                                 -2




                   -4
                                                                                                                                             -4




                                                                                 -4

                                -4      -2          0         2      4                       -4         -2          0         2   4                      -4         -2          0         2   4
                                             Inverse Normal                                                  Inverse Normal                                              Inverse Normal


                                (d) Normal, st.dev = observed                                     (e) Normal, st.dev = 0.1                                    (f) Normal, factor model
     Notes: This figure displays quantile-quantile plots of the PPI resulting from shocks simulated from a Laplace distribution and the normal
     distribution. Panels (c) and (f) simulate shocks based on the global-sector-country factor model from Section 5.
                         Table A1. PPI Data Origin Summary Table

       Country      Original source             Original classification    Conversion table
       AUS          Aust. Bureau of Stats.      ANZSIC                            5
       AUT          Eurostat                    NACE rev. 2                       1
       BEL          Eurostat                    NACE rev. 2                       1
       BGR          Eurostat                    NACE rev. 2                       1
       CAN          Statistics Canada           NAICS 2007                       3,4
       CHN          NBS of China                CSIC                              5
       CZE          Eurostat                    NACE rev. 2                       1
       DNK          Eurostat                    NACE rev. 2                       1
       FIN          Eurostat                    NACE rev. 2                       1
       FRA          Eurostat                    NACE rev. 2                       1
       DEU          Eurostat                    NACE rev. 2                       1
       GRC          Eurostat                    NACE rev. 2                       1
       HUN          Eurostat                    NACE rev. 2                       1
       IRL          Eurostat                    NACE rev. 2                       1
       ITA          Eurostat                    NACE rev. 2                       1
       JPN          Bank of Japan               JSIC                              5
       KOR          The Bank of Korea           KSIC                              5
       LTU          Eurostat                    NACE rev. 2                       1
       MEX          INEGI Mexico                SCIAN                             5
       NLD          Eurostat                    NACE rev. 2                       1
       POL          Eurostat                    NACE rev. 2                       1
       PRT          Eurostat                    NACE rev. 2                       1
       ROM          Eurostat                    NACE rev. 2                       1
       RUS          FSSS (Rosstat)              OKVED                             5
       SVN          Eurostat                    NACE rev. 2                       1
       ESP          Eurostat                    NACE rev. 2                       1
       SWE          Eurostat                    NACE rev. 2                       1
       TWN          DGBAS, Taiwan               SIC of ROC                        5
       GBR          Eurostat                    NACE rev. 2                       1
       USA          BLS                         NAICS 2012                      2,3,4
Notes: Legend for last column:
   1. Eurostat NACE rev.              2 to rev.             1.1 (http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/nace-
      rev2/correspondence tables). Once the series are in NACE rev. 1.1, conversion to the ISIC
      2-letters categories used in WIOD is straightforward.
   2. US Census Bureau: NAICS 2012 to NAICS 2007
      (https://www.census.gov/eos/www/naics/concordances/concordances.html).
   3. US Census Bureau: NAICS 2007 to NAICS 2002.
   4. US Census Bureau: NAICS 2002 to NACE rev. 1.1. Once the series are in NACE rev. 1.1, conversion
      to the ISIC 2-letters categories used in WIOD is straightforward.
   5. PPI series downloaded through Datastream. We manually match the description of these series in
      the original classification to match them with the ISIC 2-letters description used in the WIOD.




                                                 46
                            Table A2. Country and Sector Coverage


        Country                   Code         Sector
        Australia                 AUS          Agriculture, Hunting, Forestry, and Fishing
        Austria                   AUT          Basic Metals and Fabricated Metal
        Belgium                   BEL          Chemicals and Chemical Products
        Bulgaria                  BGR          Coke, Refined Petroleum and Nuclear F..
        Canada                    CAN          Electrical and Optical Equipment
        China                     CHN          Electricity, Gas and Water Supply
        Czech Republic            CZE          Food, Beverages and Tobacco
        Denmark                   DNK          Leather, Leather and Footwear
        Finland                   FIN          Machinery, Nec
        France                    FRA          Manufacturing, Nec; Recycling
        Germany                   DEU          Mining and Quarrying
        Greece                    GRC          Other Non-Metallic Mineral
        Hungary                   HUN          Pulp, Paper, Paper , Printing and Pub..
        Ireland                   IRL          Rubber and Plastics
        Italy                     ITA          Textiles and Textile Products
        Japan                     JPN          Transport Equipment
        Korea                     KOR          Wood and Products of Wood and Cork
        Lithuania                 LTU
        Mexico                    MEX
        Netherlands               NLD
        Poland                    POL
        Portugal                  PRT
        Rest of the World         ROW
        Romania                   ROM
        Russian Federation        RUS
        Slovenia                  SVN
        Spain                     ESP
        Sweden                    SWE
        Taiwan, POC               TWN
        United Kingdom            GBR
        United States             USA
Notes: This table reports the countries (along with 3-letter codes) and the sectors used in the analysis.




                                                     47
             Table A3. PPI Data Origin Summary Table for ROW Countries

       Country     Original source             Original classification    Conversion table
       BRA         IBGE                        CNAE                              5
       CYP         Eurostat                    NACE rev. 2                       1
       EST         Eurostat                    NACE rev. 2                       1
       IDN         Statistics Indonesia        KBLI                              5
       IND         Office of Econ. Advisor     NIC                               5
                   to the Gov. of India
       LUX         Eurostat                    NACE    rev.   2                   1
       LVA         Eurostat                    NACE    rev.   2                   1
       MLT         Eurostat                    NACE    rev.   2                   1
       SVK         Eurostat                    NACE    rev.   2                   1
       TUR         Eurostat                    NACE    rev.   2                   1
Notes: Legend for last column:
   1. Eurostat conversion table (http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/nace-rev2/correspondence tables).
      Once the series are in NACE rev. 1.1, conversion to the ISIC 2-letters categories used in WIOD
      is straightforward.
   5. PPI series downloaded through Datastream. We manually match the description of these series in
      the original classification to match them with the ISIC aggregates used in the WIOD.




                                                48
